ESSAYS, Literary, Moral and Philosophical

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. AND PROFESSOR OF THE INSTITUTES OF MEDICINE AND
CLINICAL PRACTICE IN THE University of Pennsylvania.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY THOMAS and SAMUEL F. BRADFORD, No. 8, SOUTH FRONT
STREET. 1798.

AS A RECORD OF FRATERNAL AFFECTION, THE FOLLOWING ESSAYS ARE INSCRIBED TO
JACOB RUSH, Judge of the Third District of Pennsylvania,

BY HIS FRIEND AND BROTHER, THE AUTHOR.
January 9, 1798.
PREFACE.
MOST of the following Essays were published in the Museum, and Columbian
Magazine, in this City, soon after the end of the revolutionary war in the
United States. A few of them made their first appearance in pamphlets. They are
now published in a single volume, at the request of several friends, and with a
view of promoting the ends at first contemplated by them. Two of the Essays,
viz: that upon the use of Tobacco, and the account of remarkable circumstances
in the constitution and life of Ann Woods, are now submitted for the first time
to the eye of the public. The author has omitted in this collection two
pamphlets which he published in the year 1772, upon the slavery of the Negroes,
because he conceived the object of them had been in part accomplished, and
because the Citizens of the United States have since that time been furnished
from Great Britain and other countries, with numerous tracts upon that subject,
more calculated to complete the effect intended by the author, than his early
publications.

BENJAMIN RUSH.
Philadelphia, Jan. 9, 1798.
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
A PLAN for establishing Public Schools in Pennsylvania, and for conducting
Education agreeably to a Republican form of Government. Addressed to the
Legislature and Citizens of Pennsylvania, in the year 1786, Page 1 Of the mode
of Education proper in a Republic, Page 6 Observations upon the study of the
Latin and Greek languages, as a branch of liberal Education, with hints of a
plan of liberal Instruction, without them, accomodated to the present state of
society, manners and government in the United States, Page 21 Thoughts upon the
amusements and punishments, which are proper for Schools, Page 57 Thoughts upon
Female Education, accomodated to the present state of society, manners and
government, in the United States of America, Page 75 A defense of the Bible as
a School Book, Page 93 An address to the Ministers of the Gospel of every
denomination in the United States upon subjects interesting to morals, Page 114
An inquiry into the consistency of Oaths with Christianity, Page 125 An enquiry
into the Effects of Public Punishments upon Criminals, and upon Society, Page
136 An enquiry into the consistency of the Punishment of Murder by Death, with
Reason and Revelation, Page 164 A plan of a Peace Office for the United States,
Page 183 Information to Europeans who are disposed to migrate to the United
States of America, Page 189 An Account of the Progress of Population,
Agriculture, Manners, and Government, in Pennsylvania. Page 213 An Account of
the manners, of the German Inhabitants of Pennsylvania, Page 226 Thoughts on
common sense, Page 249 An Account of the Vices peculiar to the Indians of North
America, Page 257 Observations upon the influence of the Habitual use of
Tobacco upon Health, Morals, and Property, Page 263 An account of the Sugar
Maple Tree of the United States, Page 275 An account of the life and death of
Edward Drinker, who died on the 17 of November, 1782, in the 103 year of his
age, Page 295 Remarkable circumstances in the constitution and life of Ann
Woods, an old woman of 96 years of age, Page 301 Biographical Anecdotes of
Benjamin Lay, Page 305 Biographical Anecdotes of Anthony Benezet, Page 311
Paradise of Negro Slaves -- a dream, Page 305 Eulogium upon Dr. William Cullen,
Page 321 Eulogium upon David Rittenhouse, Page 343
Essays, LITERARY, MORAL, AND PHILOSOPHICAL.
A PLAN FOR ESTABLISHING PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN PENNSYLVANIA, AND FOR CONDUCTING
EDUCATION AGREEABLY TO A REPUBLICAN FORM OF GOVERNMENT. ADDRESSED TO THE
LEGISLATURE AND CITIZENS OF PENNSYLVANIA, IN THE YEAR 1786.
BEFORE I proceed to the subject of this essay, I shall point out, in a few
words, the influence and advantages of learning upon mankind.

I. It is friendly to religion, inasmuch as it assists in removing prejudice,
superstition and enthusiasm, in promoting just notions of the Deity, and in
enlarging our knowledge of his works.

II. It is favorable to liberty. Freedom can exist only in the society of
knowledge. Without learning, men are incapable of knowing their rights, and
where learning is confined to a few people, liberty can be neither equal nor
universal.

III. It promotes just ideas of laws and government. "When the clouds of
ignorance are dispelled (says the Marquis of Beccaria) by the radiance of
knowledge, power trembles, but the authority of laws remains immovable."

IV. It is friendly to manners. Learning in all countries, promotes
civilization, and the pleasures of society and conversation.

V. It promotes agriculture, the great basis of national wealth and happiness.
Agriculture is as much a science as hydraulics, or optics, and has been equally
indebted to the experiments and researches of learned men. The highly
cultivated state, and the immense profits of the farms in England, are derived
wholly from the patronage which agriculture has received in that country, from
learned men and learned societies.

VI. Manufactures of all kinds owe their perfection chiefly to learning --
hence the nations of Europe advance in manufactures, knowledge, and commerce,
only in proportion as they cultivate the arts and sciences.

For the purpose of diffusing knowledge through every part of the state, I beg
leave to propose the following simple plan.

I. Let there be one university in the state, and let this be established in
the capital. Let law, physic, divinity, the law of nature and nations,
economy, etc. be taught in it by public lectures in the winter season, after
the manner of the European universities, and let the professors receive such
salaries from the state as will enable them to deliver their lectures at a
moderate price.

II. Let there be four colleges. One in Philadelphia; one at Carlisle; a third,
for the benefit of our German fellow citizens, at Lancaster; and a fourth, some
years hence at Pittsburg. In these colleges, let young men be instructed in
mathematics and in the higher branches of science, in the same manner that they
are now taught in our American colleges. After they have received a testimonial
from one of these colleges, let them, if they can afford it, complete their
studies by spending a season or two in attending the lectures in the
university. I prefer four colleges in the state to one or two, for there is a
certain size of colleges as there is of towns and armies, that is most
favorable to morals and good government. Oxford and Cambridge in England are
the seats of dissipation, while the more numerous, and less crowded
universities and colleges in Scotland, are remarkable for the order, diligence,
and decent behavior of their students.

III. Let there be free schools established in every township, or in districts
consisting of one hundred families. In these schools let children be taught to
read and write the English and German languages, and the use of figures. Such
of them as have parents that can afford to send them from home, and are
disposed to extend their educations, may remove their children from the free
school to one of the colleges.

By this plan the whole state will be tied together by one system of education.
The university will in time furnish masters for the colleges, and the colleges
will furnish masters for the free schools, while the free schools, in their
turns, will supply the colleges and the university with scholars, students and
pupils. The same systems of grammar, oratory and philosophy, will be taught in
every part of the state, and the literary features of Pennsylvania will thus
designate one great, and equally enlightened family.

But, how shall we bear the expense of these literary institutions? -- I answer
-- These institutions will lessen our taxes. They will enlighten us in the
great business of finance -- they will teach us to increase the ability of the
state to support government, by increasing the profits of agriculture, and by
promoting manufactures. They will teach us all the modern improvements and
advantages of inland navigation. They will defend us from hasty and expensive
experiment in government, by unfolding to us the experience and folly of past
ages, and thus, instead of adding to our taxes and debts, they will furnish us
with the true secret of lessening and discharging both of them.

But, shall the estates of orphans, batchelors and persons who have no
children, be taxed to pay for the support of schools from which they can derive
no benefit? I answer in the affirmative, to the first part of the objection,
and I deny the truth of the latter part of it. Every member of the community is
interested in the propagation of virtue and knowledge in the state. But I will
go further, and add, it will be true economy in individuals to support public
schools. The bachelor will in time save his tax for this purpose, by being
able to sleep with fewer bolts and locks to his doors -- the estates of orphans
will in time be benefited, by being protected from the ravages of unprincipled
and idle boys, and the children of wealthy parents will be less tempted, by bad
company, to extravagance. Fewer pillories and whipping posts, and smaller
goals, with their usual expenses and taxes, will be necessary when our youth
are properly educated, than at present; I believe it could be proved, that the
expenes of confining, trying and executing criminals, amount every year, in
most of the counties, to more money than would be sufficient to maintain all
the schools that would be necessary in each county. The confessions of these
criminals generally show us, that their vices and punishments are the fatal
consequences of the want of a proper education in early life.

I submit these detached hints to the consideration of the legislature and of
the citizens of Pensylvania. The plan for the free schools is taken chiefly
from the plans which have long been used with success in Scotland, and in the
eastern states There are 600 of these schools in the small state of
Connecticut, which at this time have in them 25,000 scholars.
of America, where the influence of learning, in promoting religion, morals,
manners, and good government, has never been exceeded in any country.

The manner in which these schools should be supported and governed -- the
modes of determining the characters and qualifications of schoolmasters, and
the arrangement of families in each district, so that children of the same
religious sect and nation, may be educa- as much as possible together, will
form a proper part of a law for the establishment of schools, and therefore
does not come within the limits of this plan.

OF THE MODE OF EDUCATION PROPER IN A REPUBLIC.
THE business of education has acquired a new complexion by the independence of
our country. The form of government we have assumed, has created a new class of
duties to every American. It becomes us, therefore, to examine our former
habits upon this subject, and in laying the foundations for nurseries of wise
and good men, to adapt our modes of teaching to the peculiar form of our
government.

The first remark that I shall make upon this subject is, that an education in
our own, is to be preferred to an education in a foreign country. The principle
of patriotism stands in need of the reinforcement of prejudice. and it is well
known that our strongest prejudices in favor of our country are formed in the
first one and twenty years of our lives. The policy of the Lacedaemonians is
well worthy of our imitation. When Antipater demanded fifty of their children
as hostages for the fulfillment of a distant engagement, those wise republicans
refused to comply with his demand, but readily offered him double the number of
their adult citizens, whose habits and prejudices could not be shaken by
residing in a foreign country. Passing by, in this place, the advantages to the
community from the early attachment of youth to the laws and constitution of
their country, I shall only remark, that young men who have trodden the paths
of science together, or have joined in the same sports, whether of swimming,
scating, fishing, or hunting, generally feel, through life, such ties to each
other, as add greatly to the obligations of mutual benevolence.

I conceive the education of our youth in this country to be peculiarly
necessary in Pennsylvania, while our citizens are composed of the natives of so
many different kingdoms in Europe. Our schools of learning, by producing one
general, and uniform system of education, will render the mass of the people
more homogeneous, and thereby fit them more easily for uniform and peaceable
government.

I proceed in the next place, to enquire, what mode of education we shall adopt
so as to secure to the state all the advantages that are to be derived from the
proper instruction of youth; and here I beg leave to remark, that the only
foundation for a useful education in a republic is to be laid in Religion.
Without this there can be no virtue, and without virtue there can be no
liberty, and liberty is the object and life of all republican governments.

Such is my veneration for every religion that reveals the attributes of the
Deity, or a future state of rewards and punishments, that I had rather see the
opinions of Confucius or Mahomed inculcated upon our youth, than see them grow
up wholly devoid of a system of religious principles. But the religion I mean
to recommend is this place, is that of the New Testament.

It is foreign to my purpose to hint at the arguments which establish the truth
of the Christian revelation. My only business is to declare, that all its
doctrines and precepts are calculated to promote the happiness of society, and
the safety and well being of civil government. A Christian cannot fail of being
a republican. The history of the creation of man, and of the relation of our
species to each other by birth, which is recorded in the Old Testament, is the
best refutation that can be given to the divine right of kings, and the
strongest argument that can be used in favor of the original and natural
equality of all mankind. A Christian, I say again, cannot fail of being a
republican, for every precept of the Gospel inculcates those degrees of
humility, self-denial, and brotherly kindness, which are directly opposed to
the pride of monarchy and the pageantry of a court. A Christian cannot fail of
being useful to the republic, for his religion teaches him, that no man
"lives to himself." And lastly, a Christian cannot fail of being wholly
inoffensive, for his religion teaches him, in all things to do to others what
he would wish, in like circumstances, they should do to him.

I am aware that I dissent from one of those paradoxical opinions with which
modern times abound; and that it is improper to fill the minds of youth with
religious prejudices of any kind, and that they should be left to choose their
own principles, after they have arrived at an age in which they are capable of
judging for themselves. Could we preserve the mind in childhood and youth a
perfect blank, this plan of education would have more to recommend it; but this
we know to be impossible. The human mind runs as naturally into principles as
it does after facts. It submits with difficulty to those restraints or partial
discoveries which are imposed upon it in the infancy of reason. Hence the
impatience of children to be informed upon all subjects that relate to the
invisible world. But I beg leave to ask, why should we pursue a different plan
of education with respect to religion, from that which we pursue in teaching
the arts and sciences? Do we leave our youth to acquire systems of geography,
philosophy, or politics, till they have arrived at an age in which they are
capable of judging for themselves? We do not. I claim no more then for
religion, than for the other sciences, and I add further, that if our youth are
disposed after they are of age to think for themselves, a knowledge of one
system, will be the best means of conducting them in a free enquiry into other
systems of religion, just as an acquaintance with one system of philosophy is
the best introduction to the study of all the other systems in the world.

Next to the duty which young men owe to their Creator, I wish to see a regard
to their country, inculcated upon them. When the Duke of Sully became prime
minister to Henry the IVth of France, the first thing he did, he tells us, Was
to subdue and forget his own heart. The same duty is incumbent upon every
citizen of a republic. Our country includes family, friends and property, and
should be preferred to them all. Let our pupil be taught that he does not
belong to himself, but that he is public property. Let him be taught to love
his family, but let him be taught, at the same time, that he must forsake, and
even forget them, when the welfare of his country requires it. He must watch
for the state, as if its liberties depended upon his vigilance alone, but he
must do this in such a manner as not to defraud his creditors, or neglect his
family. He must love private life, but he must decline no station, however
public or responsible it may be, when called to it by the suffrages of his
fellow citizens. He must love popularity, but he must despise it when set in
competition with the dictates of his judgment, or the real interest of his
country. He must love character, and have a due sense of injuries, but he must
be taught to appeal only to the laws of the state, to defend the one, and
punish the other. He must love family honor, but he must be taught that
neither the rank nor antiquity of his ancestors, can command respect, without
personal merit. He must avoid neutrality in all questions that divide the
state, but he must shun the rage, and acrimony of party spirit. He must be
taught to love his fellow creatures in every part of the world, but he must
cherish with a more intense and peculiar affection, the citizens of
Pennsylvania and of the United States. I do not wish to see our youth educated
with a single prejudice against any nation or country; but we impose a task
upon human nature, repugnant alike to reason, revelation and the ordinary
dimensions of the human heart, when we require him to embrace, with equal
affection, the whole family of mankind. He must be taught to amass wealth, but
it must be only to increase his power of contributing to the wants and demands
of the state. He must be indulged occasionally in amusements, but he must be
taught that study and business should be his principal pursuits in life. Above
all he must love life, and endeavor to acquire as many of its conveniences as
possible by industry and economy, but he must be taught that this life "is not
his own," when the safety of his country requires it. These are practicable
lessons, and the history of the commonwealths of Greece and Rome show, that
human nature, without the aids of Christianity, has attained these degrees of
perfection.

While we inculcate these republican duties upon our pupil, we must not
neglect, at the same time, to inspire him with republican principles. He must
be taught that there can be no durable liberty but in a republic, and that
government, like all other sciences, is of a progressive nature. The chains
which have bound this science in Europe are happily unloosed in America. Here
it is open to investigation and improvement. While philosophy has protected us
by its discoveries from a thousand natural evils, government has unhappily
followed with an unequal pace. It would be to dishonor human genius, only to
name the many defects which still exist in the best systems of legislation. We
daily see matter of a perishable nature rendered durable by certain chemical
operations. In like manner, I conceive, that it is possible to combine power in
such a way as not only to increase the happiness, but to promote the duration
of republican forms of government far beyond the terms limited for them by
history, or the common opinions of mankind.

To assist in rendering religious, moral and political instruction more
effectual upon the minds of our youth, it will be necessary to subject their
bodies to physical discipline. To obviate the inconveniences of their studious
and sedentary mode of life, they should live upon a temperate diet, consisting
chiefly of broths, milk and vegetables. The black broth of Sparta, and the
barley broth of Scotland, have been alike celebrated for their beneficial
effects upon the minds of young people. They should avoid tasting Spirituous
liquors. They should also be accustomed occasionally to work with their hands,
in the intervals of Study, and in the busy seasons of the year in the country.
Moderate sleep, silence, occasional solitude and cleanliness, should be
inculcated upon them, and the utmost advantage should be taken of a proper
direction of those great principles in human conduct, -- sensibility, habit,
imitations and association.

The influence of these physical causes will be powerful upon the intellects,
as well as upon the principles and morals of young people.

To those who have studied human nature, it will not appear paradoxical to
recommend, in this essay, a particular attention to vocal music. Its mechanical
effects in civilizing the mind, and thereby preparing it for the influence of
religion and government, have been so often felt and recorded, that it will be
unnecessary to mention facts in favor of its usefulness, in order to excite a
proper attention to it.

I cannot help bearing a testimony, in this place, against the custom, which
prevails in some parts of America, (but which is daily falling into disuse in
Europe) of crouding boys together under one roof for the purpose of education.
The practice is the gloomy remains of monkish ignorance, and is as unfavorable
to the improvements of the mind in useful learning, as monasteries are to the
spirit of religion. I grant this mode of secluding boys from the intercourse of
private families, has a tendency to make them scholars, but our business is to
make them men, citizens and christians. The vices of young people are generally
learned from each other. The vices of adults seldom infect them. By separating
them from each other, therefore, in their hours of relaxation from study, we
secure their morals from a principal source of corruption, while we improve
their manners, by subjecting them to those restraints which the difference of
age and sex, naturally produce in private families.

From the observations that have been made it is plain, that I consider it is
possible to convert men into republican machines. This must be done, if we
expect them to perform their parts properly, in the great machine of the
government of the state. That republic is sophisticated with monarchy or
aristrocracy that does not revolve upon the wills of the people, and these must
be fitted to each other by means of education before they can be made to
produce regularity and unison in government.

Having pointed out those general principles, which should be inculcated alike
in all the schools of the state, I proceed now to make a few remarks upon the
method of conducting, what is commonly called, a liberal or learned education
in a republic.

I shall begin this part of my subject, by bearing a testimony against the
common practice of attempting to teach boys the learned languages, and the arts
and sciences too early in life. The first twelve years of life are barely
sufficient to instruct a boy in reading, writing and arithmetic. With these, he
may be taught those modern languages which are necessary for him to speak. The
state of the memory, in early life, is favorable to the acquisition of
languages, especially when they are conveyed to the mind, through the ear. It
is, moreover, in early life only, that the organs of speech yield in such a
manner as to favor the just pronounciation of foreign languages.

Too much pains cannot be taken to teach our youth to read and write our
American language with propriety and elegance. The study of the Greek language
constituted a material part of the literature of the Athenians, hence the
sublimity, purity and immortality of so many of their writings. The advantages
of a perfect knowledge of our language to young men intended for the
professions of law, physic, or divinity are too obvious to be mentioned, but in
a state which boasts of the first commercial city in America, I wish to see it
cultivated by young men, who are intended for the compting house, for many
such, I hope, will be educated in our colleges. The time is past when an
academical education was thought to be unnecessary to qualify a young man for
merchandise. I conceive no profession is capable of receiving more
embellishments from it. The French and German languages should likewise be
carefully taught in all our Colleges. They abound with useful books upon all
subjects. So important and necessary are those languages, that a degree should
never be conferred upon a young man who cannot speak or translate them.

Connected with the study of languages is the study of Eloquence. It is well
known how great a part it constituted of the Roman education. It is the first
accomplishment in a republic, and often sets the whole machine of government in
motion. Let our youth, therefore, be instructed in this art. We do not extol it
too highly when we attribute as much to the power of eloquence as to the sword,
in bringing about the American revolution.

With the usual arts and sciences that are taught in our American colleges, I
wish to see a regular course of lectures given upon History and Chronology. The
science of government, whether it related to constitutions or laws, can only be
advanced by a careful selection of facts, and these are to be found chiefly in
history. Above all, let our youth be instructed in the history of the ancient
republics, and the progress of liberty and tyranny in the different states of
Europe. I wish likewise to see the numerous facts that relate to the origin and
present state of commerce, together with the nature and principles of Money,
reduced to such a system, as to be intelligible and agreeable to a young man.
If we consider the commerce of our metropolis only as the avenue of the wealth
of the state, the study of it merits a place in a young man's education; but, I
consider commerce in a much higher light when I recommend the study of it in
republican seminaries. I view it as the best security against the influence of
hereditary monopolies of land, and, therefore, the surest protection against
aristocracy. I consider its effects as next to those of religion in humanizing
mankind, and lastly, I view it as the means of uniting the different nations of
the world together by the ties of mutual wants and obligations.

Chemistry by unfolding to us the effects of heat and mixture, enlarges our
acquaintance with the wonders of nature and the mysteries of art; hence it has
become, in most of the universities of Europe, a necessary branch of a
gentleman's education. In a young country, where improvements in agriculture
and manufactures are so much to be desired, the cultivation of this science,
which explains the principles of both of them, should be considered as an
object of the utmost importance.

Again, let your youth be instructed in all the means of promoting national
prosperity and independence, whether they relate to improvements in
agriculture, manufactures, or inland navigation. Let him be instructed further
in the general principles of legislation, whether they relate to revenue, or to
the preservation of life, liberty or property. Let him be directed frequently
to attend the courts of justice, where he will have the best opportunities of
acquairing habits of comparing, and arranging his ideas by observing the
discovery of truth, in the examination of witnesses, and where he will hear the
laws of the state explained, with all the advantages of that species of
eloquence which belongs to the bar. Of so much importance do I conceive it to
be, to a young man, to attend occasionally to the decisions of our courts of
law, that I wish to see our colleges established, only in county towns.

But further, considering the nature of our connection with the United States,
it will be necessary to make our pupil acquainted with all the prerogatives of
the national government. He must be instructed in the nature and variety of
treaties. He must know the difference in the powers and duties of the several
species of ambassadors. He must be taught wherein the obligations of
individuals and of states are the same, and wherein they differ. In short, he
must accquire a general knowledge of all those laws and forms, which unite the
sovereigns of the earth, or separate them from each other.

I beg pardon for having delayed so long to say any thing of the separate and
peculiar mode of education proper for women in a republic. I am sensible that
they must concur in all our plans of of education for young men, or no laws
will ever render them effectual. To qualify our women for this purpose, they
should not only be instructed in the usual branches of female education, but
they should be taught the principles of liberty and government; and the
obligations of patriotism should be inculcated upon them. The opinions and
conduct of men are often regulated by the women in the most arduous enterprises
of life; and their approbation is frequently the principal reward of the hero's
dangers, and the patriot's toils. Besides, the first impressions upon the minds
of children are generaly derived from the women. Of how much consequence,
therefore, is it in a republic, that they should think justly upon the great
subjects of liberty and government!

The complaints that have been made against religion, liberty and learning,
have been, against each of them in a separate state. Perhaps like certain
liquors, they should only be used in a state of mixture. They mutually assist
in correcting the abuses, and in improving the good effects of each other. From
the combined and reciprocal influence of religion, liberty and learning upon
the morals, manners and knowledge of individuals, of these, upon government,
and of government, upon individuals, it is impossible to measure the degrees of
happiness and perfection to which mankind may be raised. For my part, I can
form no ideas of the golden age, so much celebrated by the poets, more
delightful, than the contemplation of that happiness which it is now in the
power of the legislature of Pennsylvania to confer upon her citizens, by
establishing proper modes and places of education in every part of the state*

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE STUDY OF THE LATIN AND GREEK LANGUAGES, AS A BRANCH OF
LIBERAL EDUCATION, WITH HINTS OF A PLAN OF LIBERAL INSTRUCTION, WITHOUT THEM,
ACCOMMODATED TO THE PRESENT STATE OF SOCIETY, MANNERS, AND GOVERNMENT IN THE
UNITED STATES.
IT requires the recollection of escapes from a lion and a bear, to encounter
the strong and universal prejudice, in favor of the Latin and Greek languages,
as a necessary branch of liberal education. If, in combating this formidable
enemy of human reason, I should be less succesful than the Hebrew stripling was
in contending with the giant of the Philistines, I hope it will be ascribed
wholly to the want of skill to direct arguments, which, in other hands, would
lay this tyrant in the dust.

I shall attempt to discuss this question, by first delivering a few general
propositions. I shall afterward apply these propositions, and answer such
arguments as are usually urged in favor of the Latin and Greek languages as
necessary parts of an academic education.

I. The great design of a liberal education is, to prepare youth for usefulness
here, and for happiness hereafter.

II. The proper time for acquiring the necessary branches of knowledge for
these important purposes, is in the first eighteen years of life.

III. From four to five years are usually spent in acquiring a competent
knowledge of the Latin and Greek languages.

IV. The knowledge of things always preceeds the knowledge of words. Children
discover the truth of this observation every day. They know all the objects
around them, long before they are able to call them by their proper names, or
even to articulate sounds of any kind. It is supposed that children acquire
more ideas of things in the first three years of their lives, than they acquire
in any thirty years afterward.

V. The acquisition of words lessens the ability of the mind to acquire ideas.
That understanding must have uncommon strength, which does not contract an
oblique direction by being employed four or five years in learning the Latin or
Greek languages.

VI. The difficulty of acquiring those dead languages, and the little pleasure
which accompanies the knowledge of them in early life, occasion the principal
obstacles to teaching, in masters, and learning, in scholars.

The famous Busby is said to have died of "bad Latin;" that is, the
ungrammatical versions of his scholars broke his heart. How few boys relish
Latin and Greek lessons! The pleasure they sometimes discover in learning them,
is derived either from the tales they read, or from a competition, which
awakens a love of honor, and which might be displayed upon a hundred more
useful subjects; or it may arise from a desire of gaining the good will of
their masters or parents. Where these incentives are wanting, how bitter does
the study of languages render that innocent period of life, which seems
exclusively intended for happiness! "I wish I had never been born," said a boy
of eleven years old, to his mother: "why, my son?" said his mother. "Because I
am born into a world of trouble." What trouble, said his mother smiling, have
you known, my son? -- "Trouble enough, mamma," said he, "two Latin lessons to
get, every day." This boy was not deficient in genius nor in application to
books. He often amused himself in reading natural and ancient history, was
inquisitive after knowledge of every kind, and was never heard to ask a foolish
or impertinent question.

VII. Many sprightly boys of excellent capacities for useful knowledge, have
been so disgusted with the dead languages, as to retreat from the drudgery of
schools, to low company, whereby they have become bad members of society, and
entailed misery upon all who have been connected with them.

VIII. The Latin and Greek languages are the first tests of genius in schools.
Where boys discover a want of capacity for them, they are generally taken from
school, or remain there the butts of their companions. Dr. Swift early
discovered a want of taste for the dead languages. It would be unjust to
mention this fact, without ascribing it to the voice of reason and nature
speaking in this great man. He had no relish for the husks of literature. Truth
and knowledge were alone commensurate to the dignity and extent of his mind.

IX. The study of some of the Latin and Greek classics is unfavourable to
morals and religion. Indelicate amors, and shocking vices both of gods and
men, fill many parts of them. Hence an early and dangerous acquaintance with
vice; and hence, from an association of ideas, a diminshed respect for the
unity and perfections of the true God. Those classics which are free from this
censure, contain little else but the histories of murders, perpetrated by
kings, and related in such a manner as to excite pleasure and admiration. Hence
the universal preference of the military character to all others. -- To the
same cause we may ascribe the early passion for a cockade in school boys; and
the the frequent adoption of the principles and vices of armies, by young men
who are destined for other professions.

X. The study of the Latin and Greek languages is improper in the present state
of society and government in United States. While Greek and Latin are the only
avenues to science, education will always be confined to a few people. It is
only by rendering knowledge universal, that a republican form of government can
be preserved in our country.

I shall hereafter mention other reasons why the study of these languages is
improper in a peculiar manner in the United States.

XI. The cultivation of the Latin and Greek languages is a great obstacle to
the cultivation and perfection of the English language.

XII. It is likewise one of the greatest obstructions that has ever been thrown
in the way of propagating useful knowledge.

On each of these two last propositions I shall treat more fully in another
place.

I proceed now to consider the principle arguments that have been urged in
favor of the Latin and Greek languages, as necessary parts of a liberal
education.

1. A knowledge of the Latin or Greek grammar, it has been said, is necessary
for our becoming acquainted with English grammar. There was a time when the
authority of a great name imposed this opinion upon me, and even led me
publicly to adopt it, but I am now satisfied that it is wholly destitute of
truth. I have known many bachelors and masters of arts, who were incorrect
English scholars, and many persons of both sexes, ignorant of the dead
languages, who both wrote and spoke English, agreeably to the strictest rules
of modern grammar. Indeed I cannot help ascribing the late improvements in the
English language chiefly to the neglect of the Latin and Greek lanquages. The
Greek is supposed to be the most perfect language both in its construction and
harmony, that has ever been spoken by mortals. Now this language was not
learned through the medium of any other. Hence it was acquired and spoken with
equal propriety by all ranks of people, and not less by an apple woman, than by
the celebrated orators of Greece. In that highly favored nursery of human
genius, the avenues to knowledge were not obstructed by two or three dead, or
even foreign languages; nor was the precious season of youth, when memory is
most faithful, and curiosity most active, mis spent in learning words. Hence
the fame of ancient Greece in arts and sciences, and hence the sublimity of the
orations of Demosthenes, and of the poems of Homer. There was nothing in the
composition of the blood, or in the structure of the nerves of the ancient
Greeks, which gave them a pre-eminence over the rest of mankind. It arose
entirely from their being too wise to waste the important years of education in
learning to call substances, by two or three different names, instead of
studying their qualities and uses. The construction of the English, differs
materially from that of the Latin and Greek languages; and the attempt to
accommodate it to the Greek and Roman grammars has checked its improvement in
many instances. I hope to prove hereafter, that a knowledge of grammar, like a
knowledge of pronunciation, should be learned only by the ear in early life.
The practice of teaching boys English grammar, through the medium of a dead
language, is as absurd, as it would be for a parent to force his child to chew
pebbles or mahogany, in order to prepare its gums or teeth to masticate bread
and meat.

2. We are told that the Roman and Greek authors are the only perfect models of
taste and eloquence, and that it is necessary to study them, in order to
acquire their taste and spirit. Strange language indeed! what! did nature
exhaust herself in Greece and Rome? Are the ancients the only repositories of
the great principles of taste and genius? I reject the supposition; and will
venture to assert, in opposition to it, that we shall never equal the sublime
and original authors of antiquity until we cease to study them.

Nature is always the same. Let us yield to her inspiration alone, and avail
ourselves of allusions to the many discoveries which have lately been made in
her works. Shakespeare owes his fame, as a sublime and original poet, to his
having never read (as is generally believed) a Latin or Greek author. Hence he
spoke from nature, or rather, nature spoke through him. But it should be
remembered that art, as well as nature feeds the flame of genius. By neglecting
the ancients, we may borrow imagery from the many useful and well known arts
which have been the inventions of modern ages, and thereby surpass the ancients
in the variety and effect of our compositions. It is to this passion for
ancient writers that we are to ascribe the great want of originality, that
marks too many of the poems of modern times. A judicious critic has observed,
that the descriptions of Spring, which are published every year in England,
apply chiefly to the climates of Greece and the neighborhood of Rome. This is
the natural effect of a servile attachment to the ancient poets. It insensibly
checks invention and leads to imitation. The pleasure with which the poems of
the shoemaker, the milk-maid, and the Ayreshire ploughman, have been read by
all classes of people, proves that an acquaintance with the Greek or Roman
poets, is not necessary to inspire just ideas, or to produce harmony in poetry.
Dr. Swift, as an author, owes nothing to the ancients. He has attained to what
Pope calls the "majesty" and what Lord Shaftesbury calls the "divineness" of
simplicity in writing. All his compositions, exemplify his own perfect
definition of style. They consist of "proper words in their proper places." I
have heard of a learned gentlemen in Scotland, who, when any of his friends
proposed to introduce a stranger to him, asked only, as a proof of his taste
for composition, whether he admired Dr. Young's Night Thoughts? Were I to
receive a visitor upon similar terms, my only question should be, does he
admire the style of Dr. Swift?

Under this head I shall only add, that the most intimate acquaintance with the
Roman and Greek writers will not produce perfection of style in men who are
devoid of taste and genius. Hence we sometimes find the most celebrated
teachers of the Latin and Greek languages extremely deficient in English
composition. I acknowledge that Milton, Addison, Hume, Middleton and
Bolingbroke, whose styles have been so much admired, were all Latin and Greek
scholars. But in these authors, a native strength of genius, and taste
preserved their writings from the affectation and obscurity which are imparted
to English compositions, by an adherence to the grammars and arrangement of the
Latin and Greek languages.

3. It has been said that we cannot know the use or meaning of those numerous
English words which are derived from the Latin and Greek, without a knowledge
of those languages. To this I may answer, that what proves too much, proves
nothing at all. The argument that has been mentioned, proves that a knowledge
of the Celtic, the Saxon, the German, the French, the Italian and the Dutch, is
necessary to enable us to understand the use of many English words; for far the
greatest part of them are derived from those languages. But I object further to
this argument, that if a knowledge of the derivation of English words from the
Greek and Latin languages, should be followed by a strict regard to their
original meaning, it would lead us into many mistakes. The derivation of the
word "angel" would lead us to contemplate a messenger, instead of a perfect
finite intelligence. The derivation of the word "rebellion" would lead us to
contemplate a war commenced by a conquered people: instead of a resistance to
the just authority of government. Many other instances of similar incongruity
might be mentioned between the meaning of certain English words, and their
Roman and Greek originals. I conclude therefore that a knowledge of the
derivation of words is not necessary to teach us their proper use and meaning.
Custom, which is the law and rule of speech, and what is, instead of what
should be common, will always govern the use of words. Where custom is unknown,
modern English dictionaries will supply its place.

Here I beg leave to repeat that the study of the Greek and Latin languages by
the English nation has been one of the greatest obstructions, that ever has
been thrown in the way of the propagation of useful knowledge. By rendering our
language unintelligible to the greatest part of the people who hear or read it,
it has made it an improper vehicle of instruction. The orations of Demosthenes,
we are told, were, like earthquakes in ancient Greece. They moved whole
nations. The reason of this is plain. He never used a single word in any of
them, but what was alike intelligible to all classes of his hearers. The effect
of Indian eloquence upon the councils and wars of the savages in America,
depends wholly upon its being perfectly understood and felt by every member of
their communities. It has often been remarked that in England no play will
succeed without action, while sentiment alone insures the loudest claps of
applause, in the theaters of France. The reason of this is obvious. The English
language requires action to translate it, to half the common audience of a
theater, whereas the French language, which is uniform and stationary, is
understood, and, of course, the sentiment which is conveyed by it, is felt and
enjoyed by all who hear it. The writings of Voltaire are quoted by the
hairdressers and milliners of Paris, because they are written in the simple
language of the country, while many of the most celebrated British authors
cannot be understood by common readers, without the help of a dictionary or
interpreter. Richardson and Fielding are an exception to this remark. They are
alike intelligible and acceptable to the learned and unlearned, inasmuch as
they have conveyed all their ideas in plain, but decent English words. The
popularity of the methodist preachers may be ascribed in part to their speaking
in a language that is intelligible to the common people. It is true* many of
them are deficient in education, but this deficiency appears more in an
ignorance of the construction of the English language, than in the proper use
of English words, and perhaps this may be ascribed chiefly to their extempore
mode of preaching. It is happy for some of those churches where the Latin and
Greek languages are considered as necessary parts for education in their
clergy, that part of the public worship of God is confined to reading the
scriptures, and to forms of prayer, both of which are written in English, and
are intelligible to every class of hearers. Such congregations are not left to
the mercy of their preachers in every part of divine service. A pious woman in
London who heard her minister speak of the Deity, by the name of the great
Philanthropist, asked when she came home, what heathen god Philanthropist was?
There are few sermons composed by Latin and Greek scholars in which there are
not many hundred words, that are equally unintelligible to a majority of their
hearers. Hence I cannot help thinking that were John the Baptist to appear
again in our world, and to send to some of our doctors of divinity, or to many
of our young preachers to enquire after the signs of their divine mission, few
of them could adopt the answer of our Savior and say that to the poor the
gospel was "preached." It will require a total ignorance of the Latin and Greek
languages, or an uncommon mixture of good sense and piety in a preacher who is
acquainted with them, to address an audience in such a manner as to be
perfectly understood by the illiterate part of them.

I wish to press the considerations that have been mentioned under this head,
home to the feelings of the friends of virtue and religion. It has been
demonstrated, that the study of the ancient classics is hurtful to morals. It
is equally plain that the corruption of our language by the constant
substitution of words of Greek and Latin origin, to those which had become
familiar and universal, from long usage, has greatly retarded the progress of
knowledge of all kinds, but in a more especial manner, a great proportion of
that species of it which is delivered from the pulpit. I appeal to the
consciences of ministers of the gospel of all denominations, whether, instead
of exposing their their candidates for the ministry, to temptation from that
kind of learning which puffs up, without edifying, it would not be better to
direct them to employ the time which is usually mis-pent in acquiring it, in
studying the scriptures, and in making themselves masters of the English
language? It is impossible to tell what great improvements would be made by
these means in moral happiness in the United States.

4. We are told that a knowledge of the Greek and Roman languages, is necessary
to enable us to understand the frequent allusions that are made by English
writers to the mythology of those ancient nations. To this I answer, that the
less we know of this subject, the better; for what is the history of the
ancient fables, but an agreeable description of frauds -- rapes -- and murders,
which, while they please the imagination, shock the moral faculty? It is high
time to cease from idolizing the idolatry of Greece and Rome. Truth alone is
knowledge, and spending time in studying Greek and Roman fictions, is only
laboring to be more ignorant. If there is any moral contained in these
fictions, it is so much involved in obscurity, as not to be intelligible to a
young man at that time of life in which he usually becomes acquainted with
them. Happy will it be for the present and future generations, if an ignorance
of the Latin and Greek languages, should banish from modern poetry, those
disgraceful invocations of heathen gods, which indicate no less a want of
genius, than a want of reverence for the true God. I shall only add in this
place, that the best writers in the English language seldom borrow allusions
from the mythology of the Greek or Roman nations. Richardson and Fielding have
passed them by, and hence arises another reason why the works of those authors
are so universally intelligible and acceptable to to all classes of readers.

5. It has been said, that the Latin language has become a necessary part of
liberal knowledge, inasmuch as the European nations have by common consent made
it the vehicle of their discoveries. This argument had some weight while
science consisted only learning what was known; but since the enquiries of
philosophers have been directed to new objects of observation and experiment,
the Latin language has not been able to keep pace with the number and rapidity
of their discoveries. Where shall we find Latin words to convey just ideas of
the many terms which electricity -- chemistry -- navigation -- and many other
sciences have introduced into our modern languages? It is from experience of
the insufficiency of the Latin language for this purpose, that most of the
modern nations of Europe have been obliged to adopt their own languages, as the
vehicles of their discoveries, in science. If this argument had been
acknowledged to have weight in Europe, it should, from local circumstances,
have no weight in America. Here we have no intercourse with any part of Europe,
except her commercial seaports, and in these, all business is transacted in
modern languages. America, with respect to the nations of Europe, is like the
new planet, with respect to those, whose revolutions have long been described
in the solar system. She is placed at too great a distance from most of them,
to be within the influence of a reciprocal exchange of the rays of knowledge.
Like a certain animal, described by the naturalists, she must impregnate
herself. But while she retains a friendly intercourse with Great Britain, all
the valuable discoveries which are published in Latin, in any part of Europe,
will be transmitted to her through the medium of English translations.

6. It has been said that a knowledge of the Latin and Greek languages is
necessary to the learned professions of law -- physic -- and divinity. To this
I answer, that the most useful books in each of these professions are now
translated, or written in English, in consequence of which, knowledge in law --
physic -- and divinity has been greatly multiplied and extended. I see no use
at present for a knowledge of the Latin and Greek languages, for a lawyer, a
physician, or a divine, in the United States, except it be to facilitate the
remembrance of a few technical terms which may be retained without it. Two of
the most celebrated and successful lawyers in the United States, are strangers
to the Latin language. An eminent physician, who spent several of the years of
his youth in learning this language, has assured me, that he had not more than
three times in his life found any advantage from it. Very few physicians, I
believe, (professors of medecin only excepted, who are obliged to review Latin
theses previously to their publication) retain their knowledge of this
language, after they become established in business, and if they do, it is
preserved less from necessity, than from vanity, or a desire of reviving, by
reading the classics, the agreeable ideas of the early and innocent part of
their lives.

I know that it is commonly believed, that a knowledge of the Greek language,
is necessary to enable a divine fully to understand the New Testament. But I
object to this opinion, that the most useful and necessary parts of this divine
book are intelligible to the lowest capacities in its present English dress:
and I believe further, that there have been as many disputes among the critics,
about the meaning of words, and about editions and translations of the New
Testament, as there have been among unlearned christians about the meaning of
its obscure and difficult passages. If a knowledge of the Greek language be
necessary to enable a divine to understand the New Testament, it follows, that
a critical knowledge of all the dialects in which the different parts of it
were originally composed, is equally necessary for the same purpose; and, if
necessary to a divine, why not to the common people, for they are equally
interested in all the truths of revelation? The difficulties and absurdities
into which we are led by this proposition, are too obvious to be mentioned.

We are very apt to forget the age in which we live. In the fifteenth century,
all the knowledge of Europe was locked up in a few Greek and Latin manuscripts.
In this confined state of knowledge, an acquaintance with the Latin language
was thought to be necessary to civilize the human mind -- hence the teachers of
it acquired the title of "professors of humanity" in the European universities.
But we live in an age in which knowledge has been drawn from its dead
repositories, and diffused by the art of printing, in living languages, through
every part of the world. Humanity has therefore changed sides. Her gentleness
is now altogether in favor of modern literature.

We forget not only the age, but the country likewise in which we live. In
Europe many ancient constitutions -- laws -- treaties -- official letters --
and even private deeds, are written in Latin -- hence the knowledge of it has
sometimes been found useful for statesmen and lawyers -- but all the
constitutions, laws, treaties, public letters, and private deeds of the United
States, are written in English; and of course a knowledge of the Latin language
is not necessary to understand them. It is therefore as useless in America, as
the Spanish great-coat is in the island of Cuba, or the Dutch foot-stove, at
the Cape of Good Hope.

We forget further the difference of occupation between the inhabitants of the
present, and of the fifteenth century. Formerly public prayers and war were the
only business of man: but since agriculture, manufactures and commerce, have
afforded such different and profitable employments to mankind, there cannot be
greater folly than to learn two languages which are no ways connected with the
advancement of any of them.

I once thought health, the greatest blessing in the world, said Mr.
Rittenhouse to the author of this essay, but I do not think so now. There is
one thing of much greater value, and that is time. This opinion of our
excellent American philosopher, is true every where, but in a more especial
manner in the United States. Here the opportunities of acquiring knowledge and
of advancing private and public interest are so numerous, and the rewards of
genius and industry so certain, that not a particle of time should be misspent
or lost. We occupy a new country. Our principal business should be to explore
and apply its resources, all of which press us to enterprise and haste. Under
these circumstances, to spend four or five years in learning two dead
languages, is to turn our backs upon a gold mine, in order to amuse ourselves
in catching butterflies.

It is agreeable to hear of the progress of human reason in the gradual
declension of the usual methods of teaching the Latin and Greek languages
within the last forty years in Europe. Formerly boys were obliged to commit
whole volumes of Latin and Greek poetry to memory, as the only means of
learning those languages. Nor was this all; they were obliged to compose Latin
verses without the least regard being paid to genius, or taste for poetry. The
last act of school tyranny, was to compel boys to read the ancient classics
without the help of translations. All these methods of teaching the dead
languages are now laid aside. The next ray of truth that irradiates human
reason upon this subject, I hope will teach us to reject the Latin and Greek
languages altogether, as branches of a liberal education.

The progress of human reason should likewise be acknowledged in having
banished Latin and Greek quotations from sermons, and other religious tracts,
which are intended for the common people. Such quotations are to be found only
in books of science, addressed to the members of the learned professions, or to
persons who are supposed to be acquainted with the Latin and Greek languages.

There are certain follies, like the objects of sight, which cannot be seen
when the eye is placed too near them. We are struck with pity and horror in
contemplating the folly discovered by our ancestors in their military
expeditions to the holy land of Palestine. The generations which are to follow
us, will probably view our partiality to the classic ground of Greece and Rome,
with similar emotions. We laugh at the credulity of those nations who
worshipped apes and crocodiles, without recollecting, that future ages will
treat our superstitious veneration for the ancient poets and orators, with the
same ridicule. Posterity, in reading the history of the American revolution,
will wonder that in a country where so many exploits of wisdom and virtue were
performed, the human understanding was fettered by prejudices in favor of the
Latin and Greek languages. But I hope with the history of this folly, some
historian will convey to future generations, that many of the most active and
useful characters in accomplishing this revolution, were strangers to the
formalities of a Latin and Greek education.

It is high time to distinguish between a philosopher, and a scholar, between
things and words. He was educated at the college of -- said a gentleman to his
friend, speaking of a young man who was known to them both. "You mean Sir,"
replied his friend, he got his learning at the college of --; but as to
education, he appears to have received none any where. This young man was an
excellent Latin and Greek scholar, but knew nothing of men, or things.

Let it not be supposed from any thing that has been here advanced, that I wish
the knowledge of the Latin and Greek languages to be extinct in the world. Far
from it. My wish is to see it preserved, like the knowledge of law, or
medicine, as a distinct profession. Let the persons, who devote themselves to
the study of these languages, be called linguists, or interpreters, and let
them be paid for their translations and explanations of Latin and Greek books,
and other compositions in those languages. No more confidence will be placed by
the public, in the members of this new profession, than is daily placed in
lawyers and physicians, in matters of much greater importance; nor will more
credit be given to them, than we are accustomed to give to travelers and
historians. There can be no more reason why every man should be capable of
translating or judging of a Latin or Greek book, than there can be why every
man should be a lawyer or a physician, or why he should be obliged to visit
Constantinople or Grand Cairo, in order to become acquainted with the situation
of these two great cities. If this method of preserving and applying the dead
languages should be adopted, young men will learn them as they do law and
physic, by serving an apprenticeship, instead of going to school.

The following advantages would immediately attend the rejection of the Latin
and Greek languages as branches of a liberal education.

1. It would improve, and finally perfect the English language, by checking the
increase of those superfluous words which are derived from the Latin and Greek
languages. What use have we for festivity -- celebrity -- hilarity -- amenity
-- and a hundred other duplicate words, with which Johnson and Harris have
corrupted and weakened our language, and which are unintelligible to three
fourths of common English readers? The rejection of the ancient languages,
would further banish Latin and Greek words, such as, exit, fecit, excudit,
pinxit, acme, finis, bona fide, ipso facto, ad valorem, and a hundred others,
equally disgusting, from English compositions. It would moreover preserve our
language from encroachments of French and Italian words, such as eclat --
amateur -- douceur -- en passant -- corpse -- dilettanti -- con cuore -- piano
and many others, all of which impair the uniformity and dignity of the English
language.

2. The rejection of the Latin and Greek langauges from our schools, would
produce a revolution in science, and in human affairs. That nation which shall
first shake off the fetters of those ancient languages, will advance further in
knowledge, and in happiness, in twenty years, than any nation in Europe has
done, in a hundred.

3. It will have a tendency to destroy the prejudices of the common people
against schools and colleges. The common people do not despise scholars,
because they know more, but because they know less than themselves. A mere
scholar can call a horse, or a cow, by two or three different names, but he
frequently knows nothing of the qualities, or uses of those valuable animals.

4. It would be the means of banishing pride from our seminaries of public
education. Men are generally most proud of those things that do not contribute
to the happiness of themselves, or others. Useful knowledge generally humbles
the mind, but learning, like fine clothes, feeds pride, and thereby hardens the
human heart.

5. It would greatly increase the number of students in our colleges, and
thereby extend the benefits of education through every part of our country. The
excellency of knowledge would then be obvious to every body, because it would
be constantly applicable to some of the necessary and useful purposes of life,
and particularly to the security and order of wise and just government.

6. It would remove the present immense disparity which subsists between the
sexes, in the degrees of their education and knowledge. Perhaps one cause of
the misery of many families, as well as communities, may be sought for in the
mediocrity of knowledge of the women. They should know more or less, in order
to be happy themselves, and to communicate happiness to others. By ceasing to
make Latin and Greek a necessary part of a liberal education, we open the doors
for every species of improvement to the female part of society: -- hence will
arise new pleasures in their company, -- and hence, too, we may expect a
general reformation and refinement, in the generations which are to follow us;
for principles and manners in all societies are formed chiefly by the women.

It may be asked here, how shall we employ those years of a boy, that are now
usually spent in learning the Latin and Greek languages? I shall endeavor to
answer this question by laying down a short plan of a liberal English
education. In this undertaking, I shall strive to forget for a while all the
systems of education I have ever seen, and suggest such a one as is founded in
the original principles of action in the human mind.

1. Let the first eight years of a boy's time be employed in learning to speak,
spell, read and write the English language. For this purpose, let him be
committed to the care of a master, who speaks correctly at all times, and let
the books he reads, be written in a simple and correct style. During these
years, let not an English grammar by any means be put into his hands. It is to
most boys, under even twelve years of age, an unintelligible book. As well
might we contend, that a boy should be taught the names and number of the
humors of the eye, or the muscles of the tongue, in order to learn to see, or
to speak, as be taught the English language, by means of grammar. Sancho, in
attempting to learn to read, by chewing the four and twenty letters of the
alphabet, did not exhibit a greater absurdity, than a boy of seven or eight
years old does, in committing grammar rules to memory, in order to understand
the English language. Did we wish to describe a ship, so as to have all its
parts perfectly and speedily known, would we begin by describing its detached
parts in a ship-yard, or a rope-walk? Or would we not first fix every part in
its proper place, and then explain the names and uses of these parts, by
showing their subserviency to each other? In like manner, I affirm, that the
construction of our language should be learned by a careful attention to the
places and uses of the different parts of speech in agreeable compositions, and
not by contemplating them in a disjointed state in an English grammar. But I
will add further, that grammar should be taught only by the ear.
Pronounciation, which is far more extensive, and difficult, is learned only in
this way. To teach concord in the arrangement of words, let the master converse
with his pupils as well as hear them read, and let him distinctly mark and
correct every deviation from grammatical propriety which they utter. This
method of teaching grammar has been tried with success in the families of
several gentlemen of my acquaintance. It is both rational, and practicable. It
has, moreover, the authority of the wise Greeks to recommend it. Homer,
Xenophon, Demosthenes and Longinus, I believe, were all taught to speak, read,
and write their native language, without the encumbrance of a Greek grammar. I
do not mean by any thing that has been advanced, to insinuate that our pupil
should not be instructed in the principles and laws of our language. I have
reserved this part of knowledge to a much later period of his youth, at which
time he will acquire it almost as soon as Moliere's "Citizen turned Gentleman,"
learned to distinguish between prose and poetry. He will find that he is in
possession of this knowledge, and that the business of his master will be only
to give names to things with which he is already acquainted.

Under this head, I shall only add, that the perfection of the ear, as an
avenue of knowledge is not sufficiently known. Ideas acquired through that
organ, are much more durable, than those acquired by the eyes. We remember much
longer what we hear, than what we see; hence, old men recollect voices, long
after they forget faces. These facts are capable of great application to the
business of education.

Having provided our pupil with a vehicle of knowledge, by teaching him to read
and write, our next business should be to furnish him with ideas. Here it will
be necessary to remark, that the human mind in early life first comprehends
substances. From these it proceeds to actions, from actions to qualities, and
from qualities to degrees. Let us therefore in education, follow this order of
nature, and begin by instructing our pupil in the knowledge of substances, or
things. For this purpose, let us initiate him into the knowledge of the globe
on which he exists, by teaching him

2. Natural history. This study is simple and truly delightful. Animals of all
kinds are often the subjects of conversation and disputes among boys in their
walks and diversions. But this is not all; this study is the foundation of all
useful and practical knowledge in agriculture, manufactures and commerce, as
well as in philosophy, chemistry, and medecin. By making natural history the
first study of a boy, we imitate the conduct of the first teacher of man. The
first lesson that Adam received from his Maker in Paradise, was upon natural
history. It is probable that the dominion of our great progenitor over the
brute creation, and every other living creature, was founded upon a perfect
knowledge of their names and qualities, for God appears in this, as well as in
other instances, to have acted by the instrumentality of human reason. -- Where
a museum is wanting, all that is necessary for a boy to know of animals and
fishes -- insects -- trees and herbs, may be taught by means of prints.

3. Geography, is a simple science, and accommodated to the capacity of a boy
under twelve years of age. It may be perfectly understood by means of cards --
globes -- and maps; for each of these modes of conveying instruction, seizes
upon the senses and imagination. The frequent application which a boy is
obliged to make of his knowledge in geography, in reading, and conversation,
will soon fix it upon his memory, and from the time and manner in which he will
acquire it, he will never forget it.

I allow four years to be employed in acquiring these two fundamental branches
of knowledge. After our pupil has become tolerably well acquainted with them,
he should be instructed in the

4. French and German languages. These will be equally necessary, whether
commerce -- physic -- law or divinity is the pursuit of a young man. They
should be acquired only by the ear. Great care should be taken not to permit
him to learn these languages before he is twelve years old, otherwise he will
contract so much of the French and German accent as will impair the
prononciation of his native tongue.

5. Arithmetic, and some of the more simple branches of the mathematics should
be acquired between the twelfth and fourteenth years of his life.

6. Between his fourteenth and eighteenth years, he should be instructed in
grammar -- oratory -- criticism -- the higher branches of mathematics --
philosophy -- chemistry -- logic -- metaphysics -- chronology -- history --
government -- the principles of agriculture, and manufactures -- and in every
thing else that is necessary to qualify him for public usefulness, or private
happiness.

7. I know it is common to introduce what is called Moral Philosophy into a
system of liberal education. The name of this science is derived from the Pagan
schools. The study of it constituted a material part of their learning. Instead
of continuing this antichristian mode of teaching morals, I would propose a
course of lectures to be given upon the evidences, doctrines and precepts of
the Christian religion. The last part of this course might be made to include
the whole circle of moral duties, and from the connection it would have with
the evidences and doctrines of Christanity it would produce an impression upon
the understanding which no time or circumstances would ever wear away. It is by
neglecting to teach young men the Christian religion as a science, or by the
separation of its morals from its principles, that colleges have become in so
many instances the nurseries of infidelity.

Extract of a letter from the reverend Mr. James Muir, principal of the academy
of Alexandria in Virginia, to the Author, dated July 29, 1791.
I HAVE read with satisfaction, in the Museum, your observations on studying
the learned languages. There is little taste for them in this place. In our
academy, where there are near ninety students, not above nineteen are poring
over Latin and Greek. One of these nineteen was lately addressed by a student
of Arithmetic in the following language -- Pray, Sir, can you resolve me, by
your Latin, this question, If one bushel of corn cost four shillings, what cost
fifty bushels? -- A demand of this kind from a youth, is to me a proof of the
taste of Americans in the present day, who prefer the useful to the ornamental.


ANSWER to the foregoing letter, containing further observations upon the study
of the Latin and Greek languages.
DEAR SIR,
IT gave me great pleasure to find, by your polite letter of July 29th, that my
opinions, upon the subject of the Latin and Greek languages, have met with your
approbation; and that the young gentlemen who compose your academy had
discovered so much good sense in preferring useful to useless, or, at best,
ornamental literature.

I have read all the replies that have been published to my opinions: and am
more confirmed in the truth of them, than ever, by the weakness and fallacy of
the objections that have been made to them. The style of some of those replies
has established one of my propositions in the most forcible manner. It has
demonstrated that a knowledge of the dead languages does not confer taste or
elegance in the English language, any more than it does good breeding, or good
temper. I except from this remark the candid and ingenious letters published in
the Federal Gazette, said to be written by Dr. Stuber, of this city.

To persuade men, that white is black, or black, white, it is necessary
sometimes to make them believe that they are gray. The mind requires a resting
point, in passing from error to truth, upon many subjects. I shall avail myself
of this weakness in human nature, and take the liberty of suggesting a method
of teaching the Latin and Greek languages, which I conceive, will be
accommodated to the present state of the prejudices of our countrymen in their
favor.

The late Dr. Franklin used to say, that the learning of a dead or foreign
language might be divided into ten parts. That it required five only to learn
to read it -- seven to speak it -- and the whole ten to write it. Now, when we
consider how seldom we are called upon to speak or write the Latin or Greek
languages, suppose we teach our boys only to read them. This will cut off one
half the difficulty of learning them, and and enable a boy to acquire as much
of both, in two years, as will be necessary for him. He will, moreover, by this
plan, be able to read more of the classics than are read at present in our
schools. The classics are now read only for the sake of acquiring a knowledge
of the construction of the languages in which they are written; but by the plan
I have proposed, they would be read for the sake of the matter they contained,
and there would be time enough to read each book from its beginning to its end.
At present, what boy ever reads all the Aenead of Virgil, or the Iliad of
Homer? In short, few boys ever carry with them from school, any thing but a
smattering of the classics. They peep into a dozen of them; but are taught to
attend to every thing they contain, more than to subjects which are treated of
by them.

In the way I have proposed, a boy would be able to translate all the Latin and
Greek books he would meet with, and from the perfect knowledge he would acquire
of them at school, he would probably retain that knowledge as long as he lived.

To carry this mode of teaching the Latin and Greek languages into effect, it
is absolutely necessary that a boy should first be instructed in history and
geography. Let him read an account of the rise, progress, and fall of the Greek
and Roman nations; and examine, upon maps, the countries they inhabited and
conquered, and their languages will soon become interesting to him. The neglect
of this natural and easy mode of instruction, is an inversion of all order. The
absurdity of it was once happily exposed by a boy of eight years old, who, with
a Latin Grammar in his hand, gravely asked his father, who made the Latin
language, and what was it made for? Had this boy been previously instructed in
the Roman history, he would not have asked such a question. Considering his
age, it was as natural, as it was foolish.

There is no play common among children, that strikes me with an idea of half
the folly that I am struck with, every time I look into a Latin school, and see
thirty or forty little boys pinioned down to benches, and declining nouns,
conjugating verbs, or writing Latin versions. I consider the highest attainment
in this kind of learning, as nothing more than successful dostards, but far
less useful than those which are exhibited in the usual athletic excercises of
school boys.

By adopting the plan I have proposed, a boy will not open a Latin or Greek
book, till he is fourteen or fifteen years old; so that the dead languages,
instead of being the first, will be the last things he will learn at school. At
this age, he will learn them with half the trouble, and understand them much
better than he would have done at nine or ten years of age. For though
languages are acquired with most ease by the ear under puberty, yet they are
acquired most easily by the eye, after that period of life. But there is
another advantage in making the Latin and Greek languages the last things that
are taught at school. The bent of a young man's inclinations is generally known
at fourteen or fifteen, and seldom sooner. Now if he incline to commerce -- to
a military -- or a naval life -- or to a mechanical employment, in all of which
it is agreed, Latin and Greek are unnecessary, it will be improper to detain
him any longer at school, by which means much money will be saved by the
parents, and much time saved by the boy, both of which are wasted by the
present indiscriminate and preposterous mode of teaching the dead languages.

The idea of the necessity of a knowledge of those languages, as an
introduction to the knowledge of the English language, begins to lose ground.
It is certainly a very absurd one. We have several English schools in our city,
in which boys and girls of twelve and fourteen years old have been taught to
speak and write our native language with great grammatical propriety. Some of
these children would disgrace our bachelors and masters of arts, who have spent
four or five years in the study of the Latin and Greek languages in our
American colleges. It is true, these Latin and Greek scholars, after a while,
acquire a knowledge of our language: but it is in the same slow way, in which
some men acquire a knowledge of the forms of good breeding. Three months
instruction will often impart more of both, than a whole life spent in
acquiring them simply by imitation.

Where there is one Latin scholar, who is obliged, in the course of his life,
to speak or write a Latin sentence, there are hundreds who are not under that
necessity. Why then should we spend years in teaching that which is so rarely
required in future life? For some years to come, the reading of the language,
may be necessary; but a young man of fourteen or fifteen, may be taught to do
this perfectly in one year, without committing a single grammar rule to memory,
or without spoiling his hand by writing a single version.

Much more, in my opinion, might be said in favor of teaching our young men to
speak the Indian languages of our country, than to speak or write Latin. By
their means, they might qualify themselves to become ambassadors to our Indian
nations, or introduce among them a knowledge of the blessings of civilization
and religion.

We have lately seen a large portion of power wrested from the hands of kings
and priests, and exercised by its lawful owners. Is it not high time to wrest
the power over the education of our youth, out of the hands of ignorant or
prejudiced schoolmasters, and place it in the hands of men of more knowledge
and experience in the affairs of the world? We talk much of our being an
enlightened people; but I know not with what reason, while we tolerate a system
of education in our schools, which is as disgraceful to the human understanding
as the most corrupt tenets or practices of the pagan religion, or of the
Turkish government.

With great respect for your character, as well as for your present honorable
and useful employment, I am, dear sir,

Your friend and most obedient servant. BENJAMIN RUSH.
Philadelphia, August 24, 1791.

THOUGHTS UPON THE AMUSEMENTS AND PUNISHMENTS WHICH ARE PROPER FOR SCHOOLS.
ADDRESSED TO GEORGE CLYMER, ESQUIRE.
DEAR SIR,
THE last time I had the pleasure of being in your company, you did me the
honor to request my opinion upon the AMUSEMENTS and PUNISHMENTS which are
proper for schools The subjects are of a very opposite nature, but I shall
endeavor to comply with your wishes, by sending you a few thoughts upon each
of them. I am sure you will not reject my opinions because they are contrary to
received practices, for I know that you are accustomed to think for yourself,
and that every proposition that has for its objects the interests of humanity
and your country, will be treated by you with attention and candor.

I shall begin with the subjects of AMUSEMENTS. Montesquieu informs us that the
exercises of the last day of the life of Epaminondas, were the same as his
amusements in his youth. Herein we have an epitome of the perfection of
education. The amusements of Epaminondas were of a military nature; but as the
profession of arms is the business of only a small part of mankind, and happily
much less necessary in the United States than in ancient Greece, I would
propose that the amusements of our youth, at school, should consist of such
exercises as will be most subservient to their future employments in life.
These are; 1. agriculture; 2. mechanical occupations; and 3. the business of
the learned professions.

I. There is a variety in the employments of agriculture which may readily be
suited to the genius, taste, and strength of young people. An experiment has
been made of the efficacy of these employments, as amusements, in the Methodist
College at Abington, in Maryland; and, I have been informed, with the happiest
effects. A large lot is divided between the scholars, and premiums are adjudged
to those of them who produce the most vegetables from their grounds, or who
keep them in the best order.

II. As the employments of agriculture cannot afford amusement at all seasons
of the year, or in cities I would propose, that children should be allured to
to seek amusements in such of the mechanical arts as are suited to their
strength and capacities. Where is the boy who does not delight in the use of a
hammer -- a chissel -- or a saw? and who has not enjoyed a high degree of
pleasure in his youth, in constructing a miniature house? How amusing are the
machines which are employed in the manufactory of clothing of all kinds! and
how full of various entertainment are the mixtures which take place in the
chemical arts! each of these might be contrived upon such a scale, as not only
to amuse young people, but to afford a profit to their parents or masters. The
Moravians, at Bethlehem in our state, have proved that this proposition is not
a chimerical one. All the amusements of their children are derived from their
performing the subordinate parts of several of the mechanical arts; and a
considerable portion of the wealth of that worthy and happy society is the
product of the labor of their little hands. --

If, in these amusements, an appeal should be made to that spirit of
competition which is so common among young people, it would be the means of
producing more pleasure to the children, and more profit to all who are
connected with them. The wealth of those manufacturing towns in England, which
employ the children of poor people, is a proof of what might be expected from
connecting amusement* and labor together, in all our schools. The product from
the labor obtained in this way, from all the schools in the United States,
would amount to a sum which would almost exceed calculation.

III. To train the youth who are intended for the learned professions or for
merchandise, to the duties of their future employments, by means of useful
amusements, which are related to those employments, will be impracticable; but
their amusements may be derived from cultivating a spot of ground; for where is
the lawyer, the physician, the divine, or the merchant, who has not indulged or
felt a passion, in some part of his life, for rural improvements? -- Indeed I
conceive the seeds of knowledge in agriculture will be most productive, when
they are planted in the minds of this class of scholars.

I have only to add under this head, that the common amusements of children
have no connection with their future occupations. Many of them injure their
clothes, some of them waste their strength, and impair their health, and all of
them prove more or less, the means of producing noise, or of exciting angry
passions, both of which are calculated to beget vulgar manners. The Methodists
have wisely banished every species of play from their college. Even the healthy
and pleasurable exercise of swimming, is not permitted to their scholars,
except in the presence of one of their masters.

Do not think me too strict if I here exclude gunning from among the amusements
of young men. My objections to it are as follow.

1 It hardens the heart, by inflicting unnecessary pain and death upon animals.

2. It is unnecessary in civilized society, where animal food may be obtained
from domestic animals, with greater facility.

3. It consumes a great deal of time, and thus creates habits of idleness.

4. It frequently leads young men into low, and bad company.

5. By imposing long abstinence from food, it leads to intemperance in eating,
which naturally leads to intemperance in drinking.

6. It exposes to fevers, and accidents. The newspapers are occasionally filled
with melancholy accounts of the latter, and every physician must have met with
frequent and dangerous instances of the former, in the course of his practice.

I know the early use of a gun is recommended in our country, to teach our
young men the use of firearms, and thereby to prepare them for war and battle.
But why should we inspire our youth, by such exercises, with hostile ideas
toward their fellow creatures? -- Let us rather instill into their minds
sentiments of universal benevolenee to men of all nations and colors. Wars
originate in error and vice. Let us eradicate these, by proper modes of
education, and wars will cease to be necessary in our country. The divine
author and lover of peace will then suffer no man to do us wrong; yea, he will
reprove kings for our sake, saying, touch not my anointed and do my people no
harm. Should the nations with whom war is a trade, approach our coasts, they
will retire from us, as Satan did from our Savior, when he came to assault
him; and for the same reason, because they will find nothing in us congenial to
their malignant dispositions; for the flames of war can be spread from one
nation to another, only by the conducting mediums of vice and error.

I have hinted at the injury which is done to the health of young people by
some of their amusements; but there is a practice common in all our schools,
which does more harm to their bodies than all the amusements that can be named,
and that is, obliging them to sit too long in one place, or crowding too many
of them together in one room. By means of the former, the growth and shape of
the body have been impaired; and by means of the latter, the seeds of fevers
have often been engendered in schools. In the course of my business, I have
been called to many hundred children who have been seized with indispositions
in school, which evidently arose from the action of morbid effluvia, produced
by the confined breath and perspiration of too great a number of children in
one room. To obviate these evils, children should be permitted, after they have
said their lessons, to amuse themselves in the open air, in some of the useful
and agreeable exercises which have been mentioned. Their minds will be
strengthened, as well as their bodies relieved by them. To oblige a sprightly
boy to sit seven hours in a day, with his little arms pinioned to his sides,
and his neck unnaturally bent toward his book; and for no crime! -- what
cruelty and folly are manifested, by such an absurd mode of instructing or
governing young people!

I come next to say a few words upon the subject of PUNISHMENTS which are
proper in schools.

In barbarous ages every thing partook of the complexion of the times. Civil,
ecclesiastical, military, and domestic punishments were all of a cruel nature.
With the progress of reason and christianity, punishments of all kinds have
become less severe. Solitude and labor are now substituted in many countries,
with success, in the room of the whipping-post and the gallows. -- The innocent
infirmities of human nature are no longer proscribed, and punished by the
church. Discipline, consisting in the vigilance of officers, has lessened the
supposed necessity of military executions; and husbands -- fathers -- and
masters now blush at the history of the times, when wives, children, and
servants, were governed only by force. But unfortunately this spirit of
humanity and civilization has not reached our schools. The rod is yet the
principal instrument of governing them, and a schoolmaster remains the only
despot now known in free countries. Perhaps it is because the little subjects
of their arbitrary and capricious power have not been in a condition to
complain. I shall endeavor therefore to plead their cause, and to prove that
corporal punishments (except to children under four or five years of age) are
never necessary, and always hurtful, in schools. -- The following arguments I
hope will be sufficient to establish this proposition.

1. Children are seldom sent to school before they are capable of feeling the
force of rational or moral obligation. They may therefore be deterred from
committing offenses, by motives less disgraceful than the fear of corporal
punishments.

2. By correcting children for ignorance and negligence in school, their ideas
of improper and immoral actions are confounded, and hence the moral faculty
becomes weakened in after life. It would not be more cruel or absurd to inflict
the punishment of the whipping-post upon a man, for not dressing fashionably or
neatly, than it is to ferule a boy for blotting his copy book, or mis-spelling
a word.

3. If the natural affection of a parent is sometimes insufficient, to restrain
the violent effects of a sudden gust of anger upon a child, how dangerous must
the power of correcting children be when lodged in the hands of a
schoolmaster, in whose anger there is no mixture of parental affection!
Perhaps those parents act most wisely, who never trust themselves to inflict
corporal punishments upon their children, after they are four or five years
old, but endeavor to punish, and reclaim them, by confinement, or by abridging
them of some of their usual gratifications, in dress, food or amusements.

4. Injuries are sometimes done to the bodies, and sometimes to the intellects
of children, by corporal punishments. I recollect, when a boy, to have lost a
school-mate, who was said to have died in consequence of a severe whipping he
received in school. At that time I did not believe it possible, but from what I
now know of the disproportion between the violent emotions of the mind, and the
strength of the body in children, I am disposed to believe, that not only
sickness, but that even death may be induced, by the convulsions of a youthful
mind, worked up to a high sense of shame and resentment.

The effects of thumping the head, boxing the ears, and pulling the hair, in
impairing the intellects, by means of injuries done to the brain, are too
obvious to be mentioned.

5. Where there is shame, says Dr. Johnson, there may be virtue. But corporal
punishments, inflicted at school, have a tendency to destroy the sense of
shame, and thereby to destroy all moral sensibility. The boy that has been
often publicly whipped at school, is under great obligations to his maker, and
his parents, if he afterward escape the whipping-post or the gallows.

6. Corporal punishments, inflicted at school, tend to beget a spirit of
violence in boys toward each other, which often follows them through life; but
they more certainly beget a spirit of hatred, or revenge, toward their
masters, which too often becomes a ferment of the same baneful passions toward
other people. The celebrated Dr. afterward Baron Haller declared, that he
never saw, without horror, during the remaining part of his life, a
schoolmaster, who had treated him with unmerited severity, when he was only
ten years old. A similar anecdote is related of the famous M. de Condamine. I
think I have known several instances of this vindictive, or indignant spirit,
to continue toward a cruel and tyrannical schoolmaster, in persons who were
advanced in life, and who were otherwise of gentle and forgiving dispositions.

7. Corporal punishments, inflicted at schools, beget a hatred to instruction
in young people. I have sometimes suspected that the Devil, who knows how great
an enemy knowledge is to his kingdom, has had the address to make the world
believe that ferruling, pulling and boxing ears, cudgelling, horsing, etc. and,
in boarding-schools, a little starving, are all absolutely necessary for the
government of young people, on purpose that he might make both schools, and
schoolmasters odious, and thereby keep our world in ignorance; for ignorance
is the best means the Devil ever contrived, to keep up the number of his
subjects in our world.

8. Corporal punishments are not only hurtful, but altogether unnecessary, in
schools. Some of the most celebrated and succesful schoolmasters, that I have
known, never made use of them.

9. The fear of corporal punishments, by debilitating the body, produces a
corresponding debility in the mind, which contracts its capacity of acquiring
knowledge. This capacity is enlarged by the tone which the mind acquires from
the action of hope, love, and confidence upon it; and all these passions might
easily be cherished, by a prudent and enlightened schoolmaster.

10. As there should always be a certain ratio between the strength of a
remedy, and the excitability of the body in diseases, so there should be a
similar ratio between the force employed in the government of a school, and the
capacites and tempers of children. A kind rebuke, like fresh air in a fainting
fit, is calculated to act upon a young mind with more effect, than stimulants
of the greatest power; but corporal punishments level all capacities and
tempers, as quack-medicines do, all constitutions and diseases. They dishonor
and degrade our species; for they suppose a total absence of all moral and
intellectual feeling from the mind. Have we not often seen dull children
suddenly improve, by changing their schools? The reason is obvious. The
succesful teacher only accommodated his manner and discipline to the capacities
of his scholars.

11. I conceive corporal punishments, inflicted in an arbitrary manner, to be
contrary to the spirit of liberty, and that they should not be tolerated in a
free government. Why should not children be protected from violence and
injuries, as well as white and black servants? -- Had I influence enough in our
legislature to obtain only a single law, it should be to make the punishment
for striking a school boy, the same as for assaulting and beating an adult
member of society.

To all these arguments I know some well disposed people will reply, that the
rod has received a divine commission from the sacred Scriptures, as the
instrument of correcting children. To this I answer that the rod, in the Old
Testament, by a very common figure in Rhetoric, stands for punishments of any
kind, just as the sword, in the New Testament, stands for the faithful and
general administration of justice, in such a way as is most calculated to
reform criminals, and to prevent crimes

The following method of governing a school, I apprehend, would be attended
with much better effects, than that which I have endeavored to show to be
contrary to reason, humanity, religion, liberty, and the experience of the
wisest and best teachers in the world.

Let a schoolmaster endeavor, in the first place, to acquire the confidence
of his scholars, by a prudent deportment. Let him learn to command his passions
and temper, at all times, in his school, -- Let him treat the name of the
Supreme Being with reverence, as often as it occurs in books, or in
conversation with his scholars. -- Let him exact a respectful behavior toward
himself, in his school; but in the intervals of school hours, let him treat his
scholars with gentleness and familiarity. If he should even join in their
amusements, he would not loose, by his condescension, any part of his authority
over them. But to secure their affection and respect more perfectly, let him,
once or twice a year, lay out a small sum of money in penknives, and books, and
distribute them among his scholars, as rewards for proficiency in learning, and
for good behavior. If these prudent and popular measures should fail of
preventing offenses at school, then let the following modes of punishment be
adopted.

1. Private admonition. By this mode of rebuking, we imitate the conduct of the
divine Being toward his offending creatures, for his first punishment is
always inflicted privately, by means of the still voice of conscience.

2. Confinement after school-hours are ended; but with the knowledge of the
parents of the children.

3. Holding a small sign of disgrace, of any kind, in the middle of the floor,
in the presence of a whole school.

If these punishments fail of reclaiming a bad boy, he should be dismissed from
school, to prevent his corrupting his school-mates. It is the business of
parents, and not of schoolmasters, to use the last means for eradicating
idleness and vice from their children.

The world was created in love. It is sustained by love. Nations and families
that are happy, are made so only by love. Let us extend this divine principle,
to those little communities which we call schools. Children are capable of
loving in a high degree. They may therefore be governed by love.

The occupation of a schoolmaster is truly dignified. He is, next to mothers,
the most important member of civil society. Why then is there so little rank
connected with that occupation? Why do we treat it with so much neglect or
contempt? It is because the voice of reason, in the human heart, associates
with it the idea of despotism and violence. Let schoolmasters cease to be
tyrants, and they will soon enjoy the respect and rank, which are naturally
connected with their profession.

We are grossly mistaken in looking up wholly to our governments, and even to
ministers of the gospel, to promote public and private order in society.
Mothers and schoolmasters plant the seeds of nearly all the good and evil
which exist in our world. Its reformation must therefore be begun in nurseries
and in schools. If the habits we acquire there, were to have no influence upon
our future happiness, yet the influence they have upon our governments, is a
sufficient reason why we ought to introduce new modes, as well as new objects
of education into our country.

You have lately been employed in an attempt to perpetuate our existence as a
free people, by establishing the means of national credit and defense; Mr.
Clymer was one of the Representatives of Pennsylvania, in the first Congress of
the United States which met in New York, in the year 1789.
but these are feeble bulwarks against slavery, compared with habits of labor
and virtue, disseminated among our young people. Let us establish schools for
this purpose, in every township in the United States, and conform them to
reason, humanity, and the present state of society in America. Then, Sir, will
the generations who are to follow us, realize the precious ideas of the dignity
and excellence of republican forms of government, which I well recollect you
cherished with so much ardor, in the beginning of the American revolution, and
which you have manifested ever since, both by your public and private conduct.

We suffer so much from traditional error of various kinds, in education,
morals, and government, that I have been led to wish, that it were possible for
us to have schools established, in the United States, for teaching the art of
forgetting. I think three-fourths of all our schoolmasters, divines, and
legislators would profit very much, by spending two or three years in such
useful institutions.

An apology may seem necessary, not only for the length of this letter, but for
some of the opinions contained in it. I know how apt mankind are to brand every
proposition for innovation, as visionary and Utopian. But good men should not
be discouraged, by such epithets, from their attempts to combat vice and error.
There never was an improvement, in any art or science, nor even a proposal for
meliorating the condition of man, in any age or country, that has not been
considered in the light of what has been called, since Sir. Thomas More's time,
an Utopian scheme. The application of the magnet to navigation, and of steam to
mechanical purposes, have both been branded as Utopian projects. The great idea
in the mind of Columbus, of exploring a new world, was long viewed, in most of
the courts of Europe, as the dream of a visionary sailor. But why do we go to
ancient times, for proofs of important innovations in human affairs having been
treated as Utopian schemes. You and I recollect the time, when the abolition of
negro slavery in our state, as also when the independence of the United States,
and the present wise and happy confederacy of our republics, were all
considered by many of our sober prudent men, as subjects of an Utopian nature.

If those benefactors of mankind, who have levelled mountains in the great road
of human life, by the discoveries or labors which have been mentioned, have
been stigmatized with obloquy, as visionary projectors, why should an
individual be afraid of similar treatment, who has only attempted to give to
that road, from its beginning, a straight direction.

If but a dozen men like yourself, approve of my opinions, it will overbalance
the most illiberal opposition they may meet with, from all the learned vulgar
of the United States.

For the benefit of those persons who consider opinions as improved, like
certain liquors, by time; and who are opposed to innovations, only because they
did not occur to their ancestors, I shall conclude my letter with an anecdote
of a minister in London, who, after employing a long sermon, in controverting
what he supposed to be an heretical opinion, concluded it with the following
words, I tell you, I tell you my brethren, -- I tell you again, -- that an old
error is better than a new truth.

With great regard I am, Dear Sir, Yours sincerely, BENJAMIN RUSH.
Philadelphia, August 20th, 1790. P. S. Since writing the above letter, an
ingenious German friend of mine has informed me, that a curious work has lately
appeared in Germany, entitled, A treatise on human misery, written by a Mr.
Salzman, an enlightened schoolmaster, in which a striking view is given of the
misery inflicted upon part of the human race, by the present absurd, and cruel
modes of conducting education in public schools. The author concludes this part
of his work, my friend informs me, with a dream, in which he beholds with
ineffable joy, the avenging angel descending from heaven, and afterward
consuming in an immense bonfire, certain absurd school-books, and all the
ferrules in the world.



THOUGHTS UPON FEMALE EDUCATION, ACCOMMODATED TO THE PRESENT STATE OF SOCIETY,
MANNERS, AND GOVERNMENT, IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. ADDRESSED TO THE
VISITORS OF THE YOUNG LADIES' ACADEMY IN PHILADELPHIA, 28th JULY, 1787, AT THE
CLOSE OF THE QUARTERLY EXAMINATION, AND AFTERWARD PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF
THE VISITORS.
GENTLEMEN,
I HAVE yielded with diffidence to the solicitations of the Principal of the
Academy, in undertaking to express my regard for the prosperity of this
seminary of learning, by submitting to your candor, a few Thoughts upon Female
Education.

The first remark that I shall make upon this subject, is, that female
education should be accommodated to the state of society, manners, and
government of the country, in which it is conducted.

This remark leads me at once to add,, that the education of young ladies, in
this country, should be conducted upon principles very different from what it
is in Great Britain, and in some respects, different from what it was when we
were part of a monarchical empire.

There are several circumstances in the situation, employments, and duties of
women in America, which require a peculiar mode of education.

I. The early marriages of our women, by contracting the time allowed for
education, renders it necessary to contract its plan, and to confine it chiefly
to the more useful branches of literature.

II. The state of property in America, renders it necessary for the greatest
part of our citizens to employ themselves, in different occupations, for the
advancement of their fortunes. This cannot be done without the assistance of
the female members of the community. They must be the stewards, and guardians
of their husbands' property. That education, therefore, will be most proper for
our women, which teaches them to discharge the duties of those offices with the
most success and reputation.

III. From the numerous avocations from their families, to which professional
life exposes gentlemen in America, a principal share of the instruction of
children naturally devolves upon the women. It becomes us therefore to prepare
them by a suitable education, for the discharge of this most important duty of
mothers.

IV. The equal share that every citizen has in the liberty, and the possible
share he may have in the government of our country, make it necessary that our
ladies should be qualified to a certain degree by a peculiar and suitable
education, to concur in instructing their sons in the principles of liberty and
government.

V. In Great Britain the business of servants is a regular occupation; but in
America this humble station is the usual retreat of unexpected indigence; hence
the servants in this country possess less knowledge and subordination than are
required from them; and hence, our ladies are obliged to attend more to the
private affairs of their families, than ladies generally do, of the same rank
in Great Britain. "They are good servants," said an American lady of
distinguished merit, Mrs. Graeme.
in a letter to a favorite daughter, Mrs. Elizabeth Ferguson.
who will do well with good looking after. This circumstance should have great
influence upon the nature and extent of female education in America.

The branches of literature most essential for a young lady in this country,
appear to be,

I. A knowledge of the English language. She should not only read, but speak
and spell it correctly. And to enable her to do this, she should be taught the
English grammar, and be frequently examined in applying its rules in common
conversation.

II. Pleasure and interest conspire to make the writing of a fair and legible
hand, a necessary branch of a lady's education. For this purpose she should be
taught not only to shape every letter properly, but to pay the strictest regard
to points and capitals. The present mode of writing among persons of taste is
to use a capital letter only for the first word of a sentence, and for names of
persons, places and months, and for the first word of every line in poetry. The
words should be so shaped that a straight line may be drawn between two lines,
without touching the extremities of the words in either of them.


I once heard of a man who professed to discover the temper and disposition of
persons by looking at their hand writing. Without enquiring into the
probability of this story; I shall only remark, that there is one thing in
which all mankind agree upon this subject, and that is, in considering writing
that is blotted, crooked, or illegible, as a mark of vulgar education. I know
of few things more rude or illiberal, than to obtrude a letter upon a person of
rank or business, which cannot be easily read. Peculiar care should be taken to
avoid every kind of ambiguity and affectation in writing names. I have now a
letter in my possession upon business, from a gentleman of a liberal profession
in a neighboring state, which I am unable to answer, because I cannot discover
the name which is subscribed to it. Dr. Franklin received many letters while he
was in France during the American war, from persons who wished to migrate to
America, and who appeared to possess knowledge and talents that would have been
useful to his country, but their names were subscribed to their letters in so
artificial and affected a manner, that he was unable to decypher them, and of
course, did not answer them.
For obvious reasons I would recommend the writing of the first or christian
name at full length, where it does not consist of more than two syllables.
Abbreviations of all kind in letter writing, which always denote either haste
or carlessness, should likewise be avoided. I have only to add under this head
that the Italian and inverted hands which are read with difficulty, are by no
means accommodated to the active state of business in America, or to the
simplicity of the citizens of a republic.

III. Some knowledge of figures and book-keeping is absolutely necessary to
qualify a young lady for the duties which await her in this country. There are
certain occupations in which she may assist her husband with this knowledge;
and should she survive him, and agreeably to the custom of our country be the
executrix of his will, she cannot fail of deriving immense advantages from it.

IV. An acquaintance with geography and some instruction in chronology will
enable a young lady to read history, biography, and travels, with advantage;
and thereby qualify her not only for a general intercourse with the world, but
to be an agreeable companion for a sensible man. To these branches of knowledge
may be added, in some instances, a general acquaintance with the first
principles of astronomy natural philosophy and chemistry, particularly, with
such parts of them as are calculated to prevent superstition, by explaining the
causes, or obviating the effects of of natural evil, and such, as are capable
of being applied to domestic, and culinary purposes.

V. Vocal music should never be neglected, in the education of a young lady, in
this country. Besides preparing her to join in that part of public worship
which consists in psalmody, it will enable her to soothe the cares of domestic
life. The distress and vexation of a husband -- the noise of a nursey, and,
even, the the sorrows that will sometimes intrude into her own bosom, may all
be relieved by a song, where sound and sentiment unite to act upon the mind. I
hope it will not be thought foreign to this part of our subject to introduce a
fact here which has been suggested to me by my profession, and that is, that
the exercise of the organs of the breast, by singing, contributes very much to
defend them from those diseases to which our climate; and other causes, have of
late exposed them. -- Our German fellow citizens are seldom afflicted with
consumptions, nor have I ever known but one instance of spitting of blood among
them. This, I believe, is in part occasioned by the strength which their lungs
acquire, by exercising them frequently in vocal music, for this constitutes an
essential branch of their education. The music-master of our academy Mr. Adgate.
has furnished me with an observation still more in favor of this opinion. He
informed me that he had known several instances of persons who were strongly
disposed to the consumption, who were restored to health, by the moderate
exercise of their lungs in singing.

VI. DANCING is by no means an improper branch of education for an American
lady. It promotes health, and renders the figure and motions of the body easy
and agreeable. I anticipate the time when the resources of conversation shall
be so far multiplied, that the amusement of dancing shall be wholly confined to
children. But in our present state of society and knowledge, I conceive it to
be an agreeable substitute for the ignoble pleasures of drinking, and gaming,
in our assemblies of grown people.

VII. The attention of our young ladies should be directed, as soon as they are
prepared for it, to the reading of history -- travels -- poetry -- and moral
essays. These studies are accommodated, in a peculiar manner, to the present
state of society in America, and when a relish is excited for them, in early
life, they subdue that passion for reading novels, which so generally prevails
among the fair sex. I cannot dismiss this species of writing and reading
without observing, that the subjects of novels are by no means accommodated to
our present manners. They hold up life, it is true, but it is not as yet life
in America. Our passions have not as yet "overstepped the modesty of nature."
nor are they "to^^ ^o tatters," to use the expressions of the poet, by
extravagant love, jealousy, ambition, or revenge. As yet the intrigues of a
British novel, are as foreign to our manners, as the refinements of Asiatic
vice. Let it not be said, that the tales of distress, which fill modern novels,
have a tendency to soften the female heart into acts of humanity. The fact is
the reverse of this. The abortive sympathy which is excited by the recital of
imaginary distress, blunts the heart to that which is real; and, hence, we
sometimes see instances of young ladies, who weep away a whole forenoon over
the criminal sorrows of a fictitious Charlotte or Werter, turning with disdain
at three o'clock from the sight of a beggar, who solicits in feeble accents or
signs, a small portion only of the crumbs which fall from their fathers' tables.

VIII. It will be necessary to connect all these branches of education with
regular instruction in the christian religion. For this purpose the principles
of the different sects of christians should be taught and explained, and our
pupils should early be furnished with some of the most simple arguments in
favor of the truth of christianity Baron Haller's letters to his daughter on
the truths of the christian religion, and Dr. Beatie's evidences of the
christian religion briefly and plainly stated are excellent little tracts, and
well adapted for this purpose.
. A portion of the bible (of late improperly banished from our schools) should
be read by them every day, and such questions should be asked, after reading it
as are calculated to imprint upon their minds the interesting stories contained
in it.

Rousseau has asserted that the great secret of education consists in "wasting
the time of children profitably." There is some truth in this observation. I
believe that we often impair their health, and weaken their capcities, by
imposing studies upon them, which are not proportioned to their years. But this
objection does not apply to religious instruction. There are certain simple
propositions in the christian religion, which are suited in a peculiar manner,
to the infant state of reason and moral sensibility. A clergyman of long
experience in the instruction of youth The Rev. Mr. NICHOLAS COLLIN, minister
of the Swedish church in Wicocoo.
informed me, that he always found children acquired religious knowledge more
easily than knowledge upon other subjects; and that young girls acquired this
kind of knowledge more readily than boys. The female breast is the natural soil
of christianity; and while our women are taught to believe its doctrines, and
obey its precepts, the wit of Voltaire, and the style of Bolingbroke, will
never be able to destroy its influence upon our citizens.

I cannot help remarking in this place, that christianity exerts the most
friendly influence upon science, as well as upon the morals and manners of
mankind. Whether this be occasioned by the unity of truth, and the mutual
assistance which truths upon different subjects afford each other, or whether
the faculties of the mind be sharpened and corrected by embracing the truths of
revelation, and thereby prepared to investigate and perceive truths upon other
subjects, I will not determine, but I believe that the greatest discoveries in
science have been made by christian philosophers, and that there is the most
knowledge in those countries where there is the most christianity. This is true
in a peculiar manner in the science of medecin. A young Scotch physician of
enterprizing talents, who conceived a high idea of the state of medecin in the
eastern countries, spent two years in enquiries after medical knowledge in
Constantinople, and Grand Cairo. On his return to Britain he confessed to an
American physician whom he met at Naples, that after all his researches and
travels, he had discovered nothing except a single fact relative to the plague,
that he thought worth remembering or communicating. The science of medecin in
China according to the accounts of De Halde is in as imperfect a state as among
the Indians of North America.
If this remark be well founded, then those philosophers who reject
christianity, and those christians, whether parents or schoolmasters, who
neglect the religious instruction of their children and pupils, reject and
neglect the most effectual means of promoting knowledge in our country.

IX. If the measures that have been recommended for inspiring our pupils with a
sense of religious and moral obligation be adopted, the government of them will
be easy and agreeable. I shall only remark under this head, that strictness of
discipline will always render severity unnecessary, and that there will be the
most instruction in that school, where there is the most order.

I have said nothing in favor of instrumental music as a branch of female
education, because I conceive it is by no means accommodated to the present
state of society and manners in America. The price of musical instruments, and
the extravagant fees demanded by the teachers of instrumental music, form but a
small part of my objections to it.

To perform well, upon a musical instrument, requires much time and long
practice. From two to four hours in a day, for three or four years appropriated
to music, are an immense deduction from that short period of time which is
allowed by the peculiar circumstances of our country for the acquisition of the
useful branches of literature that have been mentioned. How many useful ideas
might be picked up in these hours from history, philosophy, poetry, and the
numerous moral essays with which our language abounds, and how much more would
the knowledge acquired upon these subjects add to the consequence of a lady,
with her husband and with society, than the best performed pieces of music upon
a harpsicord or a guittar! Of the many ladies whom we have known, who have
spent the most important years of their lives, in learning to play upon
instruments of music, how few of them do we see amuse themselves or their
friends with them, after they become mistresses of families! Their harpsichords
serve only as side-boards for their parlours, and prove by their silence, that
necessity and circumstances, will always prevail over fashion, and false maxims
of education.

Let it not be supposed from these observations that I am insensible of the
charms of instrumental music, or that I wish to exclude it from the education
of a lady where a musical ear irresistably disposes to it, and affluence at the
same time affords a prospect of such an exemption from the usual cares and
duties of the mistress of a family, as will enable her to practice it. These
circumstances form an exception to the general conduct that should arise upon
this subject, from the present state of society and manners in America.

It is agreeable to observe how differently modern writers, and the inspired
author of the Proverbs, describe a fine woman. The former confine their praises
chiefly to personal charms, and ornamental accomplishments, while the latter
celebrates only the virtues of a valuable mistress of a family, and a useful
member of society. The one is perfectly acquainted with all the fashionable
languages of Europe; the other, "opens her mouth with wisdom" and is perfectly
acquainted with all the uses of the needle, the distaff, and the loom. The
business of the one, is pleasure; the pleasure of the other, is business. The
one is admired abroad; the other is honored and beloved at home. Her children
arise up and call her blessed, her husband also, and he praises her. There is
no fame in the world equal to this; nor is there a note in music half so
delightful, as the respectful language with which a grateful son or daughter
perpetuates the memory of a sensible and affectionate mother.

It should not surprise us that British customs, with respect to female
education, have been transplanted into our American schools and families. We
see marks of the same incongruity, of time and place, in many other things. We
behold our houses accomodated to the climate of Great Britain, by eastern and
western directions. We behold our ladies panting in a heat of ninety degrees,
under a hat and cushion, which were calculated for the temperature of a British
summer. We behold our citizens condemned and punished by a criminal law, which
was copied from a country, where maturity in corruption renders public
executions a part of the amusements of the nation. It is high time to awake
from this servility -- to study our own character -- to examine the age of our
country -- and to adopt manners in every thing, that shall be accomodated to
our state of society, and to the forms of our government. In particular it is
incumbent upon us to make ornamental accomplishments yield to principles and
knowledge, in the education of our women.

A philosopher once said let me make all the ballads of a country and I care
not who makes its laws. He might with more propriety have said, let the ladies
of a country be educated properly, and they will not only make and administer
its laws, but form its manners and character. It would require a lively
imaginaiton to describe, or even to comprehend, the happiness of a country,
where knowledge and virtue, were generally diffused among the female sex. Our
young men would then be restrained from vice by the terror of being banished
from their company. The loud laugh, and the malignant smile, at the expense of
innocence, or of personal infirmities -- the feats of successful mimickry --
and the low priced wit, which is borrowed from a misapplication of scripture
phrases, would no more be considered as recommendations to the society of the
ladies. A double entendre in their presence, would then exclude a gentleman
forever from the company of both sexes, and probably oblige him to seek an
asylum from contempt, in a foreign country. The influence of female education
would be still more extensive and useful in domestic life. The obligations of
gentlemen to qualify themselves by knowledge and industry to discharge the
duties of benevolence, would be increased by marriage; and the patriot -- the
hero -- and the legislator, would find the sweetest reward of their toils, in
the approbation and applause of their wives. Children would discover the marks
of maternal prudence and wisdom in every station of life; for it has been
remarked that there have been few great or good men who have not been blessed
with wise and prudent mothers. Cyrus was taught to revere the gods, by his
mother Mandane -- Samuel was devoted to his prophetic office before he was
born, by his mother Hannah -- Constantine was rescued from paganism by his
mother Constantia -- and Edward the sixth inherited those great and excellent
qualities which made him the delight of the age in which he lived, from his
mother, lady Jane Seymour. Many other instances might be mentioned, if
necessary, from ancient and modern history, to establish the truth of this
proposition.

I am not enthusiastical upon the subject of education. In the ordinary course
of human affairs, we shall probably too soon follow the footsteps of the
nations of Europe in manners and vices. The first marks we shall perceive of
our declension, will appear among our women. Their idleness, ignorance, and
profligacy will be the harbingers of our ruin. Then will the character and
performance of a buffoon on the theater, be the subject of more conversation
and praise, than the patriot or the minister of the gospel; -- then will our
language and pronunciation be enfeebled and corrupted by a flood of French and
Italian words; -- then will the history of romantic amors, be preferred to the
pure and immortal writings of Addison, Hawkesworth and Johnson; -- then will
our churches be neglected, and the name of the supreme being never be called
upon, but in profane exclamations; -- then will our Sundays be appropriated,
only to feasts and concerts? -- and then will begin all that train of domestic
and political calamities -- But, I forbear. The prospect is so painful, that I
cannot help, silently, imploring the great arbiter of human, affairs, to
interpose his almighty goodness, and to deliver us from these evils, that, at
least one spot of the earth may be reserved as a monument of the effects of
good education, in order to show in some degree, what our species was, before
the fall, and what it shall be, after its restoration.

Thus, gentlemen, have I brieflly finished what I proposed. If I am wrong in
those opinions in which I have taken the liberty of departing from general and
fashonable habits of thinking, I am sure you will discover, and pardon my
mistakes. But if I am right, I am equally sure you will adopt my opinions; for
to enlightened minds truth is alike acceptable, whether it comes from the lips
of age, or the hand of antiquity, or whether it be obtruded by a person, who
has no other claim to attention, than a desire of adding to the stock of human
happiness

I cannot dismiss the subject of female education without remarking, that the
city of Philadelphia first saw a number of gentlemen associated for the purpose
of directing the education of young ladies. By means of this plan, the power of
teachers is regulated and restrained, and the objects of education are
extended. By the separation of the sexes in the unformed state of their
manners, female delicacy is cherished and preserved. Here the young ladies may
enjoy all the literary advantages of a boarding-school, and at the same time
live under the protection of their parents Unnatural confinement makes a young
woman embrace with avidity every pleasure when she is set free. To relish
domestic life, one must be acquainted with it; for it is in the house of her
parents a young woman acquires the relish. Lord Kaims's thoughts upon
education, and the culture of the heart.
. Here emulation may be excited without jealousy, -- ambition without envy, --
and competition without strife. The attempt to establish this new mode of
education for young ladies, was an experiment, and the success of it has
answered our expectations. Too much praise cannot be given to our principal
Andrew Brown.
and his assistants, for the abilities and fidelity with which they have
carried the plan into execution. The proficiency which the young ladies have
discovered in reading -- writing -- spelling -- arithmetic -- grammar --
geography -- music -- and their different catechisms, since the last
examination, is a less equivocal mark of the merit of our teachers, than any
thing I am able to express in their favor.

But the reputation of the academy must be suspended, till the public are
convinced, by the future conduct and character of our pupils, of the advantages
of the institution. To you, therefore, YOUNG LADIES, an important problem is
committed for solution; and that is, whether our present plan of education be a
wise one, and whether it be calculated to prepare you for the duties of social
and domestic life. I know that the elevation of the female mind, by means of
moral, physical and religious truth, is considered by some men as unfriendly to
the domestic character of a woman. But this is the prejudice of little minds,
and springs from the same spirit which opposes the general diffusion of
knowledge among the citizens of our republics. If men believe that ignorance is
favorable to the government of the female sex, they are certainly deceived;
for a weak and ignorant woman will always be governed with the greatest
difficulty. I have sometimes been led to ascribe the invention of ridiculous
and expensive fashions in female dress, entirely to the gentlemen The very
expensive prints of female dresses which are published annually in France, are
invented and executed wholly by GENTLEMEN.
, in order to divert the ladies from improving their minds, and thereby to
secure a more arbitrary and unlimited authority over them. It will be in your
power, LADIES, to correct the mistakes and practice of our sex upon these
subjects, by demonstrating, that the female temper can only be governed by
reason, and that the cultivation of reason in women, is alike friendly to the
order of nature, and to private as well as public happinss.

A DEFENSE OF THE USE OF THE BIBLE AS A SCHOOL BOOK. ADDRESSED TO THE REV.
JEREMY BELKNAP, OF BOSTON.
DEAR SIR,
IT is now several months, since I promised to give you my reasons for
preferring the bible as a school book, to all other compositions. I shall not
trouble you with an apology for my delaying so long to comply with my promise,
but shall proceed immediately to the subject of my letter.

Before I state my arguments in favor of teaching children to read by means of
the bible, I shall assume the five following propositions.

I. That christianity is the only true and perfect religion, and that in
proportion as mankind adopt its principles, and obey its precepts, they will be
wise, and happy.

II. That a better knowledge of this religion is to be acquired by reading the
bible, than in any other way.

III That the bible contains more knowledge necessary to man in his present
state, than any other book in the world.

IV. That knowledge is most durable, and religious instruction most useful,
when imparted in early life,

V. That the bible, when not read in schools, is seldom read in any subsequent
period of life.

My arguments in favor of the use of the bible as a school book are founded, I.
In the constitution of the human mind.

1. The memory is the first faculty which opens in the minds of children. Of
how much consequence, then, must it be, to impress it with the great truths of
christianity, before it is pre-occupied with less interesting subjects! As all
the liquors, which are poured into a cup, generally taste of that which first
filled it, so all the knowledge, which is added to that which is treasured up
in the memory from the bible, generally receives an agreeable and useful
tincture from it.

2. There is a peculiar aptitude in the minds of children for religious
knowledge. I have constantly found them in the first six or seven years of
their lives, more inquisitive upon religious subjects, than upon any others:
and an ingenious instructor of youth has informed me, that he has found young
children more capable of receiving just ideas upon the most difficult tenets of
religion, than upon the most simple branches of human knowledge. It would be
strange if it were otherwise; for God creates all his means to suit all his
ends. There must of course be a fitness between the human mind, and the truths
which are essential to its happiness.

3. The influence of prejudice is derived from the impressions, which are made
upon the mind in early life; prejudices are of two kinds, true and false. In a
world where false prejudices do so much mischief, it would discover great
weakness not to oppose them, by such as are true.

I grant that many men have rejected the prejudices derived from the bible: but
I believe no man ever did so, without having been made wiser or better, by the
early operation of these prejudices upon his mind. Every just principle that is
to be found in the writings of Voltaire, is borrowed from the Bible: and the
morality of the Deists, which has been so much admired and praised, is, I
believe, in most cases, the effect of habits, produced by early instruction in
the principles of christianity.

4. We are subject, by a general law in our natures, to what is called habit.
Now if the study of the scriptures be necessary to our happiness at any time of
our lives, the sooner we begin to read them, the more we shall be attached to
them; for it is peculiar to all the acts of habit, to become easy, strong and
agreeable by repetition.

5. It is a law in our natures, that we remember longest the knowledge we
acquire by the greatest number of our senses. Now a knowledge of the contents
of the bible, is acquired in school by the aid of the eyes and the ears; for
children after getting their lessons, always say them to their masters in an
audible voice; of course there is a presumption, that this knowledge will be
retained much longer than if it had been acquired in any other way.

6. The interesting events and characters, recorded and described in the Old
and New Testaments, are accomodated above all others to seize upon all the
faculties of the minds of children. The understanding, the memory, the
imagination, the passions, and the moral powers, are all occasionally addressed
by the various incidents which are contained in those divine books, insomuch
that not to be delighted with them, is to be devoid of every principle of
pleasure that exists in a sound mind.

7. There is a native love of truth in the human mind. Lord Shaftesbury says,
that truth is so congenial to our minds, that we love ever the shadow of it:
and Horace, in his rules for composing an epick poem, establishes the same law
in our natures, by advising the "fictions in poetry to resemble truth." Now the
bible contains more truths than any other book in the world: so true is the
testimony that it bears of God in his works of creation, providence, and
redemption, that it is called truth itself, by way of preeminence above things
that are only simply true. How forcibly are we struck with the evidences of
truth, in the history of the Jews, above what we discover in the history of
other nations? Where do we find a hero, or an historian record his own faults
or vices except in the Old Testament? Indeed, my friend, from some accounts
which I have read of the American revolution, I begin to grow skeptical to all
history except to that which is contained in the bible. Now if this book be
known to contain nothing but what is materially true, the mind will naturally
acquire a love for it from this circumstance: and from this affection for the
truths of of the bible, it will acquire a discernment of truth in other books,
and a preference of it in all the transactions of life.

VIII. There is a wonderful property in the memory, which enables it in old
age, to recover the knowledge it had acquired in early life, after it had been
apparently forgotten for forty or fifty years. Of how much consequence, then,
must it be, to fill the mind with that species of knowledge, in childhood and
youth, which, when recalled in the decline of life, will support the soul under
the infirmities of age, and smooth the avenues of approaching death? The bible
is the only book which is capable of affording this support to old age; and it
is for this reason that we find it resorted to with so much diligence and
pleasure by such old people as have read it in early life. I can recollect many
instances of this kind in persons who discovered no attachment to the bible, in
the meridian of their lives, who have notwithstanding, spent the evening of
them, in reading no other book. The late Sir John Pringle, Physician to the
Queen of Great Britain, after passing a long life in camps and at court, closed
it by studying the scriptures. So anxious was he to increase his knowledge in
them, that he wrote to Dr. Michaelis, a learned professer of divinity in
Germany, for an explanation of a difficult text of scripture, a short time
before his death.

IX. My second argument in favor of the use of the bible in schools, is
founded upon an implied command of God, and upon the practice of several of the
wisest nations of the world. -- In the 6th chapter of Deuteronomy, we find the
following words, which are directly to my purpose, And thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thy heart and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And
these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart. And thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up.

It appears, moreover, from the history of the Jews, that they flourished as a
nation, in proportion as they honored and read the books of Moses, which
contained, a written revelation of the will of God, to the children of men. The
law was not only neglected, but lost during the general profligacy of manners
which accompanied the long and wicked reign of Manassah. But the discovery of
it, in the rubbish of the temple, by Josiah, and its subsequent general use,
were followed by a return of national virtue and prosperity. We read further,
of the wonderful effects which the reading of the law by Ezra, after his return
from his captiviy in Babylon, had upon the Jews. They hung upon his lips with
tears, and showed the sincerity of their repentance, by their general
reformation.

The learning of the Jews, for many years consisted in nothing but a knowledge
of the scriptures. These were the text books of all the instruction that was
given in the schools of their prophets. It was by (...) of this general
knowledge of their law, that those Jews that wandered from Judea into our
countries, carried with them and propagated certain ideas of the true God among
all the civilized nations upon the face of the earth. And it was from the
attachment they retained to the old Testament, that they procured a translation
of it into the Greek language, after they lost the Hebrew tongue, by their long
absence from their native country. The utility of this translation, commonly
called the septuagint, in facilitating the progress of the gospel, is well
known to all who are acquainted with the history of the first age of the
christian church.

But the benefits of an early and general acquaintance with the bible, were not
confined only to the Jewish nations. They have appeared in many countries in
Europe, since the reformation. The industry, and habits of order, which
distinguish many of the German nations, are derived from their early
instruction in the principles of christianity, by means of the bible. The moral
and enlightened character of the inhabitants of Scotland, and of the New
England States, appears to be derived from the same cause. If we descend from
nations to sects, we shall find them wise and prosperous in proportion as they
become early acquainted with the scriptures. The bible is still used as a
school book among the quakers. The morality of this sect of christians is
universally acknowledged. Nor is this all, -- their prudence in the management
of their private affairs, is as much a mark of their society, as their sober
manners.

I wish to be excused for repeating here, that if the bible did not convey a
single direction for the attainment of future happiness, it should be read in
our schools in preference to all other books, from its containing the greatest
portion of that kind of knowledge which is calculated to produce private and
public temporal happiness.

We err not only in human affairs, but in religion likewise, only because "we
do not know the scriptures." The opposite systems of the (...) sects of
christians arise chiefly from their being more instructed in catechisms,
creeds, and confessions of faith, than in the scriptures. Immense truths, I
believe, are concealed in them. The time, I have no doubt, will come, when
posterity will view and pity our ignorance of these truths, as much as we do
the ignorance of the disciples of our Savior, who knew nothing of the meaning
of those plain passages in the old testament which were daily fulfilling before
their eyes. Whenever that time shall arrive, those truths which have escaped
our notice, or, if discovered, have been thought to be opposed to each other,
or to be inconsistent with themselves, will then like the stones of Solomon's
temple, be found so exactly to accord with each other, that they shall be
cemented without noise or force, into one simple and sublime system of religion.

But further, we err, not only in religion but in philosophy likewise, because
we do not know or believe the scriptures. The sciences have been compared to a
circle of which religion composes a part. To understand any one of them
perfectly it is necessary to have some knowledge of them all. Bacon, Boil, and
Newton included the scriptures in the inquiries to which their universal
geniuses disposed them, and their philosophy was aided by their knowledge in
them. A striking agreement has been lately discovered between the history of
certain events recorded in the bible and some of the operations and productions
of nature, particularly those which are related in Whitehurst's observations on
the deluge -- in Smith's account of the origin of the variety of color in the
human species, and in Bruce's travels. It remains yet to be shown how many
other events, related in the bible, accord with some late important discoveries
in the principles of medecin. The events, and the principles alluded to,
mutually establish the truth of each other. From the discoveries of the
christian philosophers, whose names have been last mentioned, I have been led
to question whether most harm has been done to revelation, by those divines who
have unduly multiplied the objects of faith, or by those deists who have unduly
multiplied the objects of reason, in explaining the scriptures.

I shall now proceed to answer some of the objections which have been made to
the use of the bible as a school book.

I. We are told, that the familiar use of the bible in our schools, has a
tendency to lessen a due reverence for it. This objection, by proving too much,
proves nothing at all. If familiarity lessens respect for divine things, then
all those precepts of our religion, which enjoin the daily or weekly worship of
the Deity, are improper. The bible was not intended to represent a Jewish ark;
and it is an antichristian idea, to suppose that it can be profaned, by being
carried into a school house, or by being handled by children. But where will
the bible be read by young people with more reverence than in a school? Not in
most private families; for I believe there are few parents, who preserve so
much order in their houses, as is kept up in our common English schools.

II. We are told, that there are many passages in the old testament, that are
improper to be read by children, and that the greatest part of it is no way
interesting to mankind under the present dispensation of the gospel. There are
I grant, several chapters, and many verses in the old testament, which in their
present unfortunate translation, should be passed over by children. But I deny
that any of the books of the old testament are not interesting to mankind,
under the gospel dispensation. Most of the characters, events, and ceremonies,
mentioned in them, are personal, providential, or instituted types of the
Messiah: All of which have been, or remain yet to be, fulfilled by him. It is
from an ignorance or neglect of these types, that we have so many deists in
christendom; for so irrefragably do they prove the truth of christianity, that
I am sure a young man who had been regularly instructed in their meaning, could
never doubt afterward of the truth of any of its principles. If any obscurity
appears in these principles, it is only (to use the words of the poet) because
they are dark, with excessive bright.

I know there is an objection among many People to teach children doctrines of
any kind, because they are liable to be controverted. But where will this
objection lead us? -- The being of a God, and the obligations of morality, have
both been controverted; and yet who has objected to our teaching these
doctrines to our chilldren?

The curiosity and capacities of young people for the mysteries of religion,
awaken much sooner than is generally supposed. Of this we have two remarkable
proofs in the old testament. The first is mentioned in the twelfth chapter of
Exodus. And it shall come when your children shall say unto you, " What mean
you by this service?" that ye shall say, It is the sacrafice of the Lord's
passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when
he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the children of Israel
went away, and did as the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron. A second proof of
the desire of children to be instructed in the mysteries of religion, is to be
found in the sixth chapter of Deuteronomy. And when thy son asks thee in the
time to come saying, What mean the testimonies -- and the statutes -- and the
judgments which the Lord our God has commanded you? Then thou shall say unto
thy son, We were Pharoah's bondmen in Egypt, and the Lord our God brought us
out of Egypt with a mighty hand. These enquiries from the mouths of children
are perfectly natural; for where is the parent who has not had similar
questions proposed to him by his children upon their being being first
conducted to a place of worship, or upon their beholding, for the first time,
either of the sacraments of our religion?

Let us not not be wiser than our Maker. If moral precepts alone could have
reformed mankind, the mission of the Son of God into our world, would have been
unnecessary. He came to promulgate a system of doctrines, as well as a system
of morals. The perfect morality of the gospel rests upon a doctrine, which,
though often controverted, has never been refuted, I mean the vicarious life
and death of the Son of God. This sublime and ineffable doctrine delivers us
from the absurd hypotheses of modern philosophers, concerning the foundation of
moral obligation, and fixes it upon the eternal and self moving principle of
LOVE. It concentrates a whole system of ethics in a single text of scripture. "
A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, even as I have
loved you." By witholding the knowledge of this doctrine from children, we
deprive ourselves of the best means of awakening moral sensibility in their
minds. We do more, we furnish an argument, for witholding from them a knowledge
of the morality of the gospel likewise; for this, in many instances, is as
supernatural, and therefore as liable to be controverted, as any of the
doctrines or miracles which are mentioned in the new testament. The miraculous
conception of the savior of the world by a virgin, is not more opposed to the
ordinary course of natural events, nor is the doctrine of the atonement more
above human reason, than those moral precepts, which command us to love our
enemies, or to die for our friends.

III. It has been said, that the division of the bible into chapters and
verses, renders it more difficult to be read, by children than many other books.

By a little care in a master, this difficulty may be obviated, and even an
advantage derived from it. It may serve to transfer the attention of the
scholar to the sense of a subject; and no person will ever read well, who is
guided by any thing else, in his stops, emphasis, or accents. The division of
the bible into chapters and verses, is not a greater obstacle to its being read
with ease, than the bad punctuation of most other books. I deliver this
stricture upon other books, from the authority of Mr. Rice, the celebrated
author of the art of speaking, whom I heard declare in a large company in
London, that he had never seen a book properly pointed in the English Language.
He exemplified, notwithstanding, by reading to the same company a passage from
Milton, his perfect knowledge of the art of reading.

Some people, I know, have proposed to introduce extracts from the bible, into
our schools, instead of the bible itself. Many excellent works of this kind,
are in print, but if we admit any one of them, we shall have the same
inundation of them that we have had of grammars, spelling books, and lessons
for children, many of which are published for the benefit of the authors only,
and all of them have tended greatly to increase the expense of education.
Besides, these extracts or abridgements of the bible, often contain the tenets
of particular sects or persons, and therefore, may be improper for schools
composed of the children of different sects of christians. The bible is a cheap
book, and is to be had in every bookstore. It is, moreover, esteemed and
prefered by all sects; because each finds its peculiar doctrines in it. It
should therefore be used in preference to any abridgements of it, or histories
extracted from it.

I have heard it proposed that a portion of the bible should be read every day
by the master, as a means of instructing children in it: But this is a poor
substitute for obliging children to read it as a school book; for by this means
we insensibly engrave, as it were, its contents upon their minds: and it has
been remarked that children, instructed in this way in the scriptures, seldom
forget any part of them. They have the same advantage over those persons, who
have only heard the scriptures read by a master, that a man who has worked with
the tools of a mechanical employment for several years, has over the man who
has only stood a few hours in a work shop and seen the same business carried on
by other people.

In this defense of the use of the bible as a school book, I beg you would not
think that I suppose the Bible to contain the only revelation which God has
made to man. I believe in an internal revelation, or a moral principle, which
God has implanted in the heart of every man, as the precursor of his final
dominion over the whole human race. How much this internal revelation accords
with the external, remains yet to be explored by philosophers. I am disposed to
believe, that most of the doctrines of christianity revealed in the bible might
be discovered by a close examination of all the principles of action in man:
But who is equal to such an enquiry? It certainly does not suit the natural
indolence, or laborious employments of a great majority of mankind. The
internal revelation of the gospel may be compared to the straight line which is
made through a wilderness by the assistance of a compass, to a distant country,
which few are able to discover, while the bible resembles a public road to the
same country, which is wide, plain, and easily found. "And a highway shall be
there, and it shall be called the way of holiness. The way faring men, though
fools, shall not err therein."

Neither let me in this place exclude the Revelation which God has made of
himself to man in the works of creation. I am far from wishing to lessen the
influence of this species of Revelation upon mankind. But the knowledge of God
obtained from this source, is obscure and feeble in its operation, compared
with that which is derived from the bible. The visible creation speaks of the
Deity in hyeroglyphics, while the bible describes all his attributes and
perfections in such plain, and familiar language that he who runs may read.

How kindly has our maker dealt with his creatures, in providing three
different cords to draw them to himself! But how weakly do some men act, who
suspend their faith, and hopes upon only one of them! By laying hold of them
all, they would approach more speedily and certainly to the center of all
happiness.

To the arguments I have mentioned in favor of the use of the bible as a
school book, I shall add a few reflections.

The present fashionable practice of rejecting the bible from our schools, I
suspect has originated with the deists. They discover great ingenuity in this
new mode of attacking christianity. If they proceed in it, they will do more in
half a century, in extirpating our religion, than Bolingbroke or Voltaire could
have effected in a thousand years. I am not writing to this class of people. I
despair of changing the opinions of any of them. I wish only to alter the
opinions and conduct of those lukewarm, or superstitious christians, who have
been misled by the deists upon this subject. On the ground of the good old
custom, of using the bible as a school book, it becomes us to entrench our
religion. It is the last bulwark the deists have left it; for they have
rendered instruction in the principles of christianity by the pulpit and the
press, so unfashionable, that little good for many years seems to have been
done by either of them.

The effects of the disuse of the bible, as a school book have appeared of late
in the neglect and even contempt with which scripture names are treated by many
people. It is because parents have not been early taught to know or respect the
characters and exploits of the old and new testament worthies, that their names
are exchanged for those of the modern kings of Europe, or of the principal
characters in novels and romances. I conceive there may be some advantage in
bearing scripture names. It may lead the persons who bear them, to study that
part of the scriptures, in which their names are mentioned, with uncommon
attention, and perhaps it may excite a desire in them to possess the talents or
virtues of their ancient namesakes. This remark first occurred to me, upon
hearing a pious woman whose name was Mary, say, that the first passages of the
bible, which made a serious impression on her mind, were those interesting
chapters and verses in which the name of Mary is mentioned in the New Testament.

It is a singular fact, that while the names of the kings and emperors of Rome,
are now given chiefly to horses and dogs scripture names have hitherto been
confined only to the human species. Let the enemies and contemners of those
names take care, lest the names of more modern kings be given hereafter only to
the same animals, and lest the names of the modern heroines of romances be
given to animals of an inferior species.

It is with great pleasure, that I have observed the bible to be the only book
read in the Sunday schools in England. We have adopted the same practice in the
Sunday schools, lately established in this city. This will give our religion
(humanly speaking) the chance of a longer life in our country. We hear much of
the persons educated in free schools in England, turning out well in the
various walks of life. I have enquired into the cause of it, and have satisfied
myself, that it is wholly to be ascribed to the general use of the bible in
those schools, for it seems the children of poor people are of too little
consequence to be guarded from the supposed evils of reading the scriptures in
early life, or in an unconsecrated school house.

However great the benefits of reading the scriptures in schools have been, I
cannot help remarking, that these benefits might be much greater, did
schoolmasters take more pains to explain them to their scholars. Did they
demonstrate the divine original of the bible from the purity, consistency, and
benevolence of its doctrines and precepts -- did they explain the meaning of
the levitical institutions, and show their application to the numerous and
sucessive gospel dispensations -- did they inform their pupils that the gross
and abominable vices of the Jews were recorded only as proofs of the depravity
of human nature, and of the insufficiency of the law, to produce moral virtue
and thereby to establish the necessity and perfection of the gospel system --
and above all, did they often enforce the discourses of our Savior, as the
best rule of life, and the surest guide to happiness, how great would be the
influence of our schools upon the order and prosperity of our country! Such a
mode of instructing children in the christian religion, would convey knowledge
into their understandings, and would therefore be preferable to teaching them
creeds, and catechisms, which too often convey, not knowledge, but words only,
into their memories. I think I am not too sanguine in believing, that
education, conducted in this manner, would, in the course of two generations,
eradicate infidelity from among us, and render civil government scarcely
necessary in our country.

In contemplating the political institutions of the United States, I lament,
that we waste so much time and money in punishing crimes, and take so little
pains to prevent them. We profess to be republicans, and yet we neglect the
only means of establishing and perpetuating our republican forms of government,
that is, the universal education of our youth in the principles of
christianity, by means of the bible; for this divine book, above all others,
favors that equality among mankind, that respect for just laws, and all those
sober and frugal virtues, which constitute the soul of republicanism.

I have now only to apologize for havging addressed this letter to you, after
having been assured by you, that your opinion, respecting the use of the bible
as a school book, coincided with mine. My excuse for what I have done is, that
I knew you were qualified by your knowledge, and disposed by your zeal in the
cause of truth, to correct all the errors you would discover in my letter.
Perhaps a further apology may be necessary for my having presumed to write upon
a subject so much above my ordinary studies. My excuse for it is, that I
thought a single mite from a member of a profession, which has been frequently
charged with skepticism in religion, might attract the notice of persons who
had often overlooked the more ample contributions upon this subject, of
gentlemen of other professions. With great respect, I am, dear sir, your
sincere friend.

BENJAMIN RUSH.
Philadelphia, March 10, 1791.
AN ADDRESS TO THE MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL OF EVERY DENOMINATION IN THE UNITED
STATES, UPON SUBJECTS INTERESTING TO MORALS.
FROM the nature of your pursuits, and from your influence in society, I am
encouraged to address you upon subjects of the utmost importance to the present
and future happiness of your fellow-citizens, as well as to the prosperity of
the United States.

Under the great diversity of opinions, you entertain in religion, you are all
united in inculcating the necessity of morals. In this business you are neither
catholics nor protestants -- churchmen nor dissenters. One spirit actuates you
all. From the success, or failure of your exertions in the cause of virtue, we
anticipate the freedom or slavery of our country. Even the new government of
the united states, from which so many advantages are expected, will neither
restore order, nor establish justice among us, unless it be accompanied and
supported by morality, among all classes of people. Impressed with a sense of
the truth of these observations, I shall briefly point out a few of those
practices, which prevail in America, which exert a pernicious influence upon
morals, and thereby prepare our country for misery and slavery.

I shall begin by pointing out, in the first place, the mischevious effects of
spirituos liquors upon the morals of our citizens.

I. They render the temper peevish and passionate. They beget quarrels, and
lead to profane and indecent language. They are the parents of idleness and
extravagance, and the certain forerunners of poverty, and frequently of jails,
wheelbarrows, and the gallows. They are likewise injurious to health and life,
and kill more than the pestilence, or the sword. Our legislatures, by
premitting the use of them, for the sake of the paltry duty collected from
them, act as absurdly as a prince would do, who should permit the cultivation
of a poisonous nut, which every year carried off ten thousand of his subjects,
because it yielded a revenue of thirty thousand pounds a year. These ten
thousand men would produce annually by their labor, or by paying a trifling
impost upon any one of the necessaries of life, twenty times that sum. In order
to put an end to the desolating effects of spirituous liquors, it will be
proper for our ministers to preach against, not the abuse of them only, but
their use altogether. They are never necessary but in sickness: and then they
are better applied to the outside, than to the inside of the body.

II Militia laws have an unfriendly influence upon morals, more especially
where they authorize the election of the officers by the privates. The meetings
of citizens for militia exercises are generally attended with intemperance in
drinking, quarrelling, profane swearing, and acts of violence to the property
of the persons who live near the places where those meetings are held. It is a
mistake to suppose that the defense of liberty requires a well organized
militia in the time of peace.

The United States proved in the beginning of the late war, and France has
proved since, that armies of disciplined irresistible troops may be formed in a
short time out of the peasants of a country. War has lately become a simple
art. All that is practical in it, may be acquired in a few weeks. The most
gallant exploits were performed during the late war, by men who had been but a
few days in the practice of handling fire arms.

III. Fairs are a Pandora's box opened twice a year, in many of the states.
They are wholly unnecessary, since shops are so common in all the civilized
parts of the country. They tempt to extravagance -- gaming -- drunkenness --
and uncleanness. They are proper only in despotic states, where the more a
people are corrupted, the more readily they submit to arbitrary government.

IV. Lawsuits should be discouraged as much as possible. They are highly
disreputable between persons who professes christianity. The attendance upon
courts exposes to idleness -- drinking and gaming; and the usual delays of
justice seldom fail of entailing hereditary discord among neighbors. It is
with inexpressible pleasure that I have lately seen an account of a
recommendation from the presbyterian synod of New York and Philadelphia, to all
the churches under their care to settle their disputes after the manner of the
primitive christians and friends, by arbitration. Blessed event in the history
of mankind! may their practice spread among all sects of christians, and may it
prove a prelude of that happy time foretold in the scriptures, when war and
murder shall be no more.

V. The licentiousness of the press is a fruitful source of the corruption of
morals. Men are deterred from injuring each other, chiefly by the fear of
detection or punishment. Now both of these are removed by the usual secrecy of
a licentious press. Hence revenge, scandal and falsehood are cherished and
propagated in a community. But further: the cause of liberty is greatly injured
by personal calumnies; for who will believe a truth that is told of a bad man,
that has been accustomed to read falsehoods published every day of a good man?
Printers who vend scurrility, would do well in considering, that the publisher
of scandal, is as bad as the author of it, in the same manner that the receiver
of stolen goods, is as bad as the thief.

It becomes the purchasers, and readers of personal scandal likewise to
consider that they are accomplices in the guilt of the authors of it. We read
with horror the accounts of human depravity which has converted public
executions into part of the amusements of several ancient and modern nations,
but the depravity of the human heart is of the same nature in that man, who can
read with pleasure, or even indifference, the mangled character of a fellow
citizen in a licentious newspaper.

VI. Horse-racing and cock-fighting are unfriendly amusements to morals, and of
course to the liberties of our country. They occasion idleness, fraud, gaming
and profane swearing, and harden the heart against the feelings of humanity.
These vulgar sports should be forbidden by law in all christian and republican
countries.

VII. Clubs of all kinds, where the only business of the company, is feeding
(for that is the true name of a gratification that is simply animal) are
hurtful to morals. The society in taverns where clubs are usually held, is
seldom subject to much order. It exposes men to idleness, prodigality, and
debt. It is in private families, only that society is innocent, or improving.
Here manners are usually kept within the bounds of decency by the company of
females, who generally compose a part of all private families; and manners, it
is well known, have an influence upon morals.

VIII. Amusements of every kind, on Sundays, beget habits of idleness and a
love of pleasure, which extend their influence to every day of the week. In
those manufacturing towns in England, where the Sundays are spent in idleness
or frolicking, little or no work is ever done on the ensuing day; hence it is
called St. Monday. If there were no hereafter -- individuals and societies
would be great gainers, by attending public worship every Sunday. Rest from
labor in the house of God, winds up the machine of both soul and body, better
than any thing else, and thereby invigorates it for the labors and duties of
the ensuing week. Should I ever travel into a christian country, and wish to
know whether the laws of that country were wise and just, and whether they were
duly obeyed, the only question I would ask, should be "do the people spend
Sunday at church, or in pleasurable entertainments at home and abroad?" the
Sunday schools in England have been found extremely useful in reforming the
children of poor people. Who can witness the practices of swimming, sliding and
scating, which prevail so universally on Sundays, in most of the cities of the
United States, and not wish for similar institutions to rescues our poor
children from destruction? I shall conclude my remarks upon this subject, by
declaring, that I do not wish to see any new laws made to enforce the keeping
of the Sabbath. I call upon ministers of the gospel only, to increase and
extend, by their influence, the pure and useful spirit of their religion In
riding through our country, we may always tell, by the appearance of the people
we meet with on the road, or see at taverns, whether they enjoy the benefit of
public worship, and of a vigilant and faithful ministry. Where a settlement
enjoys these inestimable bessings, we generally find taverns deserted on a
Sunday, and a stillness pervading the whole neighborhood* as if nature herself
had ceased from her labors, to share with man in paying her weekly homage to
God for his creating goodness

Thus I have briefly pointed out the principal sources of vice in our country.
They are all of a public nature, and affect, in a direct manner, the general
interests of society. I shall now suggest a few sources of vice, which are of a
domestic nature, and which indirectly affect the happiness of our country.

I. The frequent or long absence of the master and mistress from home, by
dissolving the bounds of domestic government, proves a fruitful source of vice
among children and servants. To prevent in some degree, the inconveniences
which arise from the necessary absence of the heads of a family, from home, it
would be a good practice to invest the eldest son or daughter, when of a
suitable age* with the government of the family and to make them responsible
for their conduct, upon the return of their parents. Government in a family is
like an electric rod to a house. Where it is wanting a family is exposed to the
attacks of every folly and vice, that come within the sphere of its attraction.

II. Frequent and large entertainments weaken domestic government, by removing
children and servants too long from the eye of authority. They moreover, expose
children and servants to the temptation of eatting and drinking to excess.

III. Boys and girls should never be admitted as servants -- into a genteel
family. They are seldom instructed properly, by their masters or mistresses.
Their leisure hours are moreover spent in bad company: and all the vices which
they pick up, are spread among the children of the family, who are generally
more prone to associate with them, than with any other. Where poverty or death
makes it necessary to bind out children, they should be bound to those persons
only, who will work with them. By these means, they will be trained to
industry, and kept from idleness and vice.

IV. Servants, both male and female should always be hired by the year,
otherwise no proper government can be established over them. The impertinence
and irregular conduct of servants, arise from their holding their places by too
short a tenure. It would be a good law to fine every person, who hired a
servant, without a written good character, signed by his last master, and
countersigned by a magistrate. This practice would soon drive bad servants out
of the civilized parts of our country and thereby prevent much evil both in
families and society. How many young men and women have carried through life
the sorrowful marks in their consciences or characters, of their being early
initiated into the mysteries of vice, by unprincipled servants of both sexes!
Servants that are married, should be preferred to such as are single. Matrimony
in all ranks of people lessens the temptation to vice, and furnishes fresh
motives to just conduct.

V. Apprentices should always board and lodge, if possible, with their masters
and mistresses, when they are separated from their parents. Young people seldom
fall into bad company in the day time. It is in the evening, when they cease to
be subject to government, that they are in the most danger of corruption: and
this danger can be obviated only by subjecting all their hours to the direction
of their masters or mistresses.

I shall conclude this address, by suggesting to ministers of the gospel, a
plan of a new species of federal government for the advancement of morals in
the United States. Let each sect appoint a representative in a general
convention of christians, whose business shall be, to unite in promoting the
general objects of christianity. Let no matters of faith or opinion ever be
introduced into this convention, but let them be considered as badges of the
sovereignty of each particular sect. To prevent all disputes, let the objects
of the deliberations of this general convention be ascertained with the same
accuracy, that the powers of the national government are defined in the new
constitution of the United States. By this previous compact, no encroachments
will ever be made by the general government, upon the principles -- discipline
-- or habits of any one sect -- for in the present state of human nature, the
division of christians into sects, is as necessary to the existence and
preservation of christianity, as the division of mankind into nations, and of
nations into separate families are necessary to promote general and private
happiness. By means of such an institution, christian charity will be promoted,
and the discipline of each church will be strengthened -- for I would propose,
that a dismission for immorality, from any one church, should exclude a man
from every church in the ecclesiastical union. But the advantages of this
christian convention will not end here. It will possess an influence over the
laws of the United States. This influence will differ from that of most of the
ecclesiastical associations that have existed in the world. It will be the
influence of reason over the passions of men. Its objects will be morals, not
principles, and the design of it will be, not to make men zealous members of
any one church, but to make them -- good neighbors -- good husbands -- good
fathers -- good masters -- good servants -- and of course good rulers and good
citizens. The plan is certainly a practicable one. America has taught the
nations of Europe by her example to be free, and it is to be hoped she will
soon teach them to govern themselves. Let her advance one step further -- and
teach mankind, that it is possible for christians of different denominations to
love each other, and to unite in the advancement of their common interests. By
the gradual operation of such natural means, the kingdoms of this world are
probably to become the kingdoms of the prince of righteousness and peace.

Philadelphia, June 21, 1788.
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE CONSISTENCY OF OATHS WITH REASON AND CHRISTIANITY.
IN discussing this question, I shall first mention the objections to oaths,
which are founded in reason; and, secondly, the objections to them which are
derived from the precepts and spirit of the christian religion.

I. Oaths produce an idea in the minds of men, that there are two kinds or
degrees of truth; the one intended for common, and the other for solemn
occasions. Now, this idea is directly calculated to beget a want of reverence
for the inferior kind of truth; hence men are led to trifle with it in the
common affairs of human life. I grant that some men will tell the truth, when
urged to it by the solemn formalities of an oath, who would not otherwise do
it: But this proves the great mischief of oaths in society; for as men are
called upon to speak the truth 999 times in common life, to once they are
called upon to swear to it, we have exactly 999 falsehoods to one truth told by
them. How extensive, then, must be the mischief of this great disproportion
between truth and falsehood, in all the affairs of human life! It is wrong to
do any thing that shall create an idea of two kinds of truth. There is a scale
of falsehoods; but truth has no degrees or subdivisions. Like its divine
author, it is an eternal unchangeable UNIT.

II. The practice of swearing according to human laws, appears to be the cause
of all profane swearing, which is so universal among all ranks of people in
common conversation; for if there are two modes of speaking the truth, it is
natural for men to prefer that mode which the laws of our country have entitled
to the first degree of credibility: hence men swear, when they wish to be
believed, in common conversation.

III. Oaths have been multiplied upon so many trifling occasions, that they
have ceased, in a great degree, to operate with any force upon the most solemn
occasions: hence the universal prevalence of perjury in courts, armies and
custom-houses, all over the world. This fact is so notorious in Jamaica, that a
law has lately been passed in that island, which requires a bond of L.200,
instead of an oath, from every captain that enters his vessel in the
custom-house, as a security for his veracity in the manifest of his cargo, and
for the amount of his duties to the government.

Reason and scripture (when perfectly understood) are never contrary to each
other; and revelation from God can never give a sanction to that which is so
evidently absurd, and unfriendly to the interests of human society. Let us
proceed then to examine the bible, and here we shall find, that oaths are as
contrary to the precepts and spirit of christianity as they are to sound reason.

Before I mention either the precepts or the spirit of the gospel, which
militate against oaths, I shall mention a few of the cases of swearing which I
find upon record in the New Testament. I shall first mention the precedents in
favor of this practice, and then the precepts and precedents against it.

The first precedent I shall produce, is taken from the example of the devil,
who addresses our Savior in an oath, in Mark v.7. "What have I to do with
thee, Jesus, thou son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God that thou
torment me not."

A second precedent is taken from the example of the high priest, who addresses
our Savior in an oath in Matthew, xxvi.63. "I adjure thee," says he, just
before he consents to his death, "by the living God, that thou tell us whether
thou be the Christ the son of God." It has been said that there was no
impropriety in this mode of expression, otherwise our Savior would have
rebuked it: but let it be remembered, that he stood before the tribunal of a
highpriest, as a prisoner, and not as a teacher; and hence we find he submits
in silence to all the profane insults that were offered him. In this silent
submission to insult, he moreover fulfilled an ancient prophesy "he is brought
as a lamb to the slaughter and as a sheep before his shearers is dumb, so he
opens not his mouth" Isaiah LIII.7.

Peter furnishes a third instance of swearing. "And again he denied" (says
Matthew, chap. XXVI.72.) "with an oath, I know not the man." It would seem from
this account, that a bare affirmation was so characteristic of a disciple of
Jesus Christ, that Peter could not use a more direct method to convince the
maid, who charged him with being a follower of Jesus of Nazareth, that he was
not a christian, than by having recourse to the Jewish and pagan practice of
taking an oath.

Herod furnishes a fourth instance of swearing, in Matthew XIV.7, when he
promised to give the daughter of Herodias whatever she should ask of him: she
asked for John the baptist's head in a charger: the king repented of his hasty
promise; "nevertheless, for the oath's sake, and them which sat with him at
meat, he commanded it to be given her." Here it is evident he would have
violated a common promise. But if common promises are not held sacred, and
binding, there is an end of a great portion of truth in society, and of all the
order and happiness which arise from it. To secure constant and universal
truth, men should swear always or not at all.

A fifth precedent for swearing we find in the xix of Acts and 13th verse.
"Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them
which had evil spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, we adjure thee, by
Jesus whom Paul preaches. And the man in whom the evil spirit was, leaped on
them, and overcame them; so that they fled out of the house naked and wounded."

The last precedent for swearing that I shall mention, is the one related in
Acts xxiii.21st. It contains an account of forty men who had bound themselves,
by an oath, not to eat or drink, until they had killed St. Paul. It would seem
that this banditti knew each other perfectly, and that they would not act
together under the form of a common obligation. The occasion indeed, seems to
require an oath. It was an association to commit murder. I am disposed to
suspect that oaths were introduced originally to compel men to do things that
were contrary to justice, or to their consciences.

In mentioning the precepts and precedents that are to be found in the new
testament against swearing, the following striking passage, taken from Matthew
v. verses 34, 35, 36, 37, should alone determine the question. "Swear not at
all, neither by heaven, for it is God's throne; nor by the earth, for it is his
footstool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great king. Neither
shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or
black But let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more
than these, comes of evil."

The words of the apostle James, are equally pointed against swearing, chap.
v.12. "But above all things my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither
by the earth, neither by any other oath; but let your yea, be yea, and your
nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation."

I know, these passages are said to be levelled only against profane swearing
in common conversation, but this will appear improbable when we reflect, that
our Savior's words were addressed exclusively to his disciples, and that the
epistle of St. James, from whence the prohibition of swearing is taken, is
directed to a number of pious converts to christianity, none of whom, any more
than the disciples of our Lord, could be suspected of profane swearing in
common conversation. Both passages equally condemn oaths of every kind, and
demonstrate their contrariety to the gospel dispensation.

There is a peculiar meaning in the reason which is given for the prohibition
of swearing in the precept, of our Savior, viz. that any thing more than a
bare affirmation, comes of evil. Yes, it came originally from the universal
prevalance of falsehood in society; but the christian religion, by opening new
sources of moral and religious obligation, and by discovering more fully the
beauty and rewards of truth and deformity, and future punishment of falsehood,
has rendered the obligation of oaths wholly unnecessary. They comport^d with
the feeble discoveries of the Jewish, and the numerous corruptions of the pagan
religions; but they are unnecessary under that full and clear manifestation of
the divine will which is contained in the gospel. Caesar's wife should not be
suspected. -- With how much more propriety should this be said of the veracity
of a christian, than of the chastity of the wife of a heathen emperor. Every
time a christian swears, he exposes the purity and truth of his religion to
suspicion. "As for you, Petrarch, your word is sufficient," said the cardinal
Colonna, in an enquiry into the cause of a riot that had happened in his
family, while that celebrated poet was a member of it; and in which he exacted
an oath from every other member of his family, not excepting his own brother,
the bishop of Luna. The same address should be made to every christian, when he
is called upon to declare the truth. "You believe in a future state of rewards
and punishment -- you profess to be the follower of that Being who has
inculcated a regard for truth, under the awful consideration of his
omniscience, and who has emphatically styled himself the TRUTH." Your word,
therefore is sufficient.

A nobleman is permitted, by the laws of England, to declare the truth upon his
honor. The profession of christianity is declared in scripture to be an high
calling, and christians are said to be priests and kings. Strange! that persons
of such high rank, should be treated with less respect than English noblemen;
and still more strange! that persons possessing these august titles should
betray their illustrious birth and dignity, by conforming to a practice which
tends so much to invalidate the truth and excellency of their religion.

It is very remarkable, that in all the accounts we have of the intercourse of
our Savior with his disciples, and of their subsequent intercourse with each
other, there is no mention made of a single oath being taken by either of them.

Perhaps there never was an event in which the highest degrees of evidence were
more necessary, than they were to establish the truth of the resurrection of
our Savior, as on the truth of this miracle depended the credibility of the
christian religion. But in the establishment of the truth of this great event,
no oath is taken, or required. The witnesses of it simply relate what they saw,
and are believed by all the disciples except one, who still remembered too well
the prohibition of his master, "swear not at all," to ask for an oath to remove
his unbelief.

It is worthy of notice likewise, that no preposterous oath of office is
required of the disciples when they assume the apostolic character, and are
sent forth to preach the gospel to all nations. How unlike the spirit of the
gospel are those human constitutions and laws, which require oaths of fidelity,
every year! and which appear to be founded in the absurd idea that men are at
all times the guardians of their own virtue.

There can be no doubt of christians having uniformly refused to take an oath
in the first ages of the church: nor did they conform to this pagan custom,
till after christianity was corrupted by a mixture with many other parts of the
pagan and Jewish religions.

There are two arguments in favor of oaths which are derived from the new
testament, and which remain to be refuted. -- 1st St. Paul uses several
expressions in his epistles which amount to oaths, and even declares "an oath
to be the end of strife." It was the character of St. Paul, that he became all
things to all men. He circumcised as well as baptized Jews, and he proves the
truth of revelation by a quotation from a heathen poet. Oaths were a part of
the Jewish and pagan institutions -- and, like several other ceremonies, for
some time, continued to retain a strong hold of the prejudices of the new
converts to christianity. But the above words of the Apostle, which have been
urged in favor of swearing, are by no means intended to apply to common life.
They have a retrospect to the promise made to Abraham of the coming of the
Messiah, and were designed to show the certainty of that event in a language
which was accommodated to the idea of the Jewish nation.

2d. It has beeen said, that the great Jehovah frequently swears, both in the
old and new testament, and that the angel who is to sound the last trumpet will
"swear that time shall be no more." Every expression of this kind should be
considered as an accommodation to Jewish and pagan customs, in order to render
the truths of revelation more intelligible and acceptable. The Supreme Being,
for the same reasons, often assumes to himself the violent passions, and even
the features and senses of men; and yet who can suppose it proper to ascribe
either of them to a Being, one of whose perfections consists in his existing as
a pure unchangeable spirit.

If oaths are contrary to reason, and have a pernicious influence upon morals
and the order of society; and above all, if they are contrary to the precepts
and spirit of the gospel; it becomes legislators and ministers of the gospel to
consider how far they are responsible for all the falsehood, profane swearing
and perjury that exist in society. It is in the power of legislators to abolish
oaths, by expunging them from our laws; and it is in the power of ministers of
the gospel, by their influence and example, to render truth so simple and
obligatory, that human governments shall be ashamed to ask any other mode of
declaring it, from Christians, than by a bare affirmation.

The friends of virtue and freedom have beheld, with great pleasure, a new
constitution established in the United States, whose objects are peace, union
and justice. It will be in the power of the first congress that shall act under
this constitution, to set the world an example of enlightened policy, by
framing laws that shall command obedience without the absurd and improper
obligation of oaths. By this means they will add the restoration and
establishment of TRUTH, to the great and valuable objects of the constitution
that have been mentioned.

Jan. 20 1789.
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE EFFECTS OF PUBLIC PUNISHMENTS UPON CRIMINALS, AND UPON
SOCIETY. READ IN THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING POLITICAL ENQUIRIES, CONVENED AT THE
HOUSE OF BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQUIRE. IN PHILADELPHIA, MARCH 9th, 1787.
Accustomed to look up to those nations from whom we have derived our origin,
for our laws, our opinions, and our manners; we have retained, with
undistinguishing reverence, their errors, with their improvements; have
blended, with our public institutions, the policy of dissimilar countries; and
have grafted, on an infant commonwealth, the manners of ancient and corrupted
monarchies.

PREFACE TO THE LAWS OF THE SOCIETY FOR POLITICAL ENQUIRIES.
THE design of punishment is said to be, 1st, to reform the person who suffers
it; 2dly, to prevent the perpetration of crimes, by exciting terror in the
minds of spectators; and, 3dly, to remove those persons from society, who have
manifested, by their tempers and crimes, that they are unfit to live in it.

From the first institution of governments, in every age and country (with but
a few exceptions) legislators have thought that punishments should be public,
in order to answer the two first of these intentions. It will require some
fortitude to combat opinions that have been sanctified by such long and general
prejudice, and supported by universal practice. But truth in government, as
well as in philosophy, is of progressive growth. As in philosophy, we often
arrive at truth by rejecting the evidence of our senses; so in government, we
often arrive at it, after divorcing our first thoughts. Reason, though deposed
and oppressed, is the only just sovereign of the human mind. Discoveries, it is
true, have been made by accident; but they have derived their credit and
usefulness only from their according with the decisions of reason.

In medicine, above every other branch of philosophy, we perceive many
instances of the want of relation between the apparent cause and effect. Who,
by reasoning a priori, would suppose, that the hot regimen was not preferable
to the cold, in the treatment of the smallpox? But experience teaches us, that
this is not the case. Cause and effect appear to be related in philosophy, like
the objects of chemistry. Similar bodies often repel each other, while bodies
that are dissimilar in figure, weight and quality, often unite together with
impetuosity. With our present imperfect degrees of knowledge of the properties
of bodies, we can discover these chemical relations only by experiment. The
same may be said of the connection between cause and effect, in many parts of
government. This connection often accords with reason, while it is repugnant to
our senses -- and when this is not the case, from our inability to perceive it,
it forces our consent from the testimony of experience and observation.

It has been remarked, that the profession of arms owes its present rank, as a
science, to its having been rescued, since the revival of letters, from the
hands of mere soldiers, and cultivated by men acquainted with other branches of
literature. The reason of this is plain. Truth is an unit. It is the same thing
in war -- philosophy -- medicine -- morals -- religion and government; and in
proportion as we arrive at it in one science, we shall discover it in others.

After this apology, for dissenting from the established opinions and practice,
upon the subject of public punishments, I shall take the liberty of declaring,
that the great ends proposed, are not to be obtained by them; and that, on the
contrary, all public punishments tend to make bad men worse, and to increase
crimes, by their influence upon society.

I. The reformation of a criminal can never be effected by a public punishment,
for the following reasons.

1st. As it is always connected with infamy, it destroys in him the sense of
shame, which is one of the strongest out-posts of virtue.

2dly. It is generally of such short duration, as to produce none of those
changes in body or mind, which are absolutely necessary to reform obstinate
habits of vice.

3dly. Experience proves, that public punishments have increased propensities
to crimes. A man who has lost his character at a whipping post, has nothing
valuable left to lose in society. Pain has begotten insensibility to the whip;
and infamy to shame. Added to his old habits of vice, he probably feels a
spirit of revenge against the whole community, whose laws have inflicted his
punishment upon him; and hence he is stimulated to add to the number and
enormity of his outrages upon society. The long duration of the punishment,
when public, by increasing its infamy, serves only to increase the evils that
have been mentioned. The criminals, who were sentenced to work in the presence
of the City of London, upon the Thames, during the late war, were prepared by
it, for the perpetration of every crime, as soon as they were set at liberty
from their confinement. I proceed,

II. To show, that public punishments, so far from preventing crimes by the
terror they excite in the minds of spectators, are directly calculated to
produce them.

All men, when they suffer, discover either fortitude, insensibility, or
distress. Let us inquire into the effects of each of these upon the minds of
spectators.

1st. Fortitude is a virtue, that seizes so forcible upon our esteem, that
wherever we see it, it never fails to weaken, or to obliterate, our detestation
of the crimes with which it is connected in criminals. I call upon you, said
major Andre, at the place of execution to his attendants to bear witness,
gentlemen, that I die like a brave man. The effect of this speech upon the
American army is well known. The spy was lost in the hero: and indignation,
every where, gave way to admiration and praise. But this is not all: the
admiration, which fortitude, under suffering, excites, has in some instances
excited envy. In Denmark uncommon pains are taken to prepare criminals for
death, by the conversation and instructions of the clergy. After this, they are
conducted to the place of execution with uncommon pomp and solemnity. The
criminals, under these circumstances, suffer death with meekness -- piety --
and sometimes with dignity. These effects of this, I have been well informed
have been, in several instances, to induce deluded people to feign or confess
crimes, which they had never committed, on purpose to secure to themselves a
conspicuous death, and a certain entrance into happiness. There is something in
the presence of a number of spectators, which is calculated to excite and
strengthen fortitude in a sufferer. "It is not so difficult a thing," said
Lewis XIV. to his courtiers, who stood round his deathbed, "to die, as I
expected." No wonder, says Voltaire, who relates this anecdote, "for all men
die with fortitude, who die in company." The bravery of soldiers is derived in
a great degree, from the operation of this principle in the human mind.

2dly. If criminals discover insensibility under their punishments, the effect
of it must be still more fatal upon society. It removes, instead of exciting
terror. In some instances, I conceive it may excite a desire in the minds of
persons whom debt or secret guilt has made miserable, to seek an end of their
distresses in the same enviable apathy to evil. Should this insensibility be
connected with cheerfulness, which is sometimes the case, it must produce still
more unfriendly effects upon society. But terrible must be the consequence of
this insensibility and cheerfulness, if they should lead criminals to retaliate
upon the inhuman curiosity of spectators, by profane or indecent insults or
conversation.

3dly. The effects of distress in criminals, though less obvious are not less
injurious to society, than fortitude or insensibility. By an immutable law of
our nature, distress of all kinds, when seen, produces sympathy, and a
disposition to relieve it. This sympathy, in generous minds, is not lessened by
the distress being the offspring of crimes: on the contrary, even the crimes
themselves are often palliated by the reflection that they were the unfortunate
consequences of extreme poverty -- of seducing company -- or of the want of a
virtuous education, from the loss or negligence of parents in early life. Now,
as the distress which the criminals suffer, is the effect of a law of the
state, which cannot be resisted, the sympathy of the spectator is rendered
abortive, and returns empty to the bosom in which it was awakened. Let us
briefly examine the consequences of this abortive sympathy in society. It will
not be necessary here to dwell upon all the advantages of this principle in
human nature. It will be sufficient to observe, that it is the vicegerent of
the divine benevolence in our world. It is intended to bind up all the wounds
which sin and death have made among mankind. It has founded hospitals --
erected charity-schools -- and connected the extremes of happiness and misery
together in every part of the globe. Above all, sensibility is the sentinel of
the moral faculty. It decides upon the quality of the actions before they reach
that divine principle of the soul. It is of itself, to use the words of an
elegant female poet Mis. Moore.
, "A hasty moral -- a sudden sense of right."

If such are the advantages of sensibility, now what must be the consequences
to society, of extirpating or weakening it in the human breast? But public
punishments are calculated to produce this effect. To prove this, I must borrow
an analogy from the animal economy. -- The sensibility of the human body is
said to be active and passive. The first is connected with motion and
sensation; the second only with sensation, The first is increased, the second
is diminished, by the repetition of impressions. The same phenomenon take place
in the human mind. Sensibility here is both active and passive. Passive
sensibility is lessened, while that which is active is increased by habit. The
passive sensibility of a physician, to the distress of his patients, is always,
diminished, but his active sensibility is always increased by time; hence we
find young physicians feel most -- but old physicians, with less feeling,
discover most sympathy with their patients.

If such be the constitution of our minds, then the effects, of distress upon
them will be, not only to destroy passive, but to eradicate active sensibility
from them. The principle of sympathy, after being often opposed by the law of
the state, which forbids it to relieve the distress it commiserates, will cease
to act altogether; and, from this defect of action, and the habit arising from
it, will soon lose its place in the human breast. Misery of every kind will
then be contemplated without emotion or sympathy. -- The widow and the orphan
-- the naked -- the sick, and the prisoner, will have no avenue to our services
or our charity -- and what is worse than all, when the sentinel of our moral
faculty is removed, there is nothing to guard the mind from the inroads of
every positive vice.

I pass over the influence of this sympathy in its first operation upon the
government of the state. While we pity, we secretly condemn the law which
inflicts the punishment: hence, arises a want of respect for was in general,
and a more feeble union of the great ties of government.

I have only to add, upon this part of my subject, that the pernicious effects
of sympathy, where it does not terminate in action, are happily provided
against by the Jewish law. Hence we read of a prohibition against it where
persons suffer for certain crimes. To spectators, the voice of heaven, under
such circumstances, is, "thine eye shall not pity him."

4thly. But it is possible the characters or conduct of criminals may be such,
as to excite indignation or contempt instead of pity, in the minds of
spectators. Let us there enquire, briefly, into the effects of these passions
upon the human mind. Every body acknowledges our obligations to universal
benevolence; but these cannot be fulfilled, unless we love the whole human
race, however diversified they may be by weakness or crimes. The indignation or
contempt which is felt for this unhappy part of the great family of mankind,
must necessarily extinguish a large; portion of this universal love. Nor is
this all the men, or perhaps the women whose persons we detest, possess souls
and bodies composed of the same materials as those of our friends and
relations. They are bone of their bone; and were originally fashioned with the
same spirits. What, then, must be the consequence of a familiarity with such
objects of horror, upon our attachments and duties to our friends and
connections, or to the rest of mankind? If a spectator should give himself time
to reflect upon such a sight of human depravity, he would naturally recoil from
the embraces of friendship, and the endearments of domestic life, and perhaps
say with an unfortunate great man, after having experienced an instance of
treachery in a friend, Oh! that I were a dog, that I might not call man my
brother. The Jewish law forbade more than nine and thirty lashes, lest the
sufferer should afterward become "vile" in the sight of spectators. It is the
prerogative of God alone, to contemplate the vices of bad men, without
withdrawing from them the support of his benevolence. Hence we find, when he
appeared in the world, in the person of his Son, he did not exclude criminals
from the benefits of his goodness. He dismissed a women caught in the
perpetration of a crime, which was capital by the Jewish law, with a friendly
admonition: and he opened the gates of paradise to a dying thief.

5thly. But let us suppose, that criminals are viewed without sympathy --
indignation -- or contempt. -- This will be the case, either when the
spectators are themselves hardened with vice, or when they are too young, or
too ignorant, to connect the ideas of crimes and punishments together. Here,
then, a new source of injury arises from the public nature of punishments.
Every portion of them will appear, to spectators of this description, to be
mere arbitrary acts of cruelty: hence will arise a disposition to exercise the
same arbitrary cruelty over the feelings and lives of their fellow creatures.
To see blows, or a halter, imposed in cold blood upon a criminal, whose passive
behavior, operating with the ignorance of the spectators, indicates innocence
more than vice, cannot fail of removing the natural obstacles to violence and
murder in the human mind.

6thly. Public punishments make many crimes known to persons who would
otherwise have passed through life in a total ignorance of them. They moreover
produce such a familiarity, in the minds of spectators, with the crimes for
which they are inflicted, that, in some instances, they have been known to
excite a propensity for them. It has been remarked, that a certain immorality
has always kept pace with public admonitions in the churches in the eastern
states. In proportion as this branch of ecclesiastical discipline has declined,
fewer children have been born out of wedlock.

7thly. Ignominy is universally acknowledged to be a worse punishment than
death. Let it not be supposed, from this circumstance, that it operates more
than the fear of death in preventing crimes. On the contrary, like the
indiscriminate punishment of death, it not only confounds and levels all
crimes, but by increasing the disproportion between crimes and punishments, it
creates a hatred of all law and government; and thus disposes to the
perpetration of every crime. Laws can only be respected and obeyed, while they
bear an exact proportion to crimes. -- The law which punishes the shooting of a
swan with death, in England, has produced a thousand murders. Nor is this all
the mischievous influence, which the punishment of ignominy has upon society.
While murder is punished with death, the man who robs on the highway, or
breaks open a house, must want the common feelings and principles which belong
to human nature, if he does not add murder to theft, in order to screen
himself, if he should be detected, from that punishment which is acknowledged
to be more terrible than death.

It would seem strange, that ignominy should ever have been adopted, as a
milder punishment than death, did we not know that the human mind seldom
arrives at truth upon any subject, till it has first reached the extremity of
error.

8thly. But may not the benefit derived to society, by employing criminals to
repair public roads, or to clean streets, overbalance the evils that have been
mentioned? I answer, by no means. On the contrary, besides operating in one, or
in all the ways that have been described, the practice of employing criminals
in public labor, will render labor of every kind disreputable, more
especially that species of it, which has for its objects the convenience or
improvement of the state. It is a well-known fact, that white men soon decline
labor in the West Indies, and in the southern states, only because the
agriculture, and mechanical employments of those countries, are carried on
chiefly by negro slaves. But I object further to the employment of criminals on
the highways and streets, from the idleness it will create, by alluring
spectators from their business, and thereby depriving the state of greater
benefits from the industry of its citizens, than it can ever derive from the
labor of criminals.

The history of public punishments, in every age and country, is full of facts,
which support every principle that has been advanced. What has been the
operation of the seventy thousand executions, that have taken place in Great
Britain from the year 1688, to the present day, upon the morals and manners of
the inhabitants of that island? Has not every prison-door that has been opened,
to conduct criminals to public shame and punishment, unlocked, at the same
time, the bars of moral obligation upon the minds of ten times the number of
people? How often do we find pockets picked under a gallows, and highway
robberies committed in sight of a gibbet? From whence arose the conspiracies,
with assassinations and poisonings, which prevailed in the decline of the Roman
empire? Were they not favored by the public executions of the amphitheatre? It
is therefore to the combined operation of indolence, prejudice, ignorance and
the defect of culture of the human heart, alone, that we are to ascribe the
continuance of public punishments, after such long and multiplied experience of
their inefficacy to reform bad men, or to prevent the commission of crimes.

III. Let it not be supposed, from any thing that has been said, that I wish to
abolish punishments. Far from it: I wish only to change the place and manner of
inflicting them, so as to render them effectual for the reformation of
criminals, and beneficial to society. Before I propose a plan for this purpose,
I beg leave to deliver the following general axioms:

1st. The human mind is disposed to exaggerate every thing that is removed from
it, by time or place.

2dly. It is equally disposed to enquire after, and to magnify such things as
are sacred.

3dly. It always ascribes the extremes in qualities, to things that are
unknown; and an excess in duration, to indefinite time.

4thly. Certain and definite evil, by being long contemplated, ceases to be
dreaded or avoided. A soldier soon loses, from habit the fear of death in
battle; but retains, in common with other people, the terror of death from
sickness or drowning.

5thly. An attachment to kindred and society is one of the strongest feelings
of the human heart.A sepeparation from them, therefore has ever been considered
as one of the severest punishments that can be inflicted upon man.

6thly. Personal liberty is so dear to all men, that the loss of it, for an
indefinite time, is a punishment so severe, that death has often been preferred
to it.

These axioms being admitted (for they cannot be controverted) I shall proceed
next to apply them, by suggesting a plan for the punishment of crimes, which, I
flatter myself, will answer all the ends that have been proposed by them.

1. Let a large house be erected in a convenient part of the state. Let it be
divided into a number of apartments, reserving one large room for public
worship. Let cells be provided for the solitary confinement of such persons as
are of a refractory temper. Let the house be supplied with the materials, and
instruments for carrying on such manufactures as can be conducted with the
least instruction, or previous knowledge. Let a garden adjoin this house, in
which the culprits may occasionally work, and walk. This spot will have a
beneficial effect not only upon health, but morals, for it will lead them to a
familiarity with those pure and natural objects which are calculated to renew
the connection of fallen man with his creator. Let the name of this house
convey an idea of its benevolent and salutary design, but let it by no means be
called a prison, or by any other name that is associated with what is infamous
in the opinion of mankind. Let the direction of this institution be committed
to persons of established characters for probity, discretion and humanity, who
shall be amenable at all times to the legislature, or courts of the state.

2dly. Let the various kinds of punishment, that are to be inflicted on crimes,
be defined and fixed by law. But let no notice be taken, in the law, of the
punishment that awaits any particular crime. By these means, we shall prevent
the mind from accustoming itself to the view of these punishmeats, so as to
destroy their terror by habit. The indifference and levity with which some men
suffer the punishment of hanging, is often occasioned by an insensibility which
is contracted by the frequent anticipation of it, or by the appearance of the
gallows suggesting the remembrance of scenes of criminal festivity, in which it
was the subject of humor or ridicule. Besides, punishments should always be
varied in degree, according to the temper of criminals, or the progress of
their reformation.

3dly. Let the duration of punishments, for all crimes be limited: but let
this limitation be unknown I conceive this secret to be of the utmost
importance in reforming criminals, and preventing crimes. The imagination, when
agitated with uncertainty, will seldom fail of connecting the longest duration
of punishment, with the smallest crime.

I cannot conceive any think more calculated to diffuse terror through a
community, and thereby to prevent crimes, than the combination of the three
circumstances that have been mentioned in punishments. Children will press upon
the evening fire in listening to the tales that will be spread from this abode
of misery. Superstition will add to its horrors: and romance will find in it
ample materials for fiction, which cannot fail of increasing the terror of its
punishments,

Let it not be objected, that the terror produced by the history of these
secret punishments, will operate like the abortive sympathy I have described.
Active sympathy can he fully excited only through the avenues of the eyes and
the ears. Besides, the recollection that the only design of punishment is the
reformation of the criminal will suspend the action of sympathy altogether. We
listen with paleness to the history of a tedious and painful operation in
surgery, without a wish to arrest the hand of the operator. Our sympathy, which
in this case is of the passive kind, is mixed with pleasure, when we are
assured, that there is a certainty of the operation being the means of saving
the life of the sufferer.

Nor let the expense of erecting and supporting a house of repentance, for the
purposes that have been mentioned, deter us from the undertaking. It would be
easy to demonstrate, that it will not cost one fourth as much as the
maintenance of the numerous jails that are now necessary in every well
regulated state. But why should receptacles be provided and supported at an
immense expense, in every country, for the relief of persons afflicted with
bodily disorders, and an objection be made to providing a place for the cure of
the diseases of the mind?

The nature -- degrees -- and duration of the punishments, should all be
determined beyond a certain degree, by a court properly constituted for that
purpose, and whose business it should be to visit the receptacle for criminals
once or twice a year.

I am aware of the prejudices of freemen, against entrusting power to a
discretionary court. But let it be remembered, that no power is committed to
this court, but what is possessed by the different courts of justice in all
free countries; nor so much as is now wisely and necessarily possessed by the
supreme and inferior courts, in the execution of the penal laws of
Pennsylvania. I shall spend no time in defending the consistency of private
punishments, with a safe and free government. Truth, upon this subject, cannot
be divided. If public punishments are injurious to criminals and to society, it
follows that crimes should be punished in private, or not punished at all.
There is no alternative. The opposition to private punishments, therefore is
founded altogether in prejudice, or in ignorance of the true principles of
liberty.

The safety and advantages of private punishments, will appear, further, when I
add, that the best governed families and schools are those, in which the faults
of servants and children are rebuked privately, and where confinement and
solitude are preferred for correction, to the use of the rod.

In order to render these punishments effectual, they should be accommodated to
the constitutions and tempers of the criminals, and the peculiar nature of
their crimes. Peculiar attention should be paid, likewise, in the nature,
degrees, and duration of punishments, to crimes, as they arise from passion,
habit or temptation.

The punishments, should consist of bodily pain, labor, watchfulness,
solitude, and silence. They should all be joined with cleanliness and a simple
diet. To ascertain the nature, degrees, and duration of the bodily pain, will
require some knowledge of the principles of sensation, and of the sympathies
which occur in the nervous system. The labor should be so regulated and
directed, as to be profitable to the state. Besides employing criminals in
laborious and useful manufactures, they may be compelled to derive all their
subsistence from a farm and a garden, cultivated by their own hands, adjoining
the place of their confinement.

These punishments may be used separately, or more or less combined, according
to the nature of the crimes, or according to the variations of the constitution
and temper of the criminals. In the application of them, the utmost possible
advantages should be taken of the laws of the association of ideas, of habit,
and of imitation.

To render these physical remedies more effectual they should be accompanied by
regular instruction in the principles and obligations of religion, by persons
appointed for that purpose.

Thus far I am supported, in the application of the remedies I have mentioned,
for the cure of crimes, by the facts contained in Mr. Howard's history of
prisons, and by other observations. It remains yet to prescribe the specific
punishment that is proper for each specific crime. Here my subject begins to
oppress me. I have no more doubt of every crime having its cure in moral and
physical influence, than I have of the efficacy of the Peruvian bark in curing
the intermitting fever. The only difficulty is, to find out the proper remedy
or remedies for particular vices. Mr Dufriche de Valaye, in his elaborate
treatise upon penal laws, has performed the office of a pioneer upon this
difficult subject. He has divided crimes into classes; and has affixed
punishments to each of them, in a number of ingenious tables. Some of the
connections he has established, between crimes and punishments, appear to be
just. But many of his punishments are contrary to the first principles of
action in man; and all of them are, in my opinion, improper, as far as he
orders them to be inflicted in the eye of the public. His attempt, however, is
laudable, and deserves the praise of every friend to mankind.

If the invention of a machine for facilitating labor, has been repaid with
the gratitude of a country, how much more will that man deserve, who shall
invent the most speedy and effectual methods of restoring the vicious part of
mankind to virtue and happiness, and of extirpating a portion of vice from the
world? Happy condition of human affairs! when humanity, philosophy and
christianity, shall unite their influence to teach men, that they are brethren;
and to prevent their preying any longer upon each other! Happy citizens of the
United States, whose governments permit them to adopt every discovery in the
moral or intellectual world, that leads to these benevolent purposes!

Let it not be objected, that it will be impossible for men, who have expiated
their offenses by the mode of punishment that has been proposed, to recover
their former connections with society. This objection arises from an
unfortunate association of ideas. The infamy of criminals is derived, not so
much from the remembrance of their crimes, as from the recollection of the
ignominy of their punishments. Crimes produce a stain, which may be washed out
by reformation, and which frequently wears away by time; but public punishments
leave scars which disfigure the whole character; and hence persons, who have
suffered them, are ever afterward viewed with horror or aversion. If crimes
were expiated by private discipline, and succeeded by reformation, criminals
would probably suffer no more in character from them, than men suffer in their
reputation or usefulness from the punishments they have undergone when boys at
school.

I am so perfectly satisfied of the truth of this opinion, that methinks I
already hear the inhabitants of our villages and townships counting the years
that shall complete the reformation of one of their citizens. I behold them
running to meet him on the day of his deliverance. His friends and family bathe
his cheeks with tears of joy; and the universal shout of the neigbourhood is,
"This our brother was lost, and is found -- was dead and is alive."

It has long been a desideratum in government, that there should exist in it no
pardoning power, since the certainty of punishment operates so much more than
its severity, or infamy, in preventing crimes. But where punishments are
excessive in degree, or infamous from being public, a pardoning power is
absolutely necessary. Remove their severity and public infamy, and a pardoning
power ceases to be necessary in a code of criminal jurisprudence. Nay, further
-- it is such a defect in penal laws, as in some measure defeats every
invention to prevent crimes, or to cure habits of vice. If punishments were
moderate, just, and private, they would exalt the feelings of public justice
and benevolence so far above the emotions of humanity in witnesses, juries and
judges, that they would forget to conceal, or to palliate crimes; and the
certainty of punishment, by extinguishing all hope of pardon in the criminal,
would lead him to connect the beginning of his repentance with the last words
of his sentence of condemnation. To obtain this great and salutary end, there
should exist certain portions of punishment, both in duration and degree, which
should be placed by law beyond the power of the discretionary court before
mentioned, to shorten or mitigate.

I have said nothing upon the manner of inflicting death as a punishment for
crimes, because I consider it as an improper punishment for any crime. Even
murder itself is propagated by the punishment of death for murder. Of this we
have a remarkable proof in Italy. The duke of Tuscany soon after the
publication of the marquis of Beccaria's excellent treatise upon this subject,
abolished death as a punishment for murder. A gentleman, who resided five years
at Pisa, informed me, that only five murders had been perpetrated in his
dominions in twenty years. The same gentleman added, that after his residence
in Tuscany, he spent three months in Rome, where death is still the punishment
of murder, and where executions, according to Dr. Moore, are conducted with
peculiar circumstances of public parade. During this short period, there were
sixty murders committed in the precincts of that city. It is remarkable, the
manners, principles, and religion, of the inhabitants of Tuscany and Rome, are
exactly the same. The abolition of death alone, as a punishment for murder,
produced this difference in the moral character of the two nations.

I suspect the attachment to death, as a punishment for murder, in minds
otherwise enlightened, upon the subject of capital punishments, arises from a
false interpretation of a passage contained in the old testament, and that is,
"he that sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed." This has been
supposed to imply that blood could only be expiated by blood. But I am disposed
to believe, with a late commentator The reverend Mr. William Turner, in the
second vol. of Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester.
upon this text of scripture, that it is rather a prediction than a law. The
language of it is simply, that such will be the depravity and folly of man,
that murder, in every age, shall beget murder. Laws, therefore, which inflict
death for murder, are, in my opinion, as unchristian as those which justify or
tolerate revenge; for the obligations of christianity upon individuals, to
promote repentance, to forgive injuries, and to discharge the duties of
universal benevolence, are equally binding upon states.

The power over human life, is the sole p^erogative of him who gave it. Human
laws, therefore, rise in rebellion against this prerogative, when they transfer
it to human hands.

If society can be secured from violence, by confining the murderer, so as to
prevent a repetition of his crime, the end of extirpation will be answered. In
confinement, he may be reformed: and if this should prove impracticable, he may
be restrained for a term of years, that will probably, be coeval with his life.

There was a time, when the punishment of captives with death or servitude, and
the indiscriminate destruction of peaceable husbandmen, women, and children,
were thought to be essential, to the success of war, and the safety of states.
But experience has taught us, that this is not the case. And in proportion as
humanity has triumphed over these maxims of false policy, wars have been less
frequent and terrible, and nations have enjoyed longer intervals of internal
tranquillity. The virtues are all parts of a circle. Whatever is humane, is wise
-- whatever is wise, is just -- and whatever is wise, just, and humane, will be
found to be the true interest of states, whether criminals or foreign enemies
are the objects of their legislation.

I have taken no notice of perpetual banishment, as a legal punishment, as I
consider it the next in degree, in folly and cruelty, to the punishment of
death. If the receptacle for criminals, which has been proposed, is erected in
a remote part of the state, it will act with the same force upon the feelings
of the human heart, as perpetual banishment. Exile, when perpetual, by
destroying one of the most powerful principles of action in man, viz. the love
of kindred and country, deprives us of all the advantages, which might be
derived from it, in the business of reformation. While certain passions are
weakened, this noble passion is strengthened by age: hence, by preserving this
passion alive, we furnish a principle, which, in time may become an overmatch
for those vicious habits, which separated criminals from their friends and from
society.

Notwithstanding this testimony against the punishment of death and perpetual
banishment, I cannot help adding, that there is more mercy to the criminal, and
less injury done to society, by both of them, than by public infamy and pain,
without them.

The great art of surgery has been said to consist in saving, not in
destroying, or amputating the diseased parts of the human body. Let governments
learn to imitate, in this respect, the skill and humanity of the healing art.
Nature knows no waste in any of her operations. Even putrefaction itself is the
parent of useful productions to man. Human ingenuity imitates nature in a
variety of arts. Offal matters, of all kinds, are daily converted into the means
of increasing the profits of industry, and the pleasures of human life. The
soul of man alone, with all its moral and intellectual powers, when misled by
passion, is abandoned, by the ignorance or cruelty of man, to unprofitable
corruption, or extirpation.

A worthy prelate of the church of England once said upon seeing a criminal led
to execution, "There goes my wicked self." Considering the vices to which the
frailty of human nature exposes whole families of every rank and class in life,
it becomes us, whenever we see a fellow creature led to public infamy and pain,
to add further. "There goes my unhappy father, my unhappy brother, or my
unhappy son," and afterward to ask ourselves, whether private punishments are
not to be preferred to public.

For the honor of humanity it can be said, that in every age and country,
there have been found persons in whom uncorrupted nature has triumphed over
custom and law. Else, why do we hear of houses being abandoned near to places
of public execution? Why do we see doors and windows shut on the days or hours
of criminal exhibitions? Why do we hear of aid being secretly afforded to
criminals, to mitigate or elude the severity of their punishments? Why is the
public executioner of the law an object of such general detestation? These
things are latent struggles of reason, or rather the secret voice of God
himself, speaking in the human heart, against the folly and cruelty of public
punishment.

I shall conclude this enquiry by observing, that the same false religion and
philosophy, which once kindled the fire on the alter of persecution, now doom
the criminal to public ignominy and death. In proportion as the principles of
philosophy and christianity are understood, they will agree in extinguishing
the one, and destroying the other. If these principles continue to extend their
influence upon government, as they have done for some years past, I cannot help
entertaining a hope, that the time is not very distant, when the gallows, the
pillory, the stocks, the whipping-post and the wheel-barrow, (the usual engines
of public punishments) will be connected with the history of the rack and the
stake, as marks of the barbarity of ages and countries, and as melancholy
proofs of the feeble operation of reason and religion upon the human mind.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE CONSISTENCY OF THE PUNISHMENT OF MURDER BY DEATH, WITH
REASON AND REVELATION.
I. THE Punishment of Murder by Death, is contrary to reason, and to the order
and happiness of society.

1. It lessens the horror of taking away human life, and thereby tends to
multiply murders.

2. It produces murder by its influence upon people who are tired of life, and
who, from a supposition that murder is a less crime than suicide, destroy a
life (and often that of a near connection) and afterward deliver themselves up
to the laws of their country, that they may escape from their misery by means
of a halter.

3. The punishment of murder by death multiplies murders, from the difficulty
it creates of convicting persons who are guilty of it. Humanity, revolting at
the idea of the severity and certainty of a capital punishment, often steps in,
and collects such evidence in favor of a murderer, as screens him from death
altogether, or palliates his crime into manslaughter. Even the law itself
favors the acquital of a murderer by making the circumstance of premeditation
and malice, necessary to render the offense, a capital crime. Mr. Townsend
tells us in his travels into Spain Vol. 3.
that seventy murders were perpetrated in Malaga in the 16 months which
preceeded his visit to that city, all of which escaped with impunity, and
probably from the causes which have been mentioned. If the punishment of murder
consisted in long confinement, and hard labor, it would be proportioned to the
measure of our feelings of justice, and every member of society would be a
watchman, or a magistrate, to apprehend a destroyer of human life, and to bring
him to punishment.

4. The punishment of murder by death checks the operations of universal
justice, by preventing the punishment of every species of murder.

5. The punishment of murder by death has been proved to be contrary to the
order and happiness of society, by the experiments of some of the wisest
legislators in Europe. The Empress of Rusia, the King of Sweden, and the Duke
of Tuscany, have nearly extirpated murder from their dominions, by converting
its punishments into the means of benefiting society, and reforming the
criminals who perpetrate it.

II. The punishment of murder by death is contrary to divine revelation. A
religion which commands us to forgive, and even to do good to, our enemies, can
never authorize the punishment of murder by death. "Vengence is mine," said the
Lord; "I will repay." It is to no purpose to say here, that this vengeance it
taken out of the hands of an individual, and directed against the criminal by
the hand of government. It is equally an usurpation of the prerogative of
heaven, whether it be inflicted by a single person, or by a whole community.

Here I expect to meet with an appeal from the letter and spirit of the gospel,
to the law of Moses, which declares, "he that kills a man shall be put to
death." Forgive, indulgent heaven! the ignorance and cruelty of man, which, by
the misapplication of this text of scripture, has so long and so often stained
the religion of Jesus Christ with folly and revenge.

The following considerations, I hope, will prove that no argument can be
deduced from this law, to justify the punishment of murder by death; -- on the
contrary, that several arguments against it, may be derived from a just and
rational explanation of that part of the Levitical institutions.

1. There are many things in scripture above, but nothing contrary to, reason.
Now, the punishment of murder by death, is contrary to reason. It cannot,
therefore, be agreeable to the will of God.

2. The order and happiness of society cannot fail of being agreeable to the
will of God. But the punishment of murder by death, destroys the order and
happiness of society. It must therefore be contrary to the will of God.

3. Many of the laws given by Moses, were accommodated to the ignorance,
wickedness, and hardness of heart, of the Jews. Hence their divine legislator
expressly says, I gave them statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby
they should not live. Of this, the law which respects divorces, and the law of
retaliation, which required, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, are
remarkable instances.

But we are told, that the punishment of murder by death, is founded not only
on the law of Moses, but upon a positive precept given to Noah and his
posterity, that "whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed,"
If the interpretation of this text given in a former essay Enquiry into the
effects of public punishments. p. 1^0.
be not admitted, I shall attempt to explain it by remarking, that soon after
the flood, the infancy and weakness of society rendered it impossible to punish
murder by confinement. There was therefore no medium between inflicting death
upon a murderer, and suffering him to escape with impunity, and thereby to
perpetrate more acts of violence against his fellow creatures. It pleased God,
in this condition of the world, to permit a less, in order to prevent a greater
evil. He therefore commits for a while his exclusive power over human life, to
his creatures for the safety and preservation of an infant society, which might
otherwise have perished, and with it, the only stock of the human race. The
command indirectly implies that the crime of murder was not punished by death
in the mature state of society which existed before the flood. Nor is this the
only instance upon record in the scriptures in which God has delegated his
power over human life to his creatures. Abraham expresses no surprise at the
command which God gave him to sacrifice his son. He submits to it as a precept
founded in reason and natural justice, for nothing could be more obvious, than
that the giver of life had a right to claim it, when and in such manner as he
pleased. 'Till men are able to give life, it becomes them to tremble at the
thought of taking it away. Will a man rob God? -- Yes -- he robs him of what is
infinitely dear to him -- of his darling attribute of mercy, every time he
deprives a fellow creature of life.

4. If the Mosaic law, with respect to murder, be obligatory upon Christians,
it follows that it is equally obligatory upon them to punish adultery,
blasphemy and other capital crimes that are mentioned in the Levitical law, by
death. Nor is this all: it justifies the extirpation of the Indians, and the
enslaving of the Africans; for the command to the Jews to destroy the
Canaanites, and to make slaves of their heathen neighbors, is as positive as
the command which declares, "that he that kills a man, shall surely be put to
death."

5. Every part of the Levitical law, is full of types of the Messiah. May not
the punishment of death, inflicted by it, be intended to represent the demerit
and consequences of sin, as the cities of refuge were the offices of the
Messiah? And may not the enlargement of murderers who had fled to those cities
of refuge, upon the death of a high priest, represent the eternal abrogation of
the law which inflicted death for murder, by the meritorious death of the
Savior of the world?

6. The imperfection and severity of these laws were probably intended farther
-- to illustrate the perfection and mildness of the gospel dispensation. It is
in this manner that God has manifested himself in many of his acts. He created
darkness first, to illustrate by comparison the beauty of light, and he permits
sin, misery, and death in the moral world, that he may hereafter display more
illustriously the blessings of righteousness, happiness, and immortal life.
This opinion is favored by St. Paul, who says, the law made nothing perfect,
and that it was a shadow of good things to come.

How delightful to discover such an exact harmony between the dictates of
reason, the order and happiness of society, and the precepts of the gospel!
There is a perfect unity in truth. Upon all subjects -- in all ages -- and in
all countries -- truths of every kind agree with each other. I shall now take
notice of some of the common arguments, which are made use of, to defend the
punishments of murder by death.

1. It has been said, that the common sense of all nations, and particularly of
savages, is in favor of punishing murder by death.

The common sense of all nations is in favor of the commerce and slavery of
their fellow creatures. But this does not take away from their immorality.
Could it be proved that the Indians punish murder by death, it would not
establish the right of man over the life of a fellow creature; for revenge we
know in its utmost extent is the universal and darling passion of all savage
nations. The practice morever, (if it exist) must have originated in necessity:
for a people who have no settled place of residence, and who are averse from
all labor, could restrain murder in no other way. But I am disposed to doubt
whether the Indians punish murder by death among their own tribes. In all those
cases where a life is taken away by an Indian of a foreign tribe, they always
demand the satisfacticn of life for life. But this practice is founded on a
desire of preserving a balance in their numbers and power; for among nations
which consist of only a few warriors, the loss of an individual often destroys
this balance, and thereby exposes them to war or extermination. It is for the
same purpose of keeping up an equality in numbers and power, that they often
adopt captive children into their nations and families. What makes this
explanation of the practice of punishing murder by death among the Indians more
probable, is, that we find the same bloody and vindictive satisfaction is
required of a foreign nation, whether the person lost, be killed by an
accident, or premeditated violence. Many facts might be mentioned from
travelers to prove that the Indians do not punish murder by death within the
jurisdiction of their own tribes. I shall mention only one, which is taken from
the Rev. Mr. John Megapolensis's account of the Mohawk Indians, lately
published in Mr Hazard's historical collection of state papers. -- There is no
punishment, (says our author) here for murder, but every one is his own
avenger. The friends of the deceased revenge themselves upon the murderer until
peace is made with the next a kin. But although they are so cruel, yet there
are not half so many murders committed among them as among Christians,
notwithstanding their severe laws, and heavy penalties.

2. It has been said, that the horrors of a guilty conscience proclaim the
justice and necessity of death, as a punishment for murder. I draw an argument
of another nature from this fact. Are the horrors of conscience the punishment
that God inflicts upon murder? Why, then should we shorten or destroy them by
death, especially as we are taught to direct the most atrocious murderers to
expect pardon in the future world? No, let us not counteract the government of
God in the human breast: let the murderer live -- but let it be to suffer the
reproaches of a guilty conscience; let him live, to make compensation to
society for the injury he has done it, by robbing it of a citizen; let him live
to maintain the family of the man whom he has murdered; let him live, that the
punishment of his crime may become universal; and, lastly, let him live, that
murder may be extirpated from the list of human crimes!

Let us examine the conduct of the moral Ruler of the world toward the first
murderer. -- See Cain, returning from his field, with his hands reeking with
the blood of his brother! Do the heavens gather blackness, and does a flash of
lightning blast him to the earth? No. Does his father Adam, the natural
legislator and judge of the world, inflict upon him the punishment of death?
No. The infinitely wise God becomes his judge and executioner. He expels him
from the society of which he was a member. He fixes in his conscience a never
dying worm. He subjects him to the necessity of labor; and to secure a
duration of his punishment, proportioned to his crime, he puts a mark of
prohibition upon him, to prevent his being put to death, by weak and angry men;
declaring, at the same time, that whosoever slays Cain, vengeance shall be
taken on him sevenfold.

But further, if a necessary connection existed between the crime of murder and
death in the mind and laws of the Deity, how comes it that Moses and David
escaped it? They both imbrued their hands in innocent blood, and yet the
horrors of a guilty conscience were their only punishment, The subsequent
conduct of those two great and good men, proves that the heart may retain a
sound part after committing murder, and that even murderers, after repentance,
may be the vehicles of great temporal and spiritual blessings to mankind.

3. The declaration of St. Paul before Festus, respecting the punishment of
death, For if I be an offender, and have committed any thing worthy of death, I
refuse not to die. -- Acts xxv. and 11.
and the speech of the dying thief on the cross, "We indeed" suffer justly, for
we receive the due reward of our deeds. -- Luke xxiii. and 41.
are said to prove the lawfulness of punishing murder by death: but they prove
only that the punishment of death was agreeable to the Roman law. Human life
was extremely cheap under the Roman government. Of this we need no further
proof than the head of John the Baptist forming a part of a royal
entertainment. From the frequency of public executions, among those people, the
sword was considered as an emblem of public justice. But to suppose, from the
appeals which are sometimes made to it as a sign of justice, that capital
punishments are approved of in the New Testament, is as absurd as it would be
to suppose that horse-racing was a christian exercise, from St. Paul's frequent
allusions to the Olympic games.

The declaration of the barbarians upon seeing the snake fasten upon St. Paul's
hand, proves nothing but the ignorance of those uncivilized people; -- and when
the barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand, they said among
themselves, no doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he has escaped the
sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live. -- Acts xvii. and 4th.

Here it will be proper to distinguish between the sense of justice so
universal among all nations, and an approbation of death as a punishment for
murder. The former is written by the finger of God upon every human heart, but
like his own attribute of justice, it has the happiness of individuals and of
society for its objects. It is always misled, when it seeks for satisfaction in
punishments that are injurious to society, or that are disproportioned to
crimes. The satisfaction of this universal sense of justice by the punishments
of imprisonment and labor, would far exceed that which is derived from the
punishment of death; for it would be of longer duration, and it would more
frequently occur; for, upon a principle formerly mentioned, scarcely any
species of murder would escape with impunity. A scale of punishments, by means
of imprisonment and labor, might easily be contrived, so as to be accomodated
to the different degrees of atrocity in murder. For example -- for the first or
highest degree of guilt, let the punishment be solitude and darkness, and a
total want of employment. For the second, solitude and labor, with the benefit
of light. For the third, confinement and labor. The duration of these
punishments should likewise be governed by the atrocity of the murder, and by
the signs of contrition and amendment in the criminal.


The conduct and discourses of our Savior should outweigh every argument that
has been or can be offered in favor of capital punishment for any crime* When
the woman caught in adultery was brought to him, he evaded inflicting the
bloody sentence of the Jewish law upon her Even the maiming of the body appears
to be offensive in his sight; for when Peter drew his sword, and smote off the
ear of the servant of the high priest, he replaced it by miracle, and at the
same time declared, that all they who take the sword, shall perish with the
sword. He forgave the crime of murder, on his cross; and after his
resurrection, he commanded his disciples to preach the gospel of forgiveness,
first at Jerusalem, where he well knew his murderers still resided. These
striking facts are recorded for our imitation, and seem intended to show that
the Son of God died, not only to reconcile God to man, but to reconcile men to
each other. There is one passage more, in the history of our Savior's life
which would of itself overset the justice of the punishment of death for
murder, if every other part of the Bible had been silent upon the subject. When
two of his disciples, actuated by the spirit of vindictive legislators,
requested permission of him to call down fire from Heaven to consume the
inhospitable Samaritans, he answered them The Son of Man is not come to destroy
men's lives but to save them. I wish these words composed the motto of the arms
of every nation upon the face of the earth. They inculcate every duty that is
calculated to preserve, restore, or prolong human life. They militate alike
against war -- and capital punishments -- the objects of which, are the
unprofitable destruction of the lives of men. How precious does a human life
appear from these words, in the sight of heaven! Pause, Legislators, when you
give your votes for inflicting the punishment of death for any crime You
frustrate in one instance, the design of the mission of the Son of God into the
world, and thereby either deny his appearance in the flesh, or reject the truth
of his gospel. You, moreover, strengthen by your conduct the arguments of the
Deists against the particular doctrines of the Christian revelation. You do
more, you preserve a bloody fragment of the Jewisn institutions. -- The Son of
Man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them Excellent words! I
require no others to satisfy me of the truth and divine original of the
Christian religion; and while I am able to place a finger, upon this text of
scripture, I will not believe an angel from heaven, should he declare that the
punishment of death, for any crime, was inculcated, or permitted by the spirit
of the gospel.

The precious nature of human life in the eyes of the Savior of mankind,
appears further in the comparative value which he has placed upon it in the
following words. Matthew, x. v. 26.
"For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his
life, or what shall a man give in exchange for his life." I have rejected the
word soul which is used in the common translation of this verse. The original
word in the Greek, signifies life, and it is thus happily and justly translated
in the verse which precedes it.

4. It has been said, that a man who has committed a murder, has discovered a
malignity of heart, that renders him ever afterward unfit to live in human
society. This is by no means true in many, and perhaps in most of the cases of
murder. It is most frequently the effect of a sudden gust of passion, and has
sometimes been the only stain of a well-spent, or inoffensive life. There are
many crimes which unfit a man much more for human society, than a single
murder; and there have been instances of murderers, who have escaped, or bribed
the laws of their country, who have afterward become peaceable and useful
members of society. Let it not be supposed that I wish to palliate, by this
remark, the enormity of murder. Far from it. It is only because I view murder
with such superlative horror, that I wish to deprive our laws of the power of
perpetuating and encouraging it.

It has been said, that the confessions of murderers have, in many instances,
sanctioned the justice of their punishment. I do not wish to lessen the
influence of such vulgar errors as tend to prevent crimes, but I will venture
to declare, that many more murderers escape discovery, than are detected, or
punished. -- Were I not afraid of trespassing upon the patience of my readers,
I might mention a number of facts, in which circumstances of the most trifling
nature have become the means of detecting theft and forgery; from which I could
draw as strong proofs of the watchfulness of Providence over the property of
individuals, and the order of society, as have been drawn from the detection of
murder. I might mention instances, likewise, of persons in whom conscience has
produced restitution for stolen goods, or confession of the justice of the
punishment which was inflicted for theft. Conscience and knowledge always keep
pace with each other, both with respect to divine and human laws.

The acquiescence of murderers in the justice of their execution, is the effect
of prejudice and education. It cannot flow from a conscience acting in concert
with reason or religion -- for they both speak a very different language.

The world has certainly undergone a material change for the better within the
last two hundred years. This change has been produced chiefly, by the secret
and unacknowledged influence of Christianity upon the hearts of men. It is
agreeable to trace the effects of the Christian religion in the extirpation of
slavery -- in the diminution of the number of capital punishments, and in the
mitigation of the horrors of war. There was a time when masters possessed a
power over the lives of their slaves. But Christianity has deposed this power,
and mankind begin to see every where that slavery is alike contrary to the
interests of society, and the spirit of the gospel. There was a time when
torture was part of the punishment of death, and when the number of capital
crimes in Great Britain, amounted to one hundred and sixty-one. -- Christianity
has abolished the former, and reduced the latter to not more than six or seven.
It has done more. It has confined, in some instances, capital punishments to
the crime of murder -- and in some countries it has abolished it altogether.
The influence of Christianity upon the modes of war, has still been more
remarkable. It is agreeable to trace its progress.

1st. In rescuing women and children from being the objects of the desolations
of war, in common with men.

2dly. In preventing the destruction of captives taken in battle, in cold blood.

3dly. In protecting the peaceable husbandman from sharing in the carnage of
war.

4thly. In producing an exchange of prisoners, instead of dooming them to
perpetual slavery.

5thly. In avoiding the invasion or destruction, in certain cases, of private
property.

6thly. In declaring all wars to be unlawful but such as are purely defensive.

This is the only tenure by which war now holds its place among Christians. It
requires but little ingenuity to prove that a defensive war cannot be carried on
successfully without offensive operations. Already the princes and nations of
the world discover the struggles of opinion or conscience in their preparations
for war. Witness the many national disputes which have been lately terminated
in Europe by negotiation, or mediation. Witness too, the establishment of the
constitution of the United States without force or bloodshed. These events
indicate an improving state of human affairs. They lead us to look forward with
expectation to the time, when the weapons of war shall be changed into
implements of husbandry, and when rapine and violence shall be no more. These
events are the promised fruits of the gospel. If they do not come to pass, the
prophets have deceived us. But if they do -- war must be as contrary to the
spirit of the gospel, as fraud, or murder, or any other of the vices which are
reproved or extirpated by it.

P. S. Since the publication of this essay and the proceeding one, the Author
has had the pleasure of seeing his principles reduced to practice in the State
of Pennsylvania, in the abolition of the punishment of death for all crimes,
(the highest degree of murder excepted) and in private punishments being
substituted to those which were public. The effects of this reformation in the
penal laws of our state have been, a remarkable diminution of crimes of all
kinds, and a great increase of convictions in a given number of offenders. The
expenses of the house appropriated to the punishment of criminals have been
more than defrayed by the profits of their labor. Many of them have been
reformed, and become useful members of society, and very few have relapsed into
former habits of vice.

The Author is happy in adding, that a reformation in the penal laws of the
states of New York and New Jersey has taken place, nearly similar to that which
has been mentioned, in Pennsylvania.

It would be an act of injustice in this place not to acknowledge that the
principles contained in the foregoing essays, would probably have never been
realized, had they not been supported and enforced by the eloquence of the late
William Bradford Esquire. and the zeal of Caleb Lownes. To both these gentlemen,
humanity and reason owe great obligations. Mr. Lownes has demonstrated by
facts, the success of schemes of philanthrophy, once deemed visionary and
impracticable. His plans for employing, and reforming his unfortunate fellow
creatures in the Philadelphia prison, discover great knowledge of the economy
of the body, and of the principles of action in the mind. To comprehend fully
the ingenuity and benevolence of these plans* it will be necessary to visit the
prison. There science and religion exhibit a triumph over vice and misery,
infinitely more sublime and affecting, than all the monuments of ancient
conquests. It is thus the father of the human race has decreed the ultimate
extermination of all evil, viz. by manifestations of love to his fallen
creatures. For the details of the discipline, order, products of labor, etc. of
this prison, the reader is referred to two elegant pamphlets, the one by Mr. De
Liancourt, of France, the other by Mr. Turnbull of South Carolina.

July, 4 1797.
A PLAN OF A PEACE-OFFICE FOR THE UNITED STATES.
AMONG the defects which have been pointed out in the federal constitution by
its antifederal enemies, it is much to be lamented that no person has taken
notice of its total silence upon the subject of an office of the utmost
importance to the welfare of the United States, that is, an office for
promoting and preserving perpetual peace in our country.

It is to be hoped that no objection will be made to the establishment of such
an office, while we are engaged in a war with the Indians, for as the
War-Office of the United States was established in the time of peace, it is
equally reasonable that a Peace-Office should be established in the time of war.

The plan of this office is as follows:

I. Let a Secretary of the Peace be appointed to preside in this office, who
shall be perfectly free from all the present absurd and vulgar European
prejudices upon the subject of government; let him be a genuine republican and
a sincere Christian, for the principles of republicanism and Christianity are
no less friendly to universal and perpetual peace, than they are to universal
and equal liberty.

II. Let a power be given to this Secretary to establish and maintain
free-schools in every city, village and township of the United States; and let
him be made responsible for the talents, principles, and morals, of all his
schoolmasters. Let the youth of our country be carefully instructed in reading,
writing, arithmetic, and in the doctrines of a religion of some kind: the
Christian religion should be preferred to all others; for it belongs to this
religion exclusively to teach us not only to cultivate peace with men, but to
forgive, nay more -- to love our very enemies. It belongs to it further to
teach us that the Supreme Being alone possesses a power to take away human
life, and that we rebel against his laws, whenever we undertake to execute
death in any way whatever upon any of his creatures.

III. Let every family in the United States be furnished at the public expense,
by the Secretary of this office, with a copy of an American edition of the
BIBLE. This measure has become the more necessary in our country, since the
banishment of the bible, as a school-book, from most of the schools in the
United States. Unless the price of this book be paid for by the public, there
is reason to fear that in a few years it will be met with only in courts of
justice or in magistrates' offices; and should the absurd mode of establishing
truth by kissing this sacred book fall into disuse, it may probably, in the
course of the next generation, be seen only as a curiosity on a shelf in a
public museum.

IV. Let the following sentence be inscribed in letters of gold over the doors
of every State and Court house in the United States.

THE SON OF MAN CAME INTO THE WORLD, NOT TO DESTROY MEN'S LIVES, BUT TO SAVE
THEM. V. To inspire a veneration for human life, and an horror at the shedding
of human blood, let all those laws be repealed which authorize juries, judges,
sheriffs, or hangmen to assume the resentments of individuals and to commit
murder in cold blood in any case whatever. Until this reformation in our code
of penal jurisprudence takes place, it will be in vain to attempt to introduce
universal and perpetual peace in our country.

VI. To subdue that passion for war, which education, added to human depravity,
have made universal, a familiarity with the instruments of death, as well as
all military shows, should be carefully avoided. For which reason, militia laws
should every where be repealed, and military dresses and military titles should
be laid aside: reviews tend to lessen the horrors of a battle by connecting
them with the charms of order; militia laws generate idleness and vice, and
thereby produce the wars they are said to prevent; military dresses fascinate
the minds of young men, and lead them from serious and useful professions; were
there no uniforms, there would probably be no armies; lastly, military titles
feed vanity, and keep up ideas in the mind which lessen a sense of the folly
and miseries of war.

VII. In the last place, let a large room, adjoining the federal hall, be
appropriated for transacting the business and preserving all the records of
this office. Over the door of this room let there be a sign, on which the
figures of a LAMB, a DOVE and an OLIVE BRANCH should be painted, together with
the following inscriptions in letters of gold: PEACE ON EARTH -- GOOD WILL TO
MAN. AH! WHY WILL MEN FORGET THAT THEY ARE BRETHREN?

Within this apartment let there be a collection of ploughshares and
pruning hooks made out of swords and spears; and on each of the walls of the
apartment, the following pictures as large as the life: 1. A lion eating straw
with an ox, and an adder playing upon the lips of a child. 2. An Indian boiling
his venison in the same pot with a citizen of Kentucky. 3. Lord Cornwallis and
Tippoo Saib, under the shade of a sycamore-tree in the East Indies, drinking
Madeira wine together out of the same decanter. 4. A group of French and
Austrian soldiers dancing arm and arm, under a bower erected in the
neighborhood of Mons. 5. A St. Domingo planter, a man of color, and a native
of Africa, legislating together in the same colonial assembly. At the time of
writing this, there existed wars between the United States and the American
Indians, between the British nation and Tippoo Saib, between the planters of St
Domingo and their African slaves, and between the French nation and the emperor
of Germany.



To complete the entertainment of this delightful apartment, let a group of
young ladies, clad in white robes, assemble every day at a certain hour, in a
gallery to be erected for the purpose, and sing odes, and hymns, and anthems in
praise of the blessings of peace.

One of these songs should consist of the following lines.

Peace over the world her olive wand extends,
And white-rob'd innocence from heaven descends;
All crimes shall cease, and ancient frauds shall fail,
Returning justice lifts aloft her scale.
In order more deeply to affect the minds of the citizens of the United States
with the blessings of peace, by contrasting them with the evils of war, let the
following inscriptions be painted upon the sign, which is placed over the door
of the War Office.

1. An office for butchering the human species. 2. A Widow and Orphan making
office. 3. A broken bone making office. 4. A Wooden leg making office. 5. An
office for creating public and private vices. 6. An office for creating a
public debt. 7. An office for creating speculators, stock Jobbers, and
Bankrupts. 8. An office for creating famine. 9 An office for creating
pestilential diseases. 10. An office for creating poverty, and the destruction
of liberty, and national happiness.
In the lobby of this office let there be painted representations of all the
common military instruments of death, also human skulls, broken bones, unburied
and putrefying dead bodies, hospitals crowded with sick and wounded Soldiers,
villages on fire, mothers in besieged towns eating the flesh of their children,
ships sinking in the ocean, rivers dyed with blood, and extensive plains
without a tree or fence, or any other object, but the ruins of deserted farm
houses.

Above this group of woeful figures, -- let the following words be inserted, in
red characters to represent human blood, "NATIONAL GLORY."

INFORMATION TO EUROPEANS WHO ARE DISPOSED TO MIGRATE TO THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA. IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND IN GREAT BRITAIN.
AGREEABLY to your request contained in your letter of the 29th of August,
1789, I have at last sat down to communicate such facts to you, upon the
subject of migration to this country, as have been the result of numerous
enquiries and observation. I am aware that this subject has been handled in a
masterly manner by Doctor Franklin, in his excellent little pamplet, entitled
Advice to those who would wish to remove to America, but as that valuable
little work is very general, and as many important changes have occurred in the
affairs of the United States since its publication, I shall endeavor to comply
with your wishes, by adding such things as have been omitted by the Doctor, and
shall accommodate them to the present state of our country.

I shall begin this letter by mentioning the descriptions of people, who ought
not to come to America.

I. Men of independent fortunes who can exist only in company, and who can
converse only upon public amusements, should not think of settling in the
United States. I have known several men of that character in this country, who
have rambled from State to State, complaining of the dullness of each of them,
and who have finally returned and renewed their former connexions and pleasures
in Europe.

II. Literary men, who have no professional pursuits, will often languish in
America, from the want of society. Our authors and scholars are generally men
of business, and make their literary pursuits subservient to their interests. A
lounger in book stores, breakfasting parties for the purpose of literary
conversation, and long attic evenings, are as yet but little known in this
country. Our companies are generally mixed, and conversation in them is a
medley of ideas upon all subjects. They begin as in England with the weather --
soon run into politics -- now and then diverge into literature -- and commonly
conclude with facts relative to commerce, manufactures and agriculture, and the
best means of acquiring and improving an estate. Men, who are philosophers or
poets, without other pursuits, had better end their days in an old country.

III. The United States as yet afford but little encouragement to the
professers of most of the fine arts. Painting and sculpture flourish chiefly in
wealthy and luxurious countries. Our native American portrait painters who have
not sought protection and encouragement in Great Britain, have been obliged to
travel occasionally from one State to another in order to support themselves.
The teachers of music have been more fortunate in America. A taste for this
accomplishment prevails very generally in our large cities: and eminent masters
in that art, who have arrived here since the peace, have received considerable
sums of money by exercising their profession among us.

I shall now mention those descriptions of people, who may better their
condition by coming to America.

I. To the cultivators of the earth the United States open the first asylum in
the world. To insure the success and happiness of an European Farmer in our
country, it is necessary to advise him either to purchase or to rent a farm
which has undergone some improvement.

The business of settling a new tract of land, and that of improving a farm,
are of a very different nature. The former must be effected by the native
American, who is accustomed to the use of the axe and the grubbing hoe, and who
possesses almost exclusively a knowledge of all the peculiar and nameless arts
of self-preservation in the woods. I have known many instances of Europeans who
have spent all their cash in unsuccessful attempts to force a settlement in the
wilderness, and who have afterward been exposed to poverty and distress at a
great distance from friends and even neighbors. I would therefore advise all
farmers with moderate capitals, to purchase or rent improved farms in the old
settlements of our States. The price and rent of these farms are different in
the different parts of the union. In Pennsylvania, the price of farms is
regulated by the quality of the land -- by the value or the improvements which
are erected upon it -- by their vicinity to sea ports and navigable water --
and by the good or bad state of the roads which lead to them. There is a great
variety, of course, in the price of farms: while some of them have been sold
for five guineas -- others have been sold at lower prices, down to one guinea,
and even half a guinea per acre, according as they were varied by the above
circumstances.

It is not expected that the whole price of a farm should be paid at the time
of purchasing it. An half, a third, or a fourth, is all that is generally
required. Bonds and mortgages are given for the remainder, (and sometimes
without interest) payable in two, three, five, or even ten years.

The value of these farms has often been doubled and even trebled, in a few
years, where the new mode of agriculture has been employed in cultivating them:
so that a man with a moderate capital, may, in the course of fifteen years,
become an opulent and independent freeholder.

If, notwithstanding what has been said of the difficulties of effecting an
establishment in the woods, the low price of the new lands should tempt the
European Farmer to settle in them, then let me add, that it can only be done by
associating himself in a large company, under the direction of an active and
intelligent American farmer. To secure even a company of European settlers from
disappointment and want in the woods, it will be necessary to clear a few acres
of land the year before, and to sow them with grain, in order to provide
subsistence for the company, till they can provide for themselves, by clearing
their own farms. The difficulties of establishing this new settlement, will be
further lessened, if a few cabins, a grist and a saw mill be erected, at the
same time the preparations are made for the temporary subsistence of the
company. In this manner, most of the first settlements of the New England men
have been made in this country. One great advantage, attending this mode of
settling, is, a company may always carry with them a clergyman and a
schoolmaster, of the same religion and language with themselves. If a settler
in the woods should possess a taste for rural elegance, he may gratify it
without any expense, by the manner of laying out his farm. He may shade his
house by means of ancient and venerable forrest-trees. He may leave rows of
them standing, to adorn his lanes and walks -- or clusters of them on the high
grounds of his fields, to shade his cattle. If he should fix upon any of those
parts of our western country, which are covered with the sugar-trees, he may
enclose a sufficient number of them to supply his family with sugar; and may
confer upon them at the same time the order and beauty of a fine orchard. In
this manner, a highly improved seat may be cut out of the woods in a few years,
which will surpass both in elegance and value a farm in an old settlement,
which has been for twenty years the subject of improvements in taste and
agriculture. To contemplate a dwelling house -- a barn -- stables -- fields --
meadows -- an orchard -- a garden, etc. which have been produced from original
creation by the labor of a single life, is, I am told, to the proprietor of
them, one of the highest pleasures the mind of man is capable of enjoying. But
how much must this pleasure be increased, when the regularity of art is blended
in the prospect, with the wildness and antiquity of nature?

It has been remarked in this country, that clearing the land of its woods,
sometimes makes a new settlement unhealthy, by exposing its damp grounds to the
action of the sun. To obviate this evil, it will be necessary for the settler
either to drain and cultivate his low grounds, as soon as they are cleared, or
to leave a body of trees between his dwelling house, and the spots from whence
the morbid effluvia are derived. The last of these methods has, in no instance
that I have heard of, failed of preserving whole families from such diseases as
arise from damp or putrid exhalations.

To country gentlemen, who have been accustomed to live upon the income of a
landed estate in Europe, it will be necessary to communicate the following
information, viz. that farms, in consequence of the unproductive woodland,
which is generally connected with them, seldom yield more than three or four
per cent. a year in cash, except in the neighborhood of large cities. Besides,
from the facility with which money enough may be saved in a few years, to
purchase land in this country, tenants will not accept of long leases: and
hence they are not sufficiently interested in the farms they rent, to keep them
in repair. If country gentlemen wish to derive the greatest advantage from
laying out their money in lands, they must reside in their vicinity. A capital
of five thousand guineas, invested in a number of contiguous farms, in an
improved part of our country, and cultivated by tenants under the eye and
direction of a landlord, would soon yield a greater income than double that sum
would in most parts of Europe. The landlord in this case must frequently visit
and inspect the state of each of his farms: and now and then he must stop to
repair a bridge or a fence in his excursions through them. He must receive all
his rents in the produce of the farms. If the tenant find his own stock, he
will pay half of all the grain he raises, and sometimes a certain proportion of
vegetables and live stock, to his landlord. The division of the grain is
generally made in the field, in sheaves or stacks, which are carried home to be
thrashed in the barn of the landlord. An estated gentleman, who can reconcile
himself to this kind of life, may be both happy and useful. He may instruct his
tenants by his example, as well as precepts in the new modes of husbandry: he
may teach them the art and advantages of gardening: he may inspire them with
habits of sobriety, industry, and economy; and thereby become the father and
protector of a dependant and affectionate neighborhood. After a busy summer
and autumn, he may pass his winters in polished society in any of our cities,
and in many of our country villages.

But should he be disinclined to such extensive scenes of business, he may
confine his purchases and labors to a single farm, and secure his superfluous
cash in bonds and mortgages, which will yield him six per cent.

Under this head, it is proper to mention, that the agricultural life begins to
maintain in the United States, the same rank that it has long maintained in
Great Britain. Many gentlemen of education among us have quitted liberal
professions, and have proved, by their success in farming, that philosophy is
in no business more useful or profitable, than in agriculture.

II. MECHANICS and MANUFACTURERS, of every description, will find certain
encouragement in the United States. During the connection of this country with
Great Britain, we were taught to believe that agriculture and commerce should
be the only pursuits of the Americans: but experiments and reflection have
taught us, that our country abounds with resources for manufactures of all
kinds: and that most of them may be conducted with great advantage in all the
states We are already nearly independent of the whole world for iron-work,
paper, and malt liquors: and great progress has been made in the manufacturies
of glass, pot-ash, and cloths of all kinds. The commercial habits of our
citizens have as yet prevented their employing large capitals in those
manufacturies: but I am persuaded that if a few European adventurers would
embark in them with capitals equal to the demand for those manufactures, they
would soon find an immense profit in their speculations. A single farmer in the
state of New York, with a capital of five thousand pounds, has cleared one
thousand a year by the manufacture of pot-ash alone.

Those mechanical arts, which are accomodated to the infant and simple state of
a country, will bid fairest to succeed among us. Every art, connected with
cultivating the earth -- building houses and ships, and feeding and clothing
the body, will meet with encouragement in this country. The prices of
provisions are so different in the different states, and even in the different
parts of the same state, and vary so much with the plenty and scarcity of
money, that it would be difficult to give you such an account of them as would
be useful. I need only remark, that the disproportion between the price of
labor and of provisions, is much greater in every part of the United States,
than in any part of Europe: and hence our tradesmen every where eat meat and
butter every day: and most of them realize the wish of Henry IV. of France, for
the peasants of his kingdom, by dining not only once, but two or three times,
upon poultry, in every week of the year.

It is a singular fact in the history of the mechanical arts in this country,
that the same arts seldom descend from father to son. Such are the profits of
even the humblest of them, that the sons of mechanics generally rise from the
lower to the more respectable occupations: and thus their families gradually
ascend to the first ranks in society among us. The influence, which the
prospects of wealth and consequence have in invigorating industry in every line
of mechanical business, is very great. Many of the first men in America, are
the sons of reputable mechanics or farmers. But I may go farther, and add, that
many men, who distinguished themselves both in the cabinet and field, in the
late war, had been mechanics. I know the British officers treated the American
cause with contempt, from this circumstance: but the event of the war showed,
that the confidence of America was not misplaced in that body of citizens.

III. LABORERS may depend upon constant employment in the United States, both
in our towns and in the country. When they work by the day, they receive high
wages: but these are seldom continued through the whole year. A labourer
receives annually, with his boarding, washing, and lodging, from fifteen to
eighteen guineas, in the middle states. It is agreeable to observe this class
of men frequently raised by their industry from their humble stations, into the
upper ranks of life, in the course of twenty or thirty years.

IV. PERSONS who are willing to indent themselves as servants for a few years,
will find that humble station no obstacle to a future establishment in our
country. Many men, who came to America in that capacity, are now in affluent
circumstances. Their former situation, where they have behaved well, does not
preclude them from forming respectable connections in marriage, nor from
sharing, if otherwise qualified, in the offices of our country.

V. The United States continue to afford encouragement to gentlemen of the
learned professions, provided they be prudent in their deportment, and of
sufficient knowledge: for since the establishment of colleges and schools of
learning in all our states, the same degrees of learning will not succeed among
us, which succeeded fifty years ago.

Several lawyers and physicians, who have arrived here since the peace, are now
in good business: and many clergymen, natives of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, are comfortably settled in good parishes. A minister of the gospel in
a country place must not expect to have all his salary paid in cash: but he
will notwithstanding seldom fail of obtaining a good subsistence from his
congregation. They will furnish his table with a portion of all the live stock
they raise for their own use: they will shoe his horses -- repair his
implements of husbandry, and assist him in gathering in his harvests, and in
many other parts of the business of his farm. From these aids, with now and
then a little cash, a clergyman may not only live well, but, in the course of
his life, may accumulate an handsome estate for his children. This will more
certainly happen, if he can redeem time enough from his parochial duties, and
the care of his farm, to teach a school. The people of America are of all
sects: but the greatest part of them are of the independent, presbyterian,
episcopal, baptist, and methodist denominations. The principles held by each of
these societies in America are the same as those which are held by the
protestant churches in Europe, from which they derive their origin.

VI. SCHOOLMASTERS of good capacities and fair characters may exepct to meet
with encouragement in the middle and southern states. They will succeed better,
if they confine their instructions to reading, writing, English grammar, and
the sciences of number and quantity. These branches of literature are of
general necessity and utility: and of course every township will furnish
scholars enough for the maintenance of a schoolmaster. Many young men have
risen by means of the connexions they have formed in this useful employment, to
rank and consequence in the learned professions in every part of this country.

From this account of the United States, you will easily perceive, that they
are a hot-bed for industry and genius in almost every human pursuit. It is
inconceivable how many useful discoveries necessity has produced within these
few years, in agriculture and manufactures, in our country. The same necessity
has produced a versatility of genius among our citizens: hence we frequently
meet with men who have exercised two or three different occupations or
professions in the course of their lives, according to the influence which
interest, accident, or local circumstances have had upon them. I know that the
peculiarities, which have been mentioned in the American character, strike an
European, who has been accustomed to consider man as a creature of habit,
formed by long established governments, and hereditary customs, as so many
deviations from propriety and order. But a wise man, who knows that national
characters arise from circumstances, will view these peculiarities without
surprise, and attribute them wholly to the present state of manners, society,
and government in America.

From the numerous competitions in every branch of business in Europe, success
in any pursuit, may be looked upon in the same light as a prize in a lottery.
But the case is widely different in America. Here there is room enough for
every human talent and virtue to expand and flourish. This is so invariably
true, that I believe there is not an instance to be found, of an industrious,
frugal prudent European, with sober manners, who has not been successful in
business, in this country.

As a further inducement to Europeans to transport themselves across the Ocean,
I am obliged to mention a fact that does little honor to the native American;
and that is, in all competitions for business, where success depends upon
industry, the European is generally preferred. Indeed, such is the facility
with which property is acquired, that where it does not operate as a stimulus
to promote ambition, it is sometimes accompanied by a relaxation of industry in
proportion to the number of years or generations which interpose between the
founder of an American family and his posterity. This preference of European
mechanics arises, likewise, from the improvements in the different arts, which
are from time to time imported by them into our country. To these facts I am
happy in being able to add, that the years of anarchy, which proved so
disgusting to the Europeans who arrived among us immediately after the peace,
are now at an end, and that the United States have at last adopted a national
government which unites with the vigor of monarchy and the stability of
aristocracy, all the freedom of a simple republic. Its influence already in
invigorating industry, and reviving credit, is universal. There are several
peculiarities in this government, which cannot fail of being agreeable to
Europeans, who are disposed to settle in America.

1. The equal share of power it holds forth to men of every religious sect. As
the first fruits of this perfection in our government, we already see three
gentlemen of the Roman Catholic church, members of the legislature of the
United States.

2. Birth in America is not required for holding either power or office in the
federal government, except that of President of the United States. In
consequence of this principle of justice, not only in the national government,
but in all our state constitutions, we daily see the natives of Britain,
Ireland, Germany, advanced to the most respectable employments in our country.

3. By a late act of congress, only two years residence in the United States
are necessary to entitle foreigners of good character to all the priviliges of
citizenship. Even that short period of time has been found sufficient to give
strangers a visible interest in the stability and freedom of our governments.
By a law passed since the above, five years residence are necessary to entitle
a foreigner to citizenship.


It is agreeable to observe the influence which our republican governments have
already had upon the tempers and manners of our citizens. Amusement is every
where giving way to business: and local politeness is yielding to universal
civility. We differ about forms and modes in politics: but this difference
begins to submit to the restraints of moral and social obligation. Order and
tranquillity appear to be the natural consequence of a well-balanced republic:
for where men can remove the evils of their governments by frequent elections,
they will seldom appeal to the less certain remedies of mobs or arms. It is
with singular pleasure that I can add further, that notwithstanding the
virulence of our dissensions about independence and the federal government,
there is now scarcely a citizen of the United States, who is not satisfied with
both, and who does not believe this country to be in a happier and safer
situation, than it was, in the most flourishing years of its dependence upon
Great Britain.

The encouragement held out to European emigrants is not the same in all the
states. New England, New York, and New Jersey, being nearly filled with
cultivators of the earth, afford encouragement chiefly to mechanics and
laborers. The inhabitants of New England have far surpassed the inhabitants of
the other states, in the establishment of numerous and profitable
manufactories. These wonderful people discover the same degrees of industry in
cultivating the arts of peace, that they did of enterprise and perseverance, in
the late war. They already export large quantities of wrought iron, hats,
women's shoes, cheese, and linen and woolen cloth. The state of New York has
likewise discovered a laudable spirit for manufacturers and domestic
improvements. European artists, therefore, cannot fail of meeting with
encouragement in each of the above states.

Pennsylvania affords an equal asylum to all the descriptions of people that
have been mentioned, under the second head of this letter. Agriculture,
manufactures, and many of the liberal arts seem to vie with each other for
pre-eminence in this state. Each of them is under the patronage of numerous and
respectable societies. No state in the union affords greater resources for ship
building, malt liquors, maple sugar, sail cloth, iron work, woolen and linen
cloths, pot-ash, and glass. Coal, likewise, abounds on the shores of the
Susquehanna, a large river which runs through half the state. The variety of
sects and nations, which compose the inhabitants of this state, has hitherto
prevented our having any steady traits in our character. We possess the virtues
and weaknesses of most of the sects and nations of Europe. But this variety has
produced such a collision in opinions and interests, as has greatly favored
the progress of genius in every art and science. We have been accused of being
factious by our sister states. This must be ascribed chiefly to our late state
constitution, which was established by violence in the beginning of the late
war, and which was never assented to by a majority of the people. But that
majority have at length asserted their power. A convention, composed of an
equal representation of the people, has met and formed a new constitution,
which comprehends in it every principle of liberty and just government. From
the excellency of this constitution -- from the harmony it has restored to our
citizens -- from the central situation of our state -- from the number and
courses of our rivers -- from the facility with which we are able to draw the
resources of the lakes to the Delaware -- from the wealth of our capital -- and
above all, from the industry and sober habits of our citizens -- there can be
no doubt that Pennsylvania will always maintain the first rank, for national
prosperity and happiness, in the United States.

There is one circumstance, peculiar in a great degree to Pensylvania, which
cannot fail of directing the eyes of the inhabitants of several of the European
nations to this state -- and that is, the natives of Britain, Ireland, Germany,
France, Switzerland, and Holland, may here meet with their former fellow
subjects, and receive from them that welcome and assistance, which are the
natural consequences of the tie of country. So strongly does this principle
operate in America, that the natives of Germany and Ireland have formed
themselves into societies in the city of Philadelphia, for the express purpose
of protecting, advising, and assisting their countrymen, as soon as they set
their feet upon the shores of Pennsylvania.

It has been said, that the lands in Pennsylvania are dearer than in some of
our sister states. They fell, it is true, for a greater nominal sum, than the
lands of the neighboring states: but in the end, they are much cheaper. The
soil is deep, rich, and durable, and from the superior industry and skill of
our farmers, our lands are more productive than those of our neighbors; hence
their higher price; for the price of lands is always in a ratio to their
quality, produce and situation: hence likewise, we are able to tell the value
of a farm in any part of the state, by first finding out the quantity of grain
an acre will produce, and the price of this grain at the nearest mill or store,
making some little allowance for the improvements which are connected with the
farm. This remark is so universally true, that a farmer never mistakes the
application of it in purchasing land. There is a certain instinct, which
governs in all purchases and sales of farms, and which arises out of the
principle I have mentioned: it is in general as accurate, as if it arose out of
the nicest calculation. It is from an ignorance or neglect of this principle,
that so many of our citizens have migrated to Kentucky, under a delusive
expectation of purchasing lands cheaper than in the old states. They are in
fact often much dearer when you estimate their price by the profit of the grain
which is cultivated upon them. For instance, an acre of land in Kentucky, which
sells for a quarter of a guinea, and yields 30 bushels of corn, at four pence
sterling per bushel, is dearer than land of the same quality in Pennsylvania,
at a guinea per acre, that yields the same quantity of corn, which can be sold
at the nearest mill or store for two shillings sterling. per bushel. To cure this
passion for migrating to the waters of the Ohio, there is but one remedy, and
that is, to open the navigation of the Mississippi. This, by raising the price
of produce, will raise the value of land so high, as to destroy the balance of
attraction to that country. This truth is at present a speculalative one, but I
hope it will be reduced to practice before the waters of the Ohio and
Mississippi have been dyed with the blood of two or three hundred thousand men.

The states to the southward of Pennsylvania possess immense resources for
political happiness: but while they tolerate negro slavery, they can never be
an agreeable retreat for an European. This objection applies chiefly to the sea
coasts of those states; for in the western parts of them, the land is
cultivated chiefly by freemen. The soil and climate of the extensive western
country of those states is kind and mild to a very great degree. There
Europeans may prosper and be happy.

Thus, Sir, have I complied in a few words with your request. In communicating
many of the facts contained in this letter, I have not considered you simply as
a citizen of London, or a subject of the crown of Britain. The whole family of
mankind, I know are your brethren; and if men be happy I am sure it is a matter
of indifference to you, whether they enjoy their happiness on this side, or on
the other side of the Atlantic ocean.

From a review of the facts that have been mentioned, you will perceive that
the present is the age of reason and action in America. To our posterity we
must bequeath the cultivation of the fine arts and the pleasures of taste and
sentiment. The foreigners who have visited and described our country without
making allowances for those peculiarities which arise from our present state of
society, have done as little honor to their understandings, as they have done
to human nature. Nor have those Europeans discovered more wisdom, who have
blended with the American character, the accidental disorders, which were the
offspring of our late public commotions. They resembled the swelling of the
sea, which succeeds a storm. At present, they have as perfectly subsided as the
disorders produced by the civil wars in England, in the last century.

It is somewhat remarkable that in every age, great inventions and great
revolutions in human affairs have taken place in a quick succession to each
other. The many curious machines for lessening labor, which have lately been
discovered in Europe, will necessarily throw many thousand artificers out of
employment. Perhaps the late successful application of the powers of fire and
water to mechanical purposes in your country, was delayed until the present
time, only that the sanctuary of our national government might be perfectly
prepared to receive and protect those industrious bodies of people, who
formerly lived by the labor of their hands, and who might otherwise become a
burden to the countries in which they had been deprived of the means of
supporting themselves. Perhaps, too, the revolutions, which are now going
forward in several of the governments on the continent of Europe, have occurred
at the present juncture for a purpose equally wise and benevolent. The first
effect of the establishment of freedom in those countries, will be to promote
population, by reducing taxes, disbanding standing armies, and abolishing the
vows and practices of celibacy: for I take it for granted that military
institutions in the time of peace, and monasteries of all kinds, must yield to
the present force and cultivated state of human reason, in those countries,
which are now the theaters of revolutions in favor of liberty. This increase
of population will require an increase of territory, which must be sought for
in the United States: for it is not probable that men who have once tasted of
the sweets of liberty, will ever think of transporting themselves to any other
country. This outlet for supernumerary inhabitants from the nations of Europe,
will eventually promote their interests and prosperity: for when a country is
so much crowded with people, that the price of the means of subsistence is
beyond the ratio of their industry, marriages are restrained: but when
emigration to a certain degree takes place, the balance between the means of
subsistence and industry is restored, and population thereby revived. Of the
truth of this principle there are many proofs in the old counties of all the
American states. Population has constantly been advanced in them by the
migration of their inhabitants to new or distant settlements.

In spite of all the little systems of narrow politicians, it is an eternal
truth, that universal happiness is universal interest. The divine government of
our world would admit of a controversy, if men, by acquiring moral or political
happiness, in one part, added to the misery of the inhabitants of another part,
of our globe.

I shall conclude this long letter by the two following remarks:

I. If freedom, joined with the facility of acquiring the means of subsistence,
have such an influence upon population -- and if existence be a title to
happiness -- then think, sir, what an ocean of additional happiness will be
created, by the influence which migration to the free and extensive territories
of the United States will have, upon the numbers of mankind.

II. If wars have been promoted in all ages and countries, by an over
proportion of inhabitants to the means of easy subsistence, then think, sir,
what an influence upon the means of supporting human life, migration to
America, and the immense increase of the productions of the earth, by the late
improvements in agriculture, will probably have, in lessening the temptations
and resources of nations to carry on war. The promises of heaven are often
accomplished by means in which there is no departure from the common operations
of nature. If the events, which have been alluded to, should contribute in any
degree to put an end to wars, it will furnish a noble triumph to your society
The gentleman to whom this letter is addressed, is of the society of the people
called quakers.
, by showing how much enlightened policy, and national happiness, are connected
with the dictates of christianity.

I am, Dear sir, With great respect, And sincere regard, Yours very
affectionately,
Philadelphia, April 16. 1790.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROGRESS OF POPULATION, AGRICULTURE, MANNERS, AND GOVERNMENT
IN PENNSYLVANIA, IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND IN ENGLAND.
DEAR SIR,
WHATEVER tends to unfold facts in the history of the human species, must be
interesting to a curious enquirer. -- The manner of settling a new country,
exhibits a view of the human mind so foreign to the views of it which have been
taken for many centuries in Europe, that I flatter myself the following account
of the progress of population, agriculture, manners, and government in
Pennsylvania will be acceptable to you. I have chosen to confine myself in the
present letter to Pennsylvania only, that all the information I shall give you
may be derived from my own knowledge and observations.

The first settler in the woods is generally a man who has outlived his credit
or fortune in the cultivated parts of the State. His time for migrating is in
the month of April. His first object is to build a small cabin of rough logs
for himself and family. The floor of this cabin is of earth, the roof is of
split logs -- the light is received through the door, and, in some instances,
through a small window made of greased paper. A coarser building adjoining this
cabin affords a shelter to a cow and a pair of poor horses. The labor of
erecting these buildings is succeeded by killing the trees on a few acres of
ground near his cabin; this is done by cutting a circle round the trees, two
or three feet from the ground. The ground around these trees is then ploughed
and Indian-corn planted in it. The season for planting this grain is about the
20th of May -- It grows generally on new ground with but little cultivation,
and yields in the month of October following, from forty to fifty bushels by
the acre. After the first of September it affords a good deal of nourishment to
his family, in its green or unripe state, in the form of what is called
roasting ears. His family is fed during the summer by a small quantity of grain
which he carries with him, and by fish and game. His cows and horses feed upon
wild grass, or the succulent twigs of the woods. For the first year he endures
a great deal of distress from hunger -- cold -- and a variety of accidental
causes, but he seldom complains or sinks under them. As he lives in the
neighborhood of Indians, he soon acquires a strong tincture of their manners.
His exertions, while they continue, are violent; but they are succeeded by long
intervals of rest. His pleasures consist chiefly in fishing and hunting. He
loves spirituous liquors, and he eats, drinks and sleeps in dirt and rags in
his little cabin. In his intercourse with the world he manifests all the arts
which characterize the Indians of our country. In this situation he passes two
or three years. In proportion as population increases around him, he becomes
uneasy and dissatisfied. Formerly his cattle ranged at large, but now his
neighbors call upon him to confine them within fences, to prevent their
trespassing upon their fields of grain. Formerly he fed his family with wild
animals, but these, which fly from the face of man, now cease to afford him an
easy subsistence, and he is compelled to raise domestic animals for the support
of his family. Above all, he revolts against the operation of laws. He cannot
bear to surrender up a single natural right for all the benefits of government,
-- and therefore he abandons his little settlement, and seeks a retreat in the
woods, where he again submits to all the toils which have been mentioned. There
are instances of many men who have broken ground on bare creation, not less
than four different times in this way, in different and more advanced parts of
the State. It has been remarked, that the flight of this class of people is
always increased by the preaching of the gospel. This will not surprise us when
we consider how opposite its precepts are to their licentious manner of living.
If our first settler was the owner of the spot of land which he began to
cultivate, he sells it at a considerable profit to his successor; but if (as is
oftener the case) he was a tenant to some rich landholder, he abandons it in
debt; however, the small improvements he leaves behind him, generally make it
an object of immediate demand to a second species of settler.

This species of settler is generally a man of some property, -- he pays one
third or one fourth part in cash for his plantation, which consists of three or
four hundred acres, and the rest in gales or instalments, as it is called here;
that is, a certain sum yearly, without interest, 'till the whole is paid. The
first object of this settler is to build an addition to his cabin; this is
done with hewed logs: and as saw-mills generally follow settlements, his floors
are made of boards; his roof is made of what are called clapboards, which are a
kind of coarse shingles, split out of short oak logs. This house is divided by
two floors, on each of which are two rooms: under the whole is a cellar walled
with stone. The cabin serves as kitchen to this house. His next object is to
clear a little meadow ground, and plant an orchard of two or three hundred
apple trees. His stable is likewise enlarged; and, in the course of a year or
two, he builds a large log barn, the roof of which is commonly thatched with
rye straw: he moreover increases the quantity of his arable land; and, instead
of cultivating Indian corn alone, he raises a quantity of wheat and rye: the
latter is cultivated chiefly for the purpose of being distilled into whiskey.
This species of settler by no means extracts all from the earth, which it is
capable of giving. His fields yield but a scanty increase, owing to the ground
not being sufficiently ploughed. The hopes of the year are often blasted by his
cattle breaking through his half made fences, and destroying his grain. His
horses perform but half the labor that might be expected from them, if they
were better fed; and his cattle often die in the spring from the want of
provision, and the delay of grass. His house, as well as his farm, bear many
marks of a weak tone of mind. His windows are unglazed, or, if they have had
glass in them, the ruins of it are supplied with old hats or pillows. This
species of settler is seldom a good member of civil or religious society: with
a large portion of a hereditary mechanical kind of religion, he neglects to
contribute sufficiently toward building a church, or maintaining a regular
administration of the ordinances of the gospel: he is equally indisposed to
support civil government: with high ideas of liberty, he refuses to bear his
proportion of the debt contracted by its establishment in our country: he
delights chiefly in company -- sometimes drinks spirituous liquors to excess --
will spend a day or two in every week, in attending political meetings; and,
thus, he contracts debts which, (if he cannot discharge in a depreciated paper
currency) compel him to sell his plantation, generally in the course of a few
years, to the third and last species of settler.

This species of settler is commonly a man of property and good character --
sometimes he is the son of a wealthy farmer in one of the interior and ancient
counties of the state. His first object is to convert every spot of ground,
over which he is able to draw water, into meadow: where this cannot be done, he
selects the most fertile spots on the farm, and devotes it by manure to that
purpose. His next object is to build a barn, which he prefers of stone. This
building is, in some instances, 100 feet in front, and 40 in depth: it is made
very compact, so as to shut out the cold in winter; for our farmers find that
their horses and cattle, when kept warm, do not require near as much food, as
when they are exposed to the cold. He uses economy, likewise, in the
consumption of his wood. Hence he keeps himself warm in winter, by means of
stoves, which save an immense deal of labor to himself and his horses, in
cutting and hawling wood in cold and wet weather. His fences are every where
repaired, so as to secure his grain from his own and his neighbor's cattle.
But further, he increases the number of the articles of his cultivation, and,
instead of raising corn, wheat and rye alone, he raises oats, buckwheat, (the
fagopyrum of Linnaeus) and spelts. Near his house, he allots an acre or two of
ground for a garden, in which he raises a large quantity of cabbage and
potatoes. His newly cleared fields, afford him every year a large increase of
turnips. Over the spring which supplies him with water, he builds a milk-house
and over this, in some instances, he builds a smoke house; he likewise adds to
the number, and improves the quality of his fruit trees: -- His sons work by
his side all the year and his wife and daughters forsake the dairy and the
spinning wheel, to share with him in the toils of harvest. The last object of
his industry is to build a dwelling house. This business is sometimes effected
in the course of his life, but is oftener bequeathed to his son, or the
inheritor of his plantation: and hence we have a common saying among our best
farmers, that a son should always begin where his father left off; that is, he
should begin his improvements, by building a commodious dwelling house, suited
to the improvements and value of the plantation. This dwelling house is
generally built of stone -- it is large, convenient, and filled with useful and
substantial furniture -- It sometimes adjoins the house of the second settler,
but is frequently placed at a little distance from it. The horses and cattle of
this species of settler, bear marks in their strength, fat and fruitfulness --
of their being plentifully fed and carefully kept. His table abounds with a
variety of the best provisions -- his very kitchen flows with milk and honey --
beer, cider, and home made wine are the usual drinks of his family: the
greatest part of the clothing of his family is manufactured by his wife and
daughters: in proportion as he increases in wealth, he values the protection of
laws: hence he punctually pays his taxes toward the support of government.
Schools and churches likewise, as the means of promoting order and happiness in
society, derive a due support from him: for benevolence and public spirit* as
to taese objects, are the natural offspring of affluence and independence. Of
this class of settlers are two-thirds of the farmers of Pennsylvania. These are
the men to whom Pennsylvania owes her ancient fame and consequence. If they
possess less refinement than their southern neighbors, who cultivate their
land with slaves, they possess more republican virtue. It was from the farms
cultivated by these men, that the American and French armies were chiefly fed
with bread during the late revolution; and it was from the produce of these
farms, that those millions of dollars were obtained from the Havanna after the
year 1780, which laid the foundation of the bank of North America, and which
fed and clothed the American army, till the peace of Paris. -- This is a short
account of the happiness of a Pennsylvania farmer -- To this happiness our
state invites men of every religion and country.

We do not pretend to offer emigrants the pleasures of Arcadia -- It is enough
if affluence, independence, and happiness are ensured to patience, industry,
and labor. The moderate price of land, The unoccupied lands are sold by the
state for about six guineas inclusive of all charges, per hundred acres. But as
most of the lands that are settled, are procured from persons who had purchased
them from the state, they are sold to the first settler for a much higher
price. The quality of the soil -- its vicinity to mills, court-houses, places
of worship, and navigable water: the distance of land-carriage to the seaports
of Philadelphia or Baltimore, and the nature of the roads, all influence the
price of land to the first settler. The quantity of cleared land, and the
nature of the improvements, added to all the above circumstances, influence the
price of farms to the second and third settlers. Hence the price of land to the
first settlers is from a quarter of a guinea to two guineas per acre; and the
price of farms is from one guinea to ten guineas per acre, to the second and
third settlers, according as the land is varied by the beforementioned
circumstances. When the first settler is unable to purchase, he often takes a
tract of land for seven years on a lease, and contracts instead of paying a
rent in cash, to clear 50 acres of land, to build a log cabin, and a barn, and
to plant an orchard on it. This tract, after the expiration of this lease,
sells or rents for a considerable profit.
the credit which arises from prudence, and the safety from our courts of law,
of every species of property, render the blessings which I have described,
objects within the reach of every man.

From a review of the three different species of settlers, it appears, that
there are certain regular stages which mark the progress from the savage to
civilized life. The first settler is nearly related to an Indian in his manners
-- In the second, the Indian manners are more diluted: It is in the third
species of settlers only, that we behold civilization completed -- It is to the
third species of settlers only, that it is proper to apply the term of farmers.
While we record the vices of the first and second settlers, it is but just to
mention their virtues likewise. -- Their mutual wants produce mutual
dependence: hence they are kind and friendly to each other -- their solitary
situation makes visitors agreeable to them; -- hence they are hospitable to
strangers: their want of money, (for they raise but little more than is
necessary to support their families) has made it necessary for them to
associate for the purposes of building houses, cutting their grain, and the
like: -- This they do in turns for each other, without any other pay than the
pleasures which usually attend a country frolic -- Perhaps what I have called
virtues are rather qualities, arising from necessity, and the peculiar state of
society in which these people live. -- Virtue should, in all cases, be the
offspring of principle.

I do not pretend to say, that this mode of settling farms in Pennsylvania is
universal -- I have known some instances where the first settler has performed
the improvements of the second, and yielded to the third. I have known a few
instances likewise, of men of enterprizing spirits, who have settled in the
wilderness, and who, in the course of a single life, have advanced through all
the intermediate stages of improvement that I have mentioned and produced all
those conveniences which have been ascribed to the third species of settlers;
thereby resembling, in their exploits, not only the pioneers and
light-infantry, but the main body of an army. There are instances likewise,
where the first settlement has been improved by the same family, in hereditary
succession, 'till it has reached the third stage of cultivation. There are many
spacious stone houses and highly cultivated farms in the neighboring counties
of the city of Philadelphia, which are possessed by the grandsons and
great-grandsons of men who accompanied William Penn across the ocean, and who
laid the foundation of the present improvements of their posterity, in such
cabbins as have been described.

This passion for migration which I have described, will appear strange to an
European. To see men turn their backs upon the houses in which they drew their
first breath -- upon the church in which they were dedicated to God -- upon the
graves of their ancestors -- upon the friends and companions of their youth --
and upon all the pleasures of cultivated society, and exposing themselves to
all the hardships and accidents of subduing the earth, and thereby establishing
settlements in a wilderness, must strike a philosopher on your side the water,
as a picture of human nature that runs counter to the usual habits and
principles of action in man. But this passion, strange and new as it appears,
is wisely calculated for the extention of population in America: and this it
does, not only by promoting the increase of the human species in new
settlements, but in the old settlements likewise. While the degrees of industry
and knowledge in agriculture, in our country, are proportioned to farms of from
75 to 300 acres, there will be a languor in population, as soon as farmers
multiply beyond the number of farms of the above dimensions. To remove this
languor, which is kept up alike by the increase of the price, and the division
of farms, a migration of part of the community becomes absolutely necessary.
And as this part of the community often consists of the idle and extravagant,
who eat without working, their removal, by increasing the facility of
subsistence to the frugal and industrious who remain behind, naturally
increases the number of people, just as the cutting off the suckers of an
apple tree increases the size of the tree, and the quantity of fruit.

I have only to add upon this subject, that the migrants from Pennsylvania
always travel to the southward. The soil and climate of the western parts of
Virginia, North and South Carolina, and Georgia, afford a more easy support to
lazy farmers, than the stubborn but durable soil of Pennsylvania. -- Here, our
ground requires deep and repeated plowing to render it fruitful -- there,
scratching the ground once or twice affords tolerable crops. In Pennsylvania,
the length and coldness of the winter make it necessary for the farmers to
bestow a large share of their labor in providing for and feeding their cattle;
but in the southern states, cattle find pasture during the greatest part of the
winter, in the fields or woods. For these reasons, the greatest part of the
western counties of the States, that have been mentioned, are settled by
original inhabitants of Pennsylvania. During the late war, the militia of
Orange county, in North Carolina, were enrolled, and their number amounted to
3,500, every man of whom had migrated from Pennsylyania. From this you will
see, that our State is the great outport of the United States for Europeans;
and that, after performing the office of a sieve by detaining all those people
who possess the stamina of industry and virtue, it allows a passage to the
rest, to those States which are accommodated to their habits of indolence.

I shall conclude this letter by remarking, that in the mode of extending
population and agriculture, which I have described, we behold a new species of
war. The third settler may be viewed as a conqueror. The weapons with which he
atchieves his conquests, are the implements of husbandry: and the virtues which
direct them, are industry and economy. Idleness -- extravagance -- and
ignorance fly before him. Happy would it be for mankind, if the kings of Europe
would adopt this mode of extending their territories: it would soon put an end
to the dreadful connection, which has existed in every age, between war and
poverty, and between conquest and desolation.

With great respect, I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient humble
servant.

[AN ACCOUNT OF THE MANNERS OF THE GERMAN INHABITANTS OF PENNSYLVANIA.
THE state of Pennsylvania is so much indebted for her prosperity and
reputation, to the German part of her citizens, that a short account of their
manners may, perhaps, be useful and agreeable to their fellow citizens in every
part of the United States.

The aged Germans, and the ancestors of those who are young, migrated chiefly
from the Palatinate; from Alcace, Swabis, Saxony, and Switzerland: but natives
of every principality and dukedom, in Germany, are to be found in different
parts of the state. They brought but little property with them. A few pieces of
gold or silver coin, a chest filled with clothes, a bible, and a prayer or an
hymn book constituted the whole stock of most of them. Many of them bound
themselves, or one or more of their children, to masters after their arrival,
for four, five, or seven years, in order to pay for their passages across the
ocean. A clergyman always accompanied them when they came in large bodies.

The principal part of them were farmers; but there were many mechanics, who
brought with them a knowledge of those arts which are necessary and useful in
all countries. These mechanics were chiefly weavers, tailors, tanners,
shoemakers, comb-makers, smiths of all kinds, butchers, paper-makers, watch
makers, and sugar bakers. I shall begin this account of the German inhabitants
of Pennsylvania, by describing the manners of the German farmers*

This body of citizens are not only industrious and frugal, but skilful
cultivators of the earth. I shall enumerate a few particulars, in which they
differ from most of the other farmers of Pennsylvania.

1st. In settling a tract of land, they always provide large and suitable
accomodations for their horses and cattle, before they lay out much money in
building a house for themselves. The barn and the stables are generally under
one roof, and contrived in such a manner as to enable them to feed their horses
and cattle, and to remove their dung, with as little trouble as possible. The
first dwelling house upon this farm is small, and built of logs. It generally
lasts the life time of the first settler of a tract of land; and hence they
have a saying, that a son should always begin his improvements where his father
left off, -- that is, by building a large and convenient stone house.

2d. They always prefer good land or that land on which there is a large
quantity of meadow ground. From an attention to the cultivation of grass, they
often double the value of an old farm in a few years, and grow rich on farms,
on which their predecessors of whom they purchased them, have nearly starved.
They prefer purchasing farms with some improvements to settling on a new tract
of land.

3d. In clearing new land, they do not girdle the trees simply, and leave them
to perish in the ground, as is the custom of their English or Irish neighbors;
but they generally cut them down and burn them. In destroying under-wood and
bushes, they generally grub them out of the ground; by which means a field is
as fit for cultivation the second year after it is cleared, as it is in twenty
years afterward. The advantages of this mode of clearing, consist in the
immediate product of the field, and in the greater facility with which it is
ploughed, harrowed and reaped. The expense of repairing a plough, which is
often broken two or three times in a year by small stumps concealed in the
ground, is often greater than the extraordinary expense of grubbing the same
field completely, in clearing it.

4th. They feed their horses and cows, of which they keep only a small number,
in such a manner, that the former perform twice the labor of those horses, and
the latter yield twice the quantity of milk of those cows, that are less
plentifully fed. There is great economy in this practice, especially in a
country where so much of the labor of a farmer is necessary to support his
domestic animals. A German horse is known in every part of the state: indeed he
seems to feel with his lord, the pleasure and the pride of his extraordinary
size or fat.

5th. The fences of a German farm are generally high, and well built; so that
his fields seldom suffer from the inroads of his own or his neighbors, horses,
cattle, hogs, or sheep.

6th. The German farmers are great oeconomists of their wood. Hence they burn
it only in stoves, in which they consume but a 4th. or 5th. part of what is
commonly burnt in ordinary open fire places: besides, their horses are saved by
means of this economy, from that immense labor, in hauling wood in the middle
of winter, which frequently unfits the horses of their neighbors for the toils
of the ensuing spring. Their houses are, moreover, rendered so comfortable, at
all times, by large close stoves, that twice the business is done by every
branch of the family, in kniting, spinning, and mending farming utensils, that
is done in houses where every member of the family crowds near to a common
fireplace, or shivers at a distance from it, -- with hands and fingers that
move, by reason of the cold, with only half their usual quickness.

They discover economy in the preservation and increase of their wood in
several other ways. They sometimes defend it, by high fences, from their
cattle; by which means the young forest trees are suffered to grow, to replace
those that are cut down for the necessary use of the farm. But where this
cannot be conveniently done, they surround the stump of that tree which is most
useful for fences, viz. the chestnut, with a small triangular fence. From this
stump a number of suckers shoot out in a few years, two or three of which in
the course of five and twenty years, grow into trees of the same size as the
tree from whose roots they derived their origin.

7th. They keep their horses and cattle as warm as possible in winter, by which
means they save a great deal of their hay and grain; for those animals when
cold, eat much more than when they are in a more comfortable situation.

8th. The German farmers live frugally in their families, with respect to diet,
furniture and apparel. They sell their most profitable grain, which is wheat;
and eat that which is less profitable, but more nourishing, that is rye or
Indian corn. The profit to a farmer, from this single article of economy, is
equal, in the course of a life time, to the price of a farm for one of his
children. They eat sparingly of boiled animal food, with large quantities of
vegetables, particularly sallad, turnips, onions, and cabbage, the last of
which they make into sour crout. They likewise use a large quantity of milk and
cheese in their diet. Perhaps the Germans do not proportion the quantity of
their animal food, to the degrees of their labor; hence it has been thought,
by some people, that they decline in strength sooner than their English or
Irish neighbors. Very few of them ever use distilled spirits in their
families: their common drinks are cider, beer, wine, and simple water. The
furniture of their house is plain and useful. They cover themseves in winter
with light feather beds instead of blankets: in this contrivance there is both
convenience, and economy, for the beds are warmer than blankets, and they are
made by themselves. The apparel of the German farmers is usually home spun.
When they use European articles of dress, they prefer those which are of the
best quality, and of the highest price. They are afraid of debt, and seldom
purchase any thing without paying cash for it.

9th. The German farmers have large or profitable gardens near their houses.
These contain little else but useful vegetables. Pennsylvania is indebted to
the Germans for the principal part of her knowledge in horticulture. There was
a time when turnips and cabbage were the principal vegetables that were used in
diet by the citizens of Philadelphia. This will not surprise those persons, who
know that the first English settlers in Pennsylvania left England while
horticulture was in its infancy in that country. It was not till the reign of
William III. that this useful and agreeable art was cultivated by the English
nation. Since the settlement of a number of German gardeners in the
neighborhood of Philadelphia, the tables of all classes of citizens have been
covered with a variety of vegetables, in every season of the year; and to the
use of these vegetables, in diet, may be ascribed the general exemption of the
citizens of Philadelphia from diseases of the skin.

10th. The Germans seldom hire men to work upon their farms. The feebleness of
that authority which masters possesses over hired servants, is such that their
wages are seldom procured from their labor, except in harvest, when they work
in the presence of their masters. The wives and daughters of the German farmers
frequently forsake, for a while, their dairy and spinning-wheel, and join their
husbands and brothers in the labor of cutting down, collecting and bringing
home the fruits of their fields and orchards The work of the gardens is
generally done by the women of the family.

11th. A large and strong wagon covered with linen cloth, is an essential part
of the furniture of a German farm. In this wagon, drawn by four or five large
horses of a peculiar breed: they convey to market over the roughest roads,
between 2 or 3 thousand pounds weight of the produce of their farms. In the
months of September and October, it is no uncommon thing, on the Lancaster and
Reading roads, to meet in one day from fifty to an hundred of these wagons, on
their way to Philadelphia, most of which belong to German farmers.

12th. The favorable influence of agriculture, as conducted by the Germans in
extending human happiness, is manifested by the joy they express upon the birth
of a child. No dread of poverty, nor distrust of Providence from an increasing
family, depress the spirits of these industrious and frugal people. Upon the
birth of a son, they exult in the gift of a ploughman or a waggoner; and upon
the birth of a daughter, they rejoice in the addition of another spinster, or
milkmaid to their family. Happy state of human society! what blessings can
civilization confer, that can atone for the extinction of the ancient and
patriarchal pleasure of raising up a numerous and healthy family of children,
to labor for their parents, for themselves, and for their country; and finally
to partake of the knowledge and happiness which are annexed to existence! The
joy of parents upon the birth of a child is the grateful echo of creating
goodness. May the mountains of Pennsylvania be for ever vocal, with songs of
joy upon these occasions! They will be the infallible signs of innocence,
industry, wealth and happiness in the state.

13th. The Germans take great pains to produce, in their children, not only
habits of labor, but a love of it. In this they submit to the irreversible
sentence inflicted upon man, in such a manner, as to convert the wrath of
heaven into private and public happiness. "To fear God, and to love work," are
the first lessons they teach their children. They prefer industrious habits to
money itself; hence, when a young man asks the consent of his father to marry
the girl of his choice, he does not enquire so much whether she be rich or
poor? or whether she possesses any personal or mental accomplishments -- as
whether she be industrious, and acquainted with the duties of a good house-wife?

14th. The Germans set a great value upon patrimonial property. This useful
principle in human nature prevents much folly and vice in young people. It
moreover leads to lasting and extensive advantages, in the improvement of a
farm; for what inducement can be stronger in a parent to plant an orchard, to
preserve forest-trees or to build a commodious and durable house, than the
idea, that they will all be possessed by a succession of generations, who shall
inherit his blood and name.

15th. The German farmers are very much influenced in planting and pruning
trees, also in sowing and reaping, by the age and appearances of the moon. This
attention to the state of the moon has been ascribed to superstition; but if
the facts related by Mr. Wilson in his observations upon climates are true,
part of their success in agriculture must be ascribed to their being so much
influenced by it.

16th. From the history that has been given of the German agriculture, it will
hardly be necessary to add that a German farm may be distinguished from the
farms of the other citizens of the state, by the superior size of their barns;
the plain, but compact form of their houses; the height of their enclosures;
the extent of their orchards; the fertility of their fields; the luxuriance of
their meadows, and a general appearance of plenty and neatness in everything
that belongs to them.

The German mechanic possesses some of the traits of the character that has
been drawn of the German farmer. His first object is to become a freeholder;
and hence we find few of them live in rented houses. The highest compliment
that can be paid to them on entering their houses is to ask them, "is this
house your own." They are industrious, frugal, punctual and just. Since their
settlement in Pennsylvania, many of them have acquired a knowledge of those
mechanical arts, which are more immediately necessary and useful in a new
country; while they continue at the same time, to carry on the arts they
imported from Germany, with vigor and success.

But the genius of the Germans of Pennsylvania, is not confined to agriculture
and the mechanical arts. Many of them have acquired great wealth by foreign and
domestic commerce. As merchants they are candid and punctual. The bank of North
America has witnessed, from its first institution, their fidelity to all their
pecuniary engagements.

Thus far have I described the individual character of several orders of the
German citizens of Pennsylvania. I shall now take notice of some of their
manners in a collective capacity. All the different sects among them are
particularly attentive to the religious educacation of their children, and to
the establishment and support of the christian religion. For this purpose they
settle as much as possible together -- and make the erection of a school house
and a place of worship the first object of their care. They commit the
education and instruction of their children in a peculiar manner to the
ministers and officers of their churches; -- hence they grow up with prejudices
in favor of public worship, and of the obligations of christianity. Such has
been the influence of a pious education among the German Lutherans in
Pennsylvania, that in the course of nineteen years only one of them has ever
been brought to a place of public shame on punishment.

As members of civil government, the Germans are peaceable -- and exact in the
payment of their taxes. Since they have participated in the power of the state,
many of them have become sensible and enlightened in the science of
legislation. Pennsylvania has had the speaker's chair of her assembly, and the
vice-president's office of her council, filled with dignity by gentlemen of
German families. The same gentlemen have since been advanced to seats in the
house of representatives, under the new constitution of the United States. In
the great controversy about the national government, a large majority of the
Germans in Pennsylvania decided in favor of its adoption, notwithstanding the
most popular arts were used to prejudice them against it.

The Germans are but little addicted to convivial pleasures.

They seldom meet for the simple purpose of eating and drinking in what are
justly called feeding parties; but they are not strangers to the virtue of
hospitality. -- The hungry or benighted traveller, is always sure to find a
hearty welcome under their roofs. A gentleman of Irish extraction, who lost his
way in traveling through Lancaster county, called late at night at the door of
a German farmer. He was kindly received and entertained with the best of every
thing the house afforded. The next morning, he offered to pay his host for his
lodging, and other accommodations: "No" said the friendly German, in broken
English -- I will take nothing from you. I was once lost, and entertained, as
you have been, at the house of a stranger who would take no pay from me for his
trouble. I am therefore now only discharging that debt: -- do you pay your debt
to me in the same way to somebody else. --

They are extremely kind and friendly as neighbors. They often assist each
other by loans of money for a short time, without interest, when the purchase
of a plantation makes a larger sum necessary than is commonly possessed by a
single farmer. To secure their confidence, it is necessary to be punctual. They
never lend money a second time, to a man who has once disappointed them in
paying what he had borrowed agreeably to his promise or obligation. It was
remarked, during the late war, that there were very few instances of any of
them discharging a bond, or a debt, with depreciated paper money.

It has been said, that the Germans are deficient in learning; and that in
consequence of their want of more general and extensive education, they are
much addicted to superstition, and are frequently imposed upon in the
management of their affairs. Many of them have lost valuable estates by being
unacquainted with the common forms of law, in the most simple transactions; and
many more of them have lost their lives, by applying to quacks in sickness: but
this objection to the Germans will soon cease to have any foundation in
Pennsylvania. Several young men, born of German parents, have been educated in
law, physic and divinity, who have demonstrated by their abilities and
knowledge, that the German genius for literature has not depreciated in
America. A college has lately been founded by the state in Lancaster, This
college is called after Dr. FRANKLIN, who was president of the state at the
time it was founded, and who contributed very liberally to its funds.
and committed chiefly to the care of the Germans of all sects, for the purpose
of diffusing learning among their children. In this college they are to be
taught the German and English languages, and all those branches of literature
which are usually taught in the colleges of Europe and America. The principal
of this college is a native of Pennsylvania, of German parentage. The Reverend
Dr. Monty Muldenberg.
His extensive knowledge and taste in the arts and sciences, joined with his
industry in the discharge of the duties of his station, have afforded to the
friends of learning in Pennsylvania, the most flattering prospects of the
future importance and usefulness of this institution,

Both sexes of the Germans discover a strong propensity to vocal and
instrumental music. They excel, in psalmody, all the other religious societies
in the state.

The freedom and toleration of the government has produced a variety of sects,
among the Germans in Pennsylvania. The Lutherans compose a great proportion of
the German citizens of the state. Many of their churches are large and
splendid. The German Presbyterians are the next to them in numbers. Their
churches are likewise large and furnished, in many places, with organs. The
clergy, belonging to these churches, have moderate salaries, but they are
punctually and justly paid. In the country they have glebes which are stocked
and occasionally worked by their congregations. The extra expenses of their
ministers, in all their excursions to their ecclesiastical meetings, are borne
by their respective congregations. By this means the discipline and general
interests of their churches are preserved and promoted. The German Lutherans
and Presbyterians live in great harmony with each other, insomuch that they
often preach in each other's churches, and in some instances unite in building
a church, in which they both worship at different times. This harmony between
two sects, one so much opposed to each other, is owing to the relaxation of the
Presbyterians in some of the peculiar doctrines of Calvanism. I have called
them Presbyterians, because most of them object to being designated by the name
of Calvanists. The Menonists, the Moravians, the Swingfielders, and the
Catholics, compose the other sects of the German inhabitants of Pennsylvania.
The Menonists hold war and oaths to be unlawful. They admit the sacraments of
baptism, by sprinkling, and the supper. From them a sect has arisen, who hold,
with the above principles and ceremonies, the necessity of immersion baptism;
hence they are called Dunkers, or Baptists. Previously to their partaking of
the sacrament of the supper, they wash each other's feet, and sit down to a
love-feast. They practice these ceremonies of their religion with great
humility and solemnity. They, moreover, hold the doctrine of universal
salvation. From this sect there have been several seceders, one of whom devoted
themselves to perpetual celibacy. They have exhibited for many years, a curious
spectacle of pious mortification, at a village called Ephrata, in Lancaster
county. They are at present reduced to fourteen or fifteen members. The
Separatists who likewise dissented from the Dunkers, reject the ordinances of
baptism and the sacrament; and hold the doctrine of the Friends, concerning the
internal revelation of the gospel. They hold, with the Dunkers, the doctrine of
universal salvation. The singular piety, and exemplary morality of these sects,
have been urged, by the advocates for the salvation of all mankind, as a proof
that the belief of that doctrine is not so unfriendly to morals, and the order
of society, as has been supposed. The Dunkers and Separatists agree in taking
no interest upon money, and in not applying to law to recover their debts.

The German Moravians are a numerous and respectable body of christians in
Pennsylvania. In their village of Bethlehem, there are two large stone
buildings, in which the different sexes are educated in habits of industry in
useful manufactures. The sisters (for by that epithet the women are called) all
sleep in two large and neat apartments. Two of them watch over the rest, in
turns, every night, to afford relief from those sudden indispositions which
sometimes occur, in the most healthy persons, in the hours of sleep. It is
impossible to record this fact, without pausing a moment to do homage to that
religion, which produces so much union and kindness in human souls. The number
of women, who belong to this sequestered female society, amounts sometimes to
120, and seldom to less than 100. It is remarkable that notwithstanding they
lead a sedentary life, and set constantly in close stove-rooms in winter, that
not more than one of them, upon an average, dies in a year. The disease which
generally produces this annual death, is the consumption. The conditions and
ages of the women of the village, as well as of the society that has been
mentioned, are distinguished by ribbons of a peculiar kind which they wear on
their caps: the widows, by white; the married women, by blue; the single women,
above 18 years of age, by pink; and those under that age, by a ribbon of a
cinnamon color. Formerly this body of Moravians held all their property in
common in imitation of the primitive christians; but, in the year 1760, a
division of the whole of it took place, except a tavern, a tan-yard, 2000 acres
of land near Bethlehem, and 5000 acres near Nazareth, a village in the
neigbourhood of Bethlehem. The profits of these estates are appropriated to the
support and propagation of the gospel. There are many valuable manufactures
carried on at Bethlehem. The inhabitants possess a gentleness in their manners,
which is peculiarly agreeable to strangers. They inure their children, of five
and six years old, to habits of early industry. By this means they are not only
taught those kinds of labor which are suited to their strength and capacities,
but are preserved from many of the hurtful vices and accidents to which
children are exposed.

The Swingfielders are a small society. They hold the same principles as the
Friends, but they differ from them in using psalmody in their worship.

The German Catholics are numerous in Philadelphia, and have several small
chapels in other parts of the state.

There is an incorporated charitable society of Germans in Philadelphia, whose
objects are their poor and distressed countrymen.

There is likewise a German society of laborers and journeymen mechanics, who
contribute 2s. 6d. eight times a year, toward a fund, out of which they allow
30s. a week to each other's families, when the head of it is unable to work;
and 7l. 10s to his widow, as soon as he is taken from his family by death.

The Germans of Pennsylvania, including all the sects that have been mentioned,
compose nearly one third part of the whole inhabitants of the state.

The intercourse of the Germans with each other, is kept up chiefly in their
own language; but most of their men, who visit the capital, and the trading or
country towns of the state, speak the English language. A certain number of the
laws of the state are now printed in German, for the benefit of those of them
who cannot read English. A large number of German newspapers are likewise
circulated through the state, through which knowledge and intelligence have
been conveyed, much to the advantage of the government. There is scarcely an
instance of a German, of either sex, in Pennsylvania, that cannot read; but
many of the wives and daughters of the German farmers cannot write. The present
state of society among them renders this accomplishment of little consequence
to their improvement or happiness.

If it were possible to determine the amount of all the property brought into
Pennsylvania by the present German inhabitants of the state, and their
ancestors, and then compare it with the present amount of their property, the
contrast would form such a monument of human industry and economy as has
seldom been contemplated in any age or country.

I have been informed that there was an ancient prophecy which foretold, that
God would bless the Germans in foreign countries. This prediction has been
faithfully verified in Pennsylvania. They enjoy here every blessing that
liberty, toleration, independence, affluence, virtue and reputation, can confer
upon them.

How different is their situation here; from what it was in Germany! Could the
subjects of the princes of Germany, who now groan away their lives in slavery
and unprofitable labor, view from an eminence, in the month of June, the
German settlements of Stratsburg, or Manheim in Lancaster county, or of Lebanon
or Bethlehem in the counties of Dauphin and Northampton; could they be
accompanied on this eminence, by a venerable German farmer, and be told by him
that many of those extensive fields of grain, full-fed herds, luxuriant
meadows, orchards, promising loads of fruit, together with the spacious barns
-- and commodious stone-dwelling houses, which compose the prospects that have
been mentioned, were all the product of the labor of a single family, and of
one generation; and that they were all secured to the owners of them by certain
laws; I am persuaded, that no chains would be able to detain them from sharing
in the freedom of their Pennsylvania friends and former fellow subjects. "We
will assert our dignity -- (would be their language) we will be men -- we will
be free -- we will enjoy the fruits of our own labors -- we will no longer be
bought and sold to fight battles -- in which we have neither interest nor
resentment -- we will inherit a portion of that blessing which God has promised
to the Germans in foreign countries -- we will be Pennsylvanians."

I shall conclude this account of the manners of the German inhabitants of
Pennsylvania by remarking that if I have failed in doing them justice, it has
not been the fault of my subject. The German character once employed the pen of
one of the first historians of antiquity. I mean the elegant and enlightened
Tacitus. It is very remarkable that the Germans in Pennsylvania retain in a
great degree all the virtues, which this author ascribes to their ancestors in
his treatise " de moribus Germanorum". -- They inherit their integrity --
fidelity -- and chastity -- but christianity has banished from them, their
drunkenness, idleness, and love of military glory. There is a singular trait in
the features of the German character in Pennsylvania, which shows how long the
most trifling customs may exist among a people who have not been mixed with
other nations. Tacitus describes the manner in which the ancient Germans build
their villages in the following words. " Suam quisque domum spatiis circumdat
sive adversus casus ignis remedium, sive inscitia aedificandi." Each man leaves
a space between his house, and those of his neighbors, either to avoid the
danger from fire, or from unskilfulnes, in architecture.
Many of the German villages in Pennsylvania are constructed in the same
manner. The small houses are composed of a mixture, of wood, brick and clay,
neatly united together. The large houses are built of stone, and many of them
after the English fashion. Very few of the houses in Germantown are connected
together. -- Where the Germans connect their houses in their villages, they
appear to have deviated from one of the customs they imported from Germany.

CITIZENS of the United States learn from the account that has been given of
the German inhabitants of Pennsylvania, to prize knowledge and industry in
agriculture and manufactures, as the basis of domestic happiness and national
prosperity.

LEGISLATORS of the United States, learn from the wealth, and independence of
the German inhabitants of Pennsylvania, to encourage by your example, and laws,
the republican virtues of industry and economy. They are the only pillars which
can support the present constitution of the United States.

LEGISLATORS of Pennsylvania, -- learn from the history of your German fellow
citizens that you possess an inexhaustible treasure in the bosom of the state,
in their manners and arts. Continue to patronize their newly established
seminary of learning and spare no expense in supporting their public
free-schools. The vices which follow the want of religious instruction, among
the children of poor people, lay the foundation of most of the jails, and
places of public punishment in the state. Do not contend with their prejudices
in favor of their language. It will be the channel through which the knowledge
and discoveries of one of the wisest nations in Europe, may be conveyed into
our country. In proportion as they are instructed and enlightened in their own
language, they will become acquainted with the language of the United States.
Invite them to share in the power and offices of government: it will be the
means of producing an union in principle and conduct between them, and those of
their enlightened fellow-citizens who are descended from other nations. Above
all, cherish with peculiar tenderness, those sects among them who hold war to
be unlawful. -- Relieve them from the oppression of absurd and unnecessary
militia laws. Protect them as the repositories of a truth of the gospel, which
has existed in every age of the church, and which must spread hereafter over
every part of the world.

The opinions respecting the commerce and slavery of the Africans, which have
nearly produced a revolution in their favor, in some of the European
governments, were transplanted from a sect of christians in Pennsylvania.
Perhaps those German sects of christians among us, who refuse to bear arms for
the purpose of shedding human blood, may be preserved by divine providence, as
the center of a circle, which shall gradually embrace all the nations of the
earth in a perpetual treaty of friendship and peace.

THOUGHTS ON COMMON SENSE.
THE human mind in common with other branches of philosophy, has become the
subject of attention in the present age of free and general enquiry. While new
faculties are discovering in it, it will conduce equally to our acquiring a
perfect knowledge of its powers, to detect and remove such supposed faculties
as do not belong to it.

I have long suspected the term Common Sense to be applied improperly to
designate a faculty of the mind. I shall not repeat the accounts which have
been given of it by Cicero -- Buffier -- Berkely -- Shaftesbury -- Bentely --
Fenelon -- Lock -- Hume -- Hobs -- Priestly and others, all of whom agree in
describing it as a faculty, or part of a faculty, possessing a quick and
universal perception of right and wrong, truth and error, and of propriety and
impropriety in human affairs.

I shall copy, as the substance of all that those authors have said upon this
subject, Dr. Reid's account of common sense, published in the 2d. chapter of
the sixth number of his Essays on the intellectual powers of man. -- It is
absurd to conceive (says the Doctor) that there can be any opposition between
reason and common sense. It is the firstborn of reason, and, as they are
commonly joined together in speech and writing, they are inseparable in their
nature.

We ascribe to reason-two offices or two degrees. The first is to judge of
things self-evident; the second is to draw conclusions that are not
self-evident from things that are. The first of these is the province, and the
sole province, of common sense, and therefore it coincides with reason in its
whole extent, and is only another name for one branch or one degree of reason.

There is an obvious reason why this degree of reason should have a name
appropriated to it, and that is, that in the greatest part of mankind no other
degree of reason is to be found. It is this degree of reason that entitles them
to the denomination of reasonable creatures.

These two degrees of reason differ in other respects, which would be
sufficient to entitle them to distinct names. The first is the gift of heaven
-- the second is learned by practice and rules, when the first is not wanting.
-- Thus far Dr. Reid.

It is with great dissidence that I object to any thing that comes from a
gentleman from whose writings I have derived so much entertainment and
instruction, and who has done so much toward removing the rubbish that has for
many ages obscured the science of metaphysics. This diffidence to offer a
single objection to Dr. Reid's opinion upon the subject under consideration, is
increased by the groupe of popular and respectable names under which he has
supported it.

The idea which I have adopted of common sense is plain and simple. I consider
it as the perception of things as they appear to the greatest part of mankind.
It has no relation to their being true or false, right or wrong, proper or
improper. For the sake of perspicuity, I shall define it to be, Opinions and
feelings in unison with the opinions and feelings of the bulk of mankind.

From this definition it is evident that common sense must necessarily differ
in different ages and countries and, in both, must vary with the progress of
taste, science, and religion. In the uncultivated state of reason, the opinions
and feelings of a majority of mankind will be wrong, and, of course, their
common or universal sense will partake of their errors. In the cultivated state
of reason, just opinions and feelings will become general, and the common sense
of the majority will be in unison with truth. I beg leave to illustrate what I
mean by a few examples.

1. There are many things which were contrary to common sense in former ages,
both in philosophy and religion, which are now universally believed, insomuch
that to call them in question is to discover a want of judgment, or a defective
education.

2. It is contrary to common sense to speak or write in favor of
republicanism, in several European countries; and it is equally contrary to it
to speak or write in favor of monarchy, in the United States of America.

3. The common sense of the planters in Jamaica, is in favor of the commerce
and slavery of the Africans. -- In Pennsylvania, reason, humanity, and common
sense, have universally declared against them.

4. In Turkey, it is contrary to the common sense of delicacy which prevails in
that country for a gentleman to dance with a lady. No such common sense
prevails in any of the western countries of Europe, or in the States of America.

5. It is contrary to the common sense of many numerous sects to believe that
it is possible for men to go to heaven, who do not embrace their principles, or
mode of worship. -- Among rational men, this common sense is contrary to truth
and christian religion.

6. The common sense of mankind has generally been in favor of established
modes and habits of practice, in medicine. Opium, bark, mercury and the lancet
have all forced their way into general use, contrary to this common sense.
Their utility is a proof how little common sense accords with the decisions of
reason, and how improperly it is supposed to be a part of that noble power of
the mind.

7. It is agreeable to the common sense of a great part of mankind, to revenge
public and private injuries by wars and duels, and yet no wise or just reason
has ever been given to justify the practice of either of them

8. The common sense of the bulk of the inhabitants of the British dominions,
and of the United States, is in favor of boys spending four or five years in
learning the Latin and Greek languages, in order to qualify them to understand
the English language Those persons who recollect that the most perfect language
in the world, viz. the Greek, was learned without the medium or aid of a dead
or foreign language, consider the above practice (founded in common sense) as
contrary to right reason and productive of many evils in education. But
further, under this head. The common sense of the same immense proportion of
people, is in favor of teaching boys words, before they are taught ideas. Now
nature and right reason both revolt at this absurd practice.

9. The common sense of nearly all nations, is in favor of preventing crimes,
by the punishment of death, but right reason, policy, and the experience of a
wise and enlightened prince, Leopold Emperor of Germany.
all concur in proving that the best means of preventing crimes, is by living
and not by dead examples.

In the perfection of knowledge, common sense and truth will be in unison with
each other. It is now more related to error than truth, and in the sense in
which I have described it, it implies more praise than censure to want it.

To say that a man has common sense, is to say that he thinks with his age or
country, in their false, as well as their true opinions; and the greater the
proportion of people, he acts and thinks with, the greater share he possesses
of this common sense. -- After all that has been said in its favor, I cannot
help thinking that it is the characteristic only of common minds.

To think and act with the majority of mankind, when they are right, and
differently from them, when they are wrong, constitutes in my opinion, the
perfection of human wisdom and conduct.

The feelings and opinions of mankind are often confounded; but they are widely
different from each other. There may be just feelings connected with erroneous
opinions and conduct. This is often the case in religion and government -- But,
in general, opinions and feelings are just and unjust in equal degrees,
according to the circumstances of age, country, and the progress of knowledge
before mentioned.

Had this common sense depended upon the information of any one of the five
external senses, I should have had no difficulty in admitting Dr. Reid's
account of it, inasmuch as the perceptions they afford are the same, in their
nature, in all healthy men, and in all ages and countries. But to suppose it to
be an inferior degree, or the first act of reason, and afterward to suppose it
to be universal, is to contradict every thing that history and observation
teach us of human nature. The king of Prussia, in his posthumous works, says,
Reason never did any thing great, by which he must have meant the common
degrees of it, or what is called, by Dr. Reid, common sense.


In matters addressed to our reason, the principal business of reason is to
correct the evidence of our senses. Indeed, the perception of truth, in
philosophy, seems to consist in little else than in the refutation of the ideas
acquired from the testimony of our senses. In the progress of knowledge, when
the exact connection between the senses and reason is perfectly understood, it
is probable that the senses and reason will be in unison with each other, and
that mankind will as suddenly connect the evidence of all the senses with the
decisions of reason, as they now connect, with certainty, the distance of
objects with the evidence of the eyes. This general unison between the senses
and reason, as in the case of vision, must be the result only of experience and
habit.

I cannot dismiss this subject without adding the following remark.

Mankind are governed, says Mr. Bail, by their prejudices, and not by their
principles. To do them good, we must, in some measure, conform to those
prejudices; -- hence we find the most acceptable men in practical society, have
been those who have never shocked their cotemporaries, by opposing popular or
common opinions. Men of opposite characters, like objects placed too near the
eye, are seldom seen distinctly by the age in which they live. They must
content themselves with the prospects of being useful to the distant and more
enlightened generations which are to follow them. Galileo, who asked pardon of
the pope, on his knees, for contradicting the common sense of the church,
respecting the revolution of the earth, and Dr. Harvey, who lost all his
business, by refusing the common sense of former ages, respectting the
circulation of the blood, now enjoy a reputation for their opinions and
discoveries, which has, in no instance ever been given to the cold blood of
common sense.

April 3 d 1791.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE VICES PECULIAR TO THE INDIANS OF NORTH AMERICA.
IT has become fashionable of late years for the philosophers of Europe to
celebrate the virtues of the savages of America. -- Whether the design of their
encomiums was to expose christianity, and depreciate the advantages of
civilization, I know not; but they have evidently had those effects upon the
minds of weak people. Without contradicting the accounts that have been
published by those gentlemen, of the virtues of the Indians in North America, I
shall briefly add an account of some of their vices, in order to complete their
natural history. My information shall be taken from the travels of Charlevoix
-- Hennepen -- Carver -- Romans and Bartram, and from conversations with
persons of veracity who have resided among them.

The first vice I shall name, that is universal among our savages, is
UNCLEANNESS. They are, in general, strangers to the obligations both of
morality and decency, as far as they relate to the marriage bed. -- The
exceptions to this remark, have been produced among those nations chiefly, who
have had an occasional intercourse with civilized nations.

2. NASTINESS is another Indian vice. This is exemplified in their food --
drinks -- dress -- persons -- and above all, in their total disregard to
decency in the time -- place -- and manner of their natural evacuations.

3. DRUNKENNESS is a more general vice among savages than among civilized
nations. -- Whole Indian tribes have been destroyed by it. Indeed they glory in
their fondness for strong liquors, and consider it as a part of their
character. A countryman who had dropped from his cart a keg of rum, rode back a
few miles in hopes of finding it. On his way he met an Indian who lived in his
neighborhood, whom he asked if he had seen his keg of rum on the road? The
Indian laughed in his face, and addressed him in the following words. What a
fool you are to ask an Indian such a question. Don't you see I am sober? Had I
met with your keg, you would have found it empty on one side of the road, and
Indian Tom drunk and asleep on the other.

4. GLUTTONY is very common among Indians. To this their long abstinence,
produced by their idleness, naturally tempts them. -- It is very common to see
them stretch themselves on the ground after a full meal, and grunt there for
several hours till they recover from the effects of their intemperance. Mr.
Bartram tells us, that they sometimes rise in the middle of the night, in order
to gratify their appetites for eating.

5. TREACHERY is another Indian vice. Who ever trusted to an Indian treaty? --
They generally begin their wars, with professions of peace and perpetual
friendship.

6. The cruelty of Indians is well known. They consider compassion as a mark of
effeminacy. Their treatment of their prisoners, shows them to possess a spirit
of revenge, which places them upon a footing with infernal spirits.

7. IDLENESS is the universal vice of savages. -- They are not only too lazy to
work, but even to think. Nothing but the powerful stimulus of hunger, or
revenge, is sufficient to rouse them into action.

8. THEFT is an Indian vice. The Indians not only steal from their civilized
neighbors, but from each other. A horse -- a gun -- or spirits, have charms in
the eyes of an Indian that no restraints can prevent his stealing, whenever
they come in his way.

9. GAMING belongs in an eminent degree to the Catalogue of Indian vices.

10. But the infamy of the Indian character is completed by the low rank to
which they degrade their women. It is well known that their women perform all
their work. They not only prepare their victuals, but plant, hoe and gather
their corn and roots. They are seldom admitted to their feasts, or share in
their conversation. The men oblige them to lie at their feet, when they sleep
without fire; and at their backs when they sleep before a fire. They afford
them no assistance in the toils of tending, feeding, and carrying their
children. They are even insensible of the dangers to which their women are
often exposed in traveling with them. A gentleman from Northumberland county,
informed me, that he once saw a body of Indian men and women wading across the
river Susquehannah. The men arrived first on the opposite shore, and pursued
their journey along the river. The women, some of whom had children on their
backs, upon coming to a deep and rapid current, suddenly cried out for help,
and made signs to their husbands and fathers to come to their assistance. The
men stood for a few minutes -- and after attentively surveying their distress,
bursted out a laughing, and then with a merry indifference, walked from them
along the shore.

This is a short nomenclature of the vices of the Indians of North America. If
it were necessary, I would quote the chapters and pages of the authors who have
established by their observations, the truth of the character I have given of
them. I am not disposed to enter into an examination of their virtues, but I
cannot help supposing them to be rather the qualities of necessity, than the
offspring of feeling, or principle. Their hospitality -- their friendships --
their patience -- and their fidelity to engagements, are the effects of
necessity, and are as essential to their existence, a honesty is to a band of
associated robbers. Their politeness in never contradicting any person, I
believe is the effect of indolence, for I know of nothing that lazy people
dislike more than to dispute, even where truth is on their side, or where
victory is certain. -- Where is the man that in a lazy fit (to which all men at
times are subject) has not heard false and absurd opinions advanced in company,
without contradicting them?

The taciturnity of the Indians which has been so much celebrated, as a mark of
their wisdom, is the effect of their want of ideas. Except in cases of
extraordinary pride, I believe taciturnity, in nine cases out of ten in
civilized company, is the effect of stupidity. I will make one more exception
to this rule, and that is in favor of those people who are in the habits of
communicating their thoughts, by writing for the public, or by corresponding
with their friends. Ideas, whether acquired from books, or by reflection,
produce a plethora in the mind, which can only be relieved by depletion from
the pen, or tongue.

But what shall we say to the encomiums that have been lavished upon the love
of liberty which characterizes our savage neighbors? -- Why -- that they arise
from an ignorance of the influence of property, upon the human mind. --
Property, and a regard for law, are born together in all societies. The passion
for liberty in an Indian, is as different from the passion for it in a
civilized republican, as the impurity of lust, is from the delicacy of love
There is a certain medium to be observed between an affection for law, and for
liberty. An excess of the former has sometimes led to tyranny, while an excess
of the latter, leads to idleness and vice. The Athenians appear to have been
intoxicated with an excess of liberty when they spent their whole time in
hearing and telling news. There is always an excess of law or liberty in a
community where poor men are idle, or where vices of any kind are suffered with
impunity.

The only reflections that I shall add upon this subject, shall be, -- how
great are the blessings of civil government which extirpates, restrains, or
punishes the vices that have been mentioned! and how great is the efficacy of
christianity, which, by purifying the heart, renders the practice of the
contrary virtues natural and agreeable?

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE INFLUENCE OF THE HABITUAL USE OF TOBACCO UPON HEALTH,
MORALS, AND PROPERTY.
WERE it possible for a being who had resided upon our globe, to visit the
inhabitants of a planet, where reason governed, and to tell them that a vile
weed was in general use among the inhabitants of the globe it had left, which
afforded no nourishment -- that this weed was cultivated with immense care --
that it was an important article of commerce -- that the want of it produced
real misery -- that its taste was extremely nauseous, that it was unfriendly to
health and morals, and that its use was attended with a considerable loss of
time and property, the account would be thought incredible, and the author of
it would probably be excluded from society, for relating a story of so
improbable a nature. In no one view, is it possible to contemplate the creature
man in a more absurd and ridiculous light, than in his attachment to TOBACCO.

This weed is of a stimulating nature, whether it be used in smoking, chewing
or in snuff. Like Opium and spirituous liquors, it is sought for in all those
cases where the body is debilitated indirectly by intemperance in eating, or by
excessive application to study, or business, or directly by sedative passions
of the mind, particularly by grief and fear. Persons after losing relations or
friends by death, often resort to it. One of the greatest snuffers I ever knew,
used it for the first time, in order to console her under a presentiment she
entertained, that she should die in childbed. Fear creates a desire for
Tobacco. Hence it is used in a greater quantity by soldiers and sailors than by
other classes of people. It is used most profusely by soldiers when they act as
picket guards, or sentinels, and by sailors in stormy weather. Persons
laboring under that state of madness which is accompanied with a sense of
misery, are much devoted to it, hence the tenants of mad-houses often accost
their attendants and visitors, with petitions for Tobacco.

The progress of habit in the use of Tobacco is exactly the same as in the use
of spirituous liquors. The slaves of it begin, by using it only after dinner --
then during the whole afternoon, and evening, afterward before dinner, then
before breakfast, and finally during the whole night. I knew a Lady who had
passed through all these stages, who used to wake regularly two or three times
every night to compose her system with fresh doses of snuff. Again -- the
progress in the decay of the sensibility of the nose to the stimulus of snuff
is analogous to the decay of the sensibility of the stomach, to the stimulus of
spirituous liquors. It feels for a while the action of Rappee; next it requires
Scotch snuff, afterward Irish-blackguard -- and finally it is affected only by
a composition of Tobacco and ground glass. This mixture is to the nose, what
Cayenne pepper and Jamaica spirits are to the stomachs of habitual dram
drinkers.

The appetite for Tobacco is wholly artificial. No person was ever born with a
relish for it. Even in those persons who are much attached to it, nature
frequently recovers her disrelish to it. It ceases to be agreeable in every
sebrile indisposition. This is so invariably true, that a disrelish to it is
often a sign of an approaching, and a return of the appetite for it, a sign of
a departing fever.

In considering the pernicious effects of Tobacco, I shall begin agreeably to
the order I have laid down, by taking notice of its influence upon health; and
here I shall mention its effects not only upon the body, but upon the mind.

1. It impairs the appetite. Where it does not produce this effect,

2. It prevents the early and complete digestion of the food, and thereby
induces distressing, and incurable diseases not only of the stomach, but of the
whole body. This effect of Tobacco is the result of the waste of the saliva in
chewing, and smoking, or of the Tobacco insinuating itself into the stomach,
when used in chewing, or snuffing. -- I once lost a young man of 17 years of
age, of a pulmonary consumption, whose disorder was brought on by the
intemperate use of segars.

3. It produces many of those diseases which are supposed to be seated in the
nerves. The late Sir John Pringle was subject in the evening of his life to
tremors in his hands. In his last visit to France, a few years before he died,
in company with Dr. Franklin, he was requested by the Doctor to observe, that
the same disorder was very common among those people of fashion who were great
snuffers. Sir John was led by this remark to suspect that his tremors were
occasioned by snuff which he took in large quantities. He immediately left off
taking it, and soon afterward recovered the perfect use of his hands. I have
seen headache, vertigo, and epilepsy produced by the use of Tobacco. A
Physician in Connecticut has remarked that it has in several instances produced
palsy and apoplexy, and Dr. Tissot ascribes sudden death in one instance, to
the excessive use of it in smoking.

4. A citizen of Philadelphia lost all his teeth by drawing the hot smoke of
Tobacco into his mouth by means of short pipe, and I have been informed of a
cancer on the lip which terminated fatally from the same cause, in a farmer in
Northumberland county in this state. The acrid nature of the matter which is
mixed with the smoke of the Tobacco may easily be discovered by the taste or
smell of a pipe stem that has been in use for two or three weeks.

5. Tobacco when used in the form of snuff seldom fails of impairing the voice
by obstructing the nose. It moreover imparts to the complexion a disagreeable
dusky color.

I have thus briefly enumerated the morbid effects of Tobacco upon the human
body. It remains under this head to mention, that the want of it is a source of
uneasiness more distressing than many bodily disorders. This uneasiness in
persons who have long been accustomed to the use of Tobacco has in some
instances produced an agitation of mind that has bordered upon distraction.
Colonel Burr informed me that the greatest complaints of dissatisfaction and
suffering that he heard among the soldiers who accompanied General Arnold in
his march from Boston to Quebec through the wilderness in the year 1775, were
from the want of Tobacco. This was the more remarkable, as they were so
destitute of provisions as to be obliged to kill, and eat their dogs. The
Persians, we are told by travelers, often expatriate themselves, when they are
forbidden the use of Tobacco, in order to enjoy it in a foreign country. These
facts will not surprise those persons who have been accustomed to view our
appetites when perverted to such things as are artificial and disagreeable, to
be much more ungovernable than the appetite for things that are originally
natural and agreeable.

But the use of Tobacco has been known to produce a more serious effect upon
the mind than the distress that has been mentioned. Sir John Pringle's memory
was impaired by snuff. This was proved by his recovering the perfect exercise
of it after he left off taking snuff agreeably to the advice of his friend Dr.
Franklin. Dr. Masillac informed me that his father lost his memory at forty
years of age by the excessive use of snuff. He took for several years two
ounces of it every day.

In answer to these observations upon the morbid effects of Tobacco it has been
said,

1. That it possesses many medical virtues. I grant it, and the facts which
establish its utility in medicine furnish us with additional arguments against
the habitual use of it. How feeble would be the effects of opium, and bark upon
the body if they constituted a part of the condiments of our daily food; --
While I admit the efficacy of Tobacco as a medicine, I cannot help adding, that
some of the diseases, or symptoms of diseases which it relieves, are evidently
induced by the habit of using it. Thus a dram of ardent spirits suspends, for a
while, a vomiting and tremors of the hands, but who does not know that those
complaints, are the effects of the intemperate and habitual use of spirituous
liquors?

2. The advocates for Tobacco, tell us that smoking, and snuff relieve that
uneasiness which succeeds a plentiful meal. I admit that the stimulars of the
Tobacco restores the system from the indirect weakness which is induced by
intemperance in eating, but the relief which is thus obtained, illy compensates
for the waste of the saliva in smoking, at a time when it is most wanted, or
for the mixture of a portion of the Tobacco with the aliment in the stomach by
means of snuffing. But why should we cure one evil by producing another? would
it not be much better to obviate the necessity of using Tobacco by always
eating a moderate meal? The recollection of the remedy probably disposes to
that intemperance in eating which produces the uneasiness that has been
mentioned.

3. We are sometimes told that Tobacco is a preservative from contagious
diseases. But many facts contradict this assertion. Mr. Howard informs us that
it had no efficacy in checking the contagion of the plague, and repeated
experience in Philadelphia has proved, that it is equally ineffectual in
preserving those who use it, from the Influenza and Yellow Fever.

4. It has been further said that chewing and smoking Tobacco assist the
intellectual operations. So do wine, and distilled spirits, but shall we upon
that account, have recourse to those liquors when we wish to stimulate our
thinking faculties? Tea and Coffee are to be preferred, when we wish to
stimulate the mind. Mr. Pope recommends a trotting horse for the same purpose.
Rousseau excited his invention by walking backwards and forwards in his room. I
suspect that Tobacco is often used, rather to supply the want of ideas than to
collect, or excite them. The absence of sensation, whether of external
impressions upon the body, or of the re-action of the mind in thought, is
always accompanied with misery. The Indians afford a striking proof of this
remark -- hence they spend whole days and even weeks in smoking, in order to
relieve themselves from the anguish which attends the inactivity and vacuum of
their minds.

We proceed next to mention the influence of the habitual use of Tobacco upon
morals.

1. One of the usual effects of smoking and chewing is thirst. This thirst
cannot be allayed by water, for no sedative or even insipid liquor will be
relished after the mouth and throat have been exposed to the stimulus of the
smoke, or juice of Tobacco. A desire of course is excited for strong drinks,
and these when taken between meals soon lead to intemperance and drunkenness.
One of the greatest sots I ever knew, acquired a love for ardent spirits by
swallowing cuds of Tobacco, which he did, to escape detection in the use of it,
for he had contracted the habit of chewing, contrary to the advice and commands
of his father. He died of a Dropsy under my care in the year 1780.

2. The use of Tobacco, more especially in smoking* disposes to idleness, and
idleness has been considered as the root of all evil. An idle man's brain,
(says the celebrated and original Mr. Bunyan) is the Devil's work shop.

3. The use of Tobacco is necessarily connected with the neglect of
cleanliness. The influence of this neglect upon morals has been happily pointed
out in an extract from captain Cooke's journal, which is published by Sir John
Pringle in one of his Orations before the Royal Society of London.

4. Tobacco, more especially when used in smoking, is generally offensive to
those people who do not use it. To smoke in company under such circumstances,
is a breach of good manners; now, manners have an influence upon morals. They
may be considered as the out posts of virtue. A habit of offending the senses
of friends or strangers by the use of Tobacco, cannot therefore be indulged
with innocence. It produces a want of respect for our fellow creatures, and
this always disposes to unkind and unjust behavior toward them. Who ever knew
a rude man completely, or uniformly moral?

The methodists forbad the use of Tobacco in the infancy of their society. The
prohibition discovered a high and just sense of the self-denial, decency, and
universal civility which are required by the gospel. What reception may we
suppose would the apostles have met with, had they carried into the cities and
houses to which they were sent, snuff-boxes, pipes, segars, and bundles of cut,
or rolls of hog, or pigtail Tobacco? Such a costly and offensive apparatus for
gratifying their appetites, would have furnished solid objections to their
persons and doctrines, and would have been a just cause for the clamors and
contempt which were excited against them. It is agreeable to observe that a
regard to good manners, upon this subject, has at last awakened in some parts
of the world. In England smoking is not permitted in taverns and coffee houses
until after 10 o'clock at night, and in France snuffing is becoming
unfashionable and vulgar. How much is it to be lamented that while the use of
Tobacco is declining in two of the most enlightened countries in Europe, it is
becoming more general in America. Who can see groups of boys of six or eight
years old in our streets smoking segars, without anticipating such a
depreciation of our posterity in health and character, as can scarcely be
contemplated at this distance of time without pain and horror!

It remains now that I briefly point out the influence of the use of Tobacco
upon time and property. Snuffing makes a great inroad upon time. A man who
takes a pinch of snuff every twenty minutes, (which most habitual snuffers do)
and snuffs fifteen hours in four and twenty, (allowing him to consume not quite
half a minute every time he uses his box,) will waste about five whole days of
every year of his life in this useless, and unwholesome practice. But when we
add to the profitable use to which this time might have been applied, the
expenses of Tobacco, pipes, snuff and spitting boxes -- and of the injuries
which are done to the clothing, during a whole life, the aggregate sum would
probably amount to several hundred dollars. To a laboring man this would be a
decent portion for a son or daughter, while the same sum, saved by a man in
affluent circumstances, would have enabled him by a contribution to a public
charity to have lessened a large portion of the ignorance, or misery of mankind.

In reviewing the account that has been given of the disagreeable and
mischievous effects of Tobacco, we are led to enquire, what are its uses upon
our globe, -- for we are assured that nothing, exists in vain. Poison is a
relative term, and the most noxious plants have been discovered to afford
sustenance to certain animals. But what animal besides man, will take Tobacco
into its mouth? Horses, Cows, Sheep, Cats, Dogs, and even hogs refuse to taste
it. Flies, Mosquitoes, and the moth are chased from our clothes by the smell of
it. But let us not arraign the wisdom and economy of nature in the production
of this plant. Modern Travelers have at last discovered that it constitutes
the food of a solitary and filthy wild beast, well known in the deserts of
Africa, by the name of the ROCK GOAT.

I shall conclude these observations by relating an Anecdote of the late Dr.
Franklin. A few months before his death, he declared to one of his friends that
he had never used Tobacco in any way in the course of his long life, and that
he was disposed to believe there was not much advantage to be derived from it,
for that he had never met with a man who used it, who advised him to follow his
example.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE SUGAR MAPLE-TREE OF THE UNITED STATES. IN A LETTER TO THOMAS
JEFFERSON, ESQUIRE. THEN SECRETARY OF STATE OF THE UNITED STATES, AND ONE OF VICE
PRESIDENTS OF THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY.
DEAR SIR,
IN obedience to your request, I have sat down to communicate to our Society
through the medium of a letter to you, a short account of the Sugar Maple-tree
of the United States, together with such facts and remarks as I have been able
to collect, upon the methods of obtaining Sugar from it, and upon the
advantages both public and private, of this Sugar.

The Acer Sacharinum of Linnaeus, or the Sugar Maple-tree, grows in great
quantities in the western counties of all the Middle States of the American
Union. Those which grow in New York and Pennsylvania yield the Sugar in a
greater quantity than those which grow on the waters of the Ohio. -- These
trees are generally found mixed with the Beech, Fagus Ferruginea.
Hemlock, Pinus abies.
White and water Ash, Fraxinus Americana.
the Cucumber tree, Magnolia acuminata.
Linden, Tilia Americana.
Aspen, Populus tremula.
Butter Nut, Juglans alba (oblonga.)
and Wild Cherry trees Prunus Virginiana, of Linnaeus:
. They sometimes appear in groves covering five or six acres in a body, but
they are more commonly interspersed with some, or all of the forest trees which
have been mentioned. From 30 to 50 trees are generally found upon an acre of
ground. They grow only in the richest soils and frequently in stony ground.
Springs of the purest water abound in their neighborhood. They are when fully
grown as tall as the white and black oaks, and from two to three feet in
diameter. Baron La Hontan, in his voyage to North America, gives the following
account of the Maple-tree in Canada. After describing the black Cherry-tree,
some of which he says are as tall as the loftiest oak, and as big as a
hogshead, he adds, The Maple-tree is much of the same height and bulk. It bears
no resemblance to that sort we have in Europe.
They put forth a beautiful white blossom in the Spring before they show a
single leaf. The color of the blosom distinguishes them from the acer rubrum,
or the common maple, which affords a blossom of a red color. The wood of the
Sugar Maple-tree is extremely inflammable, and is preferred upon that account
by hunters and surveyors for firewood. Its small branches are so much
impregnated with sugar as to afford support to the cattle, horses, and sheep of
the first settlers during the winter, before they are able to cultivate forage
for that purpose. Its ashes afford a great quantity of pot ash, exceeded by
few, or perhaps by none of the trees that grow in the woods of the United
States.

The tree is supposed to arrive at its full growth in the woods in twenty years.

It is not injured by tapping; on the contrary, the oftener it is tapped, the
more syrup is obtained from it. In this respect it follows a law of animal
secretion. A single tree has not only survived, but flourished after forty-two
tappings in the same number of years. The effects of a yearly discharge of sap
from the tree in improving and increasing the sap, is demonstrated from the
superior excellence of those trees which have been perforated in an hundred
places, by a small wood-pecker which feeds upon the sap. The trees after having
been wounded in this way, distill the remains of their juice on the ground, and
afterward acquire a black color. The sap of these trees is much sweeter to
the taste than that which is obtained from trees which have not been previously
wounded, and it affords more sugar.

From twenty-three gallons and one quart of sap procured in twenty hours from
only two of these dark colored trees, Arthur Noble, Esquire. of the state of
New York, obtained four pounds and thirteen ounces of good grained sugar.

A tree of an ordinary size yields in a good season from twenty to thirty
gallons of sap, from which are made from five to six pounds of sugar. To this
there are sometimes remarkable exceptions. Samuel Low, Esquire. a Justice of Peace
in Montgomery county, in the state of New York, informed Arthur Noble, Esquire.
that he had made twenty pounds and one ounce of sugar between the 14th and 23d
of April, in the year 1789, from a single tree that had been tapped for several
successive years before.

From the influence which culture has upon forest and other trees, it has been
supposed, that by transplanting the Sugar Maple tree into a garden, or by
destroying such other trees as shelter it from the rays of the Sun, the
quantity of the sap might be increased; and its quality much improved. I have
heard of one fact which favors this opinion. A farmer in Northampton county in
the state of Pennsylvania, planted a number of these trees above twenty years
ago in his meadow, from three gallons of the sap of which he obtains every year
a pound of sugar. It was remarked formerly that it required five or six gallons
of the sap of the trees which grow in the woods, to produce the same quantity
of sugar.

The sap distills from the wood of the tree. Trees which have been cut down in
the winter for the support of the domestic animals of the new settlers, yield a
considerable quantity of sap as soon as their trunks and limbs feel the rays of
the Sun in the spring of the year.

It is in consequence of the sap of these trees being equally diffused through
every part of them, that they live three years after they are girdled, that is,
after a circular incision is made through the bark into the substance of the
tree for the purpose of destroying it.

It is remarkable that grass thrives better under this tree in a meadow, than
in situations exposed to the constant action of the Sun.

The season for tapping the trees is in February, March, and April, according
to the weather which occurs in these months.

Warm days and frosty nights are most favorable to a plentiful discharge of
sap. The influence of the weather in increasing and lessening the discharge of
the sap from trees is very remarkable.

Dr. Tongue supposed long ago (Philosophical Transactions, No. 68) that changes
in the weather of every kind might be better ascertained by the discharges of
sap from trees than by weather glasses. I have seen a journal of the effects of
heat, cold, moisture, drought and thunder upon the discharges from the sugar
trees, which disposes me to believe that there is some foundation for Dr.
Tongue's opinion*


The quantity obtained in a day from a tree, is from five gallons to a pint,
according to the greater or less heat of the air. Mr. Low, informed Arthur
Noble, Esquire. that be obtained near three and twenty gallons of sap in one day
(April 14, 1789.) from the single tree which was before mentioned. Such
instances of a profusion of sap in single trees are however not very common.

There is always a suspension of the discharge of of sap in the night if a
frost succeed a warm day. The perforation in the tree is made with an axe or an
auger. The latter is preferred from experience of its advantages. The auger is
introduced about three-quarters of an inch, and in an ascending direction (that
the sap may not be frozen in a slow current in the mornings or evenings) and is
afterward deepened gradually to the extent of two inches. A spout is
introduced about half an inch into the hole, made by this auger, and projects
from three to twelve inches from the tree. The spout is generally made of the
Sumach Rhus.
or Elder, Sambucus canadensis.
which commonly grow in the neighborhood of the sugar trees. The tree is first
tapped on the South side; when the discharge of its sap begins to lessen, an
opening is made on its North side, from which an increased discharge takes
place. The sap flows from four to six weeks, according to the temperature of
the weather. Troughs large enough to contain three or four gallons made of
white pine, or white ash, or of dried water ash, aspen, linden, poplar,
Liriodendron Tulipifera.
or common maple, are placed under the spout, to receive the sap, which is
carried every day to a large receiver, made of either of the trees before
mentioned. From this receiver it is conveyed, after being strained, to the
boiler.

To preserve the sap from rain and impurities of all kinds, it is a good
practice to cover the troughs with a concave board, with a hole in the middle
of it.

It remains yet to be determined whether some artificial heat may be applied so
as to increase the quantity and improve the quality of the sap. Mr. Noble
informed me, that he saw a tree, under which a farmer had accidently burnt some
brush, which dropped a a thick heavy syrup resembling molasses. This fact may
probably lead to something useful hereafter.

During the remaining part of the spring months, as also in the Summer, and in
the beginning of Autumn, the maple tree yields a thin sap, but not fit for the
manufactory of sugar. It affords a pleasant drink in harvest, and has been used
instead of rum, in some instances by those farmers in Connecticut, whose
ancestors have left to them here, and there, a sugar maple tree, (probably to
shade their cattle,) in all their fields. Mr. Bruce describes a drink of the
same kind, prepared by the inhabitants of Egypt, by infusing the sugar cane in
water, which he declares to be "the most refreshing drink in the world." Baron
La Hontan, gives the following account of the sap of the sugar maple-tree, when
used as a drink, and of the manner of obtaining it, "The tree yields a sap
which has a much pleasanter taste than the best lemonade or cherry water, and
makes the wholesomest drink in the world. This liquor is drawn by cutting the
tree two inches deep in the wood, the cut being made sloping to the length of
ten or twelve inches; at the lower end of this gash, a knife is thruft into the
tree slopingly, so that the water runs along the cut or gash, as through a
gutter and falls upon the knife, which has some vessels placed underneath to
receive it. Some trees will yield five or six bottles of this water in a day,
and some inhabitants of Canada might draw twenty hogsheads of it in one day, if
they would thus cut and notch all the maple trees of their respective
plantations. The gash does no harm to the tree. Of this sap they make sugar and
syrup which is so valuable that there can be no better remedy for fortifying
the stomach. It Is but few of the inhabiants that have the patience to make
them, for as common things are slighted, so there are scarce any body but
children that give themselves he trouble of gashing these trees."


There are three methods of reducing the sap to sugar.

1. By freezing it; this method has been tried for many years, by Mn Obediah
Scott, a farmer in Luzerne county in this state, with great success. He says
that one half of a given quantity of sap reduced in this way, is better than
one-third of the same quantity reduced by boiling. If the frost should not be
intense enough, to reduce the sap to the graining point, it may afterward be
exposed to the action of the fire for that purpose.

2. By spontaneos evaporation. The hollow stump of a maple-sugar tree, which
had been cut down in the spring, and which was found sometime afterward filled
with sugar, first suggested this method of obtaining sugar to our farmers. So
many circumstances of cold and dry weather, large and flat vessels, and above
all so much time are necessary to obtain sugar, by either of the above methods,
that the most general method among our farmers is to obtain it,

3. By boiling. For this purpose the following facts which have been
ascertained by many experiments, deserve attention.

1. The sooner the sap is boiled, after it is collected from the tree, the
better. It should never be kept longer than twenty four hours, before it is put
over the fire.

2. The larger the vessel in which the sap is boiled, the more sugar is
obtained from it.

3. A copper vessel affords a sugar of a fairer color than an iron vessel.

The sap flows into wooden troughs from which it is carried and poured into
stone troughs or large cisterns in the shape of a canoe or large manger made of
white ash, linden, bass wood, or white pine, from which it is conveyed to the
kettle in which it is to be boiled. These cisterns, as well as the kettle, are
generally covered by a shed to defend the sap from the rain. The sugar is
improved by draining the sap through a blanket or cloth, either before or after
it is half boiled. Butter, hogs lard, or tallow are added to the sap in the
kettle to prevent its boiling over, and lime, eggs or new-milk are mixed with
it in order to clarify it. I have seen clear sugar made without the addition of
either of them. A spoonful of slack lime, the white of one egg, and a pint of
new-milk are the usual proportions of these articles which are mixed with
fifteen gallons of sap. In some samples which I have lately seen of maple-sugar
clarified with each of the above articles, that, in which milk alone was used,
had an evident superiority over the others, in point of color.

The sugar after being sufficiently boiled, is grained and clayed, and
afterward refined, or converted into loaf sugar. The methods of conducing each
of these processes is so nearly the same with those which are used in the
manufactory of West India sugar, and are so generally known, that I need not
spend any time in describing them.

It has been a subject of enquiry whether the maple sugar might not be improved
in its quality and increased in its quantity by the establishment of boiling
houses in the sugar maple country to be conducted by associated labor. From the
scattered situation of the trees, the difficulty of carrying the sap to a great
distance, and from the many expenses which must accrue from supporting
laborers and horses in the woods in a season of the year in which nature
affords no sustenance to man or beast, I am disposed to believe that the most
productive method both in quantity and profit of obtaining this sugar will be
by the labor of private families. For a great number of years many hundred
private families in New York and Pennsylvania have supplied themselves
plentifully with this sugar during the whole year. I have heard of many
families who have made from two to four hundred pounds in a year; and of one
man who sold six hundred pounds, all made with his own hands in one season. The
following receipts published by William Cooper, Esquire. in the Albany Gazette,
fully establishes this fact.

"Received, Cooper's Town, April 30th, 1790, of William Cooper, sixteen pounds,
for six hundred and forty pounds of sugar made with my own hands, without any
assistance in less than four weeks, besides attending to the other business of
my farm, as providing fire wood, taking care of the cattle, etc. John Nicholls.
Witness R. Smith.

A single family, consisting of a man and his two sons, on the maple sugar
lands between the Delaware and Susquehannah made 1800lb. of maple sugar in one
season.




Not more knowledge is necessary for making this sugar than is required to make
soap, cider, beer, four-crout, etc. and yet one or all of these are made in
most of the farm houses of the United States. The kettles and other utensils of
a farmer's kitchen, will serve most of the purposes of making sugar, and the
time required for the labor, (if it deserves that name) is at a season when it
is impossible for the farmer to employ himself in any species of agriculture.
His wife and all his children above ten years of age, moreover may assist him
in this business, for the profit of the weakest of them is nearly equal to that
of a man, when hired for that purpose.

A comparative view of this sugar has been freguently made with the sugar which
is obtained from the West India sugar cane, with respect to its quality, price,
and the possible or probable quantity that can be made of it in the United
States, each of which I shall consider in order.

1. The quality of this sugar is necessarily better than that which is made in
the West Indies. It is prepared in a season when not a single insect exists to
feed upon it, or to mix its excretions with it, and before a particle of dust
or of the pollen of plants can float in the air. The same observation cannot be
applied to the West India sugar. The insects and worms which prey upon it, and
of course mix with it, compose a page in a nomenclature of natural history. I
shall say nothing of the hands which are employed in making sugar in the
West Indies but, that men who work for the exclusive benefit of others, are not
under the same obligations to keep their persons clean while they are employed
in this work, that men women and children are, who work exclusively for the
benefit of themselves, and who have been educated in the habits of cleanliness.
The superior purity of the maple sugar is farther proved by its leaving a less
sediment when dissolved in water, than the West India sugar.

It has been supposed that the maple sugar is inferior to the West India sugar
in strength. The experiments which led to this opinion, I suspect have been
inaccurate, or have been made with maple sugar, prepared in a slovenly manner.
I have examined equal quantities, by weight, of both the grained and the loaf
sugar, in hyson tea, and in coffee, made in every respect equal by the minutest
circumstances that could affect the quality or taste of each of them, and could
perceive no inferiority in the strength of the maple sugar. The liquors which
decided this question were examined at the same time, by Alexander Hamilton,
Esquire. Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, Mr. Henry Drinker, and
several Ladies, who all concurred in the above opinion.

2. Whoever considers that the gift of the sugar maple trees is from a
benevolent Providence, that we have many millions of acres in our country
covered with them, that the tree is improved by repeated tappings, and that the
sugar is obtained by the frugal labor of a farmer's family, and at the same
time considers the labor of cultivating the sugar cane, the the capitals sunk
in sugar works, the first cost of slaves and cattle, the expenses of provisions
for both of them, and in some instances the additional expense of conveying the
sugar to a market, in all the West India Islands, will not hesitate in
believing that the maple sugar may be manufactured much cheaper, and sold at a
less price than that which is made in the West Indies.

3. The resources for making a sufficient quantity of this sugar not only for
the consumption of the United States, but for exportation, will appear from the
following facts. There are in the states of New York, and Pennsylvania alone at
least ten millions of acres of land which produce the sugar maple-tree, in the
proportion of thirty trees to one acre. Now, supposing all the persons capable
of labor in a family to consist of three, and each person to attend 150 trees
and each tree to yield 5lbs. of sugar in a season, the product of the labor of
60,000 families would be 135,000,000 pounds of sugar, and allowing the
inhabitants of the United States to compose 600,000 families, each of which
consumed 200 pounds of sugar in a year, the whole consumption would be
120,000,000 pounds in a year, which would leave a balance of 15,000,000 pounds
for exportation. Valuing the sugar at 6-90 of a dollar per pound, the sum saved
to the United States would be 8,000,000 dollars by home consumption, and the
sum gained by exportation would be 1,000,000 dollars. The only part of this
calculation that will appear improbable is, the number of families supposed to
be employed in the manufactory of the sugar, but the difficulty of admitting
this supposition will vanish when we consider, that double that number of
families are employed every year, in making cider, the trouble, risks and
expenses of which are all much greater than those of making maple-sugar.

But the profit of the maple tree is not confined to its sugar. It affords a
most agreeable molasses, and an excellent vinegar. The sap which is suitable
for these purposes is obtained after the sap which affords the sugar has ceased
to flow, so that the manufactories of these different products of the maple
tree, by succeeding, do not interfere with each other. The molasses may be made
to compose the basis of a pleasant summer beer. The sap of the maple is
moreover capable of affording a spirit, but we hope this precious juice will
never be prostitued by our citizens to this ignoble purpose. Should the use of
sugar in diet become more general in our country, it may tend to lessen the
inclinition or supposed necessity for spirits, for I have observed a relish for
sugar in diet to be seldom accompanied by a love for strong drink. It is the
sugar which is mixed with tea which makes it so generally disagreeable to
drunkards. But a diet, consisting of a plentiful mixture of sugar has other
advantages to recommend it, which I shall briefly enumerate.

1. Sugar affords the greatest quantity of nourishment in a given quantity of
matter of any substance in nature; of course it may be preserved in less room
in our houses, and may be consumed in less time, than more bulky and less
nourishing aliment. It has this peculiar advantage over most kinds of aliment,
that it is not liable to have its nutritious qualities affected by time or the
weather, hence it is preferred by the Indians in their excursions from home.
They mix a certain quantity of Maple sugar, with an equal quantity of Indian
corn, dried and powdered, in its milky state. This mixture is packed in little
baskets, which are frequently wetted in traveling, without injuring the sugar.
A few spoons full of it mixed with half a pint of spring water, afford them a
pleasant and strengthening meal. From the degrees of strength and nourishment,
which are conveyed into animal bodies by a small bulk of sugar, I conceive it
might be given to horses with great advantage, when they are used in
circumstances which make it difficult or expensive to support them, with more
bulky or weighty aliment. A pound of sugar with grass or hay, I have been told,
has supported the strength and spirits of an horse, during a whole day's labor
in one of the West India Islands. A larger quantity given alone, has fattened
horses and cattle during the war before last in Hispaniola, for a period of
several months, in which the exportation of sugar, and the importation of
grain, were prevented by the want of ships.

2. The plentiful use of sugar in diet, is one of the best preventives that has
ever been discovered of the diseases which are produced by worms. The Author of
Nature seems to have implanted a love for this aliment in all children, as if
it were on purpose to defend them from those diseases. I know a gentleman in
Philadelphia, who early adopted this opinion, and who by indulging a large
family of children, in the use of sugar, has preserved them all from the
diseases usually occasioned by worms.

3. Sir John Pringle has remarked, that the plague has never been known in any
country where sugar composes a material part of the diet of the inhabitants. I
think it probable, that the frequency of malignant fevers of all kinds has been
lessened by this diet, and that its more general use would defend that class of
people, who are most subject to malignant fevers, from being so often affected
by them.

4. In the numerous and frequent disorders of the breast, which occur in all
countries, where the body is exposed to a variable temperature of weather,
sugar affords the basis of many agreeable remedies. It is useful in weaknesses,
and acrid defluxions upon other parts of the body. Many facts might be adduced
in favor of this assertion. I shall mention only one, which from the venerable
name of the person, whose case furnished it, cannot fail of commanding
attention and credit. Upon my enquiring of Dr. Franklin, at the request of a
friend, about a year before he died, whether he had found any relief from the
pain of the stone, from the Blackberry Jam, of which he took large quantities,
he told me that he had, but that he believed the medicinal part of the jam,
resided wholly in the sugar, and as a reason for thinking so, he added, that he
often found the same relief, by taking about half a pint of a syrup, prepared
by boiling a little brown sugar in water, just before he went to bed, that he
did from a dose of opium. It has been supposed by some of the early physicians
of our country, that the sugar obtained from the maple tree, is more medicinal,
that that obtained from the West India sugar cane, but this opinion I believe
is without foundation. It is preferable in its qualities to the West India
sugar only from its superior cleanliness.

Cases may occur in which sugar may be required in medicine, or in diet, by
persons who refuse to be benefited, even indirectly by the labor of slaves. In
such cases, the innocent maple sugar will always be preferred Dr. Knowles, a
physician of worthy character in London, had occasion to recommend a diet to a
patient, of which sugar composed a material part. His patient refused to submit
to his prescription, and give as a reason for it, that he had witnessed so much
of the expression and exactly which were exercises upon the (...), who (...)
sugar, that he had made a vow never to taste the reduct of their misery as long
as he lived.


It has been said, that sugar injures the teeth, but this opinion now has so
few advocates, that it does not deserve a serious refutation.

To transmit to future generations, all the advantages which have been
enumerated from the maple tree, it will be necessary to protect it by law, or
by a bounty upon the maple sugar, from being destroyed by the settlers in the
maple country, or to transplant it from the woods, and cultivate it in the old
and improved parts of the United States. An orchard consisting of 200 trees,
planted upon a common farm would yield more than the same number of apple
trees, at a distance from a market town. A full grown tree in the woods yields
five pounds of sugar a year. If a greater exposure of a tree to the action of
the sun, has the same effects upon the maple, that it has upon other trees, a
larger quantity of sugar might reasonably be expected from each tree planted in
an orchard. Allowing it to be only seven pounds, then 200 trees will yield 1400
pounds of sugar, and deducting 200 from the quantity, for the consumption of
the family, there will remain for sale 1200 pounds which at 6-90 of a dollar
per pound will yield an annual profit to the farmer of 80 dollars. But if it
should be found that the shade of the maple does not check the growth of grain
any more than it does of grass, double or treble that number of maple trees may
be planted on every farm, and a profit proportioned to the above calculation be
derived from them. Should this mode of transplanting the means of obtaining
sugar be successful, it Will not be a new one. The sugar cane of the
West Indies, was brought originally from the East Indies, by the Portuguese,
and cultivated at Madeira, from whence it was transplanted directly or
indirectly, to all the sugar Islands of the West Indies.

It were to be wished, that the settlers upon the sugar maple lands, would
spare the sugar tree in clearing their lands, On a farm of 200 acres of land,
according to our former calculation, there are usually 6,000 maple trees. If
only 2,000 of those original and ancient inhabitants of the woods, were
suffered to remain, and each tree were to afford only five pounds of sugar, the
annual profit of such a farm in sugar alone, at the price formerly mentioned,
would amount to 666 dollars, 150 dollars of which would probably more than
defray all the expenses of making it, and allow a plentiful deduction for
family use.

According to the usual annual profit of a sugar maple tree, each tree is worth
to a farmer, two dollars and 2-3 of a dollar; exclusive therefore of the value
of his farm, the 2,000 sugar maple trees alone confer a value upon it of 5,330
dollars and 33-90 of a dollar.

It is said, that the sugar trees when deprived of the shelter and support they
derive from other forest trees, are liable to be blown down, occasioned by
their growing in a rich, and of course a loose soil. To obviate this, it will
only be necessary to cut off some of their branches, so as to alter its center
of gravity, and to allow the high winds to have an easy passage through them.
Orchards of sugar maple trees, which grow with an original exposure of all
their parts to the action of the sun, will not be liable to this inconvenience.

In contemplating the present opening prospects in human affairs, I am led to
expect that a material share of the happiness, which Heaven seems to have
prepared for a part of mankind, will be derived from the manufactory and
general use of maple sugar, for the benefits which I flatter myself are to
result from it, will not be confined to our own country. They will, I hope,
extend themselves to the interests of humanity in the West Indies. With this
view of the subject of this letter, I cannot help contemplating a sugar maple
tree with a species of affection and even veneration, for I have persuaded
myself, to behold in it the happy means of rendering the commerce and slavery
of our African brethren, in the sugar Islands as unnecessary, as it has always
been inhuman and unjust.

From, dear Sir, your sincere friend, BENJAMIN RUSH.
July 10th 1791.
ALL ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF EDWARD DRINKER, WHO DIED ON THE 17TH OF
NOVEMBER, 1782, IN THE 103 YEAR OF HIS AGE.
EDWARD DRINKER was born on the 24th of December, 1680, in a small cabin, near
the present corner of Walnut and Second-streets, in the city of Philadelphia.
His parents came from a place called Beverly, in the state Massachusetts. The
banks of the Delaware, on which the city of Philadelphia now stands, were
inhabited, at the time of his birth, by Indians, and a few Swedes and
Hollanders. He often talked to his companions of picking whortle berries and
catching rabbits, on spots now the most improved and populous in the city. He
recollected the second time William Penn came to Pennsylvania, and used to
point to the place where the cabin stood, in which he, and his friends, that
accompanied him, were accommodated upon their arrival. At twelve years of age,
he went to Boston, where he served his apprenticeship to a cabinet maker. In
the year 1745, he returned to Philadelphia, with his family, where he lived
until the time of his death. He was four times married, and had eighteen
children, all of whom were by his first wife. At one time of his life, he sat
down, at his own table, with fourteen children. Not long before his death he
heard of the birth of a grandchild, to one of his grandchildren, the fifth in
succession to himself.

He retained all his faculties till the last year of his life. Even his memory,
so early and so generally diminished by age was but little impaired. He not
only remembered the incidents of his childhood and youth It is remarkable that
the incidents of childhood and youth are seldom remembered or called forth
until old age. I have sometimes been led, from this and other circumstances, to
suspect that nothing is ever lost that is lodged in the memory, however it may
be buried for a time by a variety of causes. How often do we find the
transactions of early life, which we had reason to suppose were lost from the
mind for ever, revived in our memories by certain accidental sights or sounds,
particularly by certain notes or airs in musics. I have known a young man speak
French fluently when drunk, that could not put two sentences of that language
together, when sober. He had been taught it perfectly, when a boy, but had
forgotten it from difuse. A French countess was nursed by a Welsh woman, from
whom she learned to speak her language, which she soon forgot, after she had
acquired the French, which was her mother tongue. In the delirium of a fever,
many years afterward, she was heard to matter words which none of her family
or attendants understood. An old Welsh woman came to see her, who soon
perceived that the sounds which were so unintelligible to the family, were the
Welsh language. When she recovered, she could not recollect a single word of
the language, she had spoken in her sickness. I can conceive great advantages
may be derived from this retentive power in our memories, in the advancement of
the mind toward perfection in knowledge (so essential to its happiness) in a
future world.
, but the events of latter years; and so faithful was his memory to him, that
his son has informed me he never heard him tell the same story twice, but to
different persons, and in different companies. His eyesight failed him, many
years before his death, but his hearing was uniformly perfect and unimpaired.
His appetite was good till within a few days before his death. He generally ate
a hearty breakfast of a pint of tea or coffee, as soon as he got out of his
bed, with bread and butter in proportion. He ate likewise at eleven o'clock,
and never failed to eat plentifully at dinner of the grossest solid food. He
drank tea, in the evening, but never ate any supper: he had lost all his teeth
thirty years before his death, which was occasioned, his son says, by drawing
excessive hot smoke of tobacco into his mouth: but the want of suitable
mastication of his food, did not prevent its speedy digestion, nor impair his
health. Whether the gums, hardened by age, supplied the place of his teeth in a
certain degree, or whether the juices of the mouth and stomach became so much
more acrid by time, as to perform the office of dissolving the food more
speedily and more perfectly, I know not, but I have often observed, that old
people are most disposed to excessive eating, and that they suffer fewest
inconveniences from it. He was inquisitive after news in the last years of his
life. His education did not lead him to increase the stock of his ideas any
other way. But it is a fact well worth attending to, that old age, instead of
diminishing, always increases the desire of knowledge. It must afford some
consolation to those who expect to be old, to discover, that the infirmities to
which the decays of nature expose the human body, are rendered more tolerable
by the enjoyments that are to be derived from the appetite for sensual and
intellectual food.

He was remarkably sober and temperate. Neither hard labor, nor company, nor
the usual afflictions of human life, nor the wastes of nature, ever led him to
an improper or excessive use of strong drink. For the last twenty-five years of
his life, he drank twice every day of toddy, made with two table spoonfuls of
spirit, in half a pint of water. His son, a man of fifty-nine years of age,
told me that he had never seen him intoxicated. The time and manner in which he
used spirituous liquors, I believe, contributed to lighten the weight of his
years, and probably to prolong his life. Give wine to him that is of a heavy
heart, and strong drink to him that is ready to perish with age, as well as
with sickness. Let him drink and forget his sorrow, and remember his misery no
more.

He enjoyed an uncommon share of health, insomuch that in the course of his
long life he never was confined more than three days to his bed. He often
declared that he had no idea of that most distressing pain called the head
ache. His sleep was interrupted a little in the last years of his life with a
defluxion on his breast, which produced what is commonly called the old man's
cough.

The character of this aged citizen was not summed up in his negative quality
of temperance: he was a man of the most amiable temper: old age had not curdled
his blood; he was uniformly cheerful and kind to every body; his religious
principles were as steady as his morals were pure. He attended public worship
about thirty years in the Rev. Dr. Sproat's church, and died in a full
assurance of a happy immortality. The life of this man is marked with several
circumstances, which perhaps have seldom occured in the life of an individual
events. He saw and heard more of those events which are measured by time, than
have ever been seen or heard by any mane since the age of the patriarchs; he
saw the same spot of earth, which at one period of his life, was covered with
wood and bushes, and the receptacle of beasts and birds of prey, afterward
become the seat of a city not only the first in wealth and arts in the new, but
rivalling in both, many of the first cities in the old world. He saw regular
streets where he once pursued a hare: he saw churches rising upon morasses,
where he had often heard the croaking of frogs; he saw wharfs and warehouses,
where he had often seen Indian savages draw fish from the river for their daily
subsistence; and he saw ships of every size and use in those streams, where he
had often seen nothing but Indian canoes; he saw a stately edifice filled with
legislators, astonishing the world with their wisdom and virtue, on the same
spot, probably, where he had seen an Indian council fire; he saw the first
treaty ratified between the newly confederated powers of America and the
ancient monarchy of France, with all the formalities of parchment and seals, on
the same spot, probably, where he once saw William Penn ratify his first and
last treaty with the Indians, without the formality of pen, ink or paper; he
saw all the intermediate stages through which a people pass, from the most
simple to the highest degrees of civilization. He saw the beginning and end of
the empire of Great Britain, in Pennsylvania. He had been the subject of seven
successive crowned heads, and afterward became a willing citizen of a
republic; for he embraced the liberties and independence of America in his
withered arms, and triumphed in the last years of his life in the salvation of
his country.

REMARKABLE CIRCUMSTANCES IN THE CONSTITUTION AND LIFE OF ANN WOODS, AN OLD
WOMAN OF 96 YEARS OF AGE.
IN the summer of the year 1788, while I was engaged in collecting the facts
upon the subject of old age, which I have since published, Medical Inquiries
and Observations. vol. 2.
a poor woman came to my house to beg for cold victuals. Perceiving by her
countenance, and the stoop in her walk, that she was very old, I requested her
to sit down by me, while I recorded the following information, which I received
from her, and which was confirmed to me a few days afterward, by one of her
daughters with whom she lived. Her name was Ann Woods. Her age at that time was
96. She was born in Herefordshire, in England, and came to this city when she
was but ten years old, where she had lived ever since. She had been twice
married. By her first husband Wm. Dickson, she had nine children, four of whom
were then living. By her second husband Joseph Woods, whom she married after
she was sixty years old, she had one child, born within ten months after her
marriage. There were intervals of two and nearly three years between each of
her children. Three died soon after weaning them at the usual age in which
children are taken from the breast. This led her to suckle her other children
during the whole time of her pregnancy, and in several instances, she suckled
two of them, born in succession to each other, at the same time. One of her
children by her first husband, sucked until it was five years old. Her menses
appeared between her nineteenth and twentieth years and continued without any
intermission, except during her pregnancy and eleven months after the birth of
each of her children, until she was eighty years of age. At the time I saw her,
she heard tolerably well, but her sight was lost in one eye, and was weak in
the other. She lost all her teeth when she was between fifty and sixty years of
age. Her hair became gray when she was between forty and fifty. Her sleep was
not sound, owing to her having been afflicted with the Rheumatism, a disease
which was brought on her by the alternate heat and cold to winch she had
exposed herself, by following the business of a washer woman for many years.
She had had several attacks of the intermitting fever, and of the Pleurisy in
the course of her life, and was much afflicted with the Headache after her
menses ceased. She had been frequently bled while afflicted with the above
diseases. Her diet was simple, consisting chiefly of weak tea, milk, cheese,
butter and vegetables. Meat of all kinds, except veal, disagreed with her
stomach. She found great benefit from frequently changing her aliment. Her
drinks were water, cider and water, molasses and vinegar in water. She hid
never used spirits. Her memory was but little impaired. She was cheerful and
thankful that her condition in life was happier than hundreds of other old
people.

From the history of this old woman's constitution and manner of life, the
following observations will naturally occur to the reader.

1. That there is a great latitude in the time in which the menses cease. It is
more common for them in their excentricities, to disappear at the usual time,
and to return in extreme old age. In the year 1795, I saw a case of this kind
in a woman of seventy years of age in the Pennsylvania hospital.

2. There is a great latitude in the time in which women bear children. Many
children are born between fifty and sixty, but very few I believe beyond sixty.

3. It appears from the history that has been given, that acute and chronic
diseases if opposed by temperance and suitable remedies, do not necessarily
shorten the duration of human life.

4. That childbearing, and suckling children, do not materially affect health,
or longevity, where their effects are opposed by temperance and moderate labor.

5. That the evils of life are seldom so numerous, as not to leave room for
thankfulness for an exemption from a great deal of misery. This poor woman did
not complain of her weakness, pains or poverty. On the contrary, she appeared
thankful under all the afflictions of her life. While the indolent are
commanded by the wise man to go to the ant to learn industry, those persons who
abound with all the external means of happiness, and at the same time complain
of the moral government of our world, may be invited to sit down by the side of
Ann Woods, and learn from the example of her gratitude to heaven, for a single
drop of divine goodness, to render unceasing thanks for the ocean of blessings
they derive from the same source.

BIOGRAPHICAL ANECDOTES OF BENJAMAIN LAY.
THERE was a time when the name of this celebrated Christian Philosopher, was
familiar to every man, woman and to nearly every child, in Pennsylvania. -- His
size, which was not much above four feet, his dress, which was always the same,
consisting of light-coloured plain clothes, a white hat, and half-boots; -- his
milk white beard, which hung upon his breast; and, above all, his peculiar
principles and conduct, rendered him to many, an object of admiration, and to
all, the subject of conversation. --

He was born in England, and spent the early part of his life at sea. His first
settlement was in Barbados, as a merchant, where he was soon convinced of the
iniquity of the slave trade. He bore an open testimony against it, in all
companies, by which means he rendered himself so unpopular, that he left the
island in disgust, and settled in the then province of Pennsylvania. He fixed
his home at Abington, ten miles from Philadelphia, from whence he made frequent
excursions to the city, and to different parts of the country. --

At the time of his arrival in Pennsylvania, he found many of his brethren, the
people called Quakers, had fallen so far from their original principles, as to
keep negro slaves. He remonstrated with them, both publicly and privately,
against the practice; but, frequently with so much indiscreet zeal, as to give
great offense. He often disturbed their public meetings, by interrupting or
opposing their preachers, for which he was once carried out of a meeting house,
by two or three friends. -- Upon this occasion he submitted with patience to
what he considered a species of persecution. -- He lay down at the door of the
meeting house, in a shower of rain, till divine worship was ended; nor could he
be prevailed upon to rise, till the whole congregation had stepped over him in
their way to their respective homes. --

To show his indignation against the practice of slave-keeping, he once carried
a bladder filled with blood into a meeting; and, in the presence of the whole
congregation, thrust a sword, which he had concealed under his coat, into the
bladder, exclaiming, at the same time, Thus shall God shed the blood of those
persons who enslave their fellow creatures. The terror of this extravagant and
unexpected act, produced swoonings in several of the women of the congregation.
--

He once went into the house of a friend in Philadelphia, and found him seated
at breakfast, with his family around him. Being asked by him to sit down and
breakfast with them, he said, Do thou keep slaves in thy house? Upon being
answered in the affirmative, he said, Then I will not partake with thee, of the
fruits of thy unrighteousness.

He took great pains to convince a farmer and his wife, in Chester county, of
the iniquity of keeping negro slaves, but to no purpose. They not only kept
their slaves, but defended the practice. One day he went into their house, and
after a short discourse with them upon the wickedness, and particularly the
inhumanity of separating children from their parents, which was involved in the
slave trade, he seized the only child of the family, (a little girl about th^^^
years old) and pretended to run away with her -- The child cried bitterly, "I
will be good, -- I will be good," and the parents showed signs of being
alarmed. Upon observing this scene, Mr. Lay said, very emphatically, -- You
see, and feel now a little of the distress you occasion every day, by the
inhuman practice of slave-keeping.

This singular philosopher did not limit his pious testimony against vice, to
slave-keeping alone. He was opposed to every species of extravagance. Upon the
introduction of tea, as an article of diet, into Pennsylvania, his wife bought
a small quantity of it, with a set of cups and saucers, and brought them home
with her. Mr. Lay took them from her, brought them back again to the city, and
from the balcony of the courthouse scattered the tea, and broke the cups and
saucers, in the presence of many hundred spectators, delivering, at the same
time, a striking lecture upon the folly of preferring that foreign herb, with
its expensive appurtenances, to the simple and wholesome diet of our country.

He possessed a good deal of wit, and was quick at rapartee. A citizen of
Philadelphia, who knew his peculiarities, once met him in a crowd, at a
funeral, in Germantown. Being desirous of entering into a conversation with him
that should divert the company, the citizen accosted him, with the most
respectful ceremony, and declared himself to be "his most humble servant." "Art
thou my servant." said Mr. Lay, -- "Yes -- I am" said the citizen. "Then, said
Mr. Lay, (holding up his foot toward him,) clean this shoe". -- This
unexpected reply turned the laugh upon the citizen. Being desirous of
recovering himself in the opinion of the company, he asked him to instruct him
in the way to heaven. Do thou indeed wish to be taught, said Mr. Lay. "I do,"
said the citizen. "Then," said Mr. Lay, Do justice -- love mercy, and walk
humbly with thy God.

He wrote a small treatise upon negro-slavery, which he brought to Dr. Franklin
to be printed. Upon looking over it, the Doctor told him that it was not paged,
and that there appeared to be no order or arrangement in it. It is no matter
said Mr. Lay -- print any part thou please first. -- This book contained many
pious sentiments, and strong expressions against negro-slavery; but even the
address and skill of Dr. Franklin were not sufficient to connect its different
parts together, so as to render it an agreeable or useful work. This book is in
the library of the city of Philadelphia.

Mr. Lay was extremely attentive to young people. He took great pleasure in
visiting schools, where he often preached to the youth. He frequently carried a
basket of religious books with him, and distributed them as prizes, among the
scholars.

He was fond of reading. In the print of him, which is to be seen in many
houses in Philadelphia, he is represented with "Tryon on happiness" in his
hand, a book which he valued very much, and which he frequently carried with
him, in his excursions from home.

He was kind and charitable to the poor, but had no compassion for beggars. He
used to say, there was no man or woman, who was able to go abroad to beg, that
was not able to earn four pence a day, and this sum, he said, was enough to
keep any person above want, or dependence, in this country.

He was a severe enemy to idleness, insomuch that when he could not employ
himself out of doors, or when he was tired of reading, he used to spend his
time in spinning. His common sitting room was hung with skains of thread, spun
entirely by himself. All his clothes were of his own manufactory.

He was extremely temperate in his diet, living chiefly upon vegetables. --
Turnips boiled, and afterward roasted, were his favorite dinner. His drink
was pure water. From a desire of imitating our Savior, in every thing, he once
attempted to fast for forty days. This experiment, it is said, had nearly cost
him his life. He was obliged to desist from it, long before the forty days were
expired; but the fasting, it was said, so much debilitated his body, as to
accelerate his death. He lived above eighty years, and died in his own house in
Abington, about thirty years ago.

In reviewing the history of this extraordinary man, we cannot help absolving
him of his weaknesses, when we contemplate his many active virtues. He was the
pioneer of that war, which has since been carried on, so successfully, against
the commerce and slavery of the negroes. -- Perhaps the turbulence and severity
of his temper were necessary to rouse the torpor of the human mind, at the
period in which he lived, to this interesting subject. The meekness and
gentleness of Anthony Benezet, who completed what Mr. Lay began, would probably
have been as insufficient for the work performed by Mr. Lay, as the humble
piety of De Renty, or of Thomas A Kempis, would have been to have accomplished
the works of the zealous Luther, or the intrepid Knox in the sixteenth century.

The success of Mr. Lay, in sowing the seeds of a principle which bids fair to
produce a revolution in morals -- commerce -- and government, in the new and in
the old world, should teach the benefactors of mankind not to despair, if they
do not see the fruits of their benevolent propositions, or undertakings, during
their lives. -- No one feed of truth or virtue ever perished. -- Wherever it
may be sowed, or even scattered, it will preserve and carry with it the
principle of life. -- Some of these seeds produce their fruits in a short time,
but the most valuable of them, like the venerable oak -- are centuries in
growing; but they are unlike the pride of the forests, as well as all other
vegetable productions, in being incapable of a decay.

They exist and bloom for ever.

Feburary 10th. 1790.
BIOGRAPHICAL ANECDOTES OF ANTHONY BENEZET.
THIS excellent man was placed by his friends in early life in a counting
house, but finding commerce opened temptations to a worldly spirit, he left his
master, and bound himself as an apprentice to a cooper. Finding this business
too laborious for his constitution, he declined it, and devoted himself to
school-keeping; in which useful employment, he continued during the greatest
part of his life.

He possessed uncommon activity and industry in every thing he undertook. He
did every thing as if the words of his Savior were perpetually sounding in his
ears, wist ye not, that I must be about my Father's business?

He used to say, "the highest act of charity in the world was to bear with the
unreasonableness of mankind."

He generally wore plush clothes, and gave as a reason for it, that after he
had worn them for two or three years, they made comfortable and decent garments
for the poor.

He once informed a young friend, that his memory began to fail him; "but
this," said he, gives me one great advantage over thee -- for thou can find
entertainment in reading a good book only once -- but I enjoy that pleasure as
often as I read it; for it is always new to me.

He published several valuable tracts in favor of the emancipation of the
blacks, and of the civilizing and christianizing the Indians. He also published
a pamphlet against the use of ardent spirits. All these publications were
circulated with great industry, and at his own expense, throughout every part
of the United States.

He wrote letters to the queen of Great Britain, and to the queen of Portugal
to use their influence with their respective courts to abolish the African
trade. He accompanied his letter to the queen of Great Britain with a present
of his works. The queen received them with great politeness, and said after
reading them "that the author appeared to be a very good man."

He also wrote a letter to the king of Prussia, in which he endeavored to
convince him of the unlawfulness of war.

During the time the British army was in possession of the city of
Philadelphia, he was indefatigable in his endeavors to render the situation of
the persons who suffered from captivity as easy as possible. He knew no fear in
the presence of his fellow men, however dignified they were by titles or
station, and such were the propriety and gentleness of his manners in his
intercourse with the gentlemen who commanded the British and German troops,
that when he could not obtain the objects of his requests, he never failed to
secure their civilities, and frequently their esteem.

So great was his sympathy with every thing that was capable of feeling pain,
that he resolved toward the close of his life, to eat no animal food. Upon
coming into his brother's house one day, when his family was dining upon
poultry, he was asked by his brother's wife, to sit down and dine with them.
"What! (said he) would you have me eat my neighbors?

This misapplication of a moral feeling, was supposed to have brought on such a
debility in his stomach and bowels, as produced a disease in those parts of
which he finally died.

Few men, since the days of the apostles, ever lived a more disinterested life.
And yet, upon his death bed, he said, he wished to live a little longer, that
"he might bring down SELF."

The last time he ever walked across his room, was to take from his desk six
dollars, which he gave to a poor widow whom he had long assisted to maintain.

He bequeathed after the death of his widow, a house and lot in which consisted
his whole estate, to the support of a school for the education of negro
children, which he had founded and taught for several years before his death.

He died in May 1784, in the 71st. year of his age.

His funeral was attended by persons of all religious denominations, and by
many hundred black people.

Colonel J -- n, who had served in the American army, during the late war, in
returning from the funeral, pronounced an eulogium upon him. It consisted only
of the following words: "I would rather," said he, "be Anthony Benezet in that
coffin, than George Washington with all his fame."

July 15, 1788.
PARADISE OF NEGRO-SLAVES. -- A DREAM.
SOON after reading Mr. Clarkson's ingenious and pathetic essay on the slavery
and commerce of the human species, the subject made so deep an impression upon
my mind, that it followed me in my sleep, and produced a dream of so
extraordinary a nature, that I have yielded to the importunities of some of my
friends, by communicating it to the public. I thought I was conducted to a
country, which in point of cultivation and scenery, far surpassed any thing I
had ever heard, or read of in my life. This country, I found, was inhabited
only by negroes. They appeared cheerful and happy. Upon my approaching a
beautiful grove, where a number of them were assembled for religious purposes,
I perceived at once a pause in their exercises, and an appearance of general
perturbation. They fixed their eyes upon me -- while one of them, a venerable
looking man, came forward, and in the name of the whole assembly, addressed me
in the following language.

Excuse the panic which you have spread through this peaceful and happy
company: we perceive that you are a white man. -- That color which is the
emblem of innocence in every other creature of God, is to us a sign of guilt in
man. The persons whom you see here, were once dragged by the men of your color
from their native country, and consigned by them to labor -- punishment -- and
death. -- We are here collected together, and enjoy an ample compensation in
our present employments for all the miseries we endured on earth. We know that
we are secured by the Being whom we worship, from injury and oppression. Our
appearance of terror, therefore, was entirely the sudden effect of habits which
have not yet been eradicated from our minds.

Your apprehensions of danger from the sight of a white man, said I, are
natural. But in me -- you behold a friend. I have been your advocate -- and. --
Here, he interrupted me, and said, Is not your name --? I answered in the
affirmative. Upon this he ran up and embraced me in his arms, and afterward
conducted me into the midst of the assembly, where, after being introduced to
the principal characters, I was seated upon a bank of moss; and the following
account was delivered to me by the venerable person who first accosted me.

The place we now occupy, is called the paradise of negro slaves. It is
destined to be our place of residence 'till the general judgment; after which
time, we expect to be admitted into higher and more perfect degrees of
happiness. Here we derive great pleasure from contemplating the infinite
goodness of God, in allotting to us our full proportion of misery on earth; by
which means we have escaped the punishments, to which the free and happy part
of mankind too often expose themselves after death. Here we have learned to
thank God, for all the afflictions our taskmasters heaped on us; inasmuch, as
they were the means of our present happiness. Pain and distress are the
unavoidable portions of all mankind. They are the only possible avenues that
can conduct them to peace and felicity. Happy are they, who partake of their
proportion of both upon the earth. Here he ended. --

After a silence of a few minutes, a young man, who bore on his head the mark
of a wound, came up to me, and asked If I knew any thing of Mr. --, of the
Island of -- I told him "I did not." -- "Mr. --," said he, was my master. One
day, I mistook his orders, and saddled his mare instead of his horse, which
provoked him so much, that he took up an axe which laid in his yard, and with a
stroke on my head, dismissed me from life.

I long to hear, whether he has repented of this unkind action. Do, sir, write
to him, and tell him, his sin is not too great to be forgiven, tell him, his
once miserable slave, Scipio, is not angry at him -- he longs to bear his
prayers to the offended majesty of heaven -- and -- when he dies -- Scipio will
apply to be one of the convoy, that shall conduct his spirit to the regions of
bliss appointed for those who repent of their iniquities.

Before I could reply to this speech, an old man came and sat down by my side.
His wool was white as snow. With a low, but gentle voice, he thus addressed me.

Sir, I was the slave of Mr. --, in the island of -- I served him faithfully
upwards of sixty years. No rising sun ever caught me in my cabin -- no setting
sun ever saw me out of the sugar field, except on sundays and holydays. My
whole subsistence never cost my master more than forty shillings a year.
Herrings and roots were my only food. One day, in the eightieth year of my age,
the overseer saw me stop to rest myself against the side of a tree, where I was
at work. He came up to me, and beat me, 'till he could endure the fatigue and
heat occasioned by the blows he gave me, no longer. Nor was this all -- he
complained of me to my master, who instantly set me up at public vendue, and
sold me for two guineas to a tavern-keeper, in a distant parish. The distress I
felt, in leaving my children, and grand children (28 of whom I left on my old
master's plantation) soon put an end to my existence, and landed me upon these
happy shores. I have now no wish to gratify but one -- and that is to be
permitted to visit my old master's family. I long to tell my master, that his
wealth cannot make him happy. -- That the sufferings of a single hour in the
world of misery, for which he is preparing himself, will overbalance all the
pleasures he ever enjoyed in his life -- and that for every act of unnecessary
severity he inflicts upon his slaves, he shall suffer tenfold in the world to
come.

He had hardly finished his tale, when a decent looking woman came forward, and
addressed me in the following language. -- Sir,

I was once the slave of Mr. --, in the state of --. From the healthiness of my
constitution, I was called upon to suckle my Master's eldest son. To enable me
to perform this office more effectually, my own child was taken from my breast,
and soon afterward died. My affections in the first emotions of my grief,
fastened themselves upon my infant master. He thrived under my care and grew up
a handsome young man. Upon the death of his father, I became his property. --
Soon after this event, he lost 100l. at cards. To raise this money I was sold
to a planter in a neighboring state. I can never forget the anguish, with
which my aged father and mother followed me to the end of the lane, when I left
my master's house, and hung upon me, when they bid me farewell.

My new master obliged me to work in the field; the consequence of which was, I
caught a fever which in a few weeks ended my life. Say, my friend, is my first
young master still alive? -- If he is -- go to him, and tell him, his unkind
behavior to me is upon record against him. The gentle spirits in heaven, whose
happiness consists in expressions of gratitude and love, will have no
fellowship with him. -- His soul must be melted with pity, or he can never
escape the punishment which awaits the hard-hearted, equally with the
impenitent, in the regions of misery.

As soon as she had finished her story, a middle aged woman approached me, and
after a low and respectful curtsey, thus addressed me.

Sir I was born and educated in a christian family in one of the southern
states of America. In the thirty-third year of my age, I applied to my master
to purchase my freedom. Instead of granting my request, he conveyed me by force
on board of a vessel and sold me to a planter in the island of Hispaniola. Here
it pleased God. -- Upon pronouncing these words, she paused, and a general
silence ensued. -- All at once, the eyes of the whole assembly were turned from
me, and directed toward a little white man who advanced toward them, on the
opposite side of the grove, in which we were seated. His face was grave,
placid, and full of benignity. In one hand he carried a subscription paper and
a petition -- in the other, he carried a small pamphlet, on the unlawfulness of
the African slave trade, and a letter directed to the King of Prussia, upon the
unlawfulness of war. While I was employed in contemplating this venerarable
figure -- suddenly I beheld the whole assembly running to meet him -- the air
resounded with the clapping of hands -- and I awoke from my dream, by the noise
of a general acclamation of -- ANTHONY BENEZET!

AN EULOGIUM UPON DR. WILLIAM CULLEN, PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC IN
THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH; DELIVERED BEFORE THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS OF
PHILADELPHIA, ON THE 9TH OF JULY, AGREEABLY TO THEIR VOTE OF THE 4TH OF MAY,
1790, AND AFTERWARD PUBLISHED AT THEIR REQUEST.
Mr. President and Gentlemen,
BY your unanimous vote, to honor with an Eulogium, the character of the late
DR. WILLIAM CULLEN, Professor of medecin in the University of Edinburgh, you
have done equal homage to Science and Humanity. This illustrious Physician was
the Preceptor of many of us: -- He was moreover a distinguished citizen of the
republic of Medecin, and a benefactor to Mankind; and although, like the sun,
he shone in a distant hemisphere, yet many of the rays of his knowledge have
fallen upon this quarter of the globe. I rise, therefore, to mingle your
grateful praises of him, with the numerous offerings of public and private
respect which have been paid to his memory in his native country. Happy will be
the effects of such acts of distant sympathy, if they should serve to unite the
influence of science with that of Commerce, to lessen the prejudices of nations
against each other, and thereby to prepare the way for the operation of that
divine system of morals, whose prerogative alone it is, to teach mankind that
they are brethren, and to make the name of a fellow creature, in every region
of the world, a signal for brotherly affection.

In executing the task you have imposed upon me, I shall confine myself to such
parts of Dr. Cullen's character as came within the compass of my own knowledge,
during two years residence in Edinburgh. -- To his fellow citizens in Great
Britain, who were more intimately acquainted with him, we must resign the
history of his domestic character, as well as the detail of all those steps
which, in early life, led him to his unparalleled height of usefulness and fame.

Dr. CULLEN possessed a great and original genius. By genius, in the present
instance, I mean a power in the human mind of discovering the relation of
distant truths, by the shortest train of intermediate propositions. This
precious gift of Heaven, is composed of a vigorous imagination, quick
sensibility, a talent for extensive and accurate observation, a faithful
memory, and a sound judgment. These faculties were all united in an eminent
degree in the mind of Dr. Cullen. His imagination surveyed all nature at a
glance, and, like a camera obscura, seemed to produce in his mind a picture of
the whole visible creation. His sensibility was so exquisite, that the smallest
portions of truth acted upon it. By means of his talent for observation he
collected knowledge from every thing he heard, saw, or read, and from every
person with whom he conversed. His memory was the faithful repository of all
his ideas, and appeared to be alike accurate upon all subjects. Over each of
these faculties of his mind a sound judgment presided, by means of which he
discovered the relation of ideas to each other, and thereby produced those new
combinations which constitute principles in science. This process of the mind
has been called invention, and is totally different from a mere capacity of
acquiring learning, or collecting knowledge from the discoveries of others. It
elevates man to a distant resemblance of his Maker; for the discovery of truth,
is the perception of things as they appear to the Divine Mind.

IN contemplating the human faculties, thus exquisitely formed, and exactly
balanced, we feel the same kind of pleasure which arises from a view of a
magnificent palace, or an extensive and variegated prospect; but with this
difference, that the pleasure, in the first instance, is as much superior to
that which arises from contemplating the latter objects, as the mind of man is
superior, in its importance, to the most finished productions of nature or of
art.

DR. CULLEN possessed not only the genius that has been described, but an
uncommon share of learning, reading, and knowledge.

His learning was of a peculiar and useful kind -- He appeared to have
overstepped the slow and tedious forms of the schools, and, by the force of his
understanding, to have seized upon the great ends of learning, without the
assistance of many of those means which were contrived for the use of less
active minds. He read the ancient. Greek and Roman writers only for the sake of
the knowledge which they contained, with out wasting any of the efforts of his
genius in attempting to imitate their style. He was intimately acquainted with
modern languages, and through their means, with the improvements of medicine in
every country in Europe. Such was the facility with which he acquired a
language, and so great was his enterprise in his researches in medicine, that I
once heard him speak of learning the Arabic for the sake of reading Avicenna in
the original, as if it were a matter of as little difficulty to him, as it was
to compose a lecture, or to visit a patient.

DR. CULLEN's reading was extensive, but it was not confined wholly to
medicine. He read books upon all subjects; and he had a peculiar art of
extracting something from all of them which he made subservient to his
profession. He was well acquainted with ancient and modern history, and
delighted in the poets, among whom Shakespeare was his favorite. The history
of our globe, as unfolded by books of geography and travels, was so familiar to
him that strangers could not converse with him, without supposing that he had
not only traveled, but that he had lived every where. His memory had no
rubbish in it. Like a secretory organ, in the animal body, it it rejected every
thing in reading that could not be applied to some useful purpose. In this he
has given the world a most valuable lesson, for the difference between error
and useless truth is very small; and a man is no wiser for knowledge which he
cannot apply, than he is rich from possessing wealth, which he cannot spend.

DR. CULLEN's knowledge was minute in every branch of medicine. He was an
accurate anatomist, and an ingenious physiologist. He enlarged the boundaries,
and established the utility of Chemistry, and thereby prepared the way for the
discoveries and fame of his illustrious pupil Dr. Black. He stripped Materia
Medica, of most of the errors that had been accumulating in it for two thousand
years, and reduced it to a simple and practical science. He was intimately
acquainted with all the branches of natural history and philosophy. He had
studied every ancient and modern system of physic. He found the system of Dr.
Boerhave universally adopted when he accepted a chair in the University of
Edinburgh. This system was founded chiefly on the supposed presence of certain
acrid particles in the fluids, and in the departure of these, in point of
consistency, from a natural state. Dr. Cullen's first object was to expose the
errors of this pathology; and to teach his pupils to seek for the causes of
diseases in the solids. Nature is always coy. Ever since she was driven from
the heart, by the discovery of the circulation of the blood, she has concealed
herself in the brain and nerves. Here she has been pursued by Dr. Cullen; and
if he has not dragged her to public view, he has left us a clue which must in
time conduct us to her last recess in the human body. Many, however, of the
operations of nature in the nervous system have been explained by him; and no
candid man will ever explain the whole of them, without acknowledging that the
foundation of his successful inquiries was laid by the discoveries of Dr.
Cullen.

He was intimately acquainted with the histories and distinctions of the
diseases of all countries, ages, stations, occupations, and states of society.
While his great object was to explode useless remedies, he took pains to
increase the influence of diet, dress, air, exercise, and the actions of the
mind, in medicine. In a word he was a great practical physician; and he has
left behind him as many monuments of his success in curing diseases, as he has
of accuracy and ingenuity in describing their symptoms and explaining their
causes.

BUT his knowledge was not confined wholly to those sciences which are
intimately connected with medicine. His genius was universal, as to natural and
artificial subjects. He was minutely acquainted with the principles and
practices of all the liberal, mechanical, and chemical arts; and tradesmen were
often directed by him to new objects of observation and improvement in their
respective occupations. He delighted in the study of agriculture, and
contributed much to excite that taste for agricultural science, which has of
late years so much distinguished the men of genius and leisure in
North-Britain. I have been informed, that he yielded at last to that passion
for rural improvements, which is common to all men, and amused himself in the
evening of his life by cultivating a farm in the neighborhood of Edinburgh.
Happy would it be for the interests of agriculture, if physicians in all
countries, would imitate Dr. Cullen by an attachment to this noble science; for
their previous studies are of such a nature as frequently to enable them to
arrive at improvements in it without experiments, and to apply the experiments
of others, in the most extensive and profitable manner.

DR. CULLEN's publications were few in number compared with his discoveries.
They consist of his Elements of physiology, his Nosologia Methodica, his First
Lines of the Practice of Physic, an Essay upon the cold produced by
Evaporation, published in the second volume of the Physical and Literary Essays
of Edinburgh, a Letter to Lord Cathcart upon the method of recovering persons
supposed to be dead from drowning, and a system of the Materia Medica. These
are all the works which bear his name; but the fruits of his inquiries are to
be found in most of the medical publications that have appeared in
Great Britain within the last thirty years. Many of the theses, published in
Edinburgh during his life, were the vehicles of his opinions or practice in
medicine: and few of them contained an important or useful discovery, which was
not derived from hints thrown out in his lectures.

As a TEACHER of medicine, Dr. Cullen possessed many peculiar talents. He
mingled the most agreeable eloquence with the most profound disquisitions. He
appeared to lighten upon every subject upon which he spoke. His language was
simple, and his arrangement methodical, by which means he was always
intelligible. From the moment he ascended his chair, he commanded the most
respectful attention from his pupils, insomuch that I never saw one of them
discover a sign of impatience during the time of any of his lectures.

IN the investigation of truth, he sometimes ventured into the regions of
conjecture. His imagination was an hot-bed of hypotheses, which led him to
constant observation and experiment. These often proved the seeds of subsequent
discoveries. It was thus Sir Isaac Newton founded an empire in science; for
most of his discoveries were the result of preconceived hypotheses. In
delivering new opinions, Dr. Cullen preserved the strictest integrity. I have
known him more than once, refute the opnions which he had taught the preceding
year, even before the fallacy of them had been suspected by any of his pupils.
Such instances of candor often pass with the vulgar for instability; but they
are the truest characteristics of a great mind. To be unchangeable, supposes
perpetual error, or a perception of truth without the use of reason; but this
sublime act of intuition belongs only to the Deity.

There was no tincture of credulity in the mind of Dr. Cullen. He taught his
pupils the necessity of acquiring "the slow consenting academic doubt." I
mention these words of the poet with peculiar pleasure, as I find them in my
notes of one of his lectures, in which he has delivered rules for judging of
the truth of things related as facts; for he frequently remarked that there
were ten false facts (if the expression can be allowed) to one false opinion in
medicine. His Materia Medica abounds with proofs of the truth of this part of
his character. With how much caution does he admit the efficacy of medicines,
as related in books, or as suggested by his own experience. Who could have
expected to have found so much modesty in the writings of a physician in the
77th year of his age? But let it be remembered, that this physician was Dr.
Cullen; and that he always preferred utility to novelty, and loved truth, more
than fame.

He took great pains to deliver his pupils from the undue influence which
antiquity and great names are apt to have upon the human mind. He destroyed the
superstitious veneration which had been paid for many ages to the names of
Hippocrates, Galen, and other ancient authors, and inspired his pupils with a
just estimate of the writings of modern physicians. His constant aim was to
produce in their minds a change from a passive to an active state; and to force
upon them such habits of thinking and observation, as should enable them to
instruct themselves.

As he admitted no truth without examination, so he submitted to no custom in
propagating it that was not reasonable. He had a principal share in the merit
of delivering medicine from the fetters of the Latin, and introducing the
English language, as the vehicle of public instruction in the university of
Edinburgh. Much of the success of the revolution he effected in medicine, I
believe, may be ascribed to this circumstance. Perhaps the many improvements
which have lately been made in medicine in the British dominions, may likewise
be ascribed to the present fashionable custom of communicating medical
knowledge in the English language. By this means, our science has excited the
notice and inquiries of ingenious and observing men in all professions, and
thereby a kind of galaxy has been created in the hemisphere of medicine. By
assuming an English dress, it has moreover been prepared more easily to
associate with other sciences; from each of which it has received assistance
and support.

In his intercourse with his pupils Dr. Cullen was truly kind and affectionate.
Never have I known a man who possessed in a higher degree those qualities which
seize upon every affection of the heart. He knew the rare and happy arts, as
circumstances required, of being affable without being sociable; sociable
without being familiar; and familiar, without losing a particle of respect.
Such was the interest he took in the health, studies, and future establishment
of all his pupils, that each of them believed that he possessed a pre-eminence
in his friendship; while the equal diffusion of his kind offices proved that he
was the common friend and father of them all. Sometimes he would lay aside the
distance, without lessening the dignity of the professor, and mix with his
pupils at his table upon terms of the most endearing equality. Upon these
occasions his social affections seemed to have an influence upon his mind.
Science, sentiment, and convivial humor, appeared for hours together to strive
which should predominate in his conversation. I appeal to you, gentlemen, who
have shared in the pleasure which I have described, for the justice of the
picture which I have drawn of him at his hospitable table. You will recollect,
with me* how agreeably he accommodated himself to our different capacities and
tempers; how kindly he dissipated our youthful blushes, by inviting us to ask
him questions; and how much he taught us, by his inquiries, of the nature of
the soil, climate, products, and diseases of even our own country.

From the history that has been given of Dr. Cullen, we shall not be surprised
at the reputation which he gave to the university of Edinburgh, for upwards of
thirty years. The city of Edinburgh during his life became the very atmosphere
of medicine. But let me not here be unjust to the merits of his illustrious
colleagues. The names of Whytt, Rutherford, the Monroes, Black, the Gregory's,
Hope, and Home, will always be dear to the lovers of medical science. May every
healing plant bloom upon the graves of those of them who are departed! and may
those who have survived him, together with their new associate, the learned and
excellent Dr. Duncan, long continue to maintain the honor of that justly
celebrated school of medicine!

It remains now that I add a short account of Dr. Cullen's conduct as a
physician and a man.

In his attendance upon his patients, he made their health his first object,
and thereby confirmed a line between the mechanical and liberal professions;
for while wealth is pursued by the former, as the end of labor, it should be
left by the latter, to follow the more noble exertions of the mind. So gentle
and sympathizing was Dr. Cullen's manner in a sick room, that pain and distress
seemed to be suspended in his presence. Hope followed his footsteps, and death
appeared frequently to drop his commission in a combat with his skill. He was
compassionate and charitable to the poor; and from his pupils, who consulted
him in sickness, he constantly refused to receive any pecuniary satisfaction
for his services.

In his intercourse with the world he exhibited the manners of a well-bred
gentleman. He exercised upon all occasions the agreeable art, in which true
politeness is said to consist, of speaking with civility, and listening with
attention to every body. His conversation was at all times animated, agreeable,
and instructing. Few persons went into his company without learning something;
and even a common thought, by passing through his mind, received an impression,
which made it ever afterward worthy of being preserved.

He was a strict oeconomist of time. He seldom went out of his house in his
carriage, or a sedan chair, without a book in his hand; and he once told me,
that he frequently employed one of his sons to read to him after he went to
bed, that he might not lose that portion of time which passes between lying
down, and falling asleep.

He was remarkably punctual to all his professional engagements. He appeared to
consider time as a species of property, which no man had a right to take from
another without his consent.

It was by means of his economy and punctuality in the use of time, that he
accomplished so much in his profession. I have read of some men who have spent
more time in their closets, and of others who have done more business; but I
have never read, nor heard of a man, who mingled more study and business
together. He lived by rule, without subjecting himself to the slavery of forms.
He was always employed, but never in a hurry; and amidst the numerous and
complicated avocations of study and business, he appeared to enjoy the pleasure
of society, as if company-keeping and conversation were the only business of
his life.

I shall mention but one more trait in the character of Dr. Cullen, and that
is, that he was distinguished by no one singularity of behavior from other
men. It is true he stood alone; but this singularity was occasioned, not by his
quitting the society of his fellow-men by walking on their left, or right side,
but by his walking before them. Eccentricities in behavior are the offspring
of a lively fancy only, but order is inseparably connected with real genius.
The actions of the former may be compared to the crooked flash of distant
lightning, while the latter resembles in its movements the steady revolutions
of the heavenly bodies.

In reviewing the character which has been given of Dr. Cullen, I am forced to
make a short digression, while I do homage to the profession of physic by a
single remark. So great are the blessings which mankind derive from it, that if
every other argument failed to prove the administration of a providence in
human affairs, the profession of medicine alone would be sufficient for that
purpose. Who can think of the talents, virtues, and services of Dr. Cullen,
without believing that the Creator of the world delights in the happiness of
his creatures, and that his tender mercies are over all his works!

For the information of such of the members of our college as have not seen Dr.
Cullen, it may not be improper to add the following description of his person.
He was tall, slender, and had a stoop in his shoulders; his face was long; his
under lip protruded a little beyond the upper; his nose was large, and inclined
to a point downwards; his eye, which was of a blue color, was penetrating, but
soft; and over his whole face was diffused an air of mildness and thought,
which was strongly characteristic of the constant temper and operations of his
mind.

It pleased God to prolong his life to a good old age. He lived near 78 years.
He lived to demonstrate how much the duration of all the faculties of the mind
depends upon their constant exercise. He lived to teach his brethren by his
example, that the obligations to acquire and communicate knowledge, should
cease only with health and life; and lastly, he lived to reap the fruits of his
labors in the most extensive fame; for not only his pupils, and his works, had
conveyed his reputation; but canvass, paper, and clay, had borne even the image
of his person to every quarter of the globe.

The public papers, as well as private letters, inform us, that he survived his
usefulness but a few months. He resigned his professorship in the autumn of
1789, on account of bodily weakness, and died in the month of January of the
present year; a year fatal to the pride of man; for this year Franklin and
Howard, as well as Cullen, have mingled with the dust. During the interval
between his resignation and his death he received the most affectionate marks
of public and private respect. The city of Edinburgh voted him their thanks,
and presented him with a piece of plate. This instance of public gratitude
deserves our particular attention, as it is more common for cities to treat
their eminent literary characters with neglect during their lives, and
centuries afterward to contend for the honor of having given them birth. The
different medical societies of Edinburgh followed him to his chamber with
addresses full of gratitude and affection. In mentioning these facts, I am led
to contemplate the venerable subject of our praises in a situation truly solemn
and interesting. How pregnant with instruction is the deathbed of a physician,
who has spent a long life in extensive and successful practice! If the sorrows
we have relieved are the surest support in our own, how great must have been
the consolation which Dr. Cullen derived, in his last hours, from a review of
his active and useful life! How many fathers and mothers, husbands and wives,
brothers and sisters, whose tears he had wiped away by averting the stroke of
death from the objects of their affections, must have presented themselves to
his imagination, and soothed his soul with grateful prayers for his eternal
welfare! But the retrospect of the services he had rendered to his
fellow creatures, was not confined to the limits of his extensive business in
the city of Edinburgh. While the illustrious actions of most men may be viewed
with a naked eye, the achievements of Dr. Cullen in the distant regions of
humanity and science, can only be perceived by the help of a telescope. Let us
apply this instrument to discover his exploits of beneficence in every quarter
of the world. He had filled the capitals, and most of the towns of Great
Britain and Ireland with eminent physicians. Many of his pupils had arrived at
the first honors in their profession in the principal cities on the continent
of Europe. Many of them had extended the blessings of his improvements in the
principles and practice of medicine, to every British settlement in the East
and West Indies, and to every free state in America. But the sum of his
usefulness did not end here. He had taught the different professors in the
University of Pennsylvania, the art of teaching others the most successful
methods of curing diseases, and thereby he had conveyed the benefits of his
discoveries into every part of the United States. How great was the mass of
such accumulated beneficence! and how sublime must have been the pleasure which
the review of it created in his mind! Had it been possible for the merit of
such extensive and complicated services to mankind to have rescued one mortal
from the grave, Dr. Cullen had never died. But the decree of death is
universal, and even the healing art, is finally of no effect in saving the
lives of those who have exercised it with the most success in saving the lives
of others.

DR. CULLEN is now no more. What a blank has been produced by his death in the
great volume of Science! Behold! The genius of humanity weeping at his feet,
while the genius of medicine lifts up the key, which fell from his hand with
his last breath, and with inexpressible concern, cries out, "to whom shall I
give this instrument? Who now will unlock for me the treasures of universal
nature?"

Venerable Shade, adieu! What though thy American pupils were denied the
melancholy pleasure of following thee from thy Professor's-chair to thy sick
bed, with their effusions of gratitude, and praise! What though we did not
share in the grief of thy funeral obsequies, and though we shall never bedew
with our tears the splendid monument which thy affectionate and grateful
British pupils have decreed for thee in the metropolis of thy native country;
yet the remembrance of thy talents and virtues, shall be preserved in each of
our bosoms, and never shall we return in triumph from beholding the efficacy of
medicine in curing a disease, without feeling our obligations for the
instructions we have derived from thee!

I repeat it again, Dr. Cullen is now no more -- No more, I mean, a pillar and
ornament of an ancient seat of science -- no more, the delight and admiration
of his pupils -- no more the luminary of medicine to half the globe -- no more
the friend and benefactor of mankind. -- But I would as soon believe that our
solar system was created only to amuse and perish like a rocket, as believe
that a mind endowed with such immense powers of action and contemplation had
ceased to exist. Reason bids us hope that he will yet live -- And Revelation
enables us to say, with certainty and confidence, that he shall again live. --
Fain would I lift the curtain which separates eternity from time, and inquire
-- But it is not for mortals to pry into the secrets of the invisible world.

Such was the man whose memory we have endeavored to celebrate. He lived for
our benefit. It remains only that we improve the event of his death in such a
manner* that he may die for our benefit likewise. For this purpose I shall
finish our Eulogium with the following observations.

I. Let us learn from the character of Dr. Cullen duly to estimate our
profession. While Astronomy claims a Newton, and Electricity a Franklin,
Medicine has been equally honored by having employed the genius of a Cullen.
Whenever therefore we feel ourselves disposed to relax in our studies, to use
our profession for selfish purposes, or to neglect the poor* let us recollect
how much we lessen the dignity which Dr. Cullen has conferred upon our
profession.

II. By the death of Dr. Cullen the republic of medicine has lost one of its
most distinguished and useful members. It is incumbent upon us therefore to
double our diligence in order to supply the loss of our indefatigable
fellow-citizen. That physician has lived to little purpose, who does not leave
his profession in a more improved state than he found it. Let us remember, that
our obligations to add something to the capital of medical knowledge, are
equally binding with our obligations to practice the virtues of integrity and
humanity in our intercourse with our patients. Let no useful fact therefore,
however inconsiderable it may appear, be kept back from the public eye; for
there are mites in science as well as in charity, and the remote consequences
of both are often alike important and beneficial. Facts are the morality of
medicine. They are the same in all ages and in all countries. They have
preserved the works of the immortal Sydenham from being destroyed by their
mixture with his absurd theories; and under all the revolutions in systems that
will probably take place hereafter, the facts which are contained in Dr.
Cullen's works, will constitute the best security for their safe and grateful
reception by future ages.

III. Human nature is ever prone to extremes. While we celebrate the praises of
Dr. Cullen, let us take care lest we check a spirit of free inquiry, by too
great a regard for his authority in medicine. I well remember an observation
suited to our present purpose which he delivered in his introduction to a
course of lectures on the Institutes of Medicine in the year 1766. After
speaking of the long continued and extensive empire of Galen in the schools of
physic, he said, It is a great disadvantage to any science to have been
improved by a great man. His authority imposes indolence, timidity, or idolatry
upon all who come after him. -- Let us avoid these evils in our veneration for
Dr. Cullen. To believe in great men, is often as great an obstacle to the
progress of knowledge, as to believe in witches and conjurers. It is the image
worship of science; for error is as much an attribute of man, as the desire of
happiness; and I think I have observed, that the errors of great men partake of
the dimensions of their minds, and are often of a greater magnitude than the
errors of men of inferior understanding. Dr. Brown has proved the imperfection
of human genius, by extending some parts of Dr. Cullen's system of physic, and
by correcting some of its defects. But he has left much to be done by his
successors. He has even bequeathed to them the labor of removing the errors he
has introduced into medicine by his neglect of an important principle in the
animal economy, and by his ignorance of the histories and symptoms of
diseases. Perhaps no system of medicine can be perfect, while there exists a
single disease which we do not know, or cannot cure. If this be true, then a
complete system of medicine cannot be formed, till America has furnished
descriptions and cures of all her peculiar diseases. The United States have
improved the science of civil government. The freedom of our constitutions, by
imparting vigor and independence to the mind, is favorable to bold and
original thinking upon all subjects. Let us avail ourselves therefore of this
political aid to our researches, and endeavor to obtain histories and cures of
all our diseases, that we may thereby contribute our part toward the formation
of a complete system of medicine. As a religion of some kind is absolutely
necessary to promote morals; so systems of medicine of some kind, are equally
necessary to produce a regular mode of practice. They are not only necessary,
but unavoidable in medicine; for no physician, nay more, no empire, practices
without them.

The present is an age of great improvement. While the application of reason to
the sciences of government and religion, is daily meliorating the condition of
mankind, it is agreeable to observe the influence of medicine, in lessening
human misery, by abating the mortality or violence of many diseases. The
decrees of heaven appear to be fulfilling by natural means; and if no ancient
prophecies had declared it, the late numerous discoveries in medicine would
authorize us to say, that the time is approaching, when not only tyranny,
discord and superstition shall cease from our world, but when diseases shall be
unknown, or cease to be incurable; and when old age shall be the only outlet of
human life, "Thus heavenward all things tend." In that glorious era, every
discovery in medicine shall meet with its full reward; and the more abundant
gratitude of posterity to the name of Dr. Cullen; shall then bury in oblivion
the feeble attempt of this day to comply with your vote to perpetuate his fame.

AN EULOGIUM UPON DAVID RITTENHOUSE, LATE PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN
PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY; DELIVERED BEFORE THE SOCIETY IN THE FIRST PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCH IN HIGH STREET, PHILADELPHIA, ON THE 17TH DECEMBER, 1796, AGREEABLY TO
APPOINTMENT, AND PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE SOCIETY.
Gentlemen of the Philosophical Society. Friends and Colleagues,
WE are assembled this day upon a mournful occasion. Death has made an inroad
upon our Society. Our illustrious and beloved PRESIDENT, is no more.
RITTENHOUSE, the ingenious, the modest and the wise -- RITTENHOUSE, the friend
of God and man, is now no more! -- For this, the temple of Science is hung in
mourning -- for this, our eyes now drop a tributary tear. Nor do we weep alone.
-- The United States of America sympathize in our grief, for his name gave a
splendour to the American character, and the friends of humanity in distant
parts of the world, unite with us in lamenting our common loss -- for he
belonged to the whole human race.

By your vote to perpetuate the memory of this great and good man, you have
made a laudable attempt to rescue philosophers from their humble rank in the
history of mankind. It is to them we owe our knowledge and possession of most
of the necessaries and conveniences of life. To procure these blessings for us,
"they trim their midnight lamp, and hang over the sickly taper." For us, they
traverse distant regions, expose themselves to the inclemencies of the weather,
mingle with savages and beasts of prey, and in some instances, evince their
love of science and humanity by the sacrifice of their lives.

The amiable philosopher whose talents and virtues are to be the subject of the
following eulogium, is entitled to an uncommon portion of our gratitude and
praise. He acquired his knowledge at the expense of uncommon exertions, he
performed services of uncommon difficulty, and finally he impaired his health,
and probably shortened his life, by the ardor of his studies and labors for the
benefit of mankind.

In attempting to discharge the difficult and painful duty you have assigned to
me, it will be necessary to give a short account of the life of Mr.
Rittenhouse, inasmuch as several of the most interesting parts of his character
are intimately connected with it.

The village of Germantown in the neighborhood of this city, had the honor of
giving birth to this distinguished philosopher on the 8th day of April, in the
year 1732. His ancestors migrated from Holland about the beginning of the
present century. They were distinguished, together with his parents, for
probity, industry, and simple manners. It is from sources thus pure and
retired, that those talents and virtues have been chiefly derived, which have
in all ages enlightened the world. They prove by their humble origin, that the
Supreme Being has not surrendered up the direction of human affairs to the
advantages acquired by accident or vice, and they bear a constant and faithful
testimony of his impartial goodness, by their necessary and regular influence
in equalizing the condition of mankind. This is the divine order of things, and
every attempt to invert it, is a weak and unavailing effort to wrest the
government of the world from the hands of God.

The early part of the life of Mr. Rittenhouse was spent in agricultural
employments under the eye of his father, in the county of Montgomery, twenty
miles from Philadelphia, to which place he removed during the childhood of his
Son. It was at this place his peculiar genius first discovered itself. His
plough, the fences, and even the stones of the field in which he worked, were
frequently marked with figures which denoted a talent for mathematical studies.
Upon finding that the native delicacy of his constitution unfitted him for the
labors of husbandry, his parents consented to his learning the trade of a clock
and mathematical instrument maker. In acquiring the knowledge of these useful
arts, he was his own instructor. -- They afforded him great delight, inasmuch
as they favored his disposition to inquire into the principles of natural
philosophy. -- Constant employment of any kind, even in the practice of the
mechanical arts, has been found, in many instances, to administer vigor to
human genius. Franklin studied the laws of nature, while he handled his
printing types. The father of Rousseau, a jeweller at Geneva, became acquainted
with the principles of national jurisprudence, by listening to his son while he
read to him in his shop, the works of Grotius and Puffendorf; and Herschel
conceived the great idea of a new planet, while he exercised the humble office
of a musician to a marching regiment.

It was during the residence of our ingenious philosopher with his father in
the country, that he made himself master of Sir Isaac Newton's Principia, which
he read in the English translation of Mr. Mott. It was here likewise he became
acquainted with the science of Fluxions, of which sublime invention he believed
himself for a while to be the author, nor did he know for some years
afterward, that a contest had been carried on between Sir Isaac Newton and
Leibnitz, for the honor of that great and useful discovery. What a mind was
here! -- Without literary friends or society, and with but two or three books,
he became, before he had reached his four and twentieth year, the rival of the
two greatest mathematicians in Europe!

It was in this retired situation, and while employed in working at his trade,
that he planned and executed an orrery, in which he represented the revolutions
of the heavenly bodies in a manner more extensive and complete, than had been
done by any former astronomers. A correct description of this orrery drawn up
by the Rev. Dr. Smith, is published in the first volume of our Transactions.
This masterpiece of ingenious mechanism was purchased by the college of
New Jersey. A second was made by him, after the same model, for the use of the
college of Philadelphia. It now forms part of the philosophical apparatus of
the University of Pennsylvania, where it has for many years commanded the
admiration of the ingenious and the learned, from every part of the world.

The reputation he derived from the construction of this orrery, as well as his
general character for mathematical knowledge, attracted the notice of his
fellow-citizens in Pennsylvania, and in several of the neighboring states, but
the discovery of his uncommon merit belonged chiefly to his brother-in-law, the
Rev. Mr. Barton, Dr. Smith, and the late Mr. John Lukens, an ingenious
mathematician of this city. These gentlemen fully appreciated his talents, and
united in urging him to remove to Philadelphia, in order to enlarge his
opportunities of improvement and usefulness. He yielded with reluctance to
their advice, and exchanged his beloved retirement in the country for this
city, in the year 1770. Here he continued for several years, to follow his
occupation of a clock and mathematical instrument maker. He excelled in both
branches of that business. His mathematical instruments have been esteemed by
good judges to be superior in accuracy and workmanship to any of the same kind
that have been imported from Europe.

About the time he settled in Philadelphia, he became a member of our Society.
His first communication to the Society was a calculation of the transit of
Venus as it was to happen on the 3d of June, 1769, in 40 north latitude, and 5
hours west longitude from Greenwich. He was one of a committee appointed by the
Society to obsereve in the township of Norriton, this rare occurence in the
revolution, of that planet, and bore an active part in the preparations which
were made for that purpose. Of this Dr. Smith who was likewise of the
committee, has left an honorable record in the history of that event which is
published in the first volume of the transactions of our Society. "As Mr.
Rittenhouse's dwelling (says the Doctor) is about twenty miles north west from
Philadelphia; our other engagements did not permit Mr. Lukens or myself to pay
much attention to the necessary preparations; but we knew that we had entrusted
them to a gentleman on the spot [meaning Mr. Rittenhouse] who had, joined to a
complete skill in mechanics, so extensive an astronomical, and mathematical
knowledge, that the use, management and even construction of the apparatus,
were perfectly familiar to him. The laudable pains he had taken in these
material articles will best appear from the work itself, which he has
committed into my hands, with a modest introduction, giving me a liberty with
them, which his own accuracy, taste and abilities leave no room to exercise.

We are naturally led here to take a view of our philosopher with his
associates in their preparations to observe a phenomenon which had never been
seen but twice before by any inhabitant of our earth, which would never be seen
again by any person then living, and on which depended very important
astronomical consequences. The night before the long expected day, was probably
passed in a degree of solicitude which precluded sleep. How great must have
been their joy when they beheld the morning sun, "and the whole horizon without
a cloud;" for such is the description of the day given by Mr. Rittenhouse in
the report referred to by Dr. Smith. In pensive silence, and trembling anxiety,
they waited for the predicted moment of observation; it came, and brought with
it all that had been wished for and expected by those who saw it. In our
philosoper, it excited in the instant of one of the contacts of the planet with
the sun, an emotion of delight so exquisite and powerful, as to induce
fainting. This will readily be believed by those who have known the extent of
that pleasure which attends the discovery, or first perception of truth. Soon
after this event, we find him acting as one of a committee appointed to observe
the transit of Mercury on the 9th of November in the same year. This was
likewise done at Norriton, An account of it was drawn up, and published at the
request of the committee by Dr. Smith. A minute history of the whole of these
events, in which Mr. Rittenhouse continued to act a distinguished part, is
given in our transactions. It was received with great satisfaction by the
astronomers of Europe, and contributed much to raise the character of our then
infant country for astronomical knowledge.

In the year 1775, he was appointed to compose and deliver the annual oration
before our society. The subject of it, was the history of astronomy. The
language of this oration is simple, but the sentiments contained in it are
ingenious, original, and in some instances sublime. It was delivered in a
feeble voice, and without any of the advantages of oratory, but it commanded
notwithstanding, the most profound attention, and was followed by universal
admiration and applause from a crowded and respectable audience.

From the contents of this oration, it appears that Astronomy was the favorite
object of his studies. Attempts have been made to depreciate this branch of
natural philosophy, by denying its utility, and application to human affairs.
-- The opinion is an unjust one, and as it tends to convey a limited idea of
the talents of Mr. Rittenhouse, I hope I shall be excused in saying a few words
in favor of this science.

It is to astronomy we are indebted for our knowledge of navigation, by which
means the different parts of our globe have been discovered, and afterward
cemented together by the mutual wants and obligations of commerce.

It was astronomy that taught mankind the art of predicting and explaining
eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and thereby delivered them from the superstition
which in the early ages of the world, was connected with those phenomenon of
nature.

We are taught by astronomy to correct our ideas of the visible heavens, and
thus by discovering the fallacy of the simple evidence of our senses, to call
to their aid, the use of our reason, in deciding upon all material objects of
human knowledge.

Astronomy delivers the mind from a grovelling attachment to the pursuits and
pleasures of this world. "Take the miser (says our philosopher in his oration)
from the earth, if it be possible disengage him -- he whose nightly rest has
been long broken by the loss of a single foot of it, useless perhaps to him;
and remove him to the planet Mars, one of the least distant from us -- Persuade
the ambitious monarch to accompany him, who has sacrificed the lives of
thousands of his subjects to an imaginary property in certain small portions of
the earth, and point out this earth to them, with all its kingdoms and wealth,
a glittering star, close by the moon, the latter scarce visible, and the
former, less bright than our evening star. -- They would turn away their
disgusted sight from it, not thinking it worth their smallest attention, and
seek for consolation, in the gloomy regions of Mars."

Once more -- the study of astronomy has the most friendly influence upon
morals, and religion. "Yes," (says our philosopher in another part of his
oration) "the direct tendency of this science is to dilate the heart with
universal benevolence, and to enlarge its views. It flatters no princely vice,
nor national depravity. It encourages not the libertine by relaxing any of the
precepts of morality, nor does it attempt to undermine the foundations of
religion. It denies none of those attributes, which the wisest and best of
mankind have in all ages ascribed to the Deity. Nor does it degrade the human
mind from that dignity which is ever necessary to make it contemplate itself
with complacency. None of these things does astronomy pretend to, and if these
things merit the name of philosophy, and the encouragement of a people, then
let skepticism flourish, and astronomy lie neglected. -- Let the names of
Barkley and Hume become immortal, and that of Newton be lost in oblivion." --

The following is a list of such of Mr. Rittenhouse's other publications as are
contained in the three volumes of our transactions.

Observations of the comet which appeared in June and July 1770, with the
elements of its motion and the trajectory of its path, in a letter to Dr.
William Smith.

An easy method of deducing the true time of the sun's passing the meridian, by
means of a clock, from a comparison of four equal attitudes, observed on two
succeeding days, without the help of the equation tables, communicated by Dr.
William Smith.

An explanation of an opticle deception, namely, that the surfaces of bodies
viewed through the double microscope, sometimes appear to be reversed, that is,
those parts which are elevated seem depressed, and the contrary.

An account of a remarkable meteor observed at Philadelphia on the 31st of
October, 1775, with some conjectures relative to the theory of meteors, in
answer to a letter from John Page, Esquire. giving an account of the same meteor
seen in many distant places in Virginia.

Conjectures, corroborated by experiments, relative to a new theory of
magnetism; in a letter to John Page, Esquire. of Virginia.

A new method of placing a meridian mark for a transit instrument within a few
feet of the observatory, so as to have all the advantages of one placed at a
great distance; in a letter to the Rev. Dr. John Ewing.

Observations on a comet discovered in the month of January 1784.

An explanation of a curious optical phenomenon, namely, if a candle or other
luminous body be viewed through a silk umbrella, handkerchief or the like, the
luminous body will appear to be doubled; in a letter to Francis Hopkinson, Esquire.

A series of observations made at sundry times in the years 1784, 85, and 86 on
the new planet, or Georgium Sidus, also an observation of the transit of
Mercury over the Sun's disk on the 12th of November 1782.

An account of three houses in Philadelphia struck with lightning on the 7th of
June 1789.

An account of the effects of a stroke of lightning upon a house furnished with
two metallic conductors on the 17th of August, 1789; in a letter to Mr. Robert
Patterson.

Astronomical observations made at Philadelphia, containing an account of the
eclipse of the Moon on the 2d of November 1789.

An account of the transit of Mercury over the Sun's disk, on the 5th of
November 1789.

An account of the eclipse of the Sun, on the 6th. of November 1790, with an
account of corresponding observations, made at the university of William and
Mary, in Virginia, by Dr. J. Madison, and at Washington college, in Maryland,
by the Rev. Dr. Smith.

Short, and elegant theorems for finding the sum of the several powers of the
lines, either to a radius of unity, or any other; in a letter to Mr. Robert
Paterson.

An account of a comet discovered in the month of January 1793; in a letter to
Mr. Robert Patterson.

Besides these publications, our society is in possession of the following
communications from Mr. Rittenhouse, which are now in the press and will be
speedily published in the fourth volume of our transactions.

A method of determining the true plane of a planet in an eliptical form by
converging series, directly from the mean anomaly.

A new and easy method of calculating logarihims; in a letter to Mr. Robert
Patterson. A description of an improvement on pendulum clocks, by which the
error arising from the different density, or resistance of the medium in which
the pendulum vibrates, is effectually obviated.

Lastly, experiments on the expansion of wood by heat.

Talents so splendid, and knowledge so practical in mathematics, are like
mines of precious metals. They become public property by universal consent. The
State of Pennsylvania was not insensible of the wealth she possessed in the
mind of Mr. Rittenhouse. She claimed him as her own, and employed him in
business of the most important nature.

In the year 1779 he was appointed by the legislature of Pennsylvania, one of
the commissioners for adjusting a territorial dispute between Pennsylvania and
Virginia, and to his talents, moderation and firmness, were ascribed in a great
degree, the satisfactory termination, of that once alarming controversy in the
year 1785.

In 1784 he assisted in determining the length of five degrees of longitude
from a point on the Delaware, in order to fix the western limits of
Pennsylvania.

In 1786, he was employed in fixing the northern line which divides
Pennsylvania from New York.

But the application of his talents and knowledge to the settlement of
territorial disputes, was not confined to his native state. In the year 1769,
he was employed in settling the limits between New Jersey and New York, and in
1787 he was called upon to assist in fixing the boundary line between the
States of Massachusetts and New York. This last business which was executed
with his usual precision and integrity, was his farewell peace offering to the
union and happiness of his country.

In his excursions through the wilderness, he carried with him his habits of
inquiry and observation. Nothing in our mountains, soils, rivers, and springs
escaped his notice. It is to be lamented that his private letters, and the
memories of his friends, are the only records of what he collected upon these
occasions. Philosopher, or naturalist, whosoever thou art! that shall hereafter
traverse the unfrequented woods of our state, forget not to respect the paths,
first marked by the feet of this ingenious, and faithful servant of the public.
Honor the fountains consecrated to science by his skilful hand, and inhale
with double pleasure the pure atmosphere of the mountains, on which he renewed
his acquaintance with the canopy of heaven, after passing whole weeks in
forests so shady, as to conceal from him the rays of the sun. And citizens of
Pennsylvania, friends and patrons of literature, be grateful for his services.
Let the remembrance of them be dear to the present generation, and let a part
of the state distinguished in a more especial manner for its resources in
natural knowledge, bear his name with honor to the latest posterity.

In the year 1791, he was chosen successor to Dr. Franklin in the chair of our
society. In this elevated station, the highest that philosophy can confer in
our country, his conduct was marked by its usual line of propriety and dignity.
Never did the artificial pomp of station command half the respect, which
followed his unassuming manners in the discharge of the public duties of this
office. You will often recollect, gentlemen, with a mixture of pleasure and
pain, the delightful evenings you passed in the society, every time he presided
in your meetings. They were uniformly characterized by ardor in the pursuits of
science, urbanity and brotherly kindness. His attachment to the interests of
the society was evinced soon after he accepted of the President's chair, by a
donation of three hundred pounds.

But his talents and knowledge were not limited to mathematical or material
subjects; his mind was a repository of the knowledge of all ages and countries.
He had early and deeply studied most of the different systems of theology. He
was well acquainted with practical metaphysics. In reading travels he took
great delight. From them, he drew a large fund of his knowledge of the natural
history of our globe. He possessed talents for music and poetry, but the more
serious and necessary pursuits of his life, prevented his devoting much time to
the cultivation of them. He read the English poets with great pleasure. The
muse of Thomson charmed him most. He admired his elegant combination of
philosophy and poetry. However opposed these studies may appear, they alike
derive their perfection from extensive and accurate observations of the works
of nature. He was intimately acquainted with the French, German and Dutch
languages, the two former of which he acquired without the assistance of a
master. They served the valuable purpose of conveying to him the discoveries of
foreign nations, and thereby enabled him to prosecute his studies with more
advantage, in his native language.

In speaking of Mr. Rittenhouse, it has been common to lament his want of what
is called a liberal education. -- Were education what it should be, in our
public seminaries, this would have been a misfortune, but conducted as it is at
present, agreeably to the systems adopted in Europe in the fifteenth century, I
am disposed to believe that his extensive knowledge, and splendid character are
to be ascribed chiefly to his having escaped the pernicious influence of
monkish learning upon his mind in early life. Had the usual forms of a public
education in the United States been imposed upon him; instead of revolving
through life in a planetary orbit, he would probably have consumed the force of
his genius by fluttering around the blaze of an evening taper. Ritttenhouse the
philosopher, and one of the luminaries of the eighteenth century, might have
spent his hours of study in composing syllogisms, or in measuring the feet of
Greek and Latin poetry.

It will be honorable to the citizens of the United States, to add* that they
were not insensible of the merit of our philosopher. Inventions and
improvements in every art and science, were frequently submitted to his
examination, and were afterward patronised by the public, according as they
were approved of by him. Wherever he went, he met with public respect, and
private attentions. But his reputation was not confined to his native country.
His name was known and admired in every region of the earth, where science and
genius are cultivated and respected. The degree of master of Arts was conferred
upon him by the College of Philadelphia, in 1768. The same degree was conferred
upon him by the College of William and Mary, in Virginia, in 1784. In the year
1789, he received the degree of Doctor of Laws from the College of New Jersey.
He was elected a Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences at Boston
in 1782, and of the Royal Society in London in 1795.


Such were the talents and knowledge, and such the fame, of our departed
President! His virtues now demand our tribute of praise. -- And here, I am less
at a loss to know what to say, than what to leave unsaid. We have hitherto
beheld him as a philosopher, soaring like the eagle, until our eyes have been
dazzled by his near approaches to the sun. We shall now contemplate him at a
less distance, and behold him in the familiar character of a man, fulfilling
his various duties, in their utmost extent. If any thing has been said of his
talents and knowledge that has excited attention, of kindled desires in the
younger members of our society, to pursue him in his path of honor, let me
request them not to forsake me here. Come, and learn by his example, to be
good, as well as great. -- His virtues furnish the most shining models for your
imitation, for they were never obscured in any situation or stage of his life,
by a single cloud of weakness or vice. As the source of these virtues, whether
of a public or private nature, I shall first mention his exalted sense of moral
obligation, founded upon the revelation of the perfections of the Supreme
Being. This appears from many passages in his oration, and from his private
letters to his friends. In his oration we find the following pious sentiment.
"Should it please that Almighty Power who has placed us in a world in which we
are only permitted 'to look about us and to die,' to indulge us with existence
throughout that half of eternity which still remains unspent, and to conduct us
through the several stages of his works, here (meaning in the study of
astronomy) is ample provision made for employing every faculty of the mind,
even allowing its powers to be enlarged through an endless repetition of ages.
Let us not complain of the vanity of this world, and that there is nothing in
it capable of satisfying us. Happy in those wants -- happy in those desires,
forever in succession to be gratified -- happy in a continual approach to the
Deity."

"I must confess that I am not one of those sanguine spirits who seem to think
that when the withered hand of death has drawn up the curtain of eternity, all
distance between the creature and the Creator, and between finite and infinite,
will be annihilated. Every enlargement of our faculties -- every new happiness
conferred upon us, every step we advance toward the Divinity, will very
probably render us more and more sensible of his inexhaustible stores of
communicable bliss, and of his inaccessible perfections."

There appears to be a natural connection between a knowledge of the works of
nature and just ideas of the divine perfections; and if philosophers have not
in all ages been equally devout with our President, it becomes us to acquire
how far the beneficial influence of philosophy upon religion, may have been
prevented by their minds being pre-occupied in early life with the fictions of
ancient poets, and the vices of the heathen gods. It remains yet to be
determined, whether all the moral as well as natural attributes of the Deity
may not be discovered in the form, and economy of the material world, and
whether that righteousness which descended from heaven near eighteen hundred
years ago, may not wait for philosophical truth to spring up from the earth, in
order by uniting with it, to command universal belief and obedience. This
opinion, as far as it relates to one of the moral attributes of the Deity,
seems to have been admitted by our philosopher in the following elegant and
pious extract from a letter to one of his friends "give me leave (says he) to
mention two or three proofs of infinite goodness in the works of creation. The
first is, possessing goodness in ourselves. Now it is inconsistent with all
just reasoning to suppose, that there is any thing good* lovely or
praiseworthy in us, which is not possessed in an infinitely higher degree by
that Being who first called us into existence. In the next place I reckon the
exquisite and innocent delight that many things around us are calculated to
afford us. In this light the beauty and fragrance of a single rose is a better
argument for divine goodness than a luxuriant field of wheat. For if we can
suppose that we were created by a malevolent Being with a design to torment us
for his amusement, he must have furnished us with the means of subsistence, and
either have made our condition tolerable, or not have left the means of
quitting it at pleasure, in our own power. Such being my opinions, you will not
wonder at my fondness for what Mr. Addison calls 'the pleasures of the
imagination.' They are all to me, so many demonstrations of infinite goodness.

If such be the pious fruits of an attentive examination of the works of the
Creator, cease ye ministers of the gospel to defeat the design of your
benevolent labors, by interposing the common studies of the schools between our
globe, and the minds of young people. Let their first ideas be those which are
obtruded upon their senses, by the hand of nature. Permit the firmament of
heaven, and the animal, vegetable and mineral productions of the earth, to
instruct them in the wisdom and goodness of the Creator, and let the effects of
physical evil upon general happiness, vindicate the divine government, in
permitting the existence of moral evil in our world. Thus the perverse passions
of man, may be made to unite with storms and tempests, in furnishing proofs of
the goodness of the Creator of the universe.

But the religion of Mr. Rittenhouse, was not derived wholly from his knowledge
and admiration of the material world. He believed in the Christian revelation.
Of this, he gave many proofs, not only in the conformity of his life, to the
precepts of the gospel, but in his letters and conversation. I well recollect
in speaking to me of the truth and excellency of the Christian religion, he
mentioned as an evidence of its divine origin, that the miracles of our Savior
differed from all other miracles, in being entirely of a kind and benevolent
nature. It is no small triumph to the friends of Revelation to observe, in this
age of infidelity, that our religion has been admitted and even defended by men
of the most exalted understanding, and of the strongest reasoning powers. The
single testimony of David Rittenhouse in its favor, outweighs the declamations
of whole nations against it. Since the publication of the Eulogium in a
pamphlet, I have received the following account of Mr. Rittenhouse's religious
principles, in a letter from his widow, dated August 20th 1797. That you were
sufficiently authorized to assert what you did respecting Mr. Rittenhouse's
religious principles. I now add my testimony to what you have said, for well I
know the great truths of religion engaged much of his attention, and indeed
were interwoven with almost every important concern of his life. I do not
recollect, if in any of the conversations I have had with you, I informed you,
what I now do, that Dr. Price's opinions respecting Christianity were more in
unison with his own, than any others of the divines, that Dr. Price's sermons
was the last book he requested me to read to him, and that the last morning of
his life, he reminded me that I had not finished one of the Doctor's discourses
which I had began the preceding evening.


As the natural effect of his belief in the relation of the whole human race to
each other in a common Father and Redeemer, he embraced the whole family of
mankind in the arms of his benevolence. The force and extent of this virtue in
his heart, will appear from my reading one more extract from his oration. I am
aware how much I suffer by introducing quotations from that eloquent
performance, for they will cast a shade upon all I have said, or shall say upon
this occasion.

"How far, (says our philosopher) the inhabitants of the other planets may
resemble men, we cannot pretend to say.' If like them they were created liable
to fall, yet some, if not all of them may still retain their original
rectitude. We will hope they do; the thought is comfortable. -- Cease then
Gallileo to improve thy optic tube, and thou great Newton, forbear thy ardent
search, into the mysteries of nature, lest ye make unwelcome discoveries.
Deprive us not of the pleasure of believing that yonder orbs, traversing in
silent majesty the etherial regions, are the peaceful seats of innocence and
bliss, where neither natural or moral evil has ever intruded, and where to
enjoy with gratitude and adoration the Creator's bounty, is the business of
existence. If their inhabitants resemble man in their faculties and affections,
let us suppose that they are wise enough to govern themselves according to the
dictates of that reason, God has given in such a manner, as to consult their
own, and each other's happiness upon all occasions. But if on the contrary,
they have found it necessary to erect artificial fabrics of government, let us
not suppose they have done it with so little skill, and at such an enormous
expense, as to render them a misfortune, instead of a blessing. -- We will hope
that their statesmen are patriots, and that their kings (if that order of
beings has found admittance there) have the feelings of humanity. Happy people!
-- and perhaps more happy still, that all communication with us is denied. We
have neither corrupted you with our vices, nor injured you by violence. None of
your sons and daughters have been degraded from their native dignity, and
doomed to endless slavery in America, merely because their bodies may be
disposed to reflect, or absorb the rays of light, different from ours. Even
you, inhabitants of the Moon, situated in our very neighborhood, are
effectually secured from the rapacious hands of the oppressors of our globe.
And the utmost efforts of the mighty Frederick, the tyrant of the North, and
scourge of mankind, if aimed to disturb your peace, becomes inconceivably
ridiculous and impotent."

"Pardon these reflections. They arise not from the gloomy spirit of
misanthrophy. That Being, before whose piercing eye all the intricate foldings
of the human heart, become expanded, and illuminated, is my witness with what
sincerity, with what ardor -- I wish for the happiness of the whole race of
mankind. -- How much I admire that disposition of lands and seas which affords
a communication between distant regions, and a mutual exchange of benefits --
How sincerely I approve of those social refinements, which add to our
happiness, and induce us with gratitude to acknowledge our Creator's goodness,
and how much I delight in a participation of the discoveries made from time to
time in nature's works, by our philosophical brethern in Europe. But (adds our
philosopher) when I consider that luxury, and her constant follower tyranny,
which have long since laid the glories of Asia in the dust, are now advancing
like a torrent, irresistible, and have nearly completed their conquest over
Europe -- I am ready to wish -- vain wish! that nature would raise her
everlasting bars between the new and the old world, and make a voyage to Europe
as impracticable as one to the moon."

As when a traveller in passing through a wilderness, slackens his pace to
prolong the pleasure of a sudden and unexpected prospect of a majestic river
pouring its waters down the declivity of a cloud-cap't mountain, and spreading
fertility and verdure throughout the adjacent valleys, so we feel disposed to
pause, and feast upon the sublime sentiments contained in the passage which I
have read. Citizens of the United States, receive and cherish them as a legacy
from a friend, or a brother. Be just, and loose the bands of the African slave.
Be wise, and render war odious in our country. Be free, by assuming a national
character and name, and be greatly happy, by erecting a barrier against the
corruptions in morals, government, and religion, which now pervade all the
nations of Europe. Mr. William Barton, nephew to Mr. Rittenhouse, has favored
me with the following extract of a letter in September, 1755, to his
brother-in-law, the Rev. Mr. Barton, who was the friend and correspondent of
his youth, which shows how early and deeply the principles of universal
benevolence were fixed in his mind.

"I would sooner give up my interest in a future state, than be divested of
humanity; -- I mean that good will I have to the species, although one half of
them are said to be fools, and almost the other half knaves. Indeed I am firmly
persuaded, that we are not at the disposal of a Being who has the least
tincture of ill nature, or requires any in us. -- You will laugh at this grave
philosophy, or my writing to you on a subject which you have thought of a
thousand times: but, can any thing that is serious, be ridiculous? -- Shall we
suppose Gabriel smiling at Newton, for laboring to demonstrate whether the
earth be at rest or not, because the former plainly sees it move?




But the philanthropy of Mr. Rittenhouse did not consist simply in wishes for
the happiness of mankind. He reduced this divine principle to practice by a
series of faithful and disinterested services to that part of his fellow
creatures, to which the usefulness of good men is chiefly confined. His
country, his beloved country, was the object of the strongest affections of his
heart. For her, he thought, -- for her, he labored, -- and for her, in the
hours of her difficulties and danger, he wept, -- in every stage of the
American revolution. Patriots of 1776, you will acquit me of exaggeration here,
for you feel in the recollection of what passed in your own bosoms, a witness
of the truth of each of these assertions. The year of the declaration of
Independance, which changed our royal governments into Republics, produced no
change in his political principles, for he had been educated a Republican by
his father. I can never forget the pleasure with which he avowed his early but
secret attachment to an elective and representative form of government. Often
have I heard him above twenty years, ago, predict the immense increase of
talents and knowledge which has been produced by the strength and activity that
have been infused into the American mind, by our republican constitutions.
Often, likewise, at the same remote period of time, have I heard him anticipate
with delight, the effects of our revolution in sowing the seeds of a new order
of things in other parts of the world. He believed political, as well as moral
evil to be intruders into the society of man -- that general happiness was the
original design, and ultimate end of the divine government, and that a time
would come, when every part of our globe, would echo back the heavenly
proclamation of universal peace on earth, and good will to man.

Let it not be said, that he departed from the duties of a Philosopher, by
devoting a part of his time and talents to the safety and happiness of his
country. It belongs to monarchies, to limit the business of government to a
privileged order of men, and it is from the remains of a monarchical spirit in
our country, that we complain when clergymen, physicians, philosophers and
mechanics, take an active part in civil affairs. The obligations of patriotism
are as universal and binding, as those of justice and benevolence, and the
virtuous propensities of the human heart are as much resisted by every
individual who neglects the business of his country, as they are by the
extinction of the domestic affections in a cell. Man was made for a republic,
and a republic was made for man, otherwise Divine power and goodness have been
wasted, in the creation and gift of his public affections. -- Our philosopher
adopted this truth from the evidence of his (...), in common with the rest of
mankind, but it was strongly reinforced in his mind by numerous analogies of
nature. How was it possible for him to contemplate light and air as the common
and equal portions of every man, and not acknowledge that heaven intended
liberty to be distributed in the same manner among the whole human race! Or how
could he behold the beauty and harmony of the universe, as the result of
universal and mutual dependence, and not admit that heaven intended rulers to
be dependant upon those, for whose benefit alone, all government should exist.
To suppose the contrary, would be to deny unity and system in the plans of the
great creator of all things.

I shall make no apology for these sentiments. They are not foreign to the
solemnity of this discourse. Had I said less of the political principles and
conduct of our enlightened President hundreds and thousands of my
fellow-citizens would have accused me, of an act of treachery to his memory.
May the time never come, in which the praises of our republican governments,
shall not be acceptable to the ears of an American audience!

In the more limited circles of private life, Mr. Rittenhouse commanded esteem
and affection. As a neighbor he was kind and charitable. His sympathy extended
in a certain degree to distress of every kind, but it was excited with the most
force, and the kindest effects, to the weakness, pain and poverty of old age.
-- As a friend he was sincere, ardent, and disinterested. As a companion, he
instructed upon all subjects. To his happy communicative disposition, I beg
leave to express my obligations in this public manner. I can truly say, after
an acquaintance with him for six-and-twenty years, that I never went into his
company, without learning something. With pleasure have I looked beyond my
present labors to a time, when his society should constitute one of the
principal enjoyments of the evening of my life. -- But alas! that time, so
often anticipated, and so delightful in prospect -- will never -- come

I hope it will not be thought that I tread too closely upon his footsteps,
when I presume to lift the latch of his door, and to exhibit him in the
domestic relations of a husband and father. It was the practice of the
philosophers of former ages, to pass their lives in their closets, and to
maintain a formal and distant intercourse with their families; but our
philosopher was a stranger to pride and imposture in every thing. His family
constituted his chief society, and the most intimate circle of his friends.
When the declining state of his health, rendered the solitude of his study,
less agreeable than in former years, he passed whole evenings in reading or
conversing, with his wife and daughters. Happy family! so much and so long
blessed with such a head! and happier still, to have possessed dispositions and
knowledge to discern and love his exalted character, and to enjoy his
instructing conversation! -- Thus Sir Thomas Moore lived with his accomplished
wife and daughters; -- Thus Cicero educated his beloved Tullia; and in this way
only, can the female sex be elevated to that dignity, and usefulness in
society, for which they were formed, and by which from their influence upon
manners, a new era would be created in the history of mankind.

The house and manner of living, of our president, exhibited the taste of a
philosopher, the simplicity of a republican, and the temper of a Christian. He
was independent, and contented with an estate, small in the estimation of
ambition and avarice, but amply suited to all his wants and desires. He held
the office of treasurer of Pennsylvania, by an annual and unanimous vote of the
legislature, between the years 1777, and 1789. During this period, he declined
purchasing the smallest portion of the public debt of the state, thereby
manifesting a delicacy of integrity, which is known and felt only by pure and
elevated minds.

In the year 1792, he was persuaded to accept of the office of Director of the
mint of the United States. His want of health, obliged him to resign it in
1795. Here his conduct was likewise above suspicion, for I have been informed
by his colleague in office, Dr Way.
that in several instances, he paid for work done at the mint out of his
salary, where he thought the charges for it would be deemed extravagant by the
United States.

His economy extended to a wise and profitable use of his time. No man ever
found him unemployed. As an apology for detaining a friend a few minutes, while
he arranged some papers he had been examining, he said, "that he had once
thought health, the greatest blessing in the world, but that he now thought
there was one thing of much greater value, and that was time." The propriety of
this remark will appear when we consider, that Providence, so liberal in other
gifts, bestows this, in a sparing manner. He never gives a second moment, until
he has withdrawn the first, and still reserves the third in his own hand.

The countenance of Mr. Rittenhouse, was too remarkable to be unnoticed upon
this occasion. It displayed such a mixture of contemplation, benignity, and
innocence, that it was easy to distinguish his person in the largest company,
by a previous knowledge of his character. His manners were civil, and engaging
to such a degree, that he seldom passed an hour, even in a public house, in
traveling through our country without being followed by the good wishes of all
who attended upon him. There was no affectation of singularity, in any thing he
said or did: even his hand writing, in which this weakness so frequently
discovers itself, was simple and intelligible at first sight, to all who saw it.

Here I expected to have finished the detail of his virtues, but in the
neighborhood of that galaxy created by their connected luster, I behold a
virtue of inestimable value, twinkling like a rare, and solitary star. It is
his superlative modesty. This heaven born virtue was so conspicuous in every
part of his conduct, that he appeared not so much to conceal, as to be ignorant
of his superiority as a philosopher and a man, over the greatest part of his
fellow creatures.

In reviewing the intellectual endowments and moral excellency of Mr.
Rittenhouse, and our late intimate connection with him, we are led to rejoice
in being men.

We proceed now to the closing scenes of his life.

His constitution was naturally feeble, but it was rendered still more so, by
sedentary labor, and midnight studies. He was afflicted for many years with a
weak breast, which, upon unusual exertions of body or mind, or sudden changes
in the weather, became the seat of a painful and harrassing disorder. This
constitutional infirmity was not without its uses. It contributed much to the
perfection of his virtue, by producing habitual patience and resignation to the
will of heaven, and a constant eye to the hour of his dissolution. It was a
window through which he often looked with pleasure toward a place of existence
where from the increase and perfection of his intuitive faculties, he would
probably acquire more knowledge in an hour, than he had acquired in his whole
life, by the slow operations of reason; and where, from the greater magnitude
and extent of the the objects of his contemplation, his native globe, would
appear like his cradle, and all the events of time, like the amusements of his
infant years.

On the 26th of June, of the present year, the long expected messenger of
death, disclosed his commission. In his last illness, which was acute, and
short, he retained the usual patience and benevolence of his temper. Upon being
told that some of his friends had called at his door to enquire how he was; he
asked why they were not invited into his chamber to see him. "Because (said his
wife) you are too weak to speak to them." "Yes (said he) that is true, but I
could still have squeezed their hands." -- Thus with a heart overflowing with
love to his family, friends, country, and to the whole world, he peacefully
resigned his spirit into the hands of his God. Let the day of his death be
recorded in the annals of our society, and let its annual return be marked by
some public act, which shall characterise his services and our grief, and
thereby animate us and our successors, to imitate his illustrious example!

It has been the fashion of late years, to say of persons who had been
distinguished in life, when they left the world in a state of indifference to
every thing, and believing, and hoping in nothing, that they died like
philosophers. Very different was the latter end of our excellent president. He
died like a christian, interested in the welfare of all around him -- believing
in the resurrection, and the life to come, and hoping for happiness from every
attribute of the Deity.

Agreeably to his request, his body was interred in his observatory near his
dwelling house, in the presence of a numerous concourse of his fellow-citizens.
It was natural for him in the near prospect of appearing in the presence of his
Maker, to feel an attachment to that spot in which he had cultivated a
knowledge of his perfections, and held communion with him through the medium of
his works. Hereafter it shall become one of the objects of curiosity in our
city. Thither shall the philosophers of future ages resort to do homage to his
tomb, and children yet unborn, shall point to the dome which covers it, and
exultingly say, "there lies our Rittenhouse."

Let us my respected colleagues, repair for a few minutes to that awful spot.
-- In entering it -- we behold the telescope, dear instrument of his
discoveries, turned upon its axis, and pointed to the earth, which has closed
its master's eyes. -- How artless -- the inscription upon his tombstone! -- It
contains nothing but his name, and the simple record of the days and years of
his birth and death. -- Very different would have been the monument of his
worth and fame, had not the gratitude and affection of his friends been
controuled by his dying request. His head would have reclined in marble, upon
the lap of religion. At his feet, science would have sat -- bathed in tears;
while the genius of republican liberty, in the figure of a venerable hermit,
bending over his grave, would have deplored the loss of his favorite son. --
Alas! -- too -- too soon has our beloved president been torn from the chair of
our society! -- Too soon has he laid aside his robes of office, and ceased to
minister for us day and night at the altar of science! -- Ah! -- who now will
elevate his telescope, and again direct it toward yonder heavens? Who now will
observe the transit of the planets? Who now will awaken our nation to view the
trackless and stupendous comet? Who now will measure the courses of our rivers,
in order to convey their streams into our city, for the purposes of health and
commerce? -- Nature is dumb; -- for the voice of her chief interpreter is
hushed in death. -- In this hour of our bereavement, to whom shall we look? --
but to THEE, FATHER of life and light: -- thou author of great and good gifts
to man. O! let not thy Sun, thy Moon, and thy Stars now shine unobserved among
us! may the genius of our departed president, like the mantle of thy prophet of
old, descend upon some member of our society, who shall, as he did, explain to
us the mysteries of thy works, and lead us step by step, to THYSELF, the great
overflowing fountain of wisdom, goodness and mercy, to the children of men!

FINIS.

