A DISCOURSE, Delivered April 11, 1798, AT THE REQUEST OF AND BEFORE THE
NEW YORK SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING THE MANUMISSION OF SLAVES, AND PROTECTING SUCH
OF THEM AS HAVE BEEN OR MAY BE LIBERATED.

By E. H. SMITH, A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-street.

1798.

At a Stated Meeting of the New York Society for promoting the Manumission of
Slaves, etc. held at the Society's School-Room, in Cliff-street, the 15th of
May, 1798:
THE Society having received information that the Annual Discourse on Slavery
was delivered, by E. H. SMITH, on the 11th ult. agreeably to appointment, --

Resolved,

That WILLIAM JOHNSON and WILLIAM DUNLAP be a Committee to wait on Mr. SMITH,
and to request a Copy of his Discourse for publication.

Extracted from the Minutes, JACOB DOTY, Assistant Secretary.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
Friends and Fellow Citizens,
THE occasion of our present meeting is solemn and affecting, melancholy but
joyful. We are convened to celebrate the triumphs of benevolence; but we are
convened also to the renewed exhibition of the long, extensive, and malignant
usurpations of civil and domestic tyranny. Conflicting and tumultuous
recollections press upon our minds -- recollections of all that renders man
detestable and abhorred, amiable and illustrious. We have seen an exemplary
spirit of justice, active and indefatigable, animate the bosoms of a few. The
justice, the humanity, the policy, the interest, of the enslavers of men have
been eloquently appealed to; but with partial success! -- A few have listened
and reflected; a few have felt and acted; but the many have continued unmoved,
have persevered in the practice of their cruelties. Yet, startled and confused,
in the midst of their career, by the surrounding progress of emancipation, they
dread inquiry, are less assured of their future success, and have mitigated
their severity, or doubled their precautions. In this state of the public
sentiment, our duty is obvious and simple -- to preserve the vivid recollection
of the enormities which mark the reign of oppression; of the efforts which have
been made to shorten or destroy it; of the motives which should compel us to
proceed in this exalted labor: to disseminate the knowledge of them far and
wide, to the young as well as to the old, to the enslaved as well as to the
free; and, for ourselves, to act with gentleness but with firmness, with zeal
but with prudence.

The most hasty outline of the history of slavery must commence with the
formation of Society: the history of man is the history of slavery.

In the rude ages of the world, as in the most refined, superior force and
superior cunning have equally been practiced, and have both succeeded in
enslaving one portion of the human race to another. What individual strength
and personal address accomplished, in respect to one or a few, in the infancy
of society, has been since extended and perpetuated by multiform combinations
both of power and art. Ignorance, and credulity and fear, the companions of
ignorance, furnished ample opportunity for successful enterprise, where direct
violence must have been hazardous and uncertain. Mental slavery, therefore, was
of early origin and quick growth; it was assiduously cultivated; and the bands
of superstition restrained those who would easily have shaken off the fetters
of subjection. So important were these two methods of holding men in bondage to
each other, so consentaneous in their principles, and so coordinate in their
birth, that, in the outset, they were not infrequently united in the same
person: the same person was at once king and pontiff. As society advanced, the
agents of this tyranny were augmented; a seeming division of powers took place,
while a real union was maintained: to one party was committed the execution of
their joint devices; to the other was entrusted the more silent and specious
diffusion of opinions favorable to their views. The first subdued opposition
in the field; the last undermined it in the family; and while the king led his
chiefs to combat, the pontiff, surrounded by his priests, invested with the
security of inviolable sanctity, refined his cunning, multiplied his wiles, and
at length succeeded in subjugating the prince as well as the people. This was
sometimes a delicate task; but the fear which even the most powerful despots
entertain of their slaves, favored the sacerdotal usurpation; and they were
held by interest who secretly derided the pretensions of the prelacy.

As the state of society improved, the cultivators of superstition subtilized
and perfected their arts. They saw and obeyed the necessity of governing less
in appearance, while they redoubled their exertions, by converting to their aid
all the errors of judgment, all the violences of passion, and all the phenomena
of nature, to hold an ampler tyranny over the minds of men. Unable absolutely
to impede the progress of knowledge, they labored to distort it to their own
purposes; or, failing of success, imposed a more powerful obstacle, by exerting
their influence for the destruction of the intractable sovereign, and
enlightened philosopher.

While nations were exclusively ruled by the priesthood, or by tyrants who
united in their own persons the offices of monarch and high priest, no safe
means of obtaining and consolidating authority were neglected. Afterward, upon
a separation of the two functions of enslaving the bodies and subjugating the
minds of men, the leaders of opinion strenuously supported all the outrages of
the despot who was subservient to their wishes; and, whether he ground with the
iron edge of oppression his own subjects, or the subjects of another, whether
his capricious frenzy doomed his own territories, or the dominions of a
neighboring prince, to desolation, alike sustained his fury and panegyrized
his injustice. Under such circumstances, is it wonderful that slavery became
widely diffused; that the sword and the robe alone were deemed worthy the
ambition of the great; that all the arts which nourish and bless mankind were
despised as servile; that men became the worshippers of men, and eagerly
acknowledged themselves the servants of one, that they might more securely
tyrannize over many.

Nor was this state of things limited to monarchies. Forms of government rather
varied the application of the spirit of despotism, than destroyed it. If the
citizens of States denominated free, were less servile in their demeanor
toward those who were at any time entrusted with authority, they were not the
more disposed to relinquish their dominion over the persons and minds of those
whom they had subdued, by stealth, or artifice, or conquest, to their pleasure.
The subjects of the Great King, indeed, prostrated themselves in his presence,
whom they might now supplant, now flatter to accomplish their designs; but the
frigid soldiery of Sparta, and the fickle citizens of Athens, held, with
combined watchfulness, their numerous slaves in hopeless subjection. Here,
still more than in the voluptuous capitals of the East, all mechanic arts were
deemed base, and the free citizen would have held himself degraded by the
personal performance of any of the offices which contribute to the immediate
support of life. Rome and Carthage were full of slaves, whose condition was
little different from those now employed in our own country; and the most
illustrious statesmen and generals of all these ancient and celebrated
Republics returned, through files of prostrate slaves, from the delivery of
their fellow-citizens, from the successful assertion of their own freedom, to
domineer, at home, over wretches by nature equally entitled to liberty and
happiness.

If such were the conduct of the freest and most flourishing States of
antiquity, in their most prosperous days, what was to be expected from them
when sunk and degraded by all the imbecility of voluptuousness and sloth, and
all the vices of stupidity and ignorance?

The dark ages, as they are called, were emphatically the torpor of the human
race; the sleep, in which every horrid and disgustful dream tortured and
disfigured the perverted mind. The introduction of letters, from the East, into
the new and rising republics of Italy, effected but little for the general
relief of slavery. Feodality and superstition bound in double fetters the mass
of mankind. The invention of printing was equally without sudden benefit. The
discovery of gunpowder contributed more speedily to this end, by equalizing
the powers of men. And the reformation, attempted by others, but accomplished
by Luther and Calvin, made a deeper inroad into this savage constitution of
society. From this moment the foundations of slavery were shaken. The pillar of
the church was its proudest column. It was no longer the sanctuary of the
oppressor; and the vestibule of inquiry once safely past, nothing could protect
the interior of the temple from the reiterated attacks of the keen spirit of
investigation: its lofty turrets, and its ample walls, were destined
successively to thunder to the ground. Thence forward, the progress of social
amelioration has been constant, though slow.

While these transactions were changing the face of Europe, the discovery and
settlement of America opened a new field for the execution of every noble, as
well as every baneful enterprise. What was done, need not be repeated. The
melancholy recollection oppresses even us, whose immediate ancestors bore so
little share in these detestable events. Scarcely was the sword of
extermination laid aside, half sated with the blood of its innumerable victims,
when fresh crimes were devised for the curse of this new-discovered world. A
gallant nation, by whose generous efforts their native land had been rescued
from the long dominion of brave but hated conquerors; -- a nation that had led
the way in naval and commercial enterprise; -- whose empire, narrow at home,
had been extended, by the vigor of its councils and the prowess of its chiefs,
to the distant shores of Asia, of Africa, and of America, were the first t^
violate the noble principles by which they had been guided in their own
defense, and to commence the abominable traffic in their fellow men. Their
example was speedily followed by others; and they who had contended with the
armies of a monarch, who had brought a king to the scaffold, who deserted their
country to preserve their civil and religious liberty, they were the first to
imitate this dark proceeding, and to engage in this abhorred commerce. The
rivalry of some nations, and the avarice of others, multiplied and extended the
evil; and while the consciences and the reason of the European proprietors of
America were paralized, or slept in thoughtless repose, African subjection and
domestic slavery were propagated, from the frozen bays of the north, to the icy
and tempestuous oceans of the south. The disease daily increased and gained
vigor, while the patient was inconscious of its progress, or regarded it with
the smile of self-congratulation, as desirable and felicitous. -- Negro slavery
was universal -- and the conduct of it, at home and abroad, was wrought into a
system, pursued with an unrelenting spirit of enterprizing cruelty, and
maintained by all the force of watchful and suspicious tyranny.

Such was the state of the subject in the then Colonies of Great Britain, in
the United States, when an obscure individual of a derided sect, startled by a
sudden conviction of the enormity of the crime, and the fearful consequences to
result from its continuance, sounded the alarm of forsaken justice and violated
humanity, deplored the treachery of man to man, and denounced the disobedience
of mortals to the Immortal. The loud appeals of Woolman were succeeded by the
gender, but more touching expostulations of Benezet. The first was a sudden
torrent, dashed into foam against impenetrable rocks, yet scattered over and
slightly moistening the surrounding soil: the second, a deep, silent, and
diffused stream, that percolates the sands, dissolves the least consolidated
rocks, bubbling and oozing forth through a thousand passages and clefts, and
spreading over and fertilizing an extensive territory. Encouraged by the
example of these men, or awakened by their admonitions, new advocates for the
oppressed arose. But they increased their own zeal more than they augmented the
charity of others. Their success was small -- their advances slow. Still they
advanced. The fears and jealousies of the holders of slaves were, at length,
alarmed; and oppression, which, at first, derided the feeble efforts of its
adversaries, and contemned them as the frantic revels of insanity or folly, was
rouzed into action, and animated into speech. This was a mighty triumph for the
cause of humanity. Truth and Reason are all-powerful if they gain an audience.
The arguments of Falsehood are opposed to them, as cobwebs in the hands of
Sampson. To have obtained a parley with their adversary, is to have half
achieved a victory. The parley has been obtained; the conferences have been
carried on with ardour; the enemy have maintained their ground with obstinacy;
but they are every where foiled and beaten down; they are driven to their last
subterfuges; and victory begins to incline the balance of final superiority on
the side of justice.

The holders of slaves, in the outset of the con^est, ventured to place their
defense on the ground of Justice. The rights of conquest, the denunciations of
Jehovah, and the claims of superior intellect, were severally and conjointly
urged in their behalf. They purchased the victims of unsuccessful war of their
victorious masters; they obeyed the prophetic voice of Heaven, whether they
subjugated the accursed seed of Cain, distinguished from the righteous progeny
of Seth, by their melancholy hue, or subdued to servants [themselves the
children of Japhet, dwelling in the tents of Shem,] the offspring of degenerate
Ham; they but exercised the authority with which they were invested, when to
man was given dominion over the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and
all things else which have life and motion. -- They forgot that war, but in
self-defence, that hostile incursion, was alike a violation of justice, whether
covered with defeat, or crowned with success; that men born to equal rights,
though they might forfeit them by crime, could not be deprived of them by
force; that no claim could be founded on the infraction of right; and they
concealed, or hoped to conceal, the odious cause of those conquests on which
they built their pretensions, since that cause existed in their own injustice,
in their own avarice of oppression. They forgot that the same Jehovah who
inflicted punishment on the first fratricide, did not extend it to his
offspring; and that the mark which distinguished him from men was a token of
mercy. They forgot that the curse was limited to the lineal descendants of one
of the children of the brutal son of Noah; that no industry could trace the
connection between this supposed ancestor and his supposed progeny; that,
whatever might be the will of the Deity, in respect to any particular race of
men, nothing could justify another for inflicting unprovoked injury upon them;
that the code from which they derived their pretended authority to enslave one
portion of their fellow-men, declared all to be brethren, the children of one
parent, the partakers of the same inheritance; that he whom they acknowledged
as their Savior, proclaimed himself equally the savior of all men; and that,
the future destiny of all being the same, they were unequivocally entitled to
the same present advantages. They forgot that the differences in the talents
and erudition of men arose simply from external circumstances; that the same
course or species of events which now elevated the inhabitants of Europe and
their descendants to the summit of political pre-eminence, formerly as much
distinguished the progenitors of their unhappy slaves from the rest of mankind;
that the cradle of the sciences was in Africa, and their first nurslings, and
their earliest fathers, Africans. -- All this they forgot -- but they were
reminded of it; they were silent, but they were not ashamed.

Their new plea was founded on Humanity, -- O impudence of vice! -- on that
humanity by them so violated and trampled on. They removed ignorant and unhappy
beings, from regions of barbarism and superstition, to countries enlightened by
knowledge and adorned with arts. They brought them to a christian country,
where the true God was acknowledged and worshipped, where his ordinances were
promulgated and explained, and where access was easy to the only means of a
virtuous present and happy future life. Here, fed, clothed, instructed in
numerous arts, and with opportunities for religious improvement, how much
better their condition than in their native realms! -- Gentle preachers of
humanity! generous instructors of the savage and the ignorant! It was for this,
then, that ye crossed seas and oceans, braving innumerable toils and dangers;
for this that ye excited murderous wars between peaceful and friendly
neighbors; for this that ye tore away, sundering them from their native
country, from each other, whole tribes, -- parents and children, husband and
wife, the infirm and the hardy, -- massacreing perhaps, or leaving to perish,
the aged and the little one; for this that ye bound them with iron, pressed
them like bales of cloth together into the same hold, without distinction of
sex, -- excluding them from light and air; for this that ye hurried them to
frozen, or to burning regions, scourged them to incessant toil, and tortured
them into unresisting submission; it was for this that all these exertions were
made, and so long continued -- in obedience to the impulses of humanity, and
the injunctions of religion. Hoary and hallowed apologists for avarice and
oppression! who constituted you judges of the virtue and happiness of others?
who authorized your forcible interference in their concerns? who made you
arbiters of their destiny? Had ye gone to them in simplicity and truth, with
love in your hearts, benevolence in your aspects, full of kindness, and full of
instruction; had you won them by an indefatigable and disinterested zeal in
their behalf, subdued them by the parental tenderness of your conduct, and
taught them to reverence you for the purity of your lives; had you charmed them
to peace, and led them to the ample source of knowledge, converting their
country into a garden, and themselves into social and refined beings; then
might ye have talked of humanity; then might ye have boasted of the sincerity
of your devotion. But ye have been as tigers and as wolves. Ye have entered the
tents of Africa as hyaenas; and the whole land is devoted to carnage; is waste
and desolate.

It was madness that dictated the plea of humanity in favor of the oppressors
of the Africans. The subtiler spirits of those who had been less accustomed to
shelter their conduct under the pretext of religion, suggested the more obvious
and more complex justification of Policy. They cited the example of all former
nations. Among them, whether governed by one, the few, or the many, slavery
universally obtained. It secured the thrones of princes; it occasionally might
protect the aristocracy against encroachments; it delivered the citizen from
servile labor, free to the care of government, the cultivation of science, the
pursuit of gain, and the extension of his country's power. In all, it fostered
and unyielding spirit against foreign subjection; and it generated or increased
the passion, while it provided the means, for the accomplishment of schemes of
aggrandizement and glory: -- the legitimate and only aim of the monarch and the
statesman. -- Wretched and feeble sophistry! what, are we to be bound by the
miserable example of others, or shall we be permitted to take counsel with our
reason? But, are they not coincident in warning us against the policy proposed?
Whether we regard the political or the social condition of the States that have
authorized slavery, whether we consider its effects on their happiness or their
power, the conclusion is equally against it. The safety and durable felicity of
a government depend absolutely on the attachment of its subjects or citizens;
and attachment can only be founded on a sense of the blessings it confers.
Power can never be steadily maintained, nor effectually exercised, for a long
period, but from the united exertions of a whole nation. This union must flow
from mutual confidence, of the people and the government, of the citizens in
each other. The only solid basis of confidence is morality. The same means
which perpetuate power, secure happiness. Nations, indeed, may exist for a
time; they may enjoy a temporary success, while they disregard the dictates of
justice, and trample on the rights of half mankind: a devouring fire may
suddenly burst forth and prostrate the neighboring forests; a tornado may
devastate a wide extent of harvest; an unexpected swell of the ocean may lay
waste the labors and overwhelm the habitations of men: but, as in the natural,
so in the political or moral world, all these violent agitations are of short
duration. They even contain the elements of their own destruction, or the
recompense for their own fury. The degree of power is diminished with its
extent, as its security is by its injustice; and as no nation has hitherto
attempted to obtain universal dominion on equitable principles, so none has
hitherto been able to preserve what little it has gained. Contemptible and
abhorred is that policy which, whether it aim by general or domestic subjection
to secure preponderating influence and authority, sacrifices on the altars of
avarice and ambition public virtue and private happiness. The vultures of
horror and remorse hover over the aceldama of morality to which its ferocious
triumphs convert the earth.

If honesty be indeed the best policy, then, exclaimed the tyrants of the
Africans, if it be indeed the soundest policy that nations can pursue to adhere
with inflexible obstinacy to the decrees of justice, still it is for individual
interest, and thus for the national benefit, that slavery be permitted. We are
the proprietors of a soil, the sojourners in a climate, unfriendly to health,
and hostile to industry. Our destiny has cast us here, and we must live, and we
are desirous of enjoying life. By introducing slaves, we do but secure this by
other means than are necessary in more fortunate regions. We bring them to
climates like their own; to a cultivation for which they are fitted by nature;
and we derive that wealth and that power from the labors of an ignorant race
of men, which could not be obtained by our own efforts, and which are justly
due to us, from them, for our superior knowledge, our intellectual
pre-eminence. -- Blind and fatal infatuation! what is the interest of man?
Sloth, intemperance, wealth, and capricious despotism? Or is it to labor for
the happiness of mankind, and to find our own in the creation of theirs? To
preserve, to the extremest verge of life, a mind and body equal to every
exigence, untainted by disease, unpolluted by vice, unembittered by remorse? --
Consider it simply as relative to the acquisition of wealth. The argument from
the effects of soil and climate applies only to a part of the countries which
permit domestic slavery. In these, numerous examples demonstrate the falsity of
the assertions of its advocates. Freemen, and white men, can labor there; the
mortality among them is not greater than among slaves; and their toil is vastly
more productive: they have an interest in what they do. Much of the difficulty
now experienced, and much of the mortality, would be obviated by a change in
the objects and mode of culture; and the superior productiveness of the soil,
to that of more temperate regions, exacts a degree of toil surprizingly less to
answer all the claims of nature and of luxury. But, were this not obviously
true, thus might we address the thoughtless tyrants of the Africans, --
consider the strict connection between vice and misery, and the certain,
inevitable punishment which injustice draws upon itself. Look to the millions
of unappropriated lands, ignorant of the plough, profuse of wealth, and exempt
from pestilence. Haste! look not behind you! fly the accursed soil which, for
your subsistence, requires to be nursed with the tears of innocents, and
fattened with the blood of men! Fly, while the vengeful sword of retribution is
yet suspended! Haste to the more fortunate climes beyond you; learn justice;
restrain your lustful passions; and find your true interest in temperance, and
in virtue!

The fate of the practice of oppression has been similar to that of every other
vice: the more it has been investigated, the less defensible, the more odious
has it appeared. Plea after plea has been suggested; each, in its turn, has
been controverted and set aside. Few slave-holders, capable of comprehending
truth, have attempted to re^ute the reasonings by which the justice, the
humanity, the policy of the slave trade, and the subserviency of slavery to
national and individual interest, have been disproved. Yet, so much are men the
slaves of habit, so closely does selfishness cling to our bosoms, so difficult
is error of eradication, that, foiled in these topics of defense, the advocates
of slavery have resorted to another. -- We admit, say they, that slavery is
unjust, abominable; an outrage on humanity; contrary to all sound maxims of
policy; and hostile to the interests of a people: but, then, what shall we do?
Most sincerely do we wish that this curse had never visited our country. But it
is entailed upon us by our fathers; it is interwoven with every part of our
social organization; and we can not erase the blot, without destroying the
fabric. All things are just, but all things are not expedient. -- Alas! how
multiform is error! how infinitely is it propagated! how does it appear in the
very midst of our sincerest labors! and confound our most faithful councils!
It is by intertwining itself with truth that it leads so many, even virtuous,
minds astray; nor could the most subtle enemy of justice have devised an
argument more likely to mislead than this before us, which steals upon our
feelings, while it affects to appeal only to our reason. In fact, the very
motives urged here for the continuance of slavery, are those which most
forcibly demand its abolition. Has the slave trade really devolved all these
misfortunes upon the countries which have permitted it, -- put an end to it
immediately. This may be done without materially affecting slavery. At least,
here it may be done. The United States do not, like the West Indies, require a
prodigious annual importation to supply the waste of barbarity and disease.
Cruel as is their employment, still they propagate in a proportion not much
below their consumption. But, if slavery be a curse, let no time be lost in
attempting to remove it. If its sudden removal be dangerous, let it be
gradually accomplished; but let it be accomplished. What strange reasoning is
that which would persuade us to continue and increase a mischief, because it
has existence at this moment! -- O men, free to acknowledge your errors, but
indolent to reform them, put, at length, the axe to the root of this tree of
evil! If you fear left its sudden fall bury you in its ruins, proceed with
caution! Twig after twig, branch after branch, shall decay and fall; and your
grateful posterity shall, without danger, cast down the bare and withered trunk.

It was Agathocles, I think, who, when the victorious arms of Carthage
threatened Sicily with subjugation, suddenly withdrew from its defense, and led
his soldiers into Africa, into the country of his enemies. The spirit of this
measure has sometimes been commended; but its ill-success has taken off the
glare of false courage by which it was surrounded, and proved how much more
certainly it accelerated the defeat of its conductor.

It certainly deserves to be numbered among the singular contrivances of minds
immersed in error, that, in the course and progress of the contention between
the supporters of slavery and the advocates of justice and humanity, the first,
after ample acknowledgments of the weakness of their cause in the enumerated
particulars, should, at length, come to retort the charge of injustice on the
last. The imbecility of this argument, if argument it may be called, is a
favorable omen. It bespeaks the near triumph of truth; the approaching
deliverance of the oppressed. It is the fate of error to lose strength and
consistency by every examination; that all its pleas shall regularly diminish
in effect, as they regularly succeed to each other. The moment that the
slave-holder acknowledged the injustice of slavery, that moment the slow, but
certain, death-wound was inflicted upon it. The apologists for this pernicious
system of domestic oppression, have now reached to the extremity of subterfuge.
Their last argument can impose on no discerning mind; and henceforward they
must maintain by force, what they can not support by reason. But what is this
charge of injustice which they exhibit so vehemently against the assertors of
the rights of the innocent? We did not, say they, commence the system of
slavery. We found it already established. The laws of our country authorized
the possession of a property in human flesh. They have hitherto maintained us
in it. Is it not unjust to deprive us of that which the social regulations, you
would now change, have conferred upon us? Will you, at once, despoil us of that
which we have purchased on the faith of these regulations? Are you prepared, by
a single vote, and without any compensation, to destroy so large a portion of
all our wealth? Does not the law equally protect property, whether it exist in
animate or inanimate substance? whether it be clothed with the bestial or human
form? Dare you commit so horrid an injustice? -- Miserable sophisters! were the
law to authorize you to enslave your fellow-freemen of one State, or one
County, should you act justly in availing yourselves of its sanction? Were you
born to the inheritance of an ample estate in money, the fruits of your
fathers' repeated thefts, could you vindicate your conduct in withholding it
from the rightful proprietors, by any law of descents? Shall the legislators of
a great nation be denied the power, which pertains to every individual of that
nation, of acknowledging their errors, and laboring to correct them? Shall the
most evident and inestimable interests of a whole community, not only its
present, but its future interests, require the discontinuance of a system
dangerous to our security, hostile to our property, and pernicious to our
morals, and shall the short-sighted selfishness of a small, or even a
considerable part of that community, determine its permanence? But, what is
this compensation which you are denied? Is not the constant labor of a slave,
for fifteen, or for ten, years, a sufficient compensation for the care of
protecting his infancy? Would the tyrants demand triple recompense for their
injustice? Recompense they shall have, and thrice threefold, -- but let them
tremble in the expectation!

In the existing circumstances of society, encumbered as we are with this
mighty evil, which slavery has cast upon us, we are only free to choose, amid
variety of embarrassments. There is no fear that even this factitious right of
property, so much insisted on, will not be sufficiently respected. Alas! there
is no hope but that it long continue triumphantly to oppose all the efforts of
benevolence. But, were it justly insisted on, what demons of malignant cruelty
paralize the senses and the reason of legislators? Do they not see the ruin
which surrounds us? Are they unconscious of the poison which hovers over every
roof, lurks in every house, and infects every cup? Wait they till the venders
of pestilence, till the manufacturers of plagues, relinquish their productive
and desolating craft, before they labor for the restoration of health, for the
prevention of disease? What! will they foster the fury, relax the fetters which
partially confine her, and imp her with new wings, that she may more vigorously
pursue the work of devastation? -- You, yes you, the Legislators of America,
you are the real upholders of slavery! You, yes you, Legislators of this
Commonwealth, you foster and protect it here! Is it not recognized by your
laws? and in the very face of your Constitution? of that instrument which you
maintained by your arms, and sealed with your blood? Have not those laws
authorized, systematized, and protected, and do they not now protect it? If you
fear the clamors of the enslavers of men, or if you acknowledge the justice of
their claims (...) compensation, it is you who sanction, you who uphold the
crime. It is you who are deaf to the demands of justice, the sighs of humanity,
the representations of policy, the calls of interest, the suggestions of
expediency, the warning voice of domestic tranquillity. It is you who shut the
ear, who close the eye, who clench the hand, insensible to every motive which
should most determine men to hear, to see, and to act. You perpetrate, you
perpetuate, you immortalize, injustice -- and all "for so much trash as may be
grasped thus." The opposers of justice do not read, think, reason, feel, --
they do not so much as listen. They admit but one idea, that of gain from the
labor of their slaves; they are occupied but with one care, that of
maintaining their authority. And you nourish that gain, you cherish that care,
you defend with double mounds that monstrous authority, at the hazard, if not
with the sacrifice, of all the dearest interests of society, of its very
existence. These you hazard, when the remedy is obvious, certain, easy to be
obtained, and safe to be applied. Mad insensibility! the little interest of the
moment, the gratifications of vanity, and the contests of passion, a market, a
palace, or a strip of land, engross your thoughts and dissipate your treasures,
while the welfare of a nation sleeps unregarded, while thousands of your
fellow-beings, children of the same father, and inheritors of the same destiny,
eat the bitter bread of slavery, writhe under the lash of cruelty, and sink
into the untimely grave amid the taunts of oppression! -- Amen! so be it! and
so shall be the retribution! It is but justice to the last House of
Representatives of this State to inform the reader, in this place, that they
passed a bill providing for the gradual abolition of slavery, and by a
considerable majority. The bill, however, was rejected in the Senate.


The conduct of men conscious of their villainy, is always and every where the
same. Accused, they attempt their justification; but, failing here, they strive
to overwhelm with censure those who have detected their baseness, and called
upon them to repair their injustice. Their last efforts are directed to the
destruction of the subjects of their oppression, in the vain hope of palliating
its enormity, by proving it to have been merited. As in other cases, so has it
fared in this. Incapable of vindicating themselves, or of effectually
misrepresenting the purity of our motives, the encouragers of slavery have
fallen on the miserable Africans; as though their vices and their follies
constituted a reason for subjecting them to bondage, and bending them with
reiterated wrong. Shallow subterfuge! feeble malice! Every motive urged against
them ought to interest us in their behalf. Are they dull and stupid, it is ours
to startle them into thought, and rouse them to inquiry; are they ignorant, it
is ours to cultivate and instruct them; base, ours to elevate; vicious, ours to
reclaim them. The more forlorn and hopeless their condition, the more energetic
and persevering should be our efforts. The measure of our benevolence should be
capacious as their wants; and our zeal commensurate with their insensibility.
Stupidity, ignorance, folly, vice, have each its several remedy; and our
security as well as interest, our duty as well as happiness, demand the
application. What must be the texture of his heart who can find reason in the
ignorance, in the vices, and in the sufferings of men, in all that most can
render them objects of compassion and of charity, for insuring that ignorance,
augmenting those vices, and adding to these sufferings the yoke of bondage, and
the sting of torture? Call you him man, or demon?

The experience of many years, evidence palpable to the most hardened and
obstinate sense, has demonstrated the capacity of the Blacks. The very vices of
which they stand so bitterly accused, demonstrate it. They, like all men else,
are the creatures of education, of example, of circumstances, of external
impressions. Make them outcasts and vagabonds, thrust them into the society of
drunkards and of thieves, shut from them the fair book and salutary light of
knowledge, degrade them into brutes, and trample them in the dust, and you must
expect, them to be vile and wretched, dissolute and lawless, base and stupid.
Madmen! would you "gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?"

But, notwithstanding the degraded condition of the Africans, and their
descendants, among us, -- a condition to which they have been reduced, or in
which they have been retained, by those who reproach them with it, and would
offer it as an excuse for their own inhumanity and injustice, -- still they
exhibit many examples of humble, but of cheering virtue. We not only see them
irreproachably employed in various mechanic occupations, but, in some few
instances, elevated to the illustrious offices of instructors in learning, and
inculcators of morality. The desk, and the pulpit, have witnessed their
triumphs over all the efforts of blind and malignant prejudice. Already they
begin to feel their own worth as men; already are they impressed with some just
sense of the nature of those exertions which are making in their behalf;
already have they attained to some conception of that prudent and virtuous
conduct which is the best reward for all our toils; already may they challenge
the palm from many of their whiter brethren. Perceive you not that spirit of
improvement -- flow thought it be, yet visible -- which diffuses itself among
them? Observe you not their growing knowledge, their increasing industry, their
softening manners, their correcter morals? Hear you not that sigh, wakened by
your benevolent sympathy? Mark you not that tear of grateful joy, silently
descending? See you not that ^able figure, that casts himself at your feet,
that kisses your hand, that clasps your knees, fathers and benefactors of our
race, that exclaims -- the sons of Africa feel your virtue at their souls; --
their hearts, their hands, their lives, are devoted to your service.

Go! hapless progeny of a violated parent! cultivate peace, order, knowledge.
Let your patience grow with your wrongs. Let your hearts learn forgiveness,
your hands labor for your tyrants, your lives re^ute their calumnies. Go!
assured, that, as for us, we have well considered what awaits us, -- the extent
of surrounding obstacles, and their duration, and have resolved, never to
quench our zeal, to withhold our care, to intermit our labors, never to drop
the language of persuasion, and forget the tone of justice, till we behold you
disenthralled of bonds, reinstated in your rights, blessed with science, and
adorned with virtue.

THE END.

