AN ORATION, DELIVERED JULY 4th, 1798, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF LITTLE COMPTON; IN CELEBRATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE

By Josiah C. Shan, M. A.

Hacc olim memenisse semper juvabit. VIRGIL NEWPORT: PRINTED BY H. and O.
FARNSWORTH. M,DCC,XCVIII.

TO THE PUBLIC.
ON the Fourth of July, being the Anniversary of American Independence, the
following Oraton, at the previous desire of the inhabitants of the town of
Little-Compton, was delivered, in commemoration of that event, to a numerous
assembly, at the Congregational meeting house; and, by the request of numerous
friends, it now solicits the candor of the Public -- accompanied by the hope of
the author, that the very short notice for preparation may, in some measure,
apologize for its imperfections.

LITTLE-COMPTON, August 14, 1798.
AN ORATION, etc.
MY COUNTRYMEN, AND FELLOW-CITIZENS.
IN firm reliance on your candor, and, in compliance with the polite request of
numbers now present, I have, with diffidence, accepted the invitation to appear
as your speaker, on this important and joyful occasion, before this crowded and
respectable auditory.

ACCEPT, my fellow-citizens, in this public manner, the tribute of my
gratitude, a tribute the more sincere, because it is accompanied with this
reflection, that, although a stranger among you, your partiality has induced
you to place me in this honorable station.

ASSEMBLED for the purpose of celebrating the natal day of American
Independence, and commemorating those events, which led to our present exalted
station among the nations of the earth, let us, for a moment, retrace those
many steps by which we have ascended to our present Prosperity, Independence,
and Wealth.

OUR fathers, nobly disdaining to wear the yoke of servitude, and beholding the
European world bending beneath the iron yoke of civil and religious tyranny,
nobly determined to bid adieu to their native land, enjoy their freedom, or
perish in the attempt -- "Approving heaven behold the favorite ark, dancing
over the billows of the raging ocean, and graciously preserved it, until the
chosen families were bro't in safely to these western regions.

THEY found the country swarming with savages, who threatened death, with every
kind of torture; but savages and death with torture were less terrible than
slavery -- They knew it was more safe to dwell with man, in his most
uncivilized state, than in a country where arbitrary power prevails. -- Even
anarchy itself, that bugbear, held up by the tools of power, though truly to be
deprecated, is infinitely less dangerous to mankind than arbitrary power.
Anarchy can be but of short duration; for when men are at liberty to pursue
that course, which is the most conducive to their own happiness, they will soon
adopt it, and from the rudest state of nature, order and government will soon
arise. But tyranny, when once established, entails its curses upon a nation to
the latest period of time, unless some daring genius, inspired by Heaven,
shall, unappalled by danger, bravely form and execute the arduous design of
restoring liberty and life to his enslaved country.

THE tools of power, in every age, have ransacked their invention to justify
the few, in sporting with the liberties of the many, and having found their
sophistry too weak to hold mankind in bondage, have impiously dared to force
Religion, the fair daughter of the King of Heaven, to become a prostitute in
the service of Hell. They have taught that kings, honored by the name of
Christian, might bid defiance to the founder of their faith, might pillage
Pagan countries, and deluge them with blood, only because they boasted
themselves to be the disciples of that teacher, who strictly charged his
followers to do unto others as they would that others should do unto them.

OUR fathers, having become the honest proprietors of these western shores --
having struggled through difficulties well nigh insurmountable -- having made
the wilderness to blossom like the rose, and become vocal with the praises of
their God, sat down, each under his own vine and fig tree, firm in the hope and
belief, that they should transmit to their posterity the fair inheritance of
freedom.

The crimson veil of war was soon permitted to encloud these beauteous
prospects. -- The savage Indians -- the still more savage French, and the
merciless haughty parent from whom we descended, successively attempted to
deprive us of our lives, our liberty and our property.

CHERISH in your minds, this day, my friends, the remembrance of that period,
when the British lion, unchained from his den, rushed impetuous upon
defenseless men, women and children -- when the affectionate wife beheld her
murdered, gasping husband, agonizing in the pangs of death -- her little
infant, sweet cherub! weltering in its father's blood! -- Enough!

THIS tragedy need not be heightened -- nature reluctant shrinks already from
the view, and the chilled blood rolls slowly backward to its fountain!

THE various measures taken by the British administration, to bring us into
unconditional submission, to their will; the inhuman and murderous plans they
concerted and executed, for the attainment of their object -- the savage
barbarity with which they burned our towns, ransacked our villages, and
murdered, in cold blood, young men and maidens, old men and babes, are well
impressed on your minds.

MANY of you have been engaged in the defense of your country; and some, now
present, can exhibit those wounds, received in the day of battle, and suspend
the stump of an arm as a monument of glory. -- The horrors of war are still
fresh in our memories -- The heights of Rhode Island remain as monuments of
those days of sorrow, when you rolling stream groaned beneath the thunder of
British vengeance, awakened all your fears, and held your lives in jeopardy.

UNDER all disadvantages, this northern continent, though different in its
government, manners and customs, as though inspired by one soul, greatly rose
in arms. The genius of America roused, by reiterated and atrocious acts of
tyranny and oppression, called forth the generous efforts of her sons to oppose
the destructive system -- yea to resist unto blood, rather than part with their
freedom. Liberty, fair daughter of heaven, inspired every soul with a sacred
flame, and glowed in every breast.

WE fought not for fame or glory, nor for an extension of empire; but for
freedom -- and divine Providence, the God of armies, gave us the victory, and
crowned our exertions with independence and peace.

THOSE steps which led to, and the circumstances attendant have been such and
so combined as to convince us, that no human skill or power could have directed
them.

THE variety of scenes which have checkered the rise, progress and issue of the
contest between Great Britain and America -- the many and surprising
interpositions of divine Providence, with their various windings and happy
consequences, will swell the historic page, and, rolling down the tide of time,
fill the reader with wonder and astonishment.

LET the fourth of July, 1776, be a memorial unto you forever -- Let it be
distinguished among the days of the year, as the commencement of the important
Era of our glorious independence. -- This is the day -- the ever memorable
day, in which the full blaze of liberty shown forth refulgent on Columbia's
sons.

LET our bosoms, awake to the calls of gratitude, be impressed with this truth,
that had not the Lord been on our side -- had not that God, by whom kings
reign, and princes decree justice, erected his standard in the front of our
battles, we should have in vain contended against a numerous and powerful army,
inured to the hardships of war, and accustomed to victory.

AMERICA gradually unfolded her character, until the boldness of that Congress,
which first asserted our independence, astonished the world.

EUROPE beheld us as a certain victim to English power, until, by our
successive arms, and the surrender of Burgoyne's army, the French thought it
good policy to attempt, by assisting us, to humble that power, the increase of
which they had so much reason to fear. As soon as it was made certain, that we
should persist in the maintenance of our independence, and not before, France
stepped in to our assistance.

THE politician could easily foresee, that America was calculated, from local
situation, and extent of territory, as well as by the manners and genius of her
sons, to become in some future day, a great, powerful and wealthy nation.

HAVING, amidst all the horrors of a bloody and ferocious war, expelled the
enemy from our country, and defeated, by our councils, the base attempts of a
foreign power to prescribe ignoble conditions of peace, under the mask of
friendship, we turned our attention to the regulation of our own government,
which had been preserved, during the war, more by the virtue of the people,
than the energy of law.

THE road to empire has usually been slow and difficult -- As order
progressively rose out of chaos, by the forming hand of the great architect of
nature, so must a well ordered government be collected and formed from the
scattered materials and wild mixture of a chaotic people.

THE American nation, soon after the war, feeling the imbecility of their
government, formed a convention of American geniuses, for the purpose of
devising some plan of government, calculated to combine the several states, in
one interest, and thus render them formidable in power, and happy in peace,

TO BALANCE the different interests of the states, so that each might give up
its proportion of local advantages, for the good of the whole -- to procure a
model of government, which should so accord with the genius of a large,
extensive and free people, of different education, manners and employments,
which should meet the consenting voice of even nine, among thirteen independent
republics. To effect all this, was a task, to which nothing was equal, short of
that assemblage of wisdom and philanthropy, which appeared in the convention.

YES, my fellow-citizens, this is an era reserved for the commencement of this
western empire. The United States exhibit to the world, the noble image of a
community, which, founded in equality and justice, secures to the individual
every enjoyment, which can be derived from human institutions.

THE fields and fruits are your own -- the regulations under which you live are
yours -- you are the proprietors and lords of the soil, and jointly constitute
the sovereignty of your country -- you are under a government of laws, and not
of men.

OUR excellent constitution, under whose benign and genial influence, our
infant nation has increased in wealth and population, without a parallel, is
so well guarded by checks, between executive and legislative duties, that it
must long -- very long remain as the palladium of our rights -- the boast and
admiration of unborn millions, unless some sacrilegious hand shall succeed in
undermining it, and again plunge this country into all the horrors of another
revolution.

WITH what rapid strides and improvement has this our native country,
progressed onwards, to its political acme, since the adoption of the Federal
Constitution.

OUR enterprizing sailors have unfurled the bald eagle of Columbia, and
triumphantly displayed our political Constellation in the most distant quarters
of the globe.

WE have the dainties of the farther and the nether Indies; the furs of
Kamschatka are brought to our doors, and the riches of Ethiopia's sands are
seen in our cities.

OUR enterprising farmers, educated in habits of industry, have explored the
wilderness; and cities now appear, where, but a few years since, was naught to
be seen, but the curling smoke of an Indian fire, and naught to be heard, but
the dreadful yells of merciless savages.

OUR manufactures have flourished, in a rapid degree, considering the extent of
our territory, which, while it remains unimproved, will render the labor of the
manufacturer too high, to enable him to afford his merchandise as low as it can
be imported.

THE arts and sciences have flourished, without a parallel, under the nurturing
hand of the genius of America -- We can now boast of warriors, statesmen,
philosophers, poets, historians and divines, who would do honor to any nation
on earth! -- What are all your heroes of antiquity -- your Alexanders, your
Pompeys, and your Caesar's, when compared to the God-like immortal Washington --
the glorious luminary of the present day -- before the bright effulgence of
whose virtues all heroes, ancient and modern, dwindle into comparative
insignificance! His name, while it is the terror of our enemies, is a constant
theme of admiration in the minds of all good men, throughout the universe.

WHEN we consider him as uniting the character of the hero, the statesman, the
philosopher, the farmer, and the christian, in one beautiful assemblage, it
must excite sensations of admiration, which will embalm the remembrance of his
virtues, in our affections, and in those of unborn millions yet to arise, and
hail him blessed!

TIME will not admit of my particularizing the resplendent virtues of an ADAMS,
who presides, with unshaken firmness, and unparalleled wisdom, at the head of
our federal administration -- of a FRANKLIN, who wrested the scepter from the
tyrant, and the thunderbolt from heaven -- of a RITTENHOUSE, who calculated
with astonishing precision, the revolution of the heavenly bodies -- and a long
list of the worthies, who sleep, in awful silence, in the mouldering caverns of
the dead! -- Peace to their ashes, and happiness to their souls.

METHINKS I behold the genius of America, this moment, hovering around us, and
in mournful accents, bewailing the apostasy of some of her sons -- for whose
liberties the blood of their fathers once encrimsoned the soil they now
improve! With a monitory voice she calls us to awake from our lethargy, and to
baffle those fatal snares which are laid for our political destruction.

AMERICANS, be not deceived -- Throw off the veil, which some artful demagogues
have been, for a long time, endeavoring to impose upon you.

SHALL independent Americans, urged on by a few hot headed jacobins, those
reptiles of their country, surrender their liberties to any nation on earth,
without first appealing to the God of justice, and brandishing those glittering
swords which have been once encrimsoned in the blood of their enemies? -- No!

WE are brought, my beloved countrymen, to an eventful crisis -- Our liberties
are in jeopardy, and that very nation, which has boasted of being our friends
and magnanimous ally, has already attempted, under the mask of friendship, to
reduce us to the most humiliating subjection.

I HOPE you will excuse me, if, on this important occasion, I briefly retrace
the conduct of the French toward this country, for nearly half the century
past.

BY habit, an intriguing, perfidious, faithless nation, they have ever looked
with a jealous eye, on the prosperity of the British nation. -- About the year
1759, in violation of the most solemn treaties, they endeavored to excite the
fury of the merciless savages against us, and to possess themselves, by force
of arms, of this then flourishing part of the English government. -- Kind
heaven, who has ever preserved America as in the hollow of his hand, interposed
in our behalf, and, by a dreadful storm, destroyed nearly the whole of the
French fleet, on its passage to this country, laden with soldiers and the
implements of death -- The valor of a WOLF finally put the remnant of their
armies to an ignominious flight, and the Plains of Abraham can now witness, by
its bleached skulls, the horrid carnage of that day. -- They were not only
defeated, in all their attempts, but driven from this country with shame and
disgrace, having left all their possessions in North America.

LIKE an evil demon, France sat brooding in sullen silence, over her
complicated misfortunes, meditating revenge, until the bloody war commenced
between Great-Britaia and America.

OUR ministers, knowing their hatred to England -- indefatigable at that court
of intrigue and perfidy, could not obtain any encouragement of assistance,
except from a few generous individuals -- such as the Marquis La Fayette, that
tried friend of America, that magnanimous apostle of liberty, over whose
misfortunes humanity must stop, and pay the tribute of a tear.

THE French were deaf to our sufferings -- or, at least, inactive in the
alleviation of them, until it was fully apparent, that we were determined to
maintain our independence, or perish in the attempt.

ACTUATED by revenge against Britain, and, by a hope of diminishing her power,
as well as enriching herself, on her spoils, and reaping profit from the
enterprise, she engaged, in the American war -- not, as some have ridiculously
asserted, from motives of philanthropy -- for there is no such thing as
national affection or gratitude -- but, from mercenary motives, as before
observed.

WE acknowledge she spilt her blood in our cause -- she fought valiantly in our
service, and, by her means, the day of peace was accelerated; but we despise
the base and sordid assertion, of this self-applauding nation, that we owe our
liberties to her. We owe them neither gratitude nor pence, and nothing, under
heaven, but that vengeance, which, like the liquid lava of Mount Vesuvius, will
ere long be poured down upon them, for their base atttempts to deprive us of
our liberty -- to separate the people from their government -- the best
government under heaven -- and again involve us in all the horrors of another
revolution.

WHEN the French first threw off the iron yoke of tyranny, under which they had
so long groaned, every American heart, from Georgia's sands to the province of
Main, beat in unison, with their success.

STRONGLY prepossessed in their favor, and viewing them as an oppressed people,
we beheld their struggles for liberty, with fervent prayers to the God of
heaven for their success, almost to an open declaration in their favor.

TAKING the advantages of our wishes, for their prosperity, in the
establishment of order and good government, they sent to this country; that
vile miscreant wretch, Genet, for the express purpose, as is now clearly
evident, of involving us, if possible, in the European war, although declaring
to our government, that they did not wish us to step aside from our neutrality.

HIS jacobin designs were soon unmasked, and he dismissed with shame and
disgrace.

BEHOLD in France, my fellow countrymen, a bloodthirsty, perfidious and
intriguing nation, who have murdered their king, without a legal right, --
whether guilty or not, we pretend not to say -- who have sworn avowedly to
maintain on one day what they have violated the very next -- who have filled
vessels with men, women, and children -- innocent as the dew-drops of the
morning, and sunk them in the river Seine -- who have tied young men and women
naked together, and plunging them into a watery grave, sportively called it
republican marriage -- who have massacred prisoners by thousands -- overflowed
its gutters with the blood of the slaughtered -- suspended, by the hair of the
head, the gasping remnant of some beauteous damsel, smiling in the very agonies
of death -- shifting her guillotine several times in a day, choked with blood
-- and, Good God! how shall I relate it? -- riping open mothers with child, and
before their very faces, dashing out the brains of the quivering infant against
the posts of the doors, and spreading desolation, carnage and death, in one
wide promiscuous ruin all around them! -- Ye who have eyes to weep and hearts
to feel, unstop the fountain of your tears, and ease your agonizing souls.

IN future ages, when men shall read the black historic page, which will record
these events, they will be inclined to discredit the probity of the historian
-- they will scarcely believe, that human nature could have been so depraved,
so desperately wicked.

UNDER the guidance of a Marat and Robespierre, they have denied the Christian
religion, and the immortality of the soul -- butchered those professors who
would not abjure it -- pillaged the sacred utensils of the church, and tying
them, with the Cross of Christ, on an ass, have burnt them, amidst the shouts
of the surrounding populace, with all the parade of impious mockery, and, in
defiance to the God of heaven, and the sentiments of man. Such is the situation
of religion and morality in France; and this picture, horrid as it is, and as
well attested as is the affection, that yonder sun rolls in the firmament of
heaven -- some wish us to copy. From such a government -- from such "liberty,"
Good Lord deliver us.

IT has been the undeviating policy of the French to divide and conquer. In
pursuance of this system, they have endeavored to revolutionize the world -- to
persuade the people, that they had a different interest from those who
administer the government, and that they only were the champions of true
liberty -- fighting in the cause of heaven, actuated by disinterested motives
of philanthropy.

BY valor in the field, and intrigue in the cabinet, the victories of France
excite our astonishment. Her armies have fought with a courage deserving a
better cause, than that which now appears to be their object, -- universal
dominion.

REGARDLESS of the most sacred ties, she immolates, at the shrine of her
ambition, as well those, with whom she is at peace, as those with whom she is
at war.

THE republic of Holland received them into her bosom as friends; and what a
contemptible appearance does that deluded nation now make in Europe, compared
with her former splendour! Her trade destroyed -- her ships burnt and sunk --
her money fraternized away, by intrigue and force, and her liberties buried in
a French coffin: She now exhibits to the world, the sad spectacle of a degraded
nation, ignominiously surrendering up their liberties to the greatest tyranny
on earth.

FRANCE, disregarding every moral, as well as political obligation, sacrificed
the republic of Venice to her ambition, and sold the inhabitants without any
ceremony. -- That republic, which has made so conspicuous a figure among the
nations of the earth for more than ten centuries, is now annihilated.

THE contributions exacted from those countries with which the French have been
at peace, as well as of those with which they have been at war, (...) been
collected with military force, and savage barbarity.

THE tranquillity of Europe and the world has been disturbed by the noise of
war -- France has laid aside the object, for which she at first contended --
the establishment of national liberty, founded on the basis of justice and
equal rights, and it is now plainly apparent that nothing but universal
dominion will satisfy her inordinate ambition.

SEPARATED from Europe, by the vast Atlantic, it was to be hoped that America
would be preserved from her broils and contentions -- but alas! my
fellow-citizens, although we have adhered to the punctilios of neutrality, and
studiously avoided every just cause of offense -- yet have we been viewed as
one of her enemies, because we would not involve ourselves in her bloody
quarrels.

HER ministers, who came to this country with assurances that France did not
wish us to engage in her quarrels, have since discovered, that they were
instructed to involve us, if possible.

GENET was the first mover of our jacobin clubs, those hot-beds of sedition --
by the instrumentality of which he intended to have brought us into their much
loved fraternal embrace; but in this he has been disappointed.

FRANCE, still believing that we are a divided people, and relying on the
strength of that party, which she boasts of having, in the very bosom of our
country, has viewed us, for some time past, as a certain victim to her power.

BY taking the vessels of her enemies, in our very harbors, she first infringed
the laws of neutrality, and then made our treaty with Great Britain a cause of
complaint, alleging that it was conducted in secrecy, and inimical to their
interest -- the last of which it as unfounded, as the other was true and
necessary, as they were thereby prevented from making any successful attempts
to defeat it.

WHETHER the British treaty, about which there has been so much noise, is
exceptionable or not, we pretend not to say; but this we fully believe, that it
was the height of policy to obtain it, and that it was the best possible
negotiation, which could have taken place at that time.

FRANCE has eagerly laid hold of every circumstance, to foment insurrection in
our country; to alienate the affections of the people from the government, and
involve us in all the horrors of a civil war: Her agents have swarmed in this
land of freedom: Our presses have groaned with their productions and calumnies,
against our government: They have been encouraged by designing demagogues; who,
destitute of merit, and disappointed in projects of ambition, would sell their
country or their God, to procure the favor of France.

EVERY prudent measure, calculated to heal existing differences, with that
haughty nation, has been pursued by our illustrious President, who presides at
the head of government like an atlas -- firm as the everlasting hills.

OUR ambassadors have been treated with scorn and contempt -- not even noticed
as the ministers of an independent republic -- abused in the gazettes, and
hooted at in the streets.

UNITING republican moderation and firmness, they have waited, in patience, for
an acknowledgment by the Directory; but in this they have been disappointed.

THE American government, sedulously desirous of harmony with France,
instructed their ministers to enter into negotiation, and to conclude on any
treaty not inconsistent with the dignity and happiness of our country.

TO render the embassy more respectable, three distinguished citizens have been
sent to wait on the Directory of France, and confer with them on our complaints
-- The treatment they have received is scandalous without a parallel, among
civilized nations. Although they have not been acknowledged, yet, through the
agents of Talleyrand, the prime minister of the nation, they have heard with
astonishment the demands of the Directory.

WE must disavow our approbation of Washington's farewell legacy, upon his
vacating the Presidency of the United States -- that legacy which we so justly
admired, and which, for sublimity of sentiment and political wisdom, deserves
to be written in letters of gold -- We must disapprove the speech of the
President at the opening of Congress -- We must pay Talleyrand, for his pocket
expenses, fifty thousand pounds sterling, and give and loan the Directory a
million of money, and then perhaps they will condescend -- a very pretty
condescension! to hear your ministers, and to think on your grievances! --
Unless you will do this, they will detain the millions of your property now in
their hands -- they will ravage your sea coasts -- burn and destroy your
cities, and, if possible, carry your wives and your children away in slavery.
-- Arouse then Americans, from your stupid lethargy! -- Be prepared for
resistance -- open your eyes -- let the evidence of your senses speak --
quickly dissipate those clouds which are ready to break in one wide desolating
storm, over your devoted and deluded heads.

YOUR ministers have returned and are returning from France -- War appears
inevitable or the surrender of our liberties: Already do their ships of war
indiscriminately plunder our merchantmen, in our very harbors, -- and will
independent Americans permit any nation on earth, English or French, thus
insolently to deprive us of our liberties and our property? -- No -- By the
God, who preserved our fathers in the bloody contest for freedom, we will
sooner make a rampart of our bodies, with which to defend our country, when
millions of avenging swords shall leap from their scabbards, before we will bow
the knee to any nation under the canopy of heaven. -- We had better die all
freemen than live all slaves.

LET us rally round the government of our country -- the best government on
earth, and convince that blood thirsty nation, that we are not, as they boast,
a divided people -- that although we have in the bosom of our country some
Arnolds and Randolphs, who would sell their country and their souls for pence
-- that although they have been too successful in exciting divisions among the
people, by bribery and corruption; yet, that we will never suffer the reproach
of our father's ghosts, that we have basely surrendered this soil which they
defended with their richest blood, to any nation on earth.

THE genius of America looks down, with pity, on her degenerate sons, who are
leading away from their country's cause, some honest, well designing, deluded
men, and bribing the unprincipled to thrust a dagger into the very vitals of
their parent. Beware of these characters, who are plotting your ruin -- Their
conduct is gradually unfolding -- every day discovers some new intrigue; and,
ere long, the vengeance of an incensed republic will overwhelm them with its
mighty flood.

Friends and Fellow Soldiers,

YOU are this day in arms, by your country's call -- To you, brave men, we
look, as to the defenders of our liberties: Should any enemy invade us, we
place the most perfect reliance on your well known valor, and, in the justice
of our cause, permit me to observe, that courage is an essential prerequisite
in the character of a soldier -- not a savage ferocious violence -- not a fool
hardy insensibility of danger, or headstrong rashness to run into it -- not the
fury of inflamed passions, let loose from the government of reason -- but a
calm, deliberate, rational courage; a steady, judicious, manly fortitude; the
courage of a man and not of a tiger: This is the courage essential to victory,
and this courage we doubt not you possess.

A MILITIA is the most natural defense of a free government from invasion and
tyranny. They who compose it are the proprietors of the soil; and who are so
likely to defend it, as they who have received it from their ancestors --
acquired it by their labor, or obtained it by their valor? -- Every freeman has
within his breast the great essentials of a soldier; and, having made the use
of arms familiar, is ever ready for the field.

LET your bosoms, on this day, glow with the sacred fire of patriotism -- Cast
your eyes around you, ye defenders of your country, on this brilliant assembly
-- Behold your wives -- your children and your little ones looking up to you
for protection -- and can you -- will you surrender them to any nation on
earth, while your hearts vibrate with the pulse of life? I know you will not.

YOU may soon be called on to defend, not only them, but all that is dear and
valuable in life, and had I the trump of an archangel, and the eloquence of a
Cicero, I would make all America resound, with the necessity of UNION and
FORMNESS.

" For never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
" While the earth bears a plant, or the sea rolls its waves*"
FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 9, line 18 from top, for "successive arms," read "success in arms."


