ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT SHARON, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, 4
th of JULY, 1798.

BY JOHN C. SMITH.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE COMMITTEE.

PRINTED AT LITCHFIELD BY T. COLLIER.

AN ORATION.
AT the close of our revolutionary war, I had the honor to address a
respectable audience, then assembled at this place, for the celebration of that
auspicious event. The bright return of peace, -- the complete establishment of
our national independence, was then the theme. -- I shall never forget the
unmingled transports of that day, -- the joy which sparkled in every eye, and
gladdened every heart. Peace, after a destructive war of eight years, was truly
a welcome guest; especially, as in her rich train of blessings, she brought us
the mighty object of all our struggles. The war-worn soldier who had spilt his
blood, -- the patriot-citizen who had spent his treasure, met under the same
festive roof to recount the dangers they had passed, -- the sacrifices they had
made; -- to contrast them with the inestimable prize they had won, and the
glorious prospects before them. How lightly were these dangers, these
sacrifices esteemed! -- How was the heart filled with gratitude to Heaven! --
How vast were our hopes, that this last retreat of liberty would now be secure,
-- the inviolable asylum of the oppressed of the earth! -- That on this
theater, the most interesting acts in the stupendous drama of human affairs
would be performed, and would be followed by that blissful period which the eye
of faith beholds with unceasing delight!

Would that I could now reiterate the same sentiments, -- that I could feel
myself, and perceive in others the same emotions! -- But the pleasing office of
announcing to you the glad tidings of peace, is not now devolved upon me: No,
my fellow citizens: I come not to speak to you in the voice of congratulation,
-- to extol your heroic achievements, nor to spread your recent triumphs before
you. -- I come not to tell you, that your national honor is unassailed, -- that
your persons and property are respected by all men, -- that your independence
is fixed on an immovable basis, -- and that you may therefore sit down under
your own vines and fig trees in undisturbed tranquillity -- Far otherwise. Our
political hemisphere has assumed a new and a melancholy aspect, -- clouds of
portentous appearance are already gathered for a tempest. Whether we shall
survive the storm or be swept away in its course, is known only to Him who has
said, -- "He will make the wrath of man to praise him."

On this anniversary, then, the birth day of our empire (and possibly its last)
it becomes a solemn duty, to notice the causes of our danger, and with humble
affiance in Heaven to encourage and animate each other to manly and vigorous
exertion.

The immediate causes of our alarm cannot be concealed: They are open to the
observation of all. The insolence, the proud tyranny of France, and the
treachery of our own citizens, have jointly produced the calamities we now
feel, and are still to fear. -- To speak with composure of that detested
nation, I confess, is not an easy task: Our indignation is too great for
utterance; -- nor is this all, -- language cannot furnish us with the means. As
the crimes of the Monster are without, example, so are they also without a
name. The force of epithet and expression is exhausted, and yet the half is not
told us. If a posterity shall survive the carnage which is now desolating the
world, new words, new sounds must be invented, if they are to ever comprehend,
in any measure, the unparrelled atrocities which have marked the progress of
the French revolution.

This revolution, the greatest scourge perhaps which a Holy God has yet
permitted to visit the earth, has hitherto been ascribed to causes, which in
truth have had little or no agency in producing it. The subject is now better
understood; and we discover with certainty, that those principles which we had
fondly believed to be the efficient springs of this revolution, never in fact
operated at all. -- You doubtless thought, as all America indeed thought, that
oppression made the French people mad; but it was not so. -- You thought it was
the intolerable tyranny of the Crown, the insolence of the nobility, and the
enormous exactions of a corrupt priesthood, which roused the nation to a sense
of its wrongs; but this is not true. You thought, for you had yourselves felt
the sacred flame, that it was the enthusiastic love of liberty, which rose like
a torrent, and with resistless force bore down the throne, the bastile, the
altars, arts, institutions, every vestige of the former state of things; and
buried all in one promiscuous ruin, -- yet nothing is more incorrect. -- That
the government was arbitrary, and the people oppressed, cannot be contradicted,
-- and that the state of the former called loudly for reform, and the condition
of the latter for great amelioration is equally evident. The destruction of
despotism, and the establishment of national liberty upon its ruins, is a
consummation devoutly to be wished. But let it be remembered, the nation had
submitted to a monarchy for ages without a single attempt to cast it off; --
they had become proverbial for their attachment to royalty, and for a species
of idolatry to the persons of their monarchs. It must also be admitted, that
the people labored under no new and unprecedented wrongs: On the contrary,
their last Sovereign was the most amiable in his character, -- the mildest and
most moderate in his administration, of any Prince who had ever swayed their
regal scepter. -- To what then shall we ascribe the convulsions which are
shaking Europe to its center, and which threaten to shake our Western world?
The answer to this question is of high importance, -- it has long been
conjectured by discerning men, but may be now said to rest in positive proof:
It seems well ascertained, that the French revolution is the result, chiefly,
of a combination long since formed, in Europe, by Infidels and Atheists, to
root out and effectually destroy Religion and Civil Government, -- not this or
that creed of religion, -- not this or that form of government, in this or that
particular country, -- but all religion, -- all government, -- and that through
the world.

Those who have attentively observed the course of events, will require little
or no other proof of the assertion, than the internal evidence which the events
themselves afford: Yet such I hope will indulge me in submitting a few facts,
derived, it is believed, from authentic sources, and which will need no comment.

As early as the year 1776, an association was formed of certain characters,
assuming the appellation of ILLUMINATI, -- whose pretended purpose was to
enlighten their fellow men, and deliver them from the tyranny of prejudices.
They at first professed to be, simply, reformers of christianity, -- the more
effectually to conceal their execrable designs, and lest a ready disclosure of
their real tenets should shock and discourage those who might offer themselves
for admission. To lead on the mind, eager for novelty, various degrees were
instituted, through which candidates were to pass, -- fortified, at every step,
by oaths, by the most solemn obligations of secrecy, and of fidelity to the
superiors of the order, whose commands they became bound to obey to the extent
of their lives and fortunes. At an early stage of the progress, the veil of
christianity was wholly laid aside. This encumbrance removed, the candidate
could rapidly ascend the remaining steps, ripening in all the refinements of
infidelity, until he at length reached the perfect stature of Atheism. Here the
whole plan was unfolded, -- and the disciple, now sufficiently prepared for
"treasons, stratagems and death," is plainly told that there is no God, -- no
future existence, -- no retribution; -- that all religion is a cheat, -- all
government a curse; -- that, without the aid of these, the principles of a
refined morality will form a safe and sufficient directory of human conduct;
but, that ordinary morality, as it consisted principally of duties arising from
the unequal distribution of property and power, must be rooted out* -- that the
social relations are mostly founded in gross inequality, and must be dissolved;
-- that the marriage-vow ought to be deemed as possessing neither force nor
solemnity, -- nor ought the nurture of children to be entrusted to their
parents; -- that the time is at hand, when the influence and dominion of the
Minister and the Magistrate must be destroyed, and under the mild reign of
universal liberty and equality, these new and precious doctrines be every where
established: And finally, that there must be no hesitation in adopting any
measures to effectuate these benevolent purposes, and to give these principles
an extension over the whole earth.

The process which the converts were to pursue in disseminating these
principles* was no less extraordinary. They were instructed to profess
themselves citizens of the world, governed by sentiments of unbounded
philanthropy, -- to express on all occasions, great concern for suffering
humanity, and to preach every where, the imprescriptible rights of man. -- That
in order to betray more successfully, they must possess themselves of such
posts in government, as were within their reach, -- of professorships in
universities and even of the pulpits; -- especially, they were to get into
their hands the instruction and education of youth; that their tender minds
might be early impressed with those salutary principles. They were to press
into their service, printers, journalists and booksellers, -- and by all means
to gain the fair sex, who from their ascendency over man, it was presumed might
be rendered powerful agents in revolutions.

The success of these miscreant philosophers astonished even themselves; --
their converts increased wonderfully. The profligate and abandoned found here a
sanctuary for crimes, -- the sour and discontented new sources of consolation,
-- the disappointed courtier new hopes, -- the aspiring demagogue most alluring
prospects; -- and the whole herd of literary coxcombs, to be found almost every
where, who by denying boldly the divinity of the scriptures and the Savior,
imagine they start up at once philosophers and men of much significance, joined
heartily in the cause. At any rate, under different names, Professor Robison in
his Proofs, etc. has considered the Lodges of Free Masons, as being the organs
by which illuminatism, was propagated; however there surely is neither
similarity nor connection between the principles of masonry and these novel
doctrines -- but the number of the lodges and the secrecy of their operations
rendered them, in the view of infidel philosophers, proper vehicles for the
diffusion of their pernicious theories -- By them therefore, the lodges in
Europe were corrupted and their original design wholly perverted. -- An effort
was once made, in this State, to convert the Masonic lodges into political
juntos, but to the honor of the fraternity, the proposition was rejected with
abhorrence. In Europe, it seems, the attempt was more successful.
these secret societies were soon diffused throughout France, Switzerland,
Germany and the Netherlands. In the short period of ten years, that is, in
1786, there were no less than two hundred and sixty six of these associations
in France alone: There were also many members of the same order in England and
Scotland; and disciples were, even at that time, to be found in America. Men,
some of whom, have since filled important offices in the general government,
and who, to say no more, have been true to their principles and served their
masters with fidelity.

These admirable reformers of the world, perceiving that the seeds of
irreligion, sedition, and rebellion had taken deep root and in soils highly
favorable to their growth, began now to think of reducing their theories to
practice -- and that the time had actually arrived, when all civil and
religious government must "be given up to the saints" of infidelity. It is said
to have been their original design to commence their career in Germany, where
many circumstances conspired to insure success: But the famous dispute between
the king of France and the parliament of Paris presented, not long after, a
favorable opportunity; and it was accordingly determined that France should
begin the great work. -- The members of the national assembly were,
principally, men of this description. The Duke of Orleans, who afterward first
voted for the death of his near relative the king, was at the head of all these
societies in France. Count Mirabeau, that distinguished orator in the same
assembly who governed its deliberations, had even been one of the evangelists
of the order, and had preached through Prussia and the North of Germany, the
gladsome tidings of anarchy here and eternal sleep hereafter. -- The Jacobin
clubs were the same private societies acting openly: But it was not until the
National Convention had taken all power into its own hands, that a public
declaration was made of the accursed motives which had influenced the
revolution. After having imbrued their hands in the blood of their sovereign,
one of the first acts of this Convention, was to proclaim to the world their
religious creed. They received with intemperate applause, the impious, the
blasphemous declaration, -- There is no God -- Man when free, wants no other
divinity than himself -- Reason dethrones both the kings of the earth and the
King of Heaven. -- No monarchy above, if we wish to preserve our republic
below. -- Volumes have been written to determine whether a republic of Atheists
could exist -- every other republic is a chimaera. -- The same sentiments which
had been professed and secretly taught in all these private societies for more
than seventeen years. Then followed the abolition of the christian era, the
christian Sabbath, and every thing that bore the christian name; -- then
followed a declaration of war upon regular government, -- proscriptions --
massacres; -- but I forbear to offend your ears, any longer, with the odious
narrative. -- The whole text and commentary of this horrid philosophy, have
been awfully written in lines of blood; -- they have been exhibited in those
dreadful scenes, "which eye had never before seen, ear heard, nor had it ever
entered into the heart of any (but Atheists) to conceive."

This is the origin of that revolution, which has been the theme of such
extravagant eulogy. -- What do you see in it? -- Do you behold the animating
spectacle of a great nation breaking her chains?. -- A nation marching with a
bold and dignified step toward the attainment of her liberty* -- heroically
asserting her own rights, and regarding sacredly the rights of others? -- Is
this the picture you contemplate? -- Or do you see her -- Meteor*like flame
lawless through the void,
Destroying others -- by herself destroyed; --
prostrating every institution, human and divine; -- audaciously claiming a
right of subjugating the whole human race, -- bearing abroad universal terror
and desolation, -- and erecting at home a despotism, beyond imagination severe
and intolerable? The deluded populace of that country, are no longer amused
with even the sounds of Liberty and Equality; -- those magic sounds, which the
wretched citizens were made to vociferate so loudly, are succeeded by notes of
bitter lamentation. Should you chance to find an honest man among them, he
would frankly tell you, that their kings bound them in cords of silk, in
comparison with the iron fetters they now wear; -- "that the little finger of
the Directory, is thicker than the loins" of their Monarchy. When the mock
republic began the work of illuminating the world, they professed (and swore
indeed) eternal hatred to Kings, but everlasting friendship for Republics. How
is the fact? Every king in Europe except their own murdered Monarch, now sits
on his throne, -- while every republic, every thing known by the name of
republic, -- they have successively swallowed up, or destroyed. They would even
make treaties of amity with Kings, that they might gain time to annihilate
republics.

Holland, who achieved her freedom in a most magnanimous conflict with Spain,
of forty years continuance, may now wish herself again under the Spanish yoke,
for, "that yoke was easy, that burden light," compared with the yoke of
republican France.

Geneva, Genoa, the whole list of Italian republics, are blotted out forever.
Such part of Venice, as her masters did not immediately want, has been actually
sold, -- and her name is no more to appear on the map of Europe, -- no longer
in the catalogue of nations!

Switzerland! -- My heart melts within me at the sound! How can we avoid
connecting, in idea, her sorrowful destiny with the possible fate of our own
dear country! -- Think what struggles the virtuous Swiss endured to secure
their Independence: -- It was begun by the hardy valor of the illustrious
William Tell, -- it was sealed by the precious blood of the heroes of Sempach;
and that honest, industrious people enjoyed the dear-bought blessing for
upwards of four hundred years. But Switzerland had also her Atheistical
philosophers, who stood expecting, wishing, and prepared to join the oppressors
of their country. -- The friends of liberty and order, weakened by division,
were slow and irresolute in defensive measures; -- fondly imagining their
rugged soil and lofty Alps would effectually shield them from invasion; -- and
although they knew perfectly, the deceitful, the perfidious character of their
foes, yet they trusted to negotiation; and were amused with vain hopes until at
last even their desperate valor was not sufficient to save them from
destruction -- They are fallen, -- a sad, a striking example to surviving
nations! Such is the friendship France has manifested for republics: -- America
alone is left, -- and America may address Heaven, nearly in the words of the
prophet, -- "THEY HAVE DUG DOWN THINE ALTARS -- slain every other republic
with the sword -- and now they seek my life to take it away."

I shall not tresspass upon the patience of this Audience, by entering into a
detail of the unprovoked injuries, -- the insufferable insults, this country
has experienced from France; -- these are too well known and too numerous to be
recited: Suffice it to say, -- we have suffered too much and too long! -- More
stateliness of demeanor, -- more energy of conduct at first, would at least
have saved us from national dishonor.

But notwithstanding our apprehensions from abroad, be assured, our most
formidable enemies are in the midst of us. Do you not perceive, that the United
States have long been infested with a set of men, professing the same
principles, and pursuing the same measures, which have so fatally distinguished
the revolutionists in France? -- Compare dates and events for a moment -- I
have already said the European philosophers were ripe for action in the year
1786, -- in the same year, the affairs of the Union wore a most gloomy
appearance. -- We were rushing into anarchy as fast as these reformers could
have wished; -- but in the same year, the collected wisdom of America convened
at Philadelphia, and framed in the course of that and the following year, the
Federal Constitution. When this Constitution, the most perfect work of man, was
presented to the people for adoption, do you remember the opposition, and the
leaders of it? -- Some honest men, it is true, from misrepresentation, joined
the opposition for a short time, and were soon undeceived: But the same spirit
which prompted this opposition, produced in France that revolution. -- There it
operated in demolishing all government; -- here in preventing any government at
all from being adopted. -- The result the same, and the views of these
pestilential philosophers as well answered, in the one case as the other. It is
the same set of men, who, whether in democratic societies, or as individuals,
as writers, as printers, as publishers, as booksellers, -- in office, and out
of office, -- in the professorial chair, and even in the pulpit, -- have been
unceasingly employed in obstructing every movement of the Government since its
first establishment, -- in vilifying the administration, and in traducing the
most meritorious public characters. These are the men who first presumed to
lisp a reproach upon the venerable WASHINGTON, -- a name which no genuine
American can pronounce without the mixed emotions of gratitude and reverence.
Immortal Chief! -- while the tongues of the whole civilized world are vocal in
his praise, -- there are even in that country, saved by his arm, those who have
attempted to depreciate his illustrious services -- to derogate from his
matchless virtues, -- and who still persecute him with their envenomed
calumnies, even to the humble shade of private life, -- BUT IN VAIN --
Conscious he had merited the benedictions of his country, -- and that his name
is enrolled in those deathless records, which the malignant hand of envy can
never reach, nor time itself obliterate, he enjoys a dignified repose, --
ready, no doubt, at the first call of his country, to again lead her embattled
ranks, and to sacrifice the evening of life, as he has spent the meridian of
his days, in her service. It is the same incorrigible party, which is also
endeavoring to shake the confidence of our citizens in the exalted Patriot who
now presides in the government -- You have heard the low suspicions, the open
and innumerable slanders, which have been secretly whispered or publicly
propagated against this most virtuous and admired Statesman -- His character
and his worth are far above my humble praise. Called to the first office in the
nation at a critical day, he will not disappoint the hopes of his country, --
"the rock on which the storm will beat" -- a rock, which will be found to
effectually repel the malicious, the presumptuous attacks of his, and his
country's foes. His early and tried attachment to the liberties of America are
well known; -- and the faithful pen of history will record, that if WASHINGTON
reared the glorious fabric of our Independence, it was ADAMS who first laid the
cornerstone.

It is the same party, -- the hirelings -- the devotees of France, who are
continually crying peace! peace! when destruction is approaching like a
whirlwind; -- who are constantly extolling French bravery, and justifying every
species of French villainy; -- who, by retarding the measures of defense, have
more effectually aided our enemies than by actual hostility -- and who have
their daggers already whetted, -- prepared to plunge into the vitals of their
country at the first approach of the enemy.

How long is this to be endured? -- To what extent is our patience to be drawn
out? -- Is our country to hold these parricides in her bosom, while her
faithful sons are achieving her deliverance? -- Shall we calmly see the pillars
of our government undermined by hands placed to support them? -- Shall one of
the most important offices in the nation be filled by an avowed adorer of
France? -- And can we hope to succeed while these Achans who have taken of the
accursed thing are in the midst of us? NOTE. No -- For thus says the Lord God
of Israel -- there is an accursed thing in the midst of thee O Israel, thou
can not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing
from among you.


I am no friend to sanguinary measures: But as the day has arrived when a
separation must be made between him who fears God and loves his country, and
him who regards neither; so I apprehend it is expedient, that these haters of
their country, and admirers of French liberty, be immediately conveyed to some
part of the French territory. There let them riot in the seraphic pleasures of
French fraternity and Jacobinic love; -- enjoying the delightful prospect of
despair at death, and annihilation beyond the grave, -- those rich rewards,
which Atheism holds out to all its friends and followers. -- When these are
dispatched, you may bid a calm and resolute defiance to the utmost efforts of
your foreign foes. -- Firm and united, what have you to fear? -- Can Frenchmen
appear terrible to Americans? -- Can your steady courage, -- your temperate but
inextinguishable ardor, look otherwise than with indignant contempt, upon the
French character, -- not less remarkable for crime, than vanity, -- a strange
compound of unthinking rashness and silly levity, -- a character at once
furious and frivolous? -- Did your ancestors deem the French invincible? --
They neither thought nor found them so. Do you think French bravery has
subjugated half Europe? -- by no means: Their abominable principles have
generally won the victory before their armies arrived. Had not their principles
first stunned the victims, their swords could never have drenched Europe in
slaughter. With all her boasted conquests, the real and effective force of
France is not to be compared with that of Great Britain at the commencement of
our revolution. The latter was at that moment, decidedly, the most powerful
nation on the globe; while we, in every other respect, excepting in a noble
enthusiasm, might be said to be the weakest. We had neither government,
strength, resources, nor experience: Now we eminently enjoy all these
advantages: Now we are a great and a mighty people. Would to God I could say we
are as virtuous as we are powerful!

But admit the valor and the physical strength of the French to be as great, as
formidable, as their abject adherents in this country can pretend; -- what is
to be done? You must either negociate, submit, or RESIST. Will you consent that
another attempt to negociate shall be made? Has not the dignity of the American
government been already trodden in the dirt before a nation of robbers and
murderers? It has been degraded in the persons of its Envoys, in a manner
altogether unexampled, and to a degree that every American heart that deserves
to beat, is ready to burst with indignation. Yet nothing but unconditional
submission, -- nothing but the entire surrender of your property, your liberty,
your religion, your lives, can satisfy these outrageous enemies of God and man.
There is then but one alternative, -- submission or resistance: And are you who
are here assembled, -- you who greet so cheerfully the return of this joyful
anniversary, now prepared to say, that this day shall be no more celebrated, --
no more remembered, -- and that the twenty-third year of American Independence
shall be THE LAST? Will you give up, without a struggle, the fairest portion of
individual, of social, of political happiness, ever alloted to mortals? -- Will
you relinquish the pious and literary institutions of your ancestors for more
than heathenish barbarity? -- Your sober habits for French ferocity? The
chaste, the tender relations of domestic life, for French brutality and
unbridled lust? -- Will you see the temple, where you are wont to worship the
God of your fathers, razed to its foundation, or what is worse, converted into
a circus or a brothel? Will you exchange the bright prospect of a future and
Eternal Day, for the hideous gloom of everlasting night? Will you in short,
descend from the unrivalled station of AMERICAN FREEMEN, to grovel at the feet
of a race of beings, now become the proudest, the vilest, the meanest of the
creation of God? -- Before you consent to this, recollect, I pray you, from
whom you are descended -- Can you forget the first founders of New England, --
their unconquerable spirit, amidst their unspeakable sufferings? -- Were they
intimidated, do you think, by threats, -- by persecutions -- by famine -- by
the savages on the one side, and by foreign invasion on the other? -- There was
a time when the infant colony of Connecticut alone, was surrounded by greater
dangers than now threaten United America -- Did they shrink at the approach of
danger? -- No: Relying on God, they never counted their foes. -- They stood,
indeed, in an attitude against which no human force could prevail; for while
one hand wielded the sword, the other was lifted in fervent supplication to
Heaven. Such resolution, and such piety united, what earthly power could
subdue? -- Have you forgotten the war of Independence? -- if you have, this is
the day to bring it to your recollection -- and would time permit, with what
transport could I run over the great events of that period! -- Those of you who
mingled in the conflict, and participated in its glory, can attest that the
annals of man have not furnished its parrallel. Shall the glorious fruits of
that war be abandoned? -- Shall the blood of those heroes who offered their
lives on that altar have been shed in vain? -- Shall it reproach us with the
base surrender of those invaluable rights which were purchased at a price so
dear?

Fellow Citizens! let us adopt and display the spirit of that memorable
Congress, who made to the world the solemn Declaration which has been read to
you this day. -- We have counted the cost of this contest, and find nothing so
dreadful as voluntary slavery. -- We will not be hewers of wood nor drawers of
water to any nation or people under Heaven. -- Let us resolve, that as for us
we will venerate the God of our forefathers, -- and, at all hazards, defend the
government of our choice. -- Let us teach our vile traitors and the despots of
France, that we know well the price and the value of our freedom, -- that the
hand which presumes to sieze the Holy Ark of our civil and religious liberty,
shall PERISH AT THE TOUCH; -- and that we will valiantly maintain our
Independence, or we will gloriously die in the attempt.

End.

