REMARKS ON EDUCATION.

REMARKS ON EDUCATION: ILLUSTRATING THE CLOSE CONNECTION BETWEEN VIRTUE AND
WISDOM. TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, A SYSTEM OF LIBERAL EDUCATION. WHICH, HAVING
RECEIVED THE PREMIUM AWARDED BY THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, DECEMBER
15th, 1797, IS NOW PUBLISHED BY THEIR ORDER.

BY SAMUEL HARRISON SMITH, A. M. MEMBER OF THE AM. PHIL. SOCIETY.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed FOR JOHN ORMROD. M,DCC,XCVIII.

COPY RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE American Philosophical Society offered last year, among other premiums,
one of an hundred dollars "for the best System of liberal Education and
literary instruction, adapted to the genius of the Government of the United
States; comprehending also a plan for instituting and conducting public schools
in this country, on principles of the most extensive utility" -- They reserved
to themselves, however, the right of giving, in all cases, such part only of my
premium proposed, as the performance should be adjudged to deserve; or of
withholding the whole, if it should appear to have no merit above what may have
been before published on the subject. But candidates were assured that the
Society would always judge liberally of their several claims.

VARIOUS communications having, in consequence, been received, the Society, at
a stated meeting held on the 15th of December 1797, proceeded to the
adjudication of the premium. Although none of the Systems of Education then
under review appeared to them so well adapted to the present state of Society
in this Country, as could be wished; yet considering the superior merit of two
of the performances, the one entitled "An Essay on Education;" the other,
Remarks on Education: Illustrating the close connection between Virtue and
Wisdom: To which is annexed, a System of liberal Education: the Society
adjudged to each of the authors a premium of 50 dollars, and ordered the Essays
to be published. On opening the sealed letters accompanying these performances,
it appeared that the former was written by the REVD. SAMUEL KNOX of
Bladensburg, Maryland; and the latter by SAMUEL H. SMITH of Philadelphia.

Extract from the minutes. JONATHAN WILLIAMS, One of the Secretaries.
Philadelphia, December 15 th, 1797.
PREFACE.
THE following pages were written in the summer of 1796. They are presented to
the public with only a few verbal alterations, as they were then written. New
ideas have since occurred to the author, and those which are contained in the
essay might, in many instances, have been better expressed. But as the
production, as it now appears, received the premium, it was thought improper to
make any substantial additions.

As this performance may be read by some persons unacquainted with the author,
it may be proper to state that he neither claims the reverence due to age, nor
the respect attached to established reputation -- The fewness of his years
preclude the former, while his moderate seize withhold the latter. If the
efforts which he has made shall excite the genius of his fellow-citizens, and
he shall prove, in a degree however limited, the instrument of attracting the
public attention to a subject of all others the most momentous, he will be
rewarded to the extent of his wishes.

REMARKS ON EDUCATION.
THE man, who aspires to the honor of forming a system of education adapted to
a republic, should either possess the capacity of original reflection, or that
of improving, without adopting, the ideas of others. His hatred to vice, and
aversion to error, should be as strong, as his attachment to virtue, and love
of truth. He should look upon the sentiments of the dead with distrust, and
oppose with intrepidity the prejudices of the living. As the tribunal to which
he appeals may be shrouded in delusion, he must have the courage to rend the
veil that intercepts the light of truth. He must consider the first suggestions
of his own mind as treacherous; nor suffer them to form a link in his chain of
reasoning, till they shall have passed the ordeal of reiterated investigation.
Having undergone this trial unimpaired, he will dare to hold them forth to
truth, as her legitimate offspring, and to prejudice, as her merited scourge.
No motive can bear him through this arduous performance, but a supreme sense of
duty, which, feeling ample retribution from the consciousness of doing good,
neither solicits nor despises general applause.

THE two great objects of a correct education are to make men virtuous and wise.

THE terms virtuous and wise, do not seem susceptible of absolute definition.
Accordingly, as applied to different persons, and varying circumstances, they
present different aspects; though it be possible, nay probable, that the
elements or first principles of each, however modified by endless combination,
are the same. This hypothesis derives some confirmation from the great affinity
of one virtue to another, and the close alliance between the several
departments of science and literature.

WITHOUT attempting precise definition, it may be sufficiently correct, so far
as it regards the objects of this essay, to style VIRTUE that active exertion
of our faculties, which, in the highest degree promotes our own happiness and
that of our fellow-men; and WISDOM, that intelligent principle, which improves
our faculties, affords them the means of useful exertion, and determines the
objects on which they are exercised.

WHILE wisdom and virtue have united, time immemorial, to panegyrise each other
in reference to the general good they produce in the world, two questions of
great importance have remained undecided; viz.

I. WHETHER wisdom and virtue are in any degree necessarily connected; and if
they are, whether universally, or partially?

II. WHETHER wisdom, in its greatest practical extension, would, if universally
diffused, produce the greatest portion of general happiness?

IT will be acknowledged that these points deserve a patient discussion, as
their decision will determine the definite objects of education; and as it is
absolutely necessary that man should know the objects he desires to accomplish,
before he can apply, with the prospect of a successful result, the means
adapted to secure them.

I. THE first enquiry is, "Whether wisdom and virtue are, in any degree,
necessarily connected; and if they are, whether universally, or partially?"

IT has been the opinion of some distinguished philosophers that virtue and
instinct are the same; and that a wise providence has not left the direction of
the moral principle under the capricious and feeble influence of reason: while
others have contended, that although man be by nature ignorant and entirely
destitute of moral principle, yet that he possesses faculties capable of high
improvement, if not of perfection itself. Both these systems, notwithstanding
their numerous votaries, are probably founded in error.

IF instinct and virtue be synonimous, it is clear, that where there is most
instinct, there should be most virtue, and that, as the brute creation possess
instinct in a much higher degree than man, they must likewise possess virtue in
a higher degree. This result will not be seriously contended for by any one.
For, however ferocious and ignorant man may be, he is infinitely surpassed in
these qualities by every animal that has the capacity of being ferocious. In
this contrast too, it is proper to observe, that, however the instinct of the
brute may withhold him from doing injury, is seldom, if ever, inspires him with
the ardour of doing good.

WERE instinct and virtue the same, it would be clear that the infant would be
more virtuous than his fire, and the savage inhabitant of the forest more
virtuous than the offspring of civilization and science. For the ears of the
infant are open to the voice of nature alone, while those of its parent are not
altogether regardless of the dictates of reason. A precise analogy exists
between the infant and its parent, and the savage and civilized man; the mind
of the savage is still in its infancy, while civilization, if the expression be
allowed, imparts manhood to the mind. -- If this point remain still undecided
in the mind of any, let it be asked, if the idiot or the lunatic are ever
esteemed virtuous? It will then be seen that virtue without reason is a phantom
which never existed.

THOSE, who would ascribe every thing to reason and nothing to nature, probably
adopted their ideas, more from a conviction, that the rival system was false,
than from any distinct conviction of the truth of their own; and from that
disposition of the mind, which makes us readily, if not eagerly, embrace the
reverse of that which we have found to be erroneous.

TO affirm that because education does much, it can therefore accomplish every
thing, is to pronounce a maxim refuted by universal experience. Every
circumstance in this life partakes of a finite nature; and the power of
education, however great, has doubtless its limits.

HOWEVER difficult, if not impossible, it might be to gain the assent of some
philosophers to the system of natural inequality in reference to virtue or
capacity; they will, without hesitation, agree, that the physical part of man
is infinitely modified by nature; they will also grant, that an infinite
variety seems to be delighted in by the author of nature; and that this variety
is most displayed in those works, which abound, in the highest degree, with
qualities that excite our admiration or regard. Both these instances, borrowed
from material objects, furnish striking analogies, illustrative of the
existence of variety of morality and intellect in different minds uninfluenced
by education. Is it to be believed that an object so important, as variety
appears to be in the estimation of the author of nature, should be left to the
control of causes, operating so unequally, and in so contracted a sphere, as
reason and civilization? Were it to depend entirely on these accidental
circumstance, might it not be highly endangered? Might it not be lost?

THERE are some things, which, however controverted by the refinements of
philosophy, will always continue to be held in secure belief by the good sense
of mankind. Such is the conviction of natural biass; of one person possessing
genius; another, fancy; a third, memory; etc. --

THE deductions from this concise and necessarily superficial view of a
subject, in some respects intricate, are, that nature is neither so liberal,
nor education so omnipotent, as the rival systems affirm; that man is indebted
to both; that certain passions are born with him, which he cannot exterminate,
but may control; that a varied capacity is imparted to him, which, by education
he can weaken or improve. But, that still the traces of nature are visible in
his thoughts and actions; and that her voice never ceases to be heard amidst
all the refinements of art.

BUT even granting, what is far from being the truth, that man, unenlightened
by education, has engraven upon his heart certain great principles of duty, and
is possessed of the means necessary for their discharge, it yet remains
uncontested, that these principles are few and undefined; and that they do not
comprehend half the relations in which men stand toward each other. It
follows, of course, that they must be extended and improved, before they can
answer the great purposes for which they were originally implanted in man, and
submitted to his guidance, modification and extension.

BESIDES, it should never be forgotten in discussions similar to this, that man
is already in a great degree civilized; and that though it may be possible for
the savage to resist the force of improvement, and remain unshaken in his
attachment to his original state, yet that man, once civilized, has it not in
his power to return to his natural condition. He may overturn all the trophies
of the arts, he may consign to the flames every vestige of science, he may
extinguish every spark of genius; but he is still unable to reduce himself to
the savage state. We behold him more debased, perhaps, than the barbarian, but
without his ferocity. The world abounds with scenes in which the triumphs of
science have been succeeded by the most brutal ignorance; over which fear,
meanness, and indolence have spread their gloomy features; features the very
opposite of those which characterize the savage life.

WE cannot, therefore, err in assuming it as a fact that virtue and wisdom are
in some degree necessarily connected; that the crude wisdom which nature
bestows is unequal to the production and government of virtue, such as man in
his pursuit of happiness discovers it to be his interest to practice; and that
to insure this desirable object, it is necessary that the original faculties of
the mind should be vigorously exercised, extended, and strengthened.

IT still remains to be considered whether wisdom and virtue are partially or
universally connected.

IT is generally agreed that no being can be perfectly good without being
perfectly wise. Such is the sublime idea we form of deity. It will be observed
that perfect goodness is not here made to depend solely on the intention of the
agent, but also on the good effected; as we now consider virtue an efficient
principle exerting all the energies of its nature.

THE assertion that the man, who, without equalling this character, approaches
it the nearest, would partake in the highest degree of the divine excellence,
might be deemed correct, were not the world full of examples of men, who,
though possessed of comprehensive powers of mind, are not only deficient in the
exercise of virtue, but actually famed for the most profligate indulgence in
vice. This enigma, however, admits of easy solution. Great endowments of mind
are so rare, that they are seldom displayed without exciting more envy than
attachment. He, who not only admires but esteems another for his talents, must
possess no inconsiderable portion of talent himself; just as the best evidence
of a supreme love of virtue is a high regard for the source of all virtue. The
class of men possessed of these qualities being small, and that possessed of
different, if not hostile qualities, being very numerous, it is not surprising
that resentment and malice should be active in their efforts to crush so
formidable an adversary. Thus the most unworthy means are used to nip in the
bud talents qualified to enlarge the sphere of human happiness.

HUMAN virtue has its limits. To be the object of unceasing calumny and
detraction, without sighing for vengeance, would argue an apathy of heart by no
means mortal. The subject of oppression, has now, in his turn, recourse to
those means, which had been so successfully applied to his ruin; and finding
them successful, he throws away the crutch of truth for the staff of deception.
Ceasing to feel an interest in that virtue which he had just seen so much
despised, his ambition grasps objects which bring with them immediate
gratification, and lull the conscience to a dangerous repose. Wealth, power,
and pleasure, throw out their gay and splendid solicitations, and virtue is
exiled from the heart in which it lately delighted to dwell.

THIS would not be the case, if virtue and talents were as common as vice and
ignorance. The moment a majority enlist themselves on the side of the former
marks the era of their eternal reign. This era is that which all good and
great men should unite to hasten.

FROM a review of history, it will appear, that just in proportion to the
cultivation of science and the arts has the happiness of man advanced in the
nation which cultivated them. And this arose in a great measure from this
consideration. The wants of nature are few in its unimproved state. Man of
course is exempt from the necessity of making any great efforts for his
support. He is therefore indolent. Not dependent on another, for any thing
which his heart holds dear, he is reserved, distant, unaccommodating in his
deportment. He scarcely merits the epithet of a social being. Of course, if his
vices are not numerous, his virtues are still less so.

THE very reverse of this takes place as society improves. The dearest part of
man's happiness, in this stage of his existence, is connected with a supply of
articles, which depend on the industry of one, who is alike dependent on him.
Hence a reciprocity of wants! Hence the origin of new and permanent regards,
the parents of a thousand now virtues! From what source do these proceed, but
from the developement of reason, suggesting to man the improvement of his
situation? This improvement seems susceptible of endless extension. Hence the
conclusion, that reason in alliance with virtue admits of progression without
termination, and that the purity of the last is best secured by the strength of
the first.

WE proceed to consider,

II. WHETHER wisdom itself, in its greatest extension, would, if universally
diffused, produce the greatest portion of general happiness.

THE affirmative side of this question will be illustrated by considering;

THAT the diffusion of knowledge actually produces some virtues, which without
it would have no existence, and that it strengthens and extends all such
virtues as are generally deemed to have, in a limited degree, an existence
independent of uncommon seize. And that,

THE exercise of these virtues is the only certain means of securing real
happiness.

THE virtues, which are the exclusive and appropriate offspring of an
enlightened understanding, are those which are disconnected with any particular
time, person, or place. Existing without reference to these, a spirit of
universal philanthropy is inspired, that views the whole world as a single
family, and transfers to it the feelings of regard which are indulged toward
the most amiable of our acquaintance. This sentiment, free from the alloy of
personal consideration, or national attachment, lifts the mind to an elevation
infinitely superior to the sensation of individual regard, superior to the
ardent feelings of patriotism, and rivals, in a measure, the enjoyment of the
sublime ideas we connect with the apprehension of the divine mind. This tone of
mind must acknowledge congeniality with the noblest virtues. The mind is full
and yet tranquil. The turbulence of passion is subdued into a reverence of
reason. Man feels himself too ennobled to do a base or a mean thing. He yields
to an irresistible enthusiasm to atchieve whatever unites the highest portion
of greatness with the largest portion of goodness. Language is inadequate to
the description of the feelings of a man thus inspired; it hastens to his
actions, which can receive only a feeble delineation.

IT will be found still more unequivocally, that a diffusion of knowledge
strengthens and extends all such virtues as have in a limited degree an
existence, independent of uncommon seize. This class of virtues
comprehends those which are created by the relation in which one man stands to
another, and which are the basis of what may be denominated common duty.

THE discretion with which man is vested implies the necessity of some
knowledge. Were it not for this possession, he would be the sport of casualty
and accident. He would nominally be his own master, but really a slave to some
unknown power.

NATURE appears to have been liberal in its endowments to most of her
offspring, as far as respects the preservation of each species; but to have
been least liberal in this respect to man; doubtless because she has lavished
her bounty in imparting to him alone the capacity of gradual and large
improvement.

THE doctrine of original depravity here affords a forcible illustration. It is
not material to decide whether this belief be correctly true in the extent to
which some writers have carried it; or whether the alleged depravity be a
crime, or only a defect. It is sufficient that such a belief almost universally
prevails, and that all mankind acknowledge the vast intermediate space that
lies between the barrenness of the state of nature, and the improvement
effected by a liberal education. This general opinion of mankind is alike
authoritative in regard to virtue as well as reason. If it has any superior
application, it tends more to establish, in the natural state, the absence of
virtue than of intellect.

ALL agree that virtue can never be carried too far. But does not the truth of
this remark depend entirely upon the manner in which virtue is directed, or
more properly, perhaps, on an accurate definition of it? If this be true, will
not the greatest portion of virtue be ascribed to the man, who, with given
means, accomplishes the most good? And is not this the same with saying that
virtue in its highest exercise requires the greatest seize? If it be
enquired what these seize should be, it may be replied that, as all
knowledge is susceptible of practical application, and is abused when it does
not receive such application, it is improper to fix any limits to the
improvement of the mind, which in proportion to its extension is qualified to
effect general good.

IN general and in sum, says lord Bacon Bacon, vol. 2. p. 447.
certain it is, that veritas and bonitas differ, but as the seal and the print;
for truth prints goodness, and they be the clouds of error, which descend in
the storms of passion and perturbation.

THE duties of men are precisely co-extensive with their knowledge. If that be
granted, which cannot be denied, that every man is bound to do all the good he
can, then follows clearly the obligation of every one to enlarge the powers of
his mind, as the only means of extending the sphere of his usefulness.

IT has been observed, in refutation of these remarks, that half the knowledge
of which philosophy boasts, withdraws the mind from useful employment, by
occupying it with considerations of idle curiosity and unproductive
speculation. But if it be enquired by whom this observation has been made, it
will appear that literature and science disclaim it; that it has generally
arisen from the indolence and envy of ignorance, or sprung from the malice of
blasted pretensions. It is true that he whose years revolve in acquiring,
without using, learning, is even more selfish and criminal than the miser, as
he hoards from society a greater good; and, in this view of the subject, what
Bacon says is strictly just;

As for the philosophers, they make imaginary laws for imaginary commonwealths,
and their discoveries are as the stars, which give little light, because they
are so high; Bacon, vol. 2. p. 537.


BUT has that science been ever named, the prosecution of which is entirely
unconnected with the general good? Has not astronomy, now acknowledged to be
the most sublime of studies, which unites whatever is great and astonishing
both on the moral and physical scale, been the theme of unconscious ignorance
and folly? Has not chemistry been assailed by the too successful satire of
illiterate wit? That satire which now fastens on the departments of Natural
History and Botany? Has not superstition attempted to identify astronomy and
profanity; and for a time succeeded? And yet astronomy [Note A.] now holds, by
an undissenting voice, and elevated rank among the sciences; and chemistry,
notwithstanding the philosopher's stone, unfolds, every day, its high practical
importance; and discoveries, which, at first, promised only cold speculative
truth, have produced the greatest practical good. [Note B.]

IT is worthy of remark, that all kinds of knowledge are intimately allied, and
that the perfection of one department if science depends as much on the
advancement of other departments, as it does on the accurate developement of
its own peculiar principles [Note C.] All exclusive devotedness of the mind to
one branch of knowledge, instead of enlarging, will impair it. Instead of
furnishing it with truth, it will burden it with error. Of this tendency Lock
relates several whimsical instances.

"A METAPHYSICIAN," he says, will bring plowing and gardening immediately to
abstract notions; an alchymist will reduce divinity to the maxims of his
laboratory, and allegorise the scriptures into the philosopher's stone. And I
heard once a man, who had more than ordinary excellence in music, seriously
accommodate Moses's seven days of the first week, to the seven notes of music,
as thence had been taken the measure and method of creation. He, therefore, who
grants it to be necessary that one science should be deeply explored, yields
more than the superficial observer imagines. He acknowledges the propriety of
applying all the necessary means, and these will be found to embrace a
considerable acquaintance with almost every branch of knowledge.

WERE a specification to be made of those circumstances most closely connected
with the happiness of man, it would appear in how eminent a degree they are
promoted by a cultivated understanding.

UNDER the head of morals, it would appear, that the virtues appropriate to a
family would be secured as well as rendered more captivating; secured by the
enlightened conviction of the intimate convection between duty and interest:
rendered more captivating by their borrowing a new character from the liberal
spirit inspired by reason. To the natural tie of parental regard would be added
the grateful sensation excited in the mind of a child from the communication of
new ideas, and the production, of course, of new pleasures. To the magic of
instinct would be superadded the charm of reflection.

THE sense of justice and honesty would be confirmed by the folly of injustice
and dishonesty. Supposing a general illumination of mind to prevail, the means
of detecting, and the consequences of exposing, dishonesty, would be so easy
and serious, that every rational being would see his interest inseparably
connected with justice and honesty.

PATRIOTISM, a virtue which has fertilized the barren rock and given the
greatest expansion to the mind and the heart, would become a steady and a
rational principle. Founded on an unprejudiced attachment to country, we should
cease to glory in error, solely because it proceeded from our ancestors. Love
of country would impel us to transfuse into our own system of economy every
improvement offered by other countries. In this case, we should not be attached
so much to the soil, as to the institutions and manners, of our country.

IN physics, it would appear, that in proportion to the extension of
philosophical research, new connections and relations are discovered between
natural objects, which result in discoveries of high practical use; promoting
whatever tends to the convenience and comfort of social life, enlarging the
sphere of harmless gratification, and giving birth to new, and frequently
ingenious occupations.

IT remains to be considered, whether the exercise of the enumerated virtues,
be not the only mean of securing real happiness.

No necessity is believed to exist, to prove, that a system of pure selfishness
is hostile in the highest degree to happiness. If this system should find any
advocates but those whose object it is to dazzle by ingenuity and wit, instead
of convincing by argument, I would appeal to the universal odium attached to an
indulgence of those passions which center entirely in selfish enjoyment.
Avarice, drunkenness, monastic seclusion, are all now the objects of impartial
execration, while the practiser of these selfish indulgencies holds in as great
contempt the world which despises him, and feels himself independent only in
wretchedness.

I SHALL not dwell longer on this subject, but assume, from what has been
already said, and from that which must obviously suggest itself to every mind,
that the exercise of feelings which lead to beneficent actions is the surest
pledge of internal happiness.

WHETHER reason itself would be fertile in the production of virtue need not be
decided. It is probable that reason is only that power which directs the
passions to their fit objects, and determines the force with which they ought
to be applied. Rousseau says, It is by the activity of our passions, that our
reason improves; we covet knowledge merely because we court enjoyment, and it
is impossible to conceive, why a man exempt from fears and desires should take
the trouble to reason. The passions, in their turn, owe their origin to our
wants. Rousseau on Inequality of mankind, 8 vo. Edit. p. 40.


THE passions, as imparted by nature, are few, but impetuous. The whole energy
of the soul here speaks in every word and action. The conduct of one individual
to another, in proportion as man obtains a more correct knowledge of duty,
becomes the subject of a certain portion, often a moderate one, of praise or
blame, of reward or punishment. And, accordingly, civilized man is as cautious
in pronouncing an opinion on the conduct of the person who invites his
strictures, as unbridled passion is impetuous and rash. The last knows no
gradations between virtue and vice, and of course loves or hates in the
extremest degree. The consequence is, that man is miserable; as miserable
perhaps from the consciousness of ill directed vengeance or misapplied regard,
as from the sense of undeserved resentment.

IN proportion to the advancement of the arts and sciences, the passions are
increased in number, and abridged in force, by the diversity of objects which
solicit their exercise. Man, reduced from a sullen state of independence,
becomes the subject of innumerable wants, the center of innumerable pleasures.
Avarice, so congenial to ignorance and indolence, is robbed of more than half
is violence by the love of pleasure, and a regard to popular opinion. It never
fails to be as much weakened in the vortex of activity, as it is cherished in
the listlessness of seclusion. In large commercial towns there are few misers.
In monasteries they abound. Besides the ambition of acquiring more keep afloat
immense riches, which circulate till they become the inheritance of an heir,
who seldom feels a disposition to hoard them.

PITY is said by some writers to be the strongest passion of nature. But how
does it operate? -- Upon every object it meets. Accident accomplishes every
thing. Entirely mechanical, it as frequently encourages vice, as it relieves
virtue. Whereas knowledge produces discernment and discrimination. The
benevolence of an improved mind is virtue, because it aids merit in distress;
natural pity is often vice, because it is blind, and as frequently assists the
wicked as the good; perhaps oftener, as virtue is more averse to solicitation
than vice.

LET us consider the different effects of pity and benevolence, as here
distinguished, on the person who exercises them. Pity is a mere natural
impulse; there is no merit in obeying its voice; the good which it does is
forgotten as soon as accomplished; all the happiness it affords is confined to
a moment, and this is an unreflecting happiness; it is the happiness of an
infant. -- Benevolence, on the contrary, is never practiced without reflection.
It chooses its objects with care, which when chosen it is liberal in rewarding.
It does not give to depravity the debt due to virtue, and thereby generate
self-reproach. Virtue and merit are its creditors, to whom it ever struggles to
be just. Gratitude, almost unknown to the dispenser of pity, is the offspring
of benevolence. Remembrance recals, perhaps heightens, the pleasures excited by
the good effected; and he, who is actuated by enlightened benevolence, is amply
rewarded by his own feelings, independently of the treatment he may receive
from the object of his bounty, or the propitious influence of his actions on
his future peace.

THE same remarks, illustrating the difference between the passions of the
ignorant and the wise, might be extensively applied with but little variation.
Suffice it in addition to say that with the wise, inclination is supplanted by
duty, caprice by consistency. Emulation and competition too come in with all
their forces, and, perhaps, produce more virtue in the world than they found in
it. [Note D.]

HE who has been accustomed to feel within himself the resource of reflection,
and the capacity of improvement, delights in abstracting his attention from
grovelling pursuits, and in disengaging himself from the sordid cares of low
occupation. However impossible it be for him entirely to withdraw himself from
these engagements, yet he always possesses an unexhausted treasure, on which he
may draw, when oppressed with them. Neither the mind nor the body seem designed
for one uniform employment. The more extensive the objects, therefore, within
the reach of man, the larger is his circle of enjoyment. History enforces the
truth of this remark. Who more happy as well as distinguished, than they who
alternately exchanged the plough for the closet; who now procured food for the
body, and now sought food for the mind? Who more unrivalled in tranquil
pleasure, in unambitious retirement, in splendid consideration, than
Cincinnatus?

THAT man seems, on the whole, to be the most happy, who possessed of a large
stock of ideas, is in the constant habit of increasing them, and whom every
hour of his existence renders more informed. The energy of such a mind is
almost without limits; it admits of constant activity; for when fatigued with
one train of ideas, it finds repose in another. A rich variety of enjoyment is
ever before it, the bare consciousness of possessing which is sufficient of
itself to make it happy.

SOME notice is due to the objections to the connection between knowledge and
happiness. It is said that a refinement of ideas disinclines the mind to an
attention to common objects, to which a very moderate degree of reflection is
equal. This objection, if it has any present force at all, would be wholly
removed by that knowledge becoming common which is now rare. We now find it to
be the general exclamation that prosperity is altogether owing to accident, and
this remark is sanctioned, in some measure, by the concurrence of the wise as
well as the uninformed. This arises from the imperfection of human knowledge,
whereby men obtain a good desired, not through the fit means as discovered by
reason, but as suggested by accident. Hence the inclination is so often
repugnant to availing itself of the means of acquiring a desirable object, that
it is frequently coerced into them, contrary to its wishes. Hence the affairs
of the world are called a lottery, where fortune presides, and reason is blind.

As, however, every effect is inseparable from its cause, and as the events of
this life, which men most covet, depend upon causes, which the improved mind
without doubt possesses the power of discovering, the time may and probably
will arrive, in which by far the greater part, if not the whole, of those
things, at present the gift of accident, will be the reward of virtue and
reflection. It will then be as great a phenomenon for wisdom not to be
succeeded by prosperity, as it is now to be connected with it, even in
reference to those objects which it ever will deem subordinate.

ONE philosopher of great distinction, it is granted, has said that were man to
consult his real happiness, he would never reflect; intimating that the act of
reflection is injurious to health. This aspersion on science can be traced, as
it regards Rousseau, to no better origin, than that of a mind, inconsistent
with itself, and discontented with every present enjoyment. The mind of
Rousseau was, without doubt, a great one; it emitted, as copiously as genius or
fancy could desire, the sparks of a noble intellect, which dared to disdain the
shackles of prejudice, and break the chains of ignorance. But it must be
allowed, that in those cases which admitted of personal application, he grossly
erred, and generally suffered his strong sense to be overruled by his
inexplicable feelings. Complete refutation, however, will be the portion of
this injurious remark, by considering the persevering zeal, which has
characterized the conduct of the cultivators of science; by considering their
unanimous opinion that the moment which gives birth to a new thought is a
period of unrivalled enjoyment, which has been compared to the feelings of
deity at the creation; [Note E.] and lastly, by considering that longevity has,
in a remarkable degree, been the reward of those, who have cultivated science.
Let any one, who doubts this fact, consult a biographical dictionary, and all
the prejudices he ever possessed on the subject must vanish; he will grant that
as the mind depends on the exercise of the body for its vigor, so the health of
the body, in its turn, is promoted by the active employment of the faculties of
the mind.

ONE great objection cannot be here overlooked; its discussion is highly
important from its connection with numerous prejudices, and particularly with
the passion of avarice. It will be said that though refined happiness be
intimately connected with virtue and knowledge, yet that this kind of happiness
was never designed for the mass of any nation, as their subsistence depends
entirely on labor, and the productiveness of labor depends on the time
devoted to it.

IT only requires a zealous disposition to embrace what ought to be, instead of
clinging to what is, to disarm this objection of all its force. It is granted
that a small portion of that time, which is at present occupied by the labor
of the body, will, should these ideas be adopted, be absorbed in the exercise
of the mind. But it should be observed;

1. THAT it is not true, as implied in the objection, that the mind and body
are incapable of contemporaneous employment. So far is this from being a fact,
that some activity of body is absolutely necessary to vigorous reflection. The
more severe the reflection, the more likely is the student to be involved in
even involuntary exercise. Viewing this objection with the greatest partiality,
it can only apply to those studies that require the highest abstraction of
mind, which will forever be confined to a few. Those trains of thought, which
are connected with practical improvement, will be aided rather than impaired by
labor, if it be not uncommonly severe.

2. The actual labor necessary to subsist man is much less than that which
occupies the whole of his time. The hours at present devoted to labor are
about twelve. Let us suppose these to be abridged by bringing them down to ten.
A question occurs whether this diminution of time will lessen the mass of
articles of necessity or convenience fabricated? -- The solution of this
question either affirmatively or negatively is of little consequence, though
from the first suggestions of the mind it would seem important. It is not
probable it would produce the diminution supposed; because ten hours of active
labor may in their result be equal to twelve; as there is a protraction of
labor destructive of all energy. This is so abundantly illustrated in the case
of slaves, compared with freemen, that the fact needs only to be mentioned to
be decisive; but yielding for a moment that ten hours of manual labor will not
produce so much as twelve, will not more be gained by improved modes of labor,
than is lost by this dereliction of two hours? Will not the habit of reflection
and progressive improvement continually devise new means of accomplishing a
given object? Have not the powers of machinery already given a new creation to
manufactures? And is not agriculture equally susceptible of improvement?

BUT granting that this abridgment of labor would diminish the articles of
use, is it unequivocal that this effect would be an evil? The necessaries of
life would still be produced in abundance. The conveniences of life produced
would be fully equal to a moderate indulgence of its pleasures. The only
deficiency existing would apply to articles of luxury. And whether these ought
to be encouraged or repressed cannot be a question in a state of society in
which every man is a candidate for equal happiness. An indulgence in luxury is
a selfish enjoyment, which may be said to seduce every one from his duty. The
less, therefore, it prevails, the better for virtue and general happiness.

3. THE relative wealth of individuals, under this arrangement, would remain
the same with that under the old one, as far as it applied to the citizens of
the United States. Some small difference might be produced between the relative
wealth of the United States and that of foreign nations; but its effects seem
too unimportant to be dwelt on.

LET us, then, consider a moderate increase of the hours of reflection, and a
small decrease of those of labor, as a leading feature in a system of
republican education. He, who thinks frequently, imbibes a habit of
independence, and of self-esteem, which are perhaps the great and the only
preservatives of virtue. Let us consider this feature as new, and as one which
would be happily distinctive. Let us consider it as the prerogative of
political virtue to ennoble man, as much as it is the assumption of political
vice to degrade him.

A REVIEW of what I have written convinces me that I have entered a field which
seems to acknowledge no limits. Points of morality and expedience occur in
profusion, whose elucidation still demands the highest talents, after having
employed, for ages, the deepest powers of research.

IN the subsequent part of my remarks, I shall, to avoid prolixity, aim at the
most rigid conciseness, and trust almost entirely to the reader for an
examination of what I state.

THE diffusion of knowledge, co-extensive with that of virtue, would seem to
apply with close precision to a republican system of education, because;

1. AN enlightened nation is always most tenacious of its rights.

2. IT is not the interest of such a society to perpetuate error; as it
undoubtedly is the interest of many societies differently organized.

3. IN a republic, the sources of happiness are open to all without injuring
any.

4. IF happiness be made at all to depend on the improvement of the mind, and
the collision of mind with mind, the happiness of an individual will greatly
depend upon the general diffusion of knowledge and a capacity to think and
speak correctly.

5. UNDER a Republic, duly constructed, man feels as strong a biass to
improvement, as under a despotism he feels an impulse to ignorance and
depression.

WE have now reached the goal of the preceding speculations. The necessary
limits to an essay of this nature have prohibited minute illustration; but it
has, we hope, been made to appear, with sufficient (...) that human happiness
depends upon (...) of virtue and wisdom; that virtue cannot (...) cultivated;
that it is only secure when (...) with knowledge; and of consequence that
knowledge (...) cannot possibly be too extensively diffused. It follows that
the great object of a liberal (...) of education should be the almost universal
diffusion of knowledge.

BUT as knowledge is infinite, and as its complete attainment requires more
time than man has at his command, it becomes interesting to assign;

I. THE time fit to be devoted to education. II. THE objects proper to be
accomplished; and III. The manner of accomplishing them.
I. THE time fit to be devoted to education.

PHILOSOPHY, which is but another word for experience, has decided the
happiness of man to depend upon the labor of the body and the exercise of the
mind. It had been well for mankind, had the human race in its earliest age been
under the control of principles of legislation, which by a judicious
apportionment of the hours of reflection to those of labor, had produced in
infancy and youth habits destined from their strength to remain unimpaired in
advanced age. Had the voice of philosophy dictated such a system, it would have
been established on these principles. Bare subsistence requires certain
articles, which are the product of labor. These are necessaries of life, and
must be obtained by labor. Convenience demands a further supply, the
furnishing of which would occupy an additional period of labor. This
convenience is essentially connected with happiness, mental as well as
corporeal. Labor would, therefore, have been called upon to satisfy the claims
of necessity and convenience; it would have been unseduced by the allurements
of luxury.

UNFORTUNATELY for mankind no such system has been adopted. It has scarcely
even been thought of. The novelty of the plan forms no objection to its truth.
If it possess decided advantages, let us dare to believe human virtue equal to
its accomplishment.

WE have seen that in a nation, in which the hours of labor should be
abridged, and those of reflection increased, no injury would be sustained by
individuals, and little, if any, by the nation itself.

IT were a vain attempt, however, instantaneously to inspire with a love of
science men from whose minds reflection has long been alienated. The
improvement proposed must be the effect of a system of education gradually and
cautiously developed.

PREVIOUSLY to any prospect of success, one principle must prevail. Society
must establish the right to educate, and acknowledge the duty of having
educated, all children. A circumstance, so momentously important, must not be
left to the negligence of individuals. It is believed, that this principle is
recognized in almost all our state constitutions. If so, the exercise of it
would not be contested. Indeed, whether at present acknowledged or not, it
would produce such beneficial effects, as well in reference to the parent as
the child, that a general acquiescence might be relied on. [Note F.]

HAVING contemplated in reference to man an abatement of two hours of labor,
the next object of enquiry is what time should be devoted to the education of
youth. It should unquestionably be much larger; as during this period the mind
is unimproved; as impressions of the greatest strength are rapidly made; and as
the future biass of the mind entirely depends upon the improvement of these
impressions. The period, however, should have its limits. Study should never be
continued after it becomes oppressive. The preceptor should be as cautious in
using every mean necessary to prevent disgust, as he ought to be zealous in
exciting a thirst of knowledge. Without aiming at rigid precision, in
considering the claims of labor and study, we shall not, perhaps, materially
err in assigning four hours each day to education.

II. THE objects proper to be accomplished.

IT is necessary that the principle of an universal diffusion of knowledge
should be in the highest degree energetic. This is a principle which cannot be
too extensively embraced; for it is too true, that all the efforts of an
enlightened zeal will never make a whole nation as well informed as its
interests would prescribe.

BUT this necessary limit forms no objection to every practicable extension of
it. We shall be furnished with irrefragable evidence of its beneficial
tendency, on considering that knowledge has only produced injurious effects,
when it has been the subject of monopoly. The efforts of ignorance to oppress
science have excited a spirit of retaliation, which we must not be surprised at
beholding, in its turn, its own avenger. The moment, however, which marks the
universal diffusion of science, by withdrawing the temptation to, as well as
the means of, injury, will restore knowledge to its original purity and luster.
It is with knowledge, as with every other thing which influences the human
mind. It acts precisely in proportion to the force of the object acted upon. As
the beggar cannot corrupt by gold the beggar; so neither can opulence corrupt
opulence. In the same manner, equality of intellectual seize is a foe to
oppression; and just as mankind shall advance in its possession, the means as
well as the inducement to oppress will be annihilated. We are correct,
therefore, in declaring a diffusion of knowledge, the best, perhaps the only
pledge of virtue, of equality, and of independence.

LET us, then, with mental inflexibility, believe that though all men will
never be philosophers, yet that all men may be enlightened; and that folly,
unless arising from physical origin, may be banished from the society of men.
[Note G.]

THE ideas already expressed, and those which succeed, must be understood as
applicable to a system of general education. They only prescribe what it is
necessary every man should know. They do not attempt to limit his acquisitions.
Wealth and genius will always possess great advantages. It will be their
prerogatives, if properly directed, to carry improvement to its highest
eminences.

IN forming a system of liberal education, it is necessary to avoid ideas of
too general a character, as well as those which involve too minute a
specification. Considerable latitude must be allowed for the different degrees
of natural capacity, and the varying shades of temper and biass. It seems,
therefore, fit to lay down principles which possess properties common to every
mind, and which will, of course, in their application, admit of few, if any,
exceptions.

THE first great object of a liberal system of education should be, the
admission into the young mind of such ideas only as are either absolutely true,
or in the highest degree probable; and the cautious exclusion of all error.

WERE man able to trace every effect to its cause, he would probably find that
the virtue or the vice of an individual, the happiness or the misery of a
family, the glory or the infamy of a nation, have had their sources in the
cradle, over which the prejudides of a nurse or a mother have presided. The
years of infancy are those in which the chains of virtue or of vice are
generally forged. First impressions are almost omnipotent. Their reign is
silent, but not on that account the less secure. The mind no sooner begins to
unfold itself than it grasps with eagerness every new idea. Intoxicated, as it
were, with pleasure at its reception, it surrenders itself more to enjoyment
than reflection. Indeed, it has now the capacity to enjoy, but not to reflect.
In proportion to the length of time any idea occupies the mind, does it acquire
strength and produce conviction. And no sooner have these ends been
accomplished, than it constitutes itself the judge of every other resembling or
opposing idea. Hence it tyrannizes with despotic authority.

IF this view be correct, should it not be thought treason against truth and
virtue, to instill prejudice and error into the young mind? If this be treason
against truth and virtue, what shall we say of those who inculcate principles
which they know to be false, and attempt in this way to establish systems that
only exist in the midst of human carnage and destruction?

WHETHER we consider man's existence as terminated by the grave, or view him,
as he doubtless is, the heir of a future life, we must consider his happiness
as altogether dependent on the observance of certain moral principles. The
universality with which these have been received may be considered as the test
of their truth. These principles are few and simple. As the mind expands they
should be explained. They require no other aid than clear illustration. The
unperverted understanding acknowledges their truth as it were by intuition.
[Note H.]

LET then those truths in which all men agree be firmly impressed; let those
which are probable be inculcated with caution, and let doubt always hang over
those respecting which the good and the wise disagree. Above all things let the
infant mind be protected from conviction without proof.

BUT it will be said that in almost all the departments of a general plan of
education, the perusal of approved books must be chiefly relied on. The
indispensable economy of arrangements which are to pervade a whole society,
will prohibit the employment of preceptors of either great or original talents.
It will therefore be fit that the preceptor, instead of inculcating his own
immature ideas, should be guided by prescribed works. It is asked, where
performances explaining and enforcing plain and undeniable truths, and avoiding
prejudices or falsehoods, are to be found? Such productions are acknowledged to
be rare. It is also granted that this difficulty presents one of the most
serious obstacles to successful education. But it is not insurmountable. It is
attempted to be removed, as will appear hereafter, by offering large rewards
for books of this nature, and by inciting the learned by other inducements to
embark in so noble a service. At present we must be satisfied in giving the
preference to those works which abound most with truth and are the most exempt
from error.

THE elements of education, viz. reading and writing, are so obviously
necessary, that it is useless to do more than enumerate them.

OF nearly equal importance are the first principles of mathematics, as at
present almost universally taught.

A TOLERABLY correct idea of Geography would seem, in a Republic especially, to
involve great advantages. The interest of the mercantile part of the community
is closely connected with correct geographical knowledge. Many important
departments of science include an accurate knowledge of it. But the most
important consideration is that which contemplates the United States as either
allied in friendship, or arrayed in hostility, with the other nations of the
earth. In both which cases, it becomes the duty of the citizen to have just
ideas of the position, size, and strength, of nations, that he may as much as
possible, confide in his own judgment, in forming an opinion of our foreign
relations, instead of yielding his mind to a dangerous credulity. A most
interesting part of Geography relates to a knowledge of our own country.
Correct information on this subject will always conduce to strengthen the bands
of friendship, and to dissipate the misrepresentations of party prejudice.

THE cultivation of natural philosophy, particularly so far as it relates to
agriculture and manufactures, has been heretofore almost entirely neglected.
The benefits, however, which it would produce, are great, both as they regard
the happiness of the individual, and as they regard national wealth. Many of
the labors of the farmer and the mechanic, so far from forbidding reflection,
invite it. Thus the constant developement of new beauties in nature, and the
almost as constant production of new wonders in art, extort admiration from the
most ignorant, and even impress their minds with considerable delight. And yet
how little do they know of the energies of nature or art? Lost in the
contemplation of effects, the tribute of a grateful mind finds vent in simple
wonder.

IF we reverse the scene, and behold the farmer enlightened by the knowledge of
chemistry, how wide a field of reflection and pleasure, as well as profit,
would acknowledge his empire?

THE ingenuity of the mechanic would not long remain passive. Repeated efforts
at improvement would often prove successful, and be the source of new and rapid
wealth. At any rate in all these cases, whether prospered with the expected
success or not, an adequate compensation would be conferred on the mind thus
employed, whose thoughts generally bring with them their own reward.

THE circumscribed advantages, attending Geographical knowledge, will be
greatly enlarged by a liberal acquaintance with History. In proportion as this
branch of education shall be cultivated, men will see the mighty influence of
moral principle, as well on the private individuals of a community, as on those
who are called to preside over its public concerns. It will be distinctly seen,
that ambition has generally risen on a destruction of every sentiment of
virtue, and that it much oftener merits execration than applause. Power, long
enjoyed, will appear to be hostile to the happiness, and subversive of the
integrity, of the individual in whom it centres. Fanaticism and superstition
will appear surrounded with blood and torture. War will stand forth with the
boldest prominence of vice and folly, and make it, for a while, doubtful,
whether man is most a villain or a fool. In short the mirror which history
presents will manifest to man what, it is probable, he will become, should he
surrender himself up to those selfish pursuits, which centering in his own fame
alone, have ennabled him without horror to wade through the blood and the tears
of millions.

THIS horrid truth, confirmed by every page of history, will restrain, as it
undoubted has restrained, the indulgence of furious passion. The immortal
admiration attached to great and disinterested virtue, the immortal detestation
inseparable from great and selfish vice, will furnish the mind at once with the
strongest incentives to the one, and the liveliest abhorrence of the other.

THE second leading object of education, should be to inspire the mind with a
strong disposition to improvement.

IT is acknowledged that science is still in its infancy. The combination of
ideas is infinite. As this combination advances the circle of knowledge is
enlarged, and of course, the sphere of happiness extended. At present science
is only cultivated by a few recluse students, too apt to mingle the illusions
of imagination with the results of indistinct observation. Hence the reproach
that theory and practice oppose each other. But no sooner shall a whole nation
be tributary to science, than it will dawn with new luster. To adopt a physical
illustration, its rays may be expected to meet with little absorption from
ignorance, but to be reflected with additional luster, from every object they
strike.

THE most splendid discoveries have not been made by philosophers of profound
erudition and abstracted reflection, but by men of moderate seize and
correct observation. They have proceeded from steady and patient observation.

WERE the progress of a mind to improvement attended with no other effects than
internal delight, it would still deserve the highest rank among those objects
which produce happiness. Banishing from the mind all those sensations of
indifference, ennui, and vacancy, which produce effects the more cruel from
their being almost wholly without remedy, it would give to existence a thousand
new charms; not fleeting, but constant and always at command. The periods of
youth and of active life would be invigorated, the close of existence would
become a blessing instead of a burden. Is there any thing in existence more
interesting than an old man, whose mind is stored with wisdom, and whose heart
is full of sensibility?

WERE it supposed probable that any objection would be made to a vigorous
spirit of research, an appeal might be made to the words of Dr. Clarke, alike
eminent for distinction in virtue and science: A free and impartial inquiry
into truth is far from being reprehensible. On the contrary, it is a
disposition which every man ought in himself to labor after, and to the utmost
of his power encourage in others. It is the great foundation of all our
knowledge, of all true virtue, and of all sincere religion.

THIS progressive improvement would be promoted, in the third place, by
inspiring youth with a taste for, and an attachment to, science, so firm, that
it should be almost impossible to eradicate it in the subsequent periods of
life.

FOR this purpose studies which address themselves to the heart, as well as
those which require strong mental attention, should invite the exercise of
their thoughts. Rewards should be liberally bestowed, as well those which
furnish the means of moderate pleasure, as those which confer distinction.
Coercion should be seldom, if ever applied. [Note I.]

BUT this great object would be assisted, more than by any other consideration,
by --

RENDERING, in the fourth place, knowledge as highly practical as possible.

THIS idea has been already noticed. But it merits a more extensive discussion.
Next to the first object it claims the greatest notice.

ALL science ought to derive its rank from its utility. The real good which it
actually does, or is capable of doing, is the only genuine criterion of its
value. Man may indulge himself in sublime reveries, but the world will forever
remain uninterested in them. It is only when he applies the powers of his mind
to objects of general use, that he becomes their benefactor; until he does this
he is neither entitled to their gratitude or applause.

HE is the best friend of man, who makes discoveries involving effects which
benefit mankind the most extensively. Moral truths are therefore of importance
but little short of infinite. For they apply to numbers which almost evade
enumeration, and to time which loses itself in eternity. These truths, all
agree, are not to be sought in the cloister. They are only acquired by uniting
the calm and patient reflection of retirement, with the bold and penetrating
observation of active life.

IN physics, the happiness of mankind is in the highest degree increased by
discoveries and improvements connected with agriculture and manufactures. These
two occupations employ ninetenths of most communities, and a much larger
proportion of others. Does it not then become an interesting enquiry, whether
it be not expedient in infancy and youth to communicate to the mind the leading
principles of nature and art in these departments of labor, not only by a
theoretic exposition of them, but also by their practical developement.

IF almost the whole community be destined to pursue one or other of these
avocations from necessity, and if it be the duty of an individual to support
himself, whenever he can, by an exertion of his own powers; and if these can
only yield a sure support from an ability to be acquired in youth to prosecute
a particular branch of agriculture or mechanics, does it not seem to be the
duty of society to control education in such a way as to secure to every
individual this ability? If this ability existed, how much misery would be
annihilated, how much crime would be destroyed? Even under a government, In
France.
in which the happiness of men does not appear to have been the leading object,
the nobility were obliged to be instructed fully in the principles, and
partially in the practice, of a particular trade.

SHOULD, however, the justice of abridging natural right in these cases be
doubted, and its expedience denied, the propriety of a union of practical with
theoretic instruction will not be contested in reference to those who are
designed for agriculture or mechanics.

NAKED speculation is either unintelligible or uninteresting to the young mind,
while it delights in examining external appearances, and often in searching
after their causes. Those objects which have engaged our earliest, and surely
in some respects our happiest days, are cherished and pursued by the mind with
increasing delight in advanced and old age. From this plain view of the
subject, it appears that in youth the addition of practical to theoretical
knowledge would add to its charms; while in maturer age the blending theoretic
with practical knowledge would render labor more agreeable and engaging.

As the period of education will, it is probable, in most instances, be
protracted till the child shall be engaged in preparing himself for some
employment in life, it would be important to confine his attention, in a
considerable degree, to the acquisition of that kind of knowledge which would
be of the greatest practical use in the profession for which he is destined.
Give the mind an object worthy of its efforts, and you may rely upon their
being made. In this case the child would realise the connection between its
present pursuits, and its future prosperity, and this impression could not fail
to kindle new ardour in its youthful breast.

THE fifth object should be the inspiring youth with an ardent love for
mankind. To accomplish this end, the preceptor should cautiously avoid
instilling into the mind of his pupil a mean idea of human nature. The pages of
the moralist by debasing man have aided that degeneracy which they deprecate.
We should not even convey a suspicion of the honesty of him whom we wish to be
virtuous. Those who have led the public mind, so far from attending to this
maxim, have almost universally pourtrayed the heart and conduct of man as
infinitely depraved; and we have often beheld the gloomy spectacle of a
misanthropic infant. If we examine the tendency of the unperverted principles
of nature, we must acknowledge their hostility to that suspicion and jealously
which have proceeded from the force of education. The delight which we all feel
on contemplating the absence of suspicion, is an evidence of the triumph of
virtue and nature. The child has no doubt of the honesty of those about him,
until his mind has received an artificial biass. Having received this
unfortunate biass, and looking upon his fellow-beings as hostile, as he enters
on life, he treats them with suspicion; and perhaps, on the supposition that
they would pursue their own interest even to his injury, he hesitates not to
pursue his to theirs. This aggression, on his part, cannot fail to produce from
them that conduct which he has been taught to expect; and thus irrationally is
strengthened a conviction dictated by prejudice.

WE know, in our intercourse with the world, that confidence is the parent of
friendship, which forbids its subject to do an act base or dishonorable. On
the other hand, it is alike evident that distrust produces enmity, and that
enmity will often dictate, in the paroxysm of resentment, a mean and
disgraceful action.

IN whatever light this subject is viewed by reason, it will appear that men
are the creatures of sentiment, and that their virtue is often greatly,
sometimes altogether, dependent on the opinion entertained of them by others.
Let us then embrace the sentiment so forcibly expressed by Sullivan, "It is not
possible," says he, for a sane mind, for any continuance, to look upon mankind,
either as emmets, below his serious attention, or as monsters, more worthy of
his hatred than his regard.

III. THE manner of accomplishing the objects of education!

THIS branch of the subject may, in many respects, claim superior importance to
the other branches. It involves a more detailed statement, and more minute and
specific ideas, than those which have been already discussed.

It is to be feared, however, that the necessary specification of small objects
which it requires to render it clear or useful, may lessen, in the minds of
some, the dignity of the subject, and expose it to the edge of ridicule. But it
should be considered that as education itself altogether consists in a vigilant
attention to small objects, and would be wholly defeated without such
attention, so that system of education, other considerations being equal, must
be the best, which, in these small objects, leaves the least to error,
negligence and caprice. As in the natural world the boundless ocean takes its
source in innumerable petty springs, so the mind, invigorated with extensive
acquisitions, acknowledges its dependence on the humblest ideas.

BEFORE we proceed to adjust the several parts of the system, two interesting
enquiries present themselves for solution.

I. At what age education should commence?

II. SHOULD education be public or private?

I. EVERY correct view of human nature shows the young mind, though tender, to
be capable of great improvement. The injury it so often sustains from yielding
to superstitious notions, by being sacrificed to unmanly fear, and by being
wedded to numerous prejudices, abundantly attests the influence of certain
ideas on the mind, which had it been honestly directed, would have embraced
truth instead of delusion, and courage instead of pusillanimity. Mark the first
dawnings of the mind, and say if the infant exhibit any evidence of attachment
to falsehood? On the contrary, with the most engaging simplicity, you behold it
giving expression to truths the most obvious. Regard the interesting credulity
with which the child hears a mavelous story, until its mind labor under the
oppresive burden of a tissue of supernatual incidents. We may then assume it
as an undeniable fact that an attachment to truth is the property of the
unperverted mind.

WHILE this principle is in its vigor, it is infinitely important that the
mind should be as highly exercised as possible. But, it is said, that it should
not be fatigued, much less oppressed. Granted. But, let it in reply be
remarked, that at no period of our life, as at the earliest, are we, in some
respects, so capable of a constant exercise of our faculties. Every object
around, every idea within, is then new. Novelty is the source of our highest
enjoyment; of course not an object impresses the senses, not an idea is formed
in the mind, which does not yield the most exquisite delight. Why is the
remembrance of the scenes of childhood so dear to us, but from the interesting
recollection of scenes "Forever varying, and forever new."


ON this branch of the subject, we may gather correct ideas, by attending to
the remarks of a writer of antiquity, who has for the most part united with
masterly skill philosophy and a knowledge of human nature. Quintillian says,
Some have thought that none should be instructed in letters who are under seven
years of age, because that early period can neither comprehend learning nor
endure labor.

BUT what can they do better from the time at which they are able to talk? For
something they must do. Or why should we slight the gain, little as it is,
which occurs, before the age of seven? For certainly, however little that may
be which the preceding age shall have contributed, yet the boy will be learning
greater things in that very year, in which he would otherwise have been
learning smaller. This, extended to several years, amounts to a sum; and
whatever is anticipated in infancy, is an acquisition to the period of youth.

LET us not then throw away even the very first period; and the less so as the
elements of learning require memory alone, which is not only found in little
boys, but is very tenacious in them.

IT is true, that the measure of knowledge which infancy will receive is small.
But in most systems of education it has been injudiciously restricted. The mind
has lost half its vigor by being oppressed with the nomenclature of science.
Languages have been exclusively forced upon it; and it has been compelled to
believe legitimate science to be as unmeaning and as barren as the words which
it has acquired.

HAD a different plan been pursued; had our native language only occupied the
attention until well understood; had the simple elements of morals and physics
received concurrent inculcation, intellectual strength might have been secured
instead of being spent. The mind, engaged in objects intimately connected with
its own happiness, and the happiness of those around it, would have imbibed a
love of knowledge, which would probably never have been lost. [Note K.]

THESE remarks are forcibly illustrated by a luminous observation of
Montesquieu. "Another advantage," says he, their (the Ancients) education had
over ours; it never was effaced by contrary impressions. Epaminondas the last
year of his life, said, heard, saw, and performed the very same things, as at
the age in which he received the first principles of his education.

ONE consideration may deserve some attention, though it is not known hitherto
to have received any; and as it flows from a general law of nature, its truth
is confided in. All animals excepting man are submitted almost wholly to their
own efforts as to subsistence and welfare, as soon as they have acquired
physical strength sufficient to protect them from the invasion of force. No
animal is known to exist which does not require a certain portion of sagacity
to guide it. This sagacity, it may therefore be fairly supposed to possess as
soon as it attains its physical manhood. Man alone, in his present state,
passes a course of years in corporeal manhood, and mental infancy. May not the
idea be hazarded that this has arisen from false education, which has retarded
the progress of the mind, and protracted the period of mental infancy beyond
the limits assigned it by nature.

FROM these considerations, it appears, that the earlier the mind is placed
under a proper regimen, the greater is the probability of producing the desired
effects. Some years must be surrendered to the claims of maternal regard: some
will elapse before the child is able to attend to any thing but those external
objects which irresistibly force themselves on its notice.

MAKING an allowance of five years, for these unavoidable sacrifices, and for
the acquisition of those elements of knowledge which are with facility acquired
in any situation, we arrive at the period of life most proper for commencing a
system of general education.

IT is acknowledged that there is something arbitrary in fixing the period of
commencing the education of youth, as the mind varies in different persons.
Still however, it seems necessary that age should decide the time fit for
beginning education, which on the whole, with perhaps few variations, will be
found the least exceptionable mode of giving to this part of the system a
feature definite and certain; a feature which shall not be under the control of
parental weakness or ignorant caprice. If at the age of five, the mind, in some
children, be too tender to receive much, an intelligent instructor will be
satisfied with imparting little. No danger need be apprehended from intense
application at this period of life. Every idea formed in the mind will be
simple, and it is only in the combination of ideas that much mental vigor is
required.

II. SHOULD education be public or private?

THE most distinguished talents have been engaged in the discussion of this
subject; and here, as in most controversies of a speculative cast, we find a
great diversity of sentiment. Quintillian and Milton are warm in their eulogium
on a public, while Lock is equally animated in his praise of a private system
of education. The great argument, which may be called the center of all others
urged, is the production of emulation by a public education; while the great
objection made to public education, is the sacrifice, alleged to be produced,
of morality and honesty.

As there is, undoubtedly, truth on both sides, it becomes necessary to
consider what weight the alleged advantages and disadvantages ought to possess
in determining the preference of the judgment to one over the other system. It
will, perhaps, be possible to reconcile the apparently conflicting ideas, in
such a way, as to make the result of benefit produced infinitely larger than
the risque of injury sustained.

THE early period of life is under parental and especially maternal control.
The solicitude of a mother is now the best, the only protection, which the
child can receive. Some years elapse, before the mind seems capable of being
impressed with true or false knowledge in a degree sufficient to influence its
future expansion, and during this period, it is fortunate that we have not
occasion to regret the unenlightened state of the female mind. But though these
years do not mark much strength of mind, yet they rapidly unfold and form the
disposition, which seldom fails to receive a virtuous bias from a mother, who,
however vicious herself, feels deeply interested in the virtue of her
offspring. Hence those amiable affections are excited which are the ornament of
human nature. Before the age of five the child seldom feels a disposition to do
an immoral thing; and even if it should exhibit such a symptom, the temper is
so flexible, that it easily yields to a more virtuous direction.

THE young mind, having passed five years of its existence, free from much
corruption, and a plan of education being now commenced, it becomes an object
of consideration whether the child should remain with its parents, or be
separated from them.

AS a large portion of parental solicitude still exists, which alone seems
capable of securing a vigilant attention to those little indications of temper
and mind which now so profusely appear, it seems highly important that the
child should still remain under the immediate control of parental authority.
That affection which, on the part of the child, is but half formed, will have
time and opportunity to gain strength, a love of domestic tranquillity will be
produced, and both these principles will form a firm shield to virtue.

ON the other hand, the daily attendance at school will withdraw the mind of
the child from an entire dependence on its parents; will place it in situations
demanding the exercise of its faculties; and will strengthen, instead of
weakening, its attachment to domestic scenes. To be deprived of that which we
love is in some degree painful to us all; to children it is painful in the
highest degree. Yet a habit of voluntary or compulsory abstinence from pleasure
is absolutely necessary to human happiness.

THE child, in this situation, having its time divided between school, the
hours of diversion, and those spent in the house of its parents, will, perhaps,
remain as free from a prostration of morals, as can be expected in infancy.
This, indeed, is the plan, which universally prevails in the civilized world,
and its universality is certainly some argument in its favor.

LET this plan, partly domestic and partly public, be pursued till the mind
begins boldly to expand itself, and to indicate an ability and an inclination
to think for itself. The commencement of this capacity of combining ideas takes
place about the age of ten. We have now reached the period which claims the
closest attention. The mind now feels its vigor, and delights in displaying
it. Ambition is kindled, emulation burns, a desire of superiority and
distinction are roused.

THIS, then, appears to be the era, if ever, of public education. The
indulgence of parental tenderness should now be exchanged for the patient and
unobstructed exercise of the mental powers. Let us attend to the advantages of
the two rival systems at this period.

WITH regard to the plan of public Education;

1. EMULATION is excited. Without numbers there can be no emulation. It is
founded on the love of distinction. In a private family this distinction cannot
be acquired.

2. An attention to study, when the child is removed from the house of its
parent, may be uninterruped; whereas while it resides with him a thousand
trifling, menial, avocations, will always take precedence. From this results
the conviction in the mind of the child that study is altogether subordinate to
the objects to which it is compelled to attend.

3. BUT, above every other consideration, the system of public education,
inspires a spirit of independent reflection and conduct. Removed from a scene,
where it has little occasion to think, and less to act, the child now finds
itself placed in a situation free from rigid parental authority. [Note L.]
Placed in the midst of objects of pursuit, its preference of one object to
another, is often determined by its own volition. Hence reflection is excited;
and with children there is certainly no danger of too much thought; -- the only
apprehension is that there being too little.

LET a spirit of independent reflection animate a large number of even youthful
minds, and the acquisition of useful truths will soon be rapid. This spirit,
aided by the instruction of enlightened precepts, must give an undeniable
ascendency to the public over the private plan.

ERROR is never more dangerous than in the mouth of a parent. The child, from
the dawn of its existence, accustomed to receive as undoubted every idea from
this quarter, seldom, if ever, questions the truth of what it is told. Hence
prejudices are as hereditary as titles; and you may almost universally know the
sentiments of the son by those of the father. [Note M.] Now by education remote
from parental influence, the errors of the father cease to be entailed upon the
child -- Still farther, the child, having acquired true ideas, very often, from
the superior force of truth, dissipates the errors of his parent by the
remonstrances of reason.

As education professes to improve the state and character of men, and not
barely to oppose their declension, it must follow that domestic education is
improper, as it does no more, even if successful, than secure the last at the
expense of the first.

WHEN we consider the argument urged against public education (for only one is
urged with any tenacity) we shall find that the evil it deprecates arises from
the imperfection of human nature, more than from any appropriate and exclusive
property of public education.

WHEREVER there are numbers, of children assembled together, there will be
mischief and immorality. This is true; but is it so extensively true as to
countervail the numerous advantages which have been but partially stated? Is it
equal to the injury sustained by the mechanical adoption of parental error or
vice? More mischief, more immorality, have sprung from this source, than from
the one complained of. On the other hand does not the conduct of children, in a
public institution, in a considerable degree, resemble the actions of men in
the world? The knowledge, therefore, thus acquired, though sometimes at the
expense of honesty and truth, must be deemed of some importance. It is probable
that it arose from the spirit of their plans of education, that Sparta was the
last nation that fell a prey to the Macedonians, and Crete to the Romans. The
Samnites, Montesquieu observes, had the same institutions, which furnished
those very Romans with the subject of four and twenty triumphs. Indeed, though
it be probable, that no plan can ever be devised, which shall admit all the
advantages of an honorable and zealous competition, and exclude all the
injuries heretofore so closely allied as to be deemed inseparable, yet some
improvement ought not to be despaired of, amidst the universal tendency of
every thing to amelioration.

THE discussion of this subject appears in some measure superseded, and the
preference unequivocally established of the public over the private plan, by
the small expense of the first, compared with the unpracticable expense of the
last. If parents educated their children, the hours withdrawn from business
would alone impoverish them.

BEFORE a detail is given of the course of education proposed, it may be proper
concisely to state the points, which it has been the object of the preceding
remarks to establish.

IN THE FIRST PLACE, virtue and wisdom have been deemed to possess an
inseparable connection, and the degree and efficiency of the one has been
decided to depend on the measure and vigor of the other. From this proposition
the inference is deduced that a nation cannot possibly be too enlightened, and
that the most energetic zeal is necessary to make it sufficiently so for the
great interests of virtue and happiness.

SECONDLY. That it is the duty of a nation to superintend and even to coerce
the education of children, and that high considerations of expediency not only
justify, but dictate the establishment of a system, which shall place under a
control, independent of, and superior to, parental authority, the education of
children.

THIRDLY. The preference has been given at a certain age to public education
over domestic education.

FOURTHLY. The period of education recommended has been fixed at an age so
early, as to anticipate the reign of prejudice, and to render the first
impressions made on the mind subservient to virtue and truth.

GUIDED by these principles it is proposed;

I. THAT the period of education be from 5 to 18.

II. THAT every male child, without exception, be educated.

III. THAT the instructor in every district be directed to attend to the
faithful execution of this injunction. That it be made punishable by law in a
parent to neglect offering his child to the preceptor for instruction.

IV. THAT every parent, who wishes to deviate in the education of his children
from the established system, be made responsible for devoting to the education
of his children as much time as the established system prescribes.

V. THAT a fund be raised from the citizens in the ratio of their property.

VI. THAT the system be composed of primary schools; of colleges; and of a
University.

VII. THAT the primary schools be divided into two clases; the first consisting
of boys from 5 to 10 years old; the second consisting of boys from 10 to 18. --
And that these classes be subdivided, if necessary, into smaller ones.

VIII. THAT the instruction given to the first class be the rudiments of the
English Language, Writing, Arithmetic, the commission to memory and delivery of
select pieces, inculcating moral duties, describing natural phenomena, or
displaying correct fancy.

IX. THOUGH this class is formed of boys between the age of 5 and 10 years, yet
should rapid acquisitions be made in the above branches of knowledge at an
earlier age than that of 10, the boy is to be promoted into the second class.

X. THE most solemn attention must be paid to avoid instilling into the young
mind any ideas or sentiments whose truth is not unequivocally established by
the undissenting suffrage of the enlightened and virtuous part of mankind.

XI. THAT the instruction given to the second class be an extended and more
correct knowledge of Arithmetic; of the English language, comprising plain
rules of criticism and composition; the concise study of General History and a
more detailed acquaintance with the history of our own country; of Geography;
of the laws of nature, practically illustrated. That this practical
illustration consist in an actual devotion of a portion of time to agriculture
and mechanics, under the superintendance of the preceptor. That it be the duty
of this class to commit to memory, and frequently to repeat, the constitution,
and the fundamental laws of the United States.

XII. THAT each primary school consist of 50 boys.

XIII. THAT such boys be admitted into the college as shall be deemed by the
preceptor to be worthy, from a manifestation of industry and talents, of a more
extended education. That one boy be annually chosen out of the second class of
each primary school for this preferment.

XIV. THAT the students at college so promoted be supported at the public
expense, but that such other students may be received, as shall be maintained
by their parents.

XV. THAT the studies of the college consist in a still more extended
acquaintance with the above stated branches of knowledge, together with the
cultivation of polite literature.

XVI. THAT each college admit 200 students.

XVII. THAT an opportunity be furnished to those who have the ability, without
interfering with the established studies, of acquiring a knowledge of the
modern languages, music, drawing, dancing, and fencing; and that the permission
to cultivate these accomplishments he held forth as the reward of diligence and
talents.

XVIII. THAT a National University be established, in which the highest
branches of science and literature shall be taught. That it consist of students
promoted from the colleges. That one student out of ten be annually chosen for
this promotion by a majority of the suffrages of the professors of the college
to which he may belong.

XIX. THAT the student so promoted be supported at the public expense, and be
lodged within the walls of the University; remaining so long as he please on a
salary, in consideration of his devoting his time to the cultivation of science
or literature, in which last case he shall become a fellow of the University.

XX. THE number of professors in the College, and the University is not fixed;
but it is proposed that the last contain a prefessor of every branch of useful
knowledge.

XXI. IT is proposed that the professors be in the first instance designated by
law; that afterward, in all cases of vacancy, the professors of the college
choose the preceptors of the primary schools, and that the professors of the
University choose the professors of the colleges.

XXII. FOR the promotion of literature and science, it is proposed that a board
of literature and science be established on the following principles:

IT shall consist of fourteen persons skilled in the several branches of, 1.
Languages. 2. Mathematics. 3. Geography and History. 4. Natural Philosophy in
general. 5. Moral Philosophy. 6. English Language, Belle Lettres, and
Criticism. 7. Agriculture. 8. Manufactures. 9. Government and Laws. 10.
Medicine. 11. Theology. 12. Elements of taste, including principles of Music,
Architecture, Gardening, Drawing, etc. 13. Military Tactics. And in addition,
14. A person eminently skilled in Science, who shall be President of the board.

THE persons forming the board shall, in the first instance, be determined by
law, and in case of vacancy, a new election shall be held by the remaining
members of the board.

TWENTY years subsequent to the commencement of the established system, all
vacancies shall be supplied by a choice made in the first instance by the
professors of the University, which shall be then approved by a majority of
colleges, the professors of each college voting by themselves; and finally
sanctioned by a majority of the fellows of the University voting. No person
under 30 years of age shall be eligible.

THE persons, so elected, shall hold their offices during life, and receive a
liberal salary, which shall render them independent in their circumstances. No
removal shall take place unless approved by the suffrages of three-fourths of
the colleges, three-fourths of the professors of the University, and
three-fourths of the fellows of the University.

IT shall be the duty of this board to form a system of national education to
be observed in the University, the colleges, and the primary schools; to choose
the professors of the University; to fix the salaries of the several officers;
and to superintend the general interests of the institution.

AS merit and talents are best secured by liberal rewards, a fund shall be
established and placed under the control of this board, out of which premiums
shall be paid to such persons as shall, by their writings, excel in the
treatment of the subjects proposed by the board for discussion, or such as
shall make any valuable discovery.

IT shall further be the duty of this board to peruse all literary or
scientific productions submitted to them by any citizen, and in case they shall
pronounce any such work worthy of general perusal and calculated to extend the
sphere of useful knowledge, it shall be printed at the public expense, and the
author rewarded.

IT shall be the especial duty of the board to determine what authors shall be
read or studied in the several institutions, and at any time to substitute one
author for another.

As the extensive diffusion of knowledge is admirably promoted by libraries, it
shall be in the power of the board to establish them, wherever it shall see
fit; and to direct all original productions of merit to be introduced into them.

IT is not concealed, that on the establishment of this board, the utility, the
energy, and the dignity of the proposed system are deemed greatly to depend. It
will therefore be proper to exhibit with some minuteness the reasons which
render such an institution expedient, or in other words to state the advantages
which may be expected to be derived from it.

OUR seminaries of learning have heretofore been under the management of men,
either incompetent to their superintendance, or not interested in a sufficient
degree in their welfare. Voluntary and disinterested services, however
honorable, are but rarely to be obtained. The zeal, which embarks a man of
talents in the promotion of any object, will cool, unless sustained by some
substantial benefits, either received or expected. It is almost impossible in
this country for the case to be different. Affluence is so uncommon that few
are to be found who possess it in union with intellectual seize.
Independent of this consideration, it is generally conceded that more knowledge
is to be expected from men in a subordinate sphere of life, who are constrained
to cultivate their minds, than from those who can live, without such
cultivation, in ease and affluence. From this combination of acknowledged
facts, it must clearly appear that every advantage will flow from the
institution of the proposed board, which either does or can proceed from those
formed on the existing plans, and that great and exclusive additional benefits
may be expected.

THE high responsibility of this board will insure its fidelity. Every member
of it, being distinguished by eminent seize in some department of
learning, will be constrained by the powerful obligations due to character, to
superintend with zeal and honesty those concerns specially delegated to him. No
branch of science or literature will flourish at the expense of another, as
they will all be represented at this board. This board being the source from
which all inferior appointments proceed, if it be governed in its choice of
persons by incorrupt and intelligent motives, the several stations of
professors and preceptors will probably be filled with men equally eminent for
knowledge and industry.

So far the advantages connected with the establishment of such a board have
been contemplated in their immediate relation to the education of youth.
Benefits, equally great and more splendid, will flow to society, from the
security given to morals, and the impulse given to science. To this board, if
liberally endowed with funds, talents will look for sure protection and
encouragement. Not only talents previously existing will be rewarded and
animated to the noblest efforts, but talents which had never otherwise existed,
will trace their creation to this institution. The reliance on having publicity
given to their discoveries and researches, and the being rewarded by fame and
some share of pecuniary assistance, will encourage all those who feel conscious
of possessing great powers of mind, to give them activity and expansion.

As it may be relied upon that a body of men, well known, and possessing a full
sense of the value of character, will guard with peculiar circumspection, the
interests of virtue, and will only reward talents when exerted in its cause, we
may expect that authors, as they regard the approbation of this board, will be
careful to promote and not attack morals. Hence it may be inferred that fewer
vicious productions will issue from the press, than at present disgrace it.

WHEN it is considered how slow literary merit is at present in receiving its
reward, and that posthumous is more frequent than living fame; when it is
considered how detrimental this circumstance is to the acquisition of
knowledge; when it is further considered that poverty is almost always the sure
lot of devotion to science; it becomes difficult to assign limits to the
advantages which science would derive from always knowing where to meet with
protection, and receive both reputation and pecuniary reward. Every work
recommended to general acceptance by this board would surely go into a rapid
circulation, which of itself will generally amply recompense the author.

IF any one circumstance be more connected with the virtue and happiness of the
United States than another, it is the substitution of works defining correctly,
political, moral and religious duty, in the place of those which are at present
in use. The radical ideas we have already established, and which are in a great
measure peculiar to us, claim a new and entirely different exposition from that
which they have yet received. Every new work, therefore, which comes from the
pen of a citizen, may be deemed an important acquisition, a stay to our virtue
and a shield to our happiness.

EXCLUSIVELY of the enumerated advantages, which science may derive from this
board, great advances in knowledge may be expected from the individual
contributions of its several members. Inured in the early period of their lives
to close application, having acquired the habits of patient and persevering
study, and at length being placed in independent and easy circumstances, we
need not fear disappointment in expecting from them performances and
discoveries of the first order.

IN considering the objections likely to be urged against embracing the plan of
education here proposed, only two of much importance are foreseen. The first is
its extensiveness, the second its expense.

As the extensiveness can only be objectionable in reference to the expense,
this alone seems to require examination.

TO give a fair trial to this system, liberal compensation should be allowed to
the preceptors and professors. Their offices should be esteemed as honorable as
any employments, either public or private, in the community; and one sure way
of rendering them so is to attach to them independence. Without this appendage
we shall in vain expect that exclusive attention to science and professional
duty, which can alone accomplish the ends desired.

THE necessary expense must, then, be submitted to without reluctance. On an
enquiry into the sources of taxation we shall find more encouragement than
discouragement. When it is stated that the wealth of the state of Pennsylvania
alone may be estimated at more than 400 million of dollars, it will at once be
seen how little the most liberal sum, raised for the purpose of education,
would partake of burden or oppression. When on the other hand the greatness of
the object is correctly estimated and truly felt, all prejudices ought at once
to be annihilated; and it is only doing justice to the patriotism of our
citizens to believe that they would be annihilated.

TWO subjects connected with a general system of education, viz. female
instruction, and that which has been called ornamental, have been avoided: Both
of these certainly involve very important considerations. But in the existing
diversity of opinion respecting the nature and extent of the first, such
coincidence and agreement as to produce a system must absolutely be despaired
of. It is sufficient, perhaps, for the present that the improvement of women is
marked by a rapid progress, and that a prospect opens equal to their most
ambitious desires. -- With regard to ornamental instruction, it would seem to
rest more on principles of expediency than of necessity. It may, also, be
considered as a kind of mental luxury, which like that of a grosser nature,
will imperceptibly, but surely, by the allurements and pleasures which its
cultivation holds forth, insinuate itself into general acceptance. But as it is
of some consequence, that a plan of instruction in the polite arts should be
devised, which so far from being incompatible with, might aid the promotion of
branches of knowledge more immediately necessary, it is proposed, that a
limited opportunity be offered in the colleges, and a full one in the
university, to become acquainted with the principles as well as execution of
every polite art. The effects of these elegant pursuits on the mind and temper
are of the most beneficial nature. [Note N.] They may be emphatically
denominated the finished offspring of civilization and refinement. Besides, a
system of sufficient comprehensiveness should contain a department for every
species of genius. Every spark of mental energy should be cherished. The mind
should be left free to choose its favorite object, and when chosen should find
the means of prosecuting it with ardour.

SUCH is the system proposed. Its imperfections are beyond doubt numerous. Of
this fact, no man can be more sensible than their author. In the discussion of
a subject, which has ably employed the pens of the most distinguished writers,
without producing a general conviction of the preference of one plan over
another, it became the writer to exercise as much diffidence as consists with
the exposition of truth. If he has manifested in any part of the preceding
speculations the appearance of arrogant confidence in his own sentiments, he
trusts it will be ascribed to his impressions of the importance of the subject,
and not to a vain attachment to his peculiar ideas. He who is solemnly
impressed with interesting truths, will think with energy, and express his
thoughts with decision.

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal agreement of all men in this country as to the
necessity of a reform in education, so essentially do their professions
disagree with their actions, that nothing short of the commanding eloquence of
truth, without (...) thundered on their ears, can produce that concurrence of
action, that unity of effort, which shall give efficiency to a wise system of
education. Let then the voice of the good man mingle with that of the wise in
announcing the necessity of speedily adopting such a measure. Instead of one
party denouncing another for equivocal political crimes, let all parties unite
in attesting their patriotism by their cooperating efforts in so great a
cause. Is it a question with any man whether our liberties are secure? Let him
know that they depend upon the knowledge of the people, and that this knowledge
depends upon a comprehensive and energetic system of education. It is true that
some nations have been free without possessing a large portion of illumination;
but their freedom has been precarious and accidental, and it has fallen as it
rose.

THE two things which we are most interested in securing are harmony at home,
and respect abroad. By calling into active operation the mental resources of a
nation, our political institutions will be rendered more perfect, ideas of
justice will be diffused, the advantages of the undisturbed enjoyment of
tranquillity and industry will be perceived by every one, and our mutual
dependence on each other will be rendered conspicuous. The great result will be
harmony. Discord and strife have always proceeded from, or risen upon,
ignorance and passion. When the first has ceased to exist, and the last shall
be virtuously directed, we shall be deprived of every source of
misunderstanding. The sword would not need a scabbard, were all men enlightened
by a conviction of their true interests.

HARMONY at home must produce respect abroad. For the era is at hand when
America may hold the tables of justice in her hand, and proclaim them to the
unresisting observance of the civilized world. Her numbers and her wealth vie
with each other in the rapidity of their increase. But the immutable wisdom of
her institutions will have a more efficient moral influence, than her physical
strength. Possessed of both she cannot fail to assume, without competition, the
station assigned her by an overruling power.

SUCH is the bright prospect of national dignity and happiness, if America give
to her youth the advantages of a liberal and just education. On the other hand,
should avarice, prejudice, or malice, frustrate this great object, and should a
declension of knowledge, gradually, but not the less decisively as to a future
period, be suffered to triumph, the prospect is gloomy and dreadful. Gigantic
power misapplied, towering ambition unsatiated with criminal gratification,
avarice trampling poverty under foot, mark but a few of the dark shades which
will in all probability, envelop our political horizon. On such an event, we
must expect the miseries of oppression at home, and conquest abroad.

IT may interest the attention, as it certainly will amuse the fancy, to trace
the effects of the preceding principles of education on a future age. It has
been observed that however virtuous, enlightened and vigorous our first efforts
to aggrandize the human character, it were, notwithstanding, folly to expect
the celerity of preternatural agency. A system founded on true principles must
gradually and cautiously eradicate error, and substitute truth. The period,
will, therefore, be remote before the world is benefitted by its complete
developement.

LET us contemplate the effects of a just system,

I. ON THE INDIVIDUAL CITIZEN. II. ON THE UNITED STATES. III. ON THE WORLD.
I. THE citizen, enlightened, will be a freeman in its truest sense. He will
know his rights, and he will understand the rights of others; discerning the
connection of his interest with the perservation of these rights, he will as
firmly support those of his fellow men as his own. Too well informed to be
misled, too virtuous to be corrupted, we shall behold man consistent and
inflexible. Not at one moment the child of patriotism, and at another the slave
of despotism, we shall see him in principle forever the same. Immutable in his
character, inflexible in his honesty, he will feel the dignity of his nature
and cheerfully obey the claims of duty. He will look upon danger without
dismay, so he will feel within himself the power of averting, or the faculty of
disarming it. With Lucretius, he may say,

IT is a view of delight to stand or walk on the shore side and to see a ship
tossed with tempest upon the sea, or to be in a fortified tower, and to see two
battles joined upon a plain. But it is a pleasure incomparable for the mind of
man to be settled, landed and fortified in the certainty of truth, and from
thence to descry and behold the errors, perturbations, labors and wanderings
up and down of other men.

THE love of knowledge, which even a moderate portion of information never
fails to inspire, would at the same time shut up many sources of misery, and
open more sources of happiness. The love of wealth would cease to be the
predominant passion of the heart; other objects would divide the attention, and
perhaps challenge and receive a more constant regard.

THE acquisition of knowledge is open to all. It injures no one. Its object is
disinterested. It delights in distinction only so far as it increases the mass
of public good. Here then is an object which all may pursue without the
interference of one with another. So far from producing interference, it will
constantly tend to destroy it; for the more men think, the more they will
resemble each other, and the more they resemble each other, the stronger will
their mutual attachment be.

II. VIEWING the effects of such a system on the United States, the first
result would be the giving perpetuity to those political principles so closely
connected with out present happiness. In addition to these might be expected
numerous improvements in our political economy.

BY these means government without oppression, and protection without danger,
will exist in their necessary strength.

POLITICS are acknowledged to be still in their infancy. No circumstance could
so rapidly promote the growth of this science as an universal illumination of
mind. The minds of millions centering in one point, could not fail to produce
the sublimest discoveries. Hence the prospect that our political institutions
would quickly mature into plans as perfect as human happiness would require.

IF all the genius of a nation could be impelled into active exertion,
philosophy, both moral and physical, would soon present a new face. Every new
discovery would probably tend to abridge the labor of the body, and to allow
opportunity, as well as inspire inclination, to cherish reflection. Man would
feel himself in possession of two extensive sources of enjoyment, the exercise
of the body, and the reflection of the mind; and he would soon find the last as
submissive as the first.

THIS state of things could not fail to elevate the United States far above
other nations. Possessed of every source of happiness, under the guardianship
of all necessary power, she would soon become a model for the nations of the
earth. This leads in the third place to,

III. THE consideration of the effects of such a system on the world.

NATION is influenced as powerfully by nation, as one individual is influenced
by another. Hence no sooner shall any one nation demonstrate by practical
illustration the goodness of her political institutions, than other nations
will imperceptibly introduce corresponding features into their systems. No
truth is more certain, than that man will be happy if he can. He only wants a
complete conviction of the means, to pursue them with energy and success. This
conviction the United States may be destined to flash on the world.

INDEPENDENT of this necessary effect, other effects will be produced. Many of
the most enlightened of our citizens will traverse the globe with the spirit of
philosophical research. They will carry with them valuable information and an
ardent enthusiasm to diffuse it. Its diffusion will be the era of reform
wherever it goes.

BUT more important, still, will be the example of the most powerful nation on
earth, if that example exhibit dignity, humility and intelligence. Scarcely a
century can elapse, before the population of America will be equal, and her
power superior, to that of Europe. Should the principles be then established,
which have been contemplated, and the connection be demonstrated between human
happiness and the peaceable enjoyment of industry and the indulgence of
reflection, we may expect to see America too enlightened and virtuous to spread
the horrors of war over the face of any country, and too magnanimous and
powerful to suffer its existence where she can prevent it. Let us, then, with
rapture anticipate the era, when the triumph of peace and the prevalence of
virtue shall be rendered secure by the diffusion of useful knowledge.

NOTES.
NOTE A. -- p. 23.
ASTRONOMY is not merely a speculative science; its use is as extensive as its
researches are profound. To it, navigation owes its safety; to it, commerce is
indebted for its extension, and Geography for its improvement. But, what above
all, speaks its praise, is, that it has led the way to the diffusion of
knowledge, and to the civilization of mankind.

Sullivan, vol. 1. p. 426. NOTE B. -- p. 23.
What benefits do we receive from the celebrated deeds of an Alexander or a
caesar? But Pythagoras gave us our commerce and our riches; if it be true, that
he invented the 47th proposition of the first book of Euclid, which is the
foundation of Trigonometry, and consequently of Navigation.

Sullivan, vol. 6. p. 303. NOTE C. -- p. 23.
Generally let this be a rule, that all partitions of knowledge, be accepted
rather for lines and veins, than for sections and separations; and that the
continuance and entireness of knowledge be preserved. For the contrary hereof
has made particular sciences to become barren, shallow, and erroneous, while
they have not been nourished and maintained from the common fountain.

Bacon, vol. 2. p. 478. NOTE D. -- p. 29.
And it is without all controversy, that learning does make the minds of men
gentle, generous, amiable, and pliant to government; whereas ignorance makes
them churlish, thwarting and mutinous: And the evidence of time does clear this
assertion, considering that the most barbarous, rude and unlearned times have
been most subject to tumults, seditions and changes.

Bacon, vol. 2. p. 421. NOTE E. -- p. 32.
Is not such the delight of mental superiority, that none on whom nature, or
study, have conferred it, would purchase the gifts of fortune by its loss.

Sullivan, vol. 6. p. 110. NOTE F. -- p. 39.
It is proper to remind parents, that their children belong to the state, and,
that in their education, they ought to conform to the rules which it prescribes.

Preliminary speech of Cambaceres, on a plan of a Civil Code for France. NOTE
G. -- p. 41.
Let no man, upon a weak conceit of sobriety, or an ill applied moderation,
think or maintain, that a man can search too far, or be too well studied in the
books of God's word, or in the book of God's work; divinity or philosophy; but
rather let men endeavor an endless progress, or proficience in truth.

Bacon's works, vol. 2. p. 417. NOTE H. -- p. 43.
The savage receives divine truths carelessly, hears them with indifference,
apprehends them confusedly, and suffers them soon to be obliterated from his
memory. But a Newton listens to them attentively, weighs them deliberately,
comprehends them accurately, and keeps them in careful remembrance. In short
nothing can secure the mind from error and imposture, but the precision arising
from a candid philosophical spirit, which admits no terms that are not clear;
no premises that are not evident; and no conclusions that do not intuitively
follow premises well ascertained.

Sullivan's view of Nature, vol. 2. p. 231. NOTE I. -- p. 49.
The end of masters in the long course of their studies is to habituate their
scholars to serious application, to make them love and value the sciences, and
to cultivate such a taste as shall make them thirst after them when they are
gone from school.

Rollin. NOTE K. -- p. 57.
There is nothing to hinder a child from acquiring every useful branch of
knowledge, and every elegant accomplishment suited to his age, without
impairing his constitution; but that the greatest attention must be paid to the
powers of the body and the mind, that they neither be allowed to languish for
want of exercise, nor be exerted beyond what they can bear.

Dr. Gregory. Further,

He, who in his early age, has been taught to study and revere the characters
of the sages, heroes, statesmen, and philosophers, who adorn the annals of
Greece and Rome, will necessarily imbibe the most liberal notions. He will
catch a portion of that generous enthusiasm, which has warmed the hearts, and
directed the conduct, of the benefactors and ornaments of the human race.

Knox, p. 172. NOTE L. -- p. 63.
Too long have we been accustomed to consider as an authority, a duty of
protection engraved by nature in our hearts. Contrary to the eternal order of
thing, a power of administration has been turned to the exclusive advantage of
those by whom it was exercised. This mistaken idea originated in the opinion
long implicitly received, that man can belong to man, an atrocious system which
the Romans modified in the days of their refinement, and which we propose
totally to overthrow, by reducing the relations between father and child to
kindness and benefits on the one side, and to respect and gratitude on the
other.

Preliminary speech of Cambaceres, on a plan of a civil Code for France. NOTE
M. -- p. 64.
These are the sentiments of Juvenal, whom justice forbids us solely to regard
as a poet. His character is only duly appreciated by considering him as one of
the most enlightened and inflexible moralists of antiquity.

There are many reprehensible things which the parents themselves point out and
hand down to their children -- So nature orders it; the examples of vice which
we see at home corrupt us sooner than any other -- One or two, whose hearts
Titan has formed of better clay, and with a partial hand, may, indeed escape
the influence of such example; but the rest are led into those footsteps of
their fathers which ought to be shunned; and the path of some habitual vice
pointed out for a long time, by a parent, draws them into it.

NOTE N. -- p. 78.
A just taste in the fine arts, by sweetening and harmonizing the temper, is a
strong antidote to the turbulence of passion. Elegance of taste procures to a
man so much enjoyment at home, or easily within reach, that, in order to be
occupied, he is, in youth, under no temptation to precipitate into hunting,
gaming, drinking; nor, in middle age, to avarice. A just relish of what is
beautiful, proper, elegant, and ornamental, in writing or painting, in
architecture or gardening, is a fine preparation for discerning what is
beautiful, just, elegant or magnanimous in character or behavior.

Lord Kaims's elements of criticism. The truth is, that polite learning is
found by experience to be friendly to all that is amiable and laudable in
social intercourse; friendly to morality. It has a secret but powerful
influence in softening and meliorating the disposition. True and correct taste
directly tends to restrain the extravagancies of passion, by regulating that
nurse of passion, a disordered imagination.

Knox's plan of a liberal Education, p. 8. THE END.

