Engraved for SPOTSWOOD and ETHERIDGE, Sold by them No 22, Marlboro Street
BOSTON


HISTORY OF THE DAVENPORT FAMILY: In which is displayed A STRIKING CONTRAST
BETWEEN Haughty Indolence and Healthful Activity. In the Characters of the
YOUNG DAVENPORTS, AND THEIR COUSINS, SOPHIA AND AMELIA EASY. Interspersed with
MORAL REFLECTIONS.

BY H. S.

TWO VOLUMES IN ONE.

Embellished with Engravings.

Boston: PRINTED AND SOLD BY SPOTSWOOD AND ETHERIDGE. 1798.

THE HISTORY OF THE DAVENPORT FAMILY.
IN the North of England lived a gentleman and lady of the name of Davenport;
they had two boys and two girls. Mrs. Davenport took care herself of the
education of her daughters, whilst her husband attended to that of the boys.
These children were very good and dutiful to their parents; and, indeed, it
would have been a shame had they been otherwise.

Their names were, CHARLES, thirteen years old, MARY, twelve, GEORGE, eleven,
CAROLINE, nine.


Though their house was several miles distant from any town, yet it had the
advantage of a very good neighborhood; this, however, did not last all the
year, as most of the families who lived thereabout, spent the winter in London:
yet, during this dreary season, our little family wished not for more society
than was to be found under their own roof; they were always happy and cheerful
within themselves. Mrs. Davenport had a brother, who was a widower, with two
daughters: Sophia and Amelia Easy. Having occasion to visit the continent, he
begged the favor of his brother and sister to take care of them during their
absence from school at Christmas. This request was readily complied with; and,
accordingly, when the holidays were nearly arrived, Mr. Davenport set off for
London, to convey these young ladies from thence down to his own house. Mary
and Caroline expected the arrival of their cousins with a deal of pleasure.
During the week that Mr. Davenport was absent, their leisure hours were
employed in making up new clothes for their dolls, and getting all their
playthings in order. At length, the happy day arrived, their papa returned, and
introduced Sophia and Amelia to them; hoping that they would be good friends,
and love one another as sisters.

Sophia Easy was fourteen years old, Amelia was twelve. They had the misfortune
to lose their mother when they were very young, and having been from that time
brought up at one of the first schools, great attention had been paid to their
French, music, and other accomplishments, but they were girls of very perverse
and wayward dispositions. Sophia was very proud and unwilling to take any
advice, haughty to servants, and impertinent to her superiors; at school she
had connected herself with a set of those silly girls who laughed at every one
(...) knew better than themselves, and tyran^^sed over those who would not
enter into their ^^diculous schemes. Amelia was vain and conceited; she never
let slip an opportunity (...) admiring herself in a looking glass, and, had the
time been allowed her, would with pleasure have spent the whole morning at her
toilet. Besides these foibles, they had each of them contracted a habit of
telling falsehoods. Such were the Miss Easys, and from what I have said of the
little Davenports, my young readers will readily suppose that they were not
much pleased with their visitors.

Mr. Davenport read short prayers to the whole family every night, which were
always over by nine o'clock, when the children went to bed. They rose at six in
summer, and at eight in winter; though used to earlier hours at school, Sophia
and Amelia did not choose to get out of bed till past eleven. Mrs. Davenport
took no notice of this the first morning, thinking that the journey had
fatigued them; but the next day when the clock struck eleven, and they had not
made their appearance, she went up stairs and gently reproved them, adding,
that she hoped (...) would not happen again. The moment she quitted the room,
"Come," says Amelia to her sister, "let us get up, or she will be coming again
to pla^^e us." "Let her come," (...); "we have (...) to pretend to be (...)."

Amelia. "Ah, but she will find us out!"


Sophia. And what if she does? she has no right to punish us.


After this they continued their conversation for a long time, till it was
interrupted by (...) entrance of Caroline; who, coming toward the bed, and
gently undrawing the curtains, "Come, my dear cousins," said she, "pray get up;
for if you stay up stairs any longer you will vex mama, and I am sure you would
not wish to do so." "I don't care whether she is (...) or not," said Sophia;
"what is it to her how long we lay in bed?" This was the first time Caroline
had ever heard her mama spoken of slightingly; it hurt her, and she quickly
answered, My mama is very good, and is never angry or vexed without reason^^ If
we get up, it will be of our own accord, said Amelia; we shall ^ot do it a bit
the sooner for her. "(...) you please," ^^^^^ned Caroline; (...) to avoid a
quarrel, hastily left the ^oom; but recollecti^g that her cousins might want
some help, she came back and offered her assistance; it was accepted, and, when
they were dressed, she conducted them to the breakfast room. "This is a very
late hour for breakfast," said Mrs. Davenport, as they entered the room; we are
a regular family, and it must not "happen again." "What," said Sophia, "are we
to get up by four?" "I did not say four," replied Mrs. Davenport, rather
displeased at her pertness; "but nine is our breakfast hour, and those who are
not down by that tim^ ^ust go without." This was spoken in so resolute a manner
that it totally silenced her nieces. They soon finished their breakfast, and
Mary took them to walk in the grounds. The sharpness of the weather, however,
soon brought them back again; Mary then produced some dissected maps, but they
would not suffer her even to open them; saying, that they had enough of
geography at school, and that they did not intend to study in holiday time.
"Study, do you call it?" said Mary; "well you cannot imagine how we all like
it, for papa teaches us; and we find it very entertaining; however, if you do
not like it, we will find out some other amusement; will you go up stairs and
play with our dolls?" "D^ you take us for babies?" said Amelia. "I am sure I
did not mean to affront you," replied Mary; "and I do not know what else to
offer you. -- Stay -- now I think of it, there is a great book of prints in the
study, will you come and look over them?" Pray cannot you fetch them?" said
Amelia.

Mary. I would with pleasure, but they are so heavy.


Sophia "You can ring the bell for a servant, I suppose."


Just then Mrs. Davenport entered the room: -- "What my dear Mary," said she,
can you find nothing to entertain your cousins with? -- Where are your Maps?

Mary. "They do not like them, mama."


Mrs. Davenport. "And pray why not?"


Sophia. Dear me, ma'am, we are sick of them at school. I hate geography.


Mrs. Davenport. That is a great pity indeed, for it is a very useful study.


Amelia. Besides, ma'am we know enough about it already.


Mrs. Davenport. I am very glad to hear that you are so clever, and I wish you
would instruct Mary and Caroline. Let me hear you inform them of the meaning of
the word continent.


Amelia. A continent -- a continent -- is a vast tract of water.


Mrs. Davenport. Is it indeed! -- well, now that is quite new to me; I always
understood it to be a vast tract of land; every part of which you might visit
without crossing any sea whatever.


Amelia. Aye, aye, a tra^^ (...) land; it is much the same thing.


Mrs. Davenport. I beg your pardon; land and water are two very different
things. Never again, my dear Amelia, pretend to more knowledge than you really
have. It Is a common remark, that those who make the greatest parade of their
learning, generally prove, upon examination, the most ignorant.


Mrs. Davenport then proposed a walk, but her nieces loudly opposed her,
saying, That indeed it was too cold to attempt it. "I fear then," said she,
"you must stay by yourselves, as Mary (...) Caroline make a practice of walking
every day; for there is nothing so unwholesome as sitting over the fire all the
day long." -- "I cannot see any necessity for walking out," said Sophia, "in
such horrid cold weather, when the very idea of it is enough to freeze one."

Mrs. Davenport. I do not know what you mean by horrid weather; but if you
never stir out except in summer, you lose many a pleasant walk, and your health
will suffer for it.


Sophia. I am forced to go out at school: but, if I had my own will, I am sure
I would never set my foot but of doors but when it was warm.


Mrs. Davenport. My dear girl, you do not show your sense by such a
declaration; for certain it is, that those who do not use exercise whilst
young, are more subject to all kinds of disorders than those who pursue a
contrary metho^^* In the midst of pain, they regret their inattention to the
advice of their friends, and lament with bitterness that it is now too late to
follow it.


This dialogue was here interrupted by the return of Mr. Davenport, and his two
sons, from their morning's ^ide. They brought with them Harry Lively, a pretty
little boy, the son of a (...) who lived five miles from the^. Bei^^ (...) ^^ly
child, he was too much i^^ulged to be q^ite ^greeable; but upon the whole; his
^^aviour was not amiss. The (...) of this (...) gentleman prevented the walk
Mrs. D^v^^port had proposed, and the children being left by themselves, all fa^
round the fire; and began talking. Little Lively po^^^^^ed a book, which he
said his pape (...) given him that morning, and that if the (...) had no
objection, he would read them a very entertaining story. They all agreed to it,
and he began reading as follows.

The History of Harry Headstrong. Though this ^^o^y is here inserted as if
^^ken from some other book, it is entirely new; as well as the Fairy Tal^, and
the Poor Man's Legacy.

HARRY HEADSTRONG had exceeding kind parents, who were willing ^o indulge him
in every thing that was proper; but he, like a foolish boy, would never take
their advice. His papa one day bought a horse that was rather unruly, and
strictly charged his groom never to let Harry ride it. Harry, however, soon
found an opportunity for so doing; for one day when his papa was out, he went
into the stables, and finding no groom there, he quickly saddled the horse, and
was just preparing to mount, when his father returned. "What are you doing
there, Sir?" said he. -- "Only going to ride Crop, papa." -- "Then," replied
Mr. Headstrong, "you are only going to do what I have expressly forbid; so pray
put off your ride for the present; go into the house, and let me not see your
face again to day." The next morning, at breakfast, Mr. Headstrong was so good
as not to take any notice of what had happened the preceding day: but this
indulgence, far from having the proper effect, only served to make Harry worse.
His father and mother being obliged to go on a visit for some days, where they
could not conveniently take him with them, Mr. Headstrong, before his
departure, gave him some very good advice, and above all, desired him upon no
account to get upon Crop's back. Harry assured him he would not, but no sooner
was his father gone, than he went to Dick the groom, and contrived to send him
out of the way upon some message or other. In the mean time, he mounted Crop,
and the moment he was out of the stable yard, set off on a gallop. When he had
got about a quarter of a mile from the house, he wished to turn back again, but
he checked the bridle in vain -- on Crop went, with such impetuosity, that
Harry could no longer keep his seat.

Luckily, however, before he quite lost it, he had time to disengage his feet
from the stirrups, otherwise he must have been dragged a considerable way;
which circumstance would, most likely, have proved fatal to him, as the road
was very uneven and flinty. His fall deprived him of his senses, and he lay
some time on the ground before any one passed by. At last a countryman came
that way, and placing him upon some hay in his cart, carried him to his own
cottage. As soon as his wife saw Harry, "Good lack a day!" quoth she, "if this
is not 'squire Headstrong's own son and heir! goodness me! if he should die! --
do, there is a good man," said she to her husband, "take Ball, and ride to tow^
for a surgeon, pathecary, or something." Tomkin thought Joan's advice was good,
so getting on Ball, he trotted away to the next town. During his absence, Harry
came to himself, but was so bruised, that he could not move. Mother Joan was a
good sort of a woman enough, but was rather inquisitive, and not a little
talkative. She make Harry relate the whole adventure, and interrupted him every
moment with some remark or other. At last, when he had finished, she exclaimed,
Good gemini! how could you be so venturesome! It Is well for you that you did
not break your neck; nay, I don't know but what (...)'ve got some broken bones
as it is. (...) will the 'squire say! he will be out of his wits almost. Harry
suffered so much pain that he hardly knew what the good woman said, but lay
crying and roaring at a great rate. "Oh," says Joan, you must not be in such
low spirits neither. She then ran out of the room, and quickly returned with a
cup of elder wine made hot with spices. It was lucky for Harry that the surgeon
arrived just time enough to prevent the dose, for had he taken it, it would
have increased his fever much, which was already at an alarming height. Mr.
Hopkin said, that none of his bones were broke, but gave it as his opinion,
that he ought to be removed to his father's house. This was agreed to, and for
three weeks he kept his bed, dangerously ill. When his father and mother heard
of the misfortune, they hastened back; so that, instead of staying from home a
fortnight, as they had originally intended, they were absent but one day.

Any one would suppose that this accident would have been sufficient to warn
^^rry from disobeying his parents again; indeed it made an impression upon him
for some time, but this wore away by degrees, and he become as bad as ever. At
last he grew so mischievous, that no gentlemen would suffer their sons to keep
company with him, fearing they should follow his bad example. His father kept
pistols in his bed chamber, and they were generally lo^ded: Harry was ordered
never to touch them, and that he might have no opportunity of doing it, he was
forbid entering the room. One day, however, when Mr. and Mrs. Headstrong, were
gone out to dinner, he stole in unperceived by the servants, and getting one of
them down, he pulled the trigger and discharged it. Unhappily the pistol had
not been looked at for some time, and was in so bad a condition that it burst.
The consequence was, that his hand was shattered in so terrible a manner that
he was forced to have it cut off. The excrutiating pain he then underwent, made
him reflect seriously on his disobedience. Oh! (thought he to himself) if I had
but minded what my father said to me, I should never have suffered thus! In
fine, this last accident had so good an effect upon him, that for the future he
did every thing his parents desired him to do, and consequently became a very
good boy.

Harry Lively. Here follows a deal of advice, but that I always skip.


Charles. Indeed, that is very foolish.


Harry Lively. And why foolish?


Charles. Papa has often told me so: I own to you, I used at one time to be of
the same way of thinking, till he convinced me of the folly of it. "My dear
Charles," said he one day, how, when you grow older, will you ever be able to
study at all, if, whilst young, you make a practice of skipping every page that
is not enlivened with an anecdote: You will next get into a habit of never
reading any but trifling books, that contain no real information, but only
serve to amuse for an hour or two at best. Mr. Davenport now entered, and
inquired how they had been employed. "We have been hearing (...) pretty story,
Sir," said Caroline, "w^^oh Harry Lively has been reading to us." Harry Lively
then handed the book to him, and Mr. Davenport, having just looked over it,
said, This story seems a good one, and I hope you will all remember the advice
at the end of it.


Harry Lively. Oh, I did not read that to them.


Mr. Davenport. And why not?


Harry Lively. It is so dull and stupid -- I ^^^er do.


Mr. Davenport. Then you lose (...) useful pi^^^ of information. Yo^ (...) dull
and stupid* you would th^^ (...) differently were you to read it with (...)
^ination to profit by it. Be assured it is your ^^at of attention that makes it
appear ^^entertaining. Young people cannot have too much advice given them,
their inexperience requires it. Without some one to direct the^^ they would be
continually falling into error and misfortune. Yet, strange it is, there are
children who have kind parents to guide them, who will, notwithstanding,
obstinately follow their own inclinations.


The second dinner bell now rang, and they all went together into the eating
room. After dinner the children all went up into an unfurnished room that was
kept on purpose for them to run about in, when the weather was bad. Here they
amused themselves with b^^^d man's buff, thread the needle, etc. till a servant
acquainted them that tea was ready. Afterward they had a pool at commerce,
(...) them till bed time.

(...) in winter, were very bad between (...) Davenport's house and Mr.
Lively's, these two gentlemen had settled, that Ha^^^ should not ride home till
the next day. Mrs. Davenport when taking leave of her neices for the night,
reminded them of the breakfast hour, adding, that if it was a fine morning, she
would take them out with her to pay some visits. Sophia and Amelia were half
determined not to rise any earlier than they had hither to done; but
recollecting, that by so doing, they might go without their breakfast, they
thought it better to obey, and accordingly were down by half past eight. Mrs.
Davenport commended their punctuality, but as she had discernment enough (...)
discover the true cause, it gave her pain to think, that nothing but the fear
of punishment was sufficient to make them act p^^^^ly. As breakfast was not
ready, they we^^ (...) their aunt into Mr. Davenport's study (...) they found
Mary and Caroline translating ^rench, and Charles and George at their Latin.
Harry Lively was looking over a folio book of prints, in which amusement Sophia
and Amelia readily accompanied him. When they had been thus employed for some
time, they went to breakfast; when that was over, Mrs. Davenport, her two
daughters, and nieces, went into the carriage to pay some visits in the
neighborhood.

This lady, being desirous of making the holidays of Sophia and Amelia pass as
pleasantly as possible, invited some young people, intending to have a dance,
and Harry Lively's father was prevailed upon to let him stay at Mr. Davenport's
till it was over. The day was expected with great impatience, as Sophia and
Amelia were never at any ball but that of ^^^ir dancing master's, and the
little Davenports had never been at any at all. At last the time came, and the
children who were (...) arrived. Mrs. Davenport was not (...) with their
company merely for the ev^^^ng, but wished them to dine there also.

The company consisted of five young ladies, and six young gentlemen; there
names were.

Boys.
James Tumble, William Wynn, John and George Fry, Edward Smith, and John
Sprightly.
Girls.
Eliza and Julia Tumble, Lucy and Emma Wynn, and Eliza Sprightly.


It to these we add Harry Lively, the Davenport, and their cousins, we shall
find just enough to make nine couple. They began dancing at six o'clock, and
would willingly have continued their sport till midnight, if Mrs. Davenport had
thought proper; but that lady judged ten a better hour for supper, as none of
them were above fourteen years old. Though the ball had been purposely made for
the entertainment of Sophia and her sister, they were so ungrateful as to pout,
and give themselves airs, because they could not dance any longer. Mrs.
Davenport, however, chose to be obeyed, and all but her neices went to bed in
perfect good humor. The next day there arrived a packet of letters from
France. Mr. Easy's letter to his eldest daughter was as follows:

Paris, Dec. 12. MY DEAR SOPHIA,
As I have not heard to the contrary, I am willing to flatter myself that you,
Amelia, and all at Thorn Park are well. As I have sent my direction to your
uncle, you may write as often as you please (the oftener indeed, the better.) I
hope, my dear girl, that both you and Amelia behave properly to my brother and
sister. Independent of the duty you owe them as your uncle and aunt, you ought
to esteem yourselves particularly obliged to them for their kindness in
permitting you to be at their house during your vacation. You must be sensible
how much more comfortable you are in that situation, than if you had spent the
holidays at school. You, my dear children, have no mother alive: there must be
many little things to correct in your dispositions, which I have no opportunity
of attending to, and which your governess, having so many more young people
under her care, is very likely to overlook. But yet, these circumstances form
no ex^^^^ for any mishehaviour of yours, as you have an aunt who is highly
capable of directing you, and loves you as if you were her own children.
Consider this, my dear girls, and be particularly attentive to any advice she
may give you, as you may depend upon it, it is for your good.

I shall be at Thorn Park about the beginning of next month. I have written to
my brother, to ask him to give you house room till then; as I should wish to
spend a few days with you before you return to school. Adieu, my dear children,
believe me to be

Your affectionate father, HENRY EASY.


Though Sophia and Amelia were very glad to hear from their father, they were
not altogether pleased to find that he differed from them in thinking that they
were to pay obedience to Mrs. Davenport. They were so foolish as to imagine
that she only reproved them for the sake of finding fault, and were inwardly
determined to pay (...) more attention to her than they had hitherto done. They
kept their resolution; and though Mrs. Davenport was always proposing some
party of pleasure for them, they took no pains to please her in return.

As to their getting up early in the morning, though their aunt was continually
representing to them how unwholesome it is to spend so many hours in bed, they
did not heed her, till Mrs. Davenport put her threat in execution of letting
them go without their beakfast, if they were not down by nine o'clock. She was
sorry to be obliged to have recourse to so harsh a method, but finding that a
milder one had no effect upon them, thought it her duty to do all she could, to
make them follow a custom so beneficial to their health. Twelfth Night now came
on, and Mrs. Davenport, still indulgent, again invited the young people who
were at the dance. Her own maid supplied the place of a pastry-cook, and
instead of sugar figures, which generally constitute the prizes on this
occasion, Mr. Davenport made up several parcels containing toys, etc. with
names pinned upon them to answer to those which they were to draw. Thus, if one
drew king, the parcel fell to his lot that was marked king.

James Tumble had a dissected Map of Europe.

William Wynn, The Lookingglass for the Mind.

John Fry, Gay's Fables.

George Fry, Blossoms of Morality.

Edward Smith, a silver pencil case.

Harry Lively, the Game of Human Life, with counters and teetotum.

Charles, a silver pocket ink-stand.

George, Sandford and Merton.

John Sprightly was king, and had Ward's Natural History, in twelve volumes.

Eliza Tumble had Tunbridge ware work box.

Julia Tumble, The Oriental Moralist.

Lucy Wynn, a dissected map of England.

Emma Wynn, a red morocco housewife.

Elizabeth Sprightly, a pocket book with silver instruments.

Amelia, a fan.

Sophia, Choice Emblems for the Improvement of Youth.

Mary, Mentoria, or the Young Ladies, Instructor.

Caroline was queen, and her prize was a mother-of-pearl and silver fruit-knife
and fork.

The young people were all much pleased with their presents, and spent the
evening very happily in examining them and playing at different games till
their separate carriages arrived. The next morning Mrs. Davenport took her
nieces and daughters to the cottages in the neighborhood, which she had always
made a practice of doing, wishing to see herself how the poor people fared, and
to relieve their poverty as much as lay in her power. They were rejoiced to see
her, for they all loved and respected her greatly, as she never quitted them
without leaving marks of her bounty behind her. It was not for these visits
alone that they were indebted to her, for she frequently sent them clothes,
butcher's meat, etc. etc. and in winter they came every other day for soup,
which Mrs. Davenport caused her servants to distribute in quantities according
to the number of different families. Mary and Caroline, too, often begged of
their mama to let them make some clothes for the younger children, which
request Mrs. Davenport was ever ready to agree to; and such great pleasure did
they find in this employment, that when they had done any thing worthy of a
reward, Mrs. Davenport gave them m^^erials for making a petticoat, gown, etc.
for some little peasant girl or other. Mary was this day provided with a gown
for Madge, their late gardener's daughter, and Caroline with a petticoat; as
they had observed, the last time they paid the little girl a visit, that she
was in great want of both these articles. Now, as I think it very likely that
my young readers wish to know how Mary and Caroline had purchased this
indulgence, I shall inform them, that they had been particularly attentive to
their different exercises for a month past, and this attention their kind mama
never failed to reward.

When they had all stepped into the carriage, the servant put in a bundle
containing little Madge's gown and petticoat. "What Is this," said Sophia; "what
are you putting this in for?" -- "Oh," says Caroline, that bundle belongs to me
and my sister; it must not be left behind upon any account" -- "Indeed but it
shall," returned Sophia, "if it is to be placed against my feet in this
manner." -- "Well then." said Caroline, I will take it up in my lap; pray don't
quarrel about it." "Pray, miss Caroline," said Amelia (who sat upon the same
side), "don't think I Will permit the nasty bundle to crowd me up; is not the
coach full enough already, without bundles?" Mrs. Davenport cast an angry look
at her nieces, and without saying any thing to them, ordered "the postillions
^o drive on. Here then," said Amelia (holding the bundle to the out-rider as
she spoke) here, do you take it back to the house, for I declare it shall not
be on my side.

Mrs. Davenport, however, forbade the servant to take it, and turning to her
niece, Here, Amelia, let me have it; it takes up but very little room, and even
if it were twice as big, you ought not to complain; but I hope you will cease
so to do, when you know what it contains. She then opened it, and displaying
the contents, said, These clothes are for a poor little girl who wants them
very much this cold weather, as her own are very old and threadbare; would you
then be so uncharitable as to suffer her to remain a week or two longer in this
uncomfortable situation, because you cannot submit to the small inconvenience
of being crowded for a little time? Or, supposing it were to be four hours
before we reach her cottage, is it not much better that you should be a little
incommoded for that time, than that she should be shivering for a week?

Sophia. That is very likely, indeed, when coals hereabouts are as cheap as
dirt, and you cannot stir half a dozen steps without meeting with a coal-pit.
There is not a single cottage that has not a roaring fire in it.


Mrs. Davenport. But you forget that she has something else to do besides
sitting by the fireside all the day. Young as she is, she goes to market to
sell the poultry she rears herself, and to bring back provisions for the family
-- draws water -- keeps the cottage and the little yard that belongs to it
clean; and when she can be spared from home, earns nine-pence a day by working
at the farmers' houses round about, as a chair-woman. Thus you see she has a
great (...) of business upon her hands, and of such a nature as of course
exposes her very much to the severity of the weather, I cannot always spare my
servants from their work, so wish to take this opportunity of conveying some
warm clothing to the poor child, or otherwise (as I said before) she must be
shivering for a week, if not longer.


Sophia. I fancy, ma'am, there is not much chance of that, as part of her
family come three times a week for soup.


Mrs. Davenport. Now pray tell me, Sophia, did you think of that when you first
objected to our carrying the bundle?


Sophia. (rather confused). Yes, ma'am, I did -- for I knew very well her
father comes every other day to Thorn Park.


Mrs. Davenport. She has no father.


Sophia. Then her mother.


Mrs. Davenport. She is an orphan.


Sophia. Then her cousin, brother, or some one.


Mrs. Davenport. You have told one falsehood, and to get out of the scrape, are
only plunging deeper. She lives with her grandfather and grandmother, who are
both too infirm to walk six miles; and therefore, instead of the soup, I give
them more clothes and money than sails to the share of any other of the poor
cottagers hereabout.


Sophia knew she was in the wrong, and being sensible that it would be to no
purpose to endeavor to defend herself, made her aunt no answer, but sat in
sullen silence till the carriage stopped at the cottage in which Madge lived.

They entered a little room that served both for parlor and kitchen, where they
found her grandmother knitting, and at the same time attending to a saucepan
full of broth that was on the fire. She rose with difficulty at their entrance,
and upon being desired by Mrs. Davenport to keep her seat, cried out, God bless
you, my dear lady! you have always been good to me, and I wish I was strong
enough to work day and night to serve you.

Mrs. Davenport. I have done nothing extraordinary for you, my good woman; you
was always a faithful servant to my mother, and your poor son and daughter,
whilst alive, were the same to me. But tell me, how is the good man your
husband?


Caroline and Mary. And Madge.


Old Woman. Ah! ma'am, it goes to my heart to tell you that he is very bad
indeed.


Mrs. Davenport. How! my good mother!


Mary and Caroline. No, no, not very bad, I hope.


Old Woman. Bless your little honest hearts, I wish I could say he will not --
but I fear indeed -- he will not live -- long.


Mrs. Davenport. Oh, no, my good old woman, do not say so -- your fears make
you think him worse. Let me see him; where is he?


Old Woman. Your ladyship is so good; he is up stairs -- the staircase is so
narrow and steep -- that --


Mrs. Davenport. Oh! never mind that, you know, I have often been up before
now, when you were confined with the rheumatism.


Old Woman. Ah! I am sure I ought never to forget that as long as I live, and
--


Mrs. Davenport. But if old Joseph is really bad, there is no time to be lost:
so pray say no more, but let me go.


Old Woman. Well, to be sure your ladyship is very good; but he will not expect
such a great honor.


The old woman, with some reluctance, now showed Mrs. Davenport and her party
up a kind of ladder, which conducted them into a small apartment, the walls of
which were neatly white-washed, and the boards as clean as possible. In one
corner was a bed in which lay old Joseph. Mrs. Davenport observing that he had
his eyes shut, offered to go down again, lest she should disturb him; but was
prevented by his waking from his slumber. The old woman approached and said,
"Here is my lady Davenport come to "see you: -- how do you now, my dear?"
Joseph raised his head, and seeing the visitors, apologized for his not being
able to receive them in a better manner; adding, that, (ill as he was) if he
had known of their coming, he would have got up. "Then," said Mrs. Davenport, I
am very glad you had no notice of it, as my intention is to comfort all the
cottagers I visit, and not to put them out of their way.

Joseph. Thank you, madam, your charity is very well known: every body who
knows you, loves you, and I can safely say, (and I have now lived eighty-six
years) that I never have heard a disrespectful word spoken of you, 'Squire
Davenport, or any of your family before you.


Mrs. Davenport. They have always considered it as their duty to assist their
fellow creatures, and I and my husband endeavor to bring up our children in
the same way of thinking.


Joseph. You are perfectly right, my good lady: depend upon it, the only way to
be happy, is to be virtuous; and surely charity is a great virtue. You, young
ladies, perhaps will believe an old man, when he tells you, that, both among
poor and rich, he never knew a wicked person happy. I myself have always
endeavored to perform my duty toward GOD and my neighbor; and as I know I
have done my uttermost, die contented.


Mrs. Davenport. Pray, my good man, do not talk of dying yet, I hope to see you
alive and merry, keeping my eldest boy's birthday on the 2d of June.


Old Man. God bless you, my lady, and all your worthy family -- That is a long
time to look forward. May you all live many, many years! But as for me, my days
are very nearly at an end.


At this part of the conversation, she could not refrain from tears; but,
amidst all her anxiety for the poor man, felt a gleam of joy upon seeing her
two nieces equally affected with the scene. As for Caroline and Mary, they
sobbed aloud. Joseph, perceiving their sorrow, begged them to be comforted; For
indeed, ma'am," said he, "you cannot think how happy and lightsome I feel; and
if it was not for my poor wife's and grand child's sake, should die as easy as
if I was going to sleep: but, when I see them miserable at the thoughts of my
death, I cannot help pitying them. My dear Joan has always ways been a good and
tender wife to me, and as for my little Madge, she is as dutiful and clever a
little lass as you would wish to see: your ladyship's goodness to her has been
great, and your promise to take her (when a few year's older) into your
service, has given my Joan and me many an happy hour. But your ladyship must
let her stay with her poor grandmother (for she loves her dearly) till she
follows me: how soon that may be, God alone knows! She is now, and has been for
many months, very infirm. The wine good 'Squire Davenport sent us, has helped
to cheer her much -- till this last illness of mine, we used constantly to take
a glass of it together every night: and my dear little Madge, when she had
finished all her work, would sit down by us and read a chapter or two in the
Bible. And let me tell you, ma'am, she has a very good hand at it. When I was a
little boy, your ladyship's grandfather paid for my schooling, and would often
take delight to hear me read; and as my learning cost the good gentleman so
much, I thought it should not be thrown away, so (...) instructed my boy as
well as I was able; and as he had not much time on his hands, I thought I might
as well teach his little Madge* and if, poor man, he was alive now, what joy it
would give his dear honest heart to see her so well provided for; as such I
already consider her, knowing that your ladyship's promises will never be
broken.

Mrs. Davenport renewed her promises to the good old man; and was showing the
little gown and petticoat to him, when Joan entered the room with the broth she
had been preparing for him. You are a good woman, Joan," said he, "and I will
(with my lady's leave) drink the broth; not that I am hungry, but because I
know it will give you pleasure. You deserve to have your heart made glad every
hour of your life, and my lady here s^^ms to try to do it as often as she can.
For look here, my dear, (showing the clothes) here is a fresh instance of the
worthy noble family's goodness to us.

Joan. Bless you, my lady, and you too, my charming young ladies, for I guess
this is your work. Our little Madge is bound to pray for you every hour.


Mary and Caroline courtesying, modestly, replied, that they thought it a
pleasure to do any thing for little Madge, they loved her so dearly. Ah! cried
Joan, you will both be as good as your mama, my little dears. "They cannot be
better!" said Joseph, as he emptied the basin of broth. "But," continued he,
would not these young ladies choose some little refreshment? I have not the
happiness of knowing, these two, but if I may judge by their likeness to you,
madam, they are your relations.

Mrs. Davenport. They are my brother's children.


Old Joseph. What, madam! your brother Henry? I beg pardon -- I recollect you
had no other. Ah! your brother Henry, he used to love me dearly -- I remember
he had a little garden of his own -- I marked it out for him -- a pretty little
fellow he was, with his little rosy cheeks and hazle eyes; I think I see him
now running toward me, with his brown hair blowing about; "Here Joseph,
Joseph," cried he, "my papa has been so kind, he has given me leave to have a
piece of ground to myself, if you will give it me, in one of the kitchen
gardens, or any where you please out of sight; for my papa says, he supposes I
shall make fine work of it; and as you like to keep the pleasure-arounds so
neat, he thought you would not wish me to have it thereabouts." Then away we
both trotted as fast as we could, he pulling along. When we got to the place, I
marked out the ground, and weeded it for him. "Now," says he, "you must, dear
Joseph, give me some flower roots, for I should like to have flowers as well as
sallad; for mama likes flowers, and so does Mary (that was you, ma'am) and I
shall give them a nosegay very often." Thus would he run on, dear little
fellow! I wish I could see him now.


Mrs. Davenport made the old man very happy, by informing him that she expected
her brother every week: Joseph had not seen him for near four years; for when
Mr. Easy was last at Thorn Park, he (the old man) was gone into Wales, to
transact some business for his landlord, Mr. Davenport. Sophia and Amelia
listened with great attention to the above account of their father, and when
their annt reminded them, that she had other cottages to visit, took their
leave with some reluctance.

Mrs. Davenport, upon quitting the house, inquired of Joan, whether there was
any thing they wanted; adding that till she had an opportunity of calling
again, she should send a servant every day to inquire after Joseph, and to
bring them wine, or any assistance they were in need of. Joseph's wife returned
her many thanks, said, they wanted nothing at present, and that if Mr. Easy
would honor them with a visit, it would give great pleasure to her poor
husband; but, as the surprise might be too much for him in his present weak
state, begged of Mrs. Davenport to let them know an hour or two beforehand.
That lady promised to attend to the caution, and leaving her love (with that of
her neices and daughters) for little Madge, stepped into the carriage, and
directed the postillions to drive home, and in their way to stop at the next
cottage; which was inhabited by a poor laborer, his wife, and five children.
The eldest was a boy, thirteen years old, who (with his father) earned his
brea^ ^oy mending the roads, and occasionlly acting as a bricklayer, carpenter,
etc. to the neighboring families. The mother and eldest girl sold their
spinning, and in the summer worked in the fields. These endeavors (though poor)
pro^^^ed them some trifling comforts, but much was still wanting. The Davenport
family sought every opportunity of relieving those poor who were endeavoring
to help themselves, and showed a spirit of industry; and likewise those who
were incapacitated from earning an honest livelihood by casualties, or extreme
old age. When the carriage stopped, two little girls ran out of the house, and
seeing Mrs. Davenport, who was just getting out, cried, Sister! sister! here is
'Squire Davenport's lady, and all the young ladies! and the coach! and the
horses! and the servants! and all the fine things! Upon hearing this
exclamation, Molly, the second daughter, left her knitting, to meet Mrs.
Davenport, who with her four companions, was now half way between the coach and
cottage. Molly acquainted her, that both her mother and eldest sister were gone
out, the one to market, and the other to sell her work; "but," continued she, "
for all that, if your ladyship and the young ladies will walk in, there is a
very good fire, and the room is quite tidy." -- Ah! that it is," cried little
Doll; "for I and my sister have just now been sweeping it, and the fire is as
bright as the sun; and all comfortable against mother and father and sister
Hetty come home." Mrs. Davenport smiled at the little girl's vivacity and
taking her and the youngest by the hand, walked on; upon which the eldest cried
out, "Pray, Dolly, do not go nigh the lady with those dirty hands, and that
dirty apron." -- "Very true," said Dolly, "I quite forgot that, but I hope I
have not done any harm yet, and I Will run directly to the pump and wash my
hands, and take off my apron, and be back in a trice!" and away she ran. Mrs.
Davenport and the rest sat round the fire, and the following dialogue passed
between them.

Mrs. Davenport. Well, Molly, and how do your father and mother do?


Molly. Quite hearty, thank your ladyship.


Mary Davenport. How does my little Peggy go on with her knitting?


Peggy. Oh, miss, I have begun a stocking; I have done with garters now.


Caroline. That is a very clever thing to be able to knit stockings. Then you
have made great haste in learning.


Molly. Ay, marry, that she has -- she is a good little girl, so mother says.


Peggy. And mother says that Dolly is good too.


Molly. Yes, I know it -- mother would not say so if she did not think so.


Sophia. Where is Dolly? -- she is a long while washing her hands.


Molly. I will go and call her, miss. She must be ready by this time.


Mrs. Davenport. No, no, do not trouble yourself, I dare say she will soon
return. How goes on reading?


Molly. Not over well, madam; father has taught my brother and eldest sister,
and mother has taught me and Dolly.


Peggy. And you have taught me a little.


Molly. Ah, but little, indeed, for I am not over clever at it myself -- and,
besides, we have not much time for it.


Caroline. How far have you got, Peggy, in the spelling book?


Peggy. Oh, miss, not farther than bla, ble; but Molly and Dolly have got a
great deal farther.


Molly. Not a great deal, sister.


Mrs. Davenport. Molly, will you read to me?


Molly. To you, ma'am! oh dear, I should be so frightened -- I am but a very
bad scholar. --


Mrs. Davenport. You have learned in so short a time, and have so much
employment of another kind, that I should be much surprised if you were any
thing like a good one.


Amelia, Sophia, Carolene, Mary. Pray read, Molly.


Molly. If your ladyship and the young ladies will not laugh at me, I am very
ready to read.


Mrs. Davenport. I will take upon me to answer for all; they would never be so
uncivil when you are doing all you can to oblige them.


Molly rose up, and opening a chest, took out a little gilt book; in which,
after some hesitation, she read as follows:

The Poor Man's Legacy.
THERE was once a poor man who had two daughters: Jenny was the eldest, and
Martha the youngest. Their father was taken ill and died. On his death bed, he
called them both to him, and thus addressed them: My dear girls, you will soon
be turned into the wide world, I have worked as much as I have been able, but
all my endeavors to leave you a little money have been fruitless; and all I
can do is to give you a little advice. You must both work hard for your living,
as you must be sensible there is not a single person from whom you can expect
any assistance. That you Jenny will be industrious, I have not the least doubt:
I wish I could be as confident, Martha, with respect to you; but as you have
always loved me tenderly, I have some hope that my death bed advice will not be
thrown away. You will be both left to yourselves, without a soul to direct you;
but still you may succeed, if you will be but good and industrious. To be happy
one must be good, in all stations of life. To those who live in affluence, it
is a necessary qualification as well as to the cottager* In the former case, it
directs the minds to a proper use of riches, it teaches the only way of
enjoying them: without it, though rolling in riches, men are miserable. How
indispensably necessary is it then to the poor; whilst undergoing the sharp
pains of hunger, they have need of consolation, and what can afford them more
than a good conscience! -- never commit a bad action upon any consideration
whatever; though it were to procure you all the comforts and elegancies of
life, you would still be miserable. Not all the riches of the world can give
inward peace to a wicked person.

Jenny and Martha received their father's advice with heartfelt gratitude. They
promised to follow it, and, weeping bitterly, begged his blessing. He gave it
them with great earnestness, and expired.

Mrs. Davenport commended Molly's reading, and was making some remarks upon the
story, when Dolly returned, with intelligence that "she spied her mother coming
down the hill;" adding, "that, she had been hunting all over the garden for
some snow drops and crocuses for the young ladies, but could only find one of
each; and I am very sorry for it," continued she, "for I do not know which to
give them to. They have all been very civil to me, but this young lady
(pointing to Mary) made me four nice bibs and aprons -- so I think, miss, I
must give them to you (that is, if you will take them) for I know you have very
fine flowers indeed at home -- such as I seldom see, but you look so smiling
and good natured, that I am sure -- yes, I am quite sure, you will accept
them." -- Mary returned the present with a kiss, and told the little girl, that
if she had but drawn up the flowers by the roots, she would have taken them
home and planted them. -- "Oh, if that is all," replied Dolly, "I can soon get
you some snow drop roots, though they are not in flower!" -- and away she ran
into the garden. The mother now entered the room, and testified her
acknowledgements for Mrs. Davenport's kind visit, I fear, my good woman,"
replied that lady, I cannot stay much longer, as the day shuts in apace, and
the roads are so bad, I am afraid of returning in the dark; but, added she, you
must tell me if you want any thing and I will endeavor to send, or bring it as
soon as possible.

Mrs. Dawson. I am bound to pray for you, ma'am, and so is my whole family. I
want nothing at present, for I and my daughter have had plenty of good work
lately, which (with my husband's and son's wages) has brought us in a good
deal. I have now nine shillings and sixpence by me, which will last some time;
and I have a prospect of work for three weeks longer. I know your goodness so
well, that you will never let a family perish for want of a little assistance:
This madam is a great comfort to us all, but while we can work we will never
come upon you.


Mrs. Davenport. I highly approve of your sentiments, and while you continue in
the same way of thinking, you will continue to thrive; nothing but ill health
can prevent it; that, I hope none of your family will ever feel the ill effects
of: but even then you must not despair, as you will always find a friend in
your landlord. By the bye, he desired me to tell your husband, that there were
some repairs wanting in the stables; and that whenever he was at leisure, he
wished him to come and look at them. Good bye, my dear girls, whatever leisure
time you have, give up to your reading; give my love to your sister Hetty, and
you, my good woman, remember me to your husband. Adieu!


The little girls and their mother accompanied Mrs. Davenport and the young
ladies to the carriage door, and courtesyed respectfully as they drove away.
What a charming thing is industry! cried Mrs. Davenport, still looking at the
cottage; those poor people maintain themselves entirely by it. They are far
more happy than if they were fed by the bounty of any one. They go to bed every
night with the pleasing reflection that they have spent the day well. They are
always cheerful, being conscious that they fulfill their duty.

The conversation now turned upon old Joseph: "I wish," said Mary, my uncle may
come soon; not only because I long to see him, but that his arrival will make
old Joseph so happy. -- "I know," returned Mrs. Davenport, that the interview
will be equally pleasing to my brother; he had always a great respect for the
old man, and regretted much his being in Wales when he visited us last." --
"How affectionately the poor man spoke about him," cried Sophia* -- that is
because he always treated him well, said Mrs. Davenport; he never thought worse
of him for his poverty, he was well assured of his honesty; and though so much
his superior in life, paid him as much attention as if he had been the first
man in the kingdom, because he knew him to be a man of integrity.

As soon as they got home, Mary put her snow-drop roots into some water, not
having time to plant them immediately. Mr. Davenport had that morning received
from his bookseller at York a great many new publications, some of which were
designed for young people. After tea, when they were all assembled in the
library, he went to a large packing case, and taking out a small volume, asked
the children if they had a mind to hear a fairy tale; "A fairy tale!" they all
exclaimed, "Oh, pray, Sir, let us hear it." -- "With all my heart," said Mr.
Davenport; "but then Charles must read it to you." -- "Oh, that I will, with
pleasure," cried he; and taking the book from his father, began reading.

The Fairy Tale.
THE king and queen of Rosyland had an only daughter, whose name was Melpomene.
She was extremely beautiful, but of so bad a temper, that no stranger could sit
an hour in her company, without thoroughly disliking her. She was passionate
and proud, but had a good heart; and if her parents had corrected her foibles
when a child, she would have made an amiable princess. The fairy, Benevolenta,
who presided (...) her birth, had foretold, that if her father (...) mother
kept her in the palace after she was two years old, it would prove a great
source of uneasiness to both parties. She perceived that this prediction gave
them great pain, and in some measure to mitigate it, proposed her own
habitation as a proper asylum for Melpomene, till such time as her magical
books should inform her that she might live with her father and mother. The
queen acknowledged herself much obliged to Benevolenta for this offer, but
inwardly determined not to profit by it, as she could not imagine where a
daughter could be so well situated as under a father's roof. The king was of
the same opinion with his royal consort; he had long wished for a child, and
now when he had got one, was in no great hurry to part with it. When Melpomene
was a month old, the queen was carried round the city in a car made of ivory
and gold, drawn by white horses, harnessed with white and silver ribbon, and
led by little boys, dressed in white, and garlands of roses. Four and twenty
g^^^s (none older than twelve preceded the carriage, strewing flowers. The
queen's household closed the procession.

When the festival was over, the fairy Benevolenta took her leave of the king
and queen, and taking Melpomene in her arms, kissed her tenderly, and turning
to the queen, "Oh, Asteria!" said she, have compassion on this poor babe:
sacrifice a little self-gratification to her happiness, and when the destined
hour arrives, consign her to my care; and though maternal fondness must regret
the separation, be not so weak as to give way to a wish, which, if gratified,
will involve your child in misery.

She then waved her wand, and immediately a car appeared in the heavens, drawn
by four doves; it descended, and mounting it, she was presently out of sight.

Two years soon passed away: Benevolenta appeared in Rosyland, and conjured
Asteria to confide the princess to her care. But the queen was inexorable;
neither threats or entreaties could prevail upon her to part with her darling.
The king was equally obstinate, and Benevolenta departed with infinite regret.
Her enxiety for the fate of the princess, and natural goodness of heart,
prompted her to take a long and very dangerous journey, in order to consult a
superior genius, respecting the possibility of softening the rigor of her
destiny. From him she received the following answer:

If Melpomene had quitted Rosyland at the age of TWO YEARS, her days would have
been crowned with bliss. Her ill-judging parents, by their folly, have doomed
her to future misery. But as our beloved fairy, Benevolenta, has interested
herself in the fate of the child, it is decreed that her misery will not be
ENDLESS.

The fairy was overjoyed upon hearing this decree; and immediately set out for
Rosyland. Upon entering the palace, she observed all the attendants
countenances filled with dismay. She eagerly inquired the cause, and was told
by one of them, that the princess had that morning been stolen away by an
invisible hand. She was making farther inquiries respecting the truth of this
intelligence, when she perceived Asteria approaching. She appeared half
distracted, staring wildly about her, and calling upon the princess.
Benevolenta hastily went to meet and embrace her, but the queen starting back,
exclaimed, It is not she! Why did you tell me she was found! You all take
pleasure in deceiving me, but I do not care -- Benevolenta will soon be here,
and she will tell me news of her. She will not be so cruel.

"I am Benevolenta," returned the fairy (shocked at her situation,) I am
Benevolenta, come to give you comfort.

Queen. YOU Benevolenta! -- No, no! do not think I will believe it. Do you
imagine I do not know Benevolenta when I see her? Benevolenta is by far more
kind than you.

The fairy finding it was impossible to administer consolation to the queen in
her present state of mind, consigned her to the care of her domestics strictly
charging them not to lose sight of her for one moment. She herself repaired to
the king's apartments, where she found him in all the agonies of sorrow. "Oh!
my friend," said he, in what a situation do you find me! To what purpose was a
child granted to my prayers, if I was to be bereft of it so soon?

"Stop!" cried Benevolenta, when the superior Powers blessed thee with a
daughter, they conditioned that she was to quit thy roof at the age of two
years, and not to return for a certain space of time. You have dared to
counteract their designs: you have been told of the consequences that would
ensue. This misfortune is but the beginning of the misery you have prepared for
her. It is your own work; do not arraign the justice of the higher powers,
because you have been presumptuous enough to draw down their anger by
disobedience to their commands.

"Oh!" replied the king do not add to my misery by these just reproaches. I
have been greatly to blame; and I now, with sufficient weight, feel the
punishment of my errors. But I have still a small ray of hope left: -- From you
I expect succor -- intercede for me, and --

"It is already done," replied the fairy; I have obtained from the great
ALMANZO-ROASTER a promise, that she will not always be unhappy, THAT HER MISERY
WILL NOT BE ENDLESS.

The king, upon hearing these last words, threw himself at the fairy's feet,
and caught hold of her robe. "Benevolenta," said he; you have restored me to
life; you have laid me under eternal obligations. Then you can give me hopes of
my daughter; I shall again have her in my arms, again embrace her! what joy! --
But while I thus anticipate my delights, what may she be enduring! How can I
tell but what some evil genius has got her in his possession -- cruel thought!
-- Oh, Benevolenta! release me from my torture -- tell where she is.

These interrogations troubled the fairy. She well knew his conjectures were
very well founded; but, fearing to increase his anxiety, totally discouraged
them: adding, that she had not the least doubt but that the princess would soon
be restored to him and his beloved consort; and, assuring him of her utmost
assistance, vanished from his sight, and the instant she found herself in her
own palace, set about preparing a charm for the discovery of Melpomene. --

The children were all listening with great attention, when a servant, who had
been sent that morning to the next post town, returned with a packet of
letters, and it afforded no little joy to the circle to find that among the
rest there was a long one from France. The children crowded with eagerness
round Mr. Davenport, whilst his amiable wife, hanging on the back of his chair,
shared in the pleasure they all received upon being acquainted with the
contents.

My dear friends at Thorn Park will be very happy to hear, that, by the time
they receive this, I shall be but a few miles from them. If the wind proves but
favorable, it is most probable I shall have it in my power to embrace them on
the fifteenth.

"The fifteenth!" they all exclaimed, why that is tomorrow! No -- surely -- is
it? Yes, today is the fourteenth -- Ah, so it is. -- Well, now that is clever
-- tomorrow! -- Dear me, how soon that will be here. -- I shall jump for joy --
I am sure I shall not get a wink of sleep all night with the thoughts of seeing
him. -- And Joseph too! what joy 'twill be to him. But pray, Sir, let us hear
the rest. Mr. Davenport, ever ready to indulge, continued as follows:

I look forward to that moment with infinite satisfaction: I shall be
surrounded by those who are dear to me; and, if I find them all perfectly well,
it will be no small addition to my happiness. (Mr. Davenport reads to himself.)

Mr. Davenport. What follows, my dears, relates to business which can only
concern your mother and myself. When we meet with any thing that you would wish
to hear, I will read it aloud.

Mr. Davenport kept his promise, but as I have already inserted as much of the
letter as is necessary, I shall say no more on the subject; only informing my
young readers, that the expectation of Mr. Easy's return employed their
thoughts so much, that, in short, they could think of nothing else; and
therefore deferred hearing the conclusion of the Fairy Tale to another day.

And now I must take my leave of those who have indulged me with the perusal of
the foregoing pages; with an assurance, that, I will conclude the Fairy Tale,
-- Introduce Entertaining Stories -- Put the Miss Easys under Mrs. Davenport's
care, etc. in the second volume: In the hope, by her instructions, to make them
nearly as amiable as Mary and Caroline; and to return my thanks to those who
have been kind enough to henor my first and feeble effort with their attention.

H. S.

END OF VOL. I.


THE HISTORY OF THE DAVENPORT FAMILY.
THE next morning as they were sitting at breakfast, they heard the sound of a
carriage driving up the avenue: They all jumped up from the table, and running
to the window, with one voice exclaimed, "Here "he is! Here he is!" In an
instant the parlour door flew open, and Mr. Easy entered. I should have much to
say, were I to repeat all that was said on both sides upon this happy meeting;
those who have affectionate fathers, uncles, and brothers, can easily picture
to themselves what passed.

Mr. Easy was a valuable acquisition to this little society; to a good heart,
he joined an excellent understanding, an improved mind, and elegant manners. He
and Mr. Davenport were educated at the same school, traveled together, and
their dispositions being alike, they formed a friendship, which increased with
their years, and which was afterward strongly cemented by the union of Mr.
Easy's sister with Mr. Davenport.

Mr. Easy also married, but unfortunately lost his wife two months after the
birth of his youngest daughter, who, being a very sickly child, did not survive
her mother many weeks.

Sophia and Amelia were very fond of their father, and, indeed, it would have
been singular if they had not, as he ever treated them with true paternal
tenderness. It Is true, they enjoyed but little of his society, as they never
saw him, but when he paid them occasional visits at school; but then he always
testified so much pleasure in being with them, and so affectionately attended
to all their little requests, that he was as dear to them as if they had always
lived together.

After the description I formerly gave of these two sisters, the above may seem
extraordinary, but then my readers must consider, that their dispositions were
such as could not hear contradiction, and therefore, while Mr. Easy had no
opportunity of thwarting their inclinations, they behaved properly toward him:
but it will soon appear, that, from the moment he had occasion to exert his
parental authority, they were no longer the same affectionate children.

This little family had so many interesting subjects for conversation, that
when the dinner bell rang, they were quite surprised to find it so late. The
evening stole off imperceptibly, and they all went to bed in high good humor.

The next morning, early, Charles and George took a walk to old Joseph's
cottage, in order to prepare him for a visit from their uncle in the course of
the day. The good couple were delighted with this intelligence the old man in
particular, who declared he felt himself younger for it by four or five years.
Before the boys had got half way home, they met Mr. Easy, who could not
restrain his impatience to see his old friend; they joined him, and were
witnesses to a very affecting scene upon their arrival at the cottage, where
they staid above an hour, and upon their return home, found breakfast almost
over. Mr. Easy acknowledged himself much obliged to his brother and sister for
their attention toward his old friend, adding, that he knew no body more
deserving of their charity.

"Pray, Sir," said Sophia, why are you so particularly fond of old Joseph? I
know he is a very good man, but he was but a common servant.

Mr. Easy. "A common servant, my dear Sophia! and is that any reason why I
should not respect his virtues?"


Sophia. No, papa, but I think there is no occasion to go and sit whole hours
with a gardener.


Mr. Easy. I am sorry you are of that opinion, I should by no mean^ wish my
children to pass their time in the servant's hall, or to make confidential
friends of them; but I cannot not conceive I let myself down in the least, when
I keep company with a poor old man, who served my father faithfully many years;
I consider him as my relation, and his age and infirmities demand my utmost
attention. But, my dear Sophia, where did you get these strange notions? I am
sure your cousins think very differently; I wish you would learn from them,
that when the lower sort of people fulfill their duty, it is incumbent upon
their superiors to treat them at all times with affability, and in such a case
as this with respect.


Sophia. With respect, papa!


Mr. Easy. Yes, Sophia, with respect; I owe it to Joseph as being so much
older, and consequently, more experienced than myself; and I don't know a man
upon earth more honest and faithful than he is. To be sure, he has neither
birth or riches to boast of, but that does not in the least lessen his title to
respect in my opinion.


Mr. Easy being very desirous of going to see some improvements that had been
lately made on his estate, which joined to Mr. Davenport's, and as he wished
his brother and sister to give him their opinion upon some others he had in
meditation, the chaise was ordered, and being now at the door, they sat off,
meaning to be back by dinner.

Mary, Caroline, Sophia, and Amelia now went to take a walk in the garden,
where the following dialogue passed between them.

Sophia aside to her sister. I think papa has caught the infection of my aunt;
you see he is beginning to be as cross as Old Nick.


Amelia. Lud, I Am Sure I shall rejoice when we set off for London; I wish, with
all my heart, we had staid in Q -- S --; such stupid holidays did I never spend
before.


Sophia. Well, I suppose we shall go now in less than a fortnight. I long for
some fun again -- there is no having any here but at the expense of receiving a
long lecture.


Amelia. Aye, I long to be at Miss Leroux again -- Lord, how I Will plague her
this time! then the poor dear will write to her ma -- ma -- and tell -- her --
what -- a naughty girl -- Miss -- Amelia Easy is! [Affecting to sob.] hah! hah!


Sophia. Yes, yes, that you may depend upon -- a great clumsy shouldered thing
-- I hate her -- she is such a whiny-piny thing.


Mary and Caroline perceiving their cousins had no inclination to talk with
them, took the first opportunity of turning down another walk.

"I wish," said Mary, "my cousins were a little better tempered; I thought we
should have been very happy together, but they will hardly take any notice of
us, and then whenever mama gives them any little piece of advice, they only
sneer and look at each other as if they were determined not to profit by it.

Caroline. I am sure mama is very good to take that trouble with them; it is
more than they deserve.


Mary. Mama sees they stand much in need of advice, and she is so good, that
she cannot bear to neglect any opportunity of being of service to them; but I
own I shall not be at all sorry when they leave us.


"That we know very well," cried out Sophia (bouncing from behind an evergreen
hedge, which ran along the side of the walk, where Mary and Caroline were) and
I promise you, we shall not cry when the time comes; for I think you are all
such disagreeable people to live with, that I Am I don't care how soon we leave
you; and then, when we are gone, you may have as much advice preached as you
please, without fear of our sneering, ha! ha!

Mary. Indeed, Sophia, I did not think you had been half so ill natured as I
find you are; I Am sure my sister and I would like to be friends with you of all
things, but that is quite impossible, whilst you continue to speak so
disrespectfully of mama, who loves us all dearly, and who does you much honor
when she condescends to tell you of any of your faults.


Amelia. Honor, indeed! a great deal of honor truly! that is as good a joke as
papa made when he talked of paying respect to the old gardener.


Caroline. For shame, for shame, Amelia! when you are in a passion, you don't
care what you say, or whom you abuse.


Amelia. And pray, Ma'am, who told you I was in a passion; and if I were, what
is it to you, you little saucy thing, what business have you to interfere?


Sophia. What sweet, amiable, wise children these are, sister! Law -- why do
you stay to talk with them? There my dears, go and play with your dolls;
flounce away! that is right. Sweet Mary! Sweet Caroline! angelic little dears!
Adieu!


The two little Davenports quitted the garden, highly disgusted with the
behavior of their visitors; but being conscious that they had nothing to
reproach themselves with, they soon forgot their anger. Mary had gathered a
crocus which she sat down quietly to copy in water colors, and Caroline took
some ribbon out of her work bag, with which she began to make a watch chain for
her brother George, who, together with Charles, had accompanied the chaise on
horseback.

There were large wooden shutters on the outside of the windows belonging to
the room where Mary and Caroline were sitting: Sophia and Amelia perceiving
these, agreed to close them all on a sudden, and by that means prevent their
cousins from pursuing their amusements in that apartment. They put their scheme
in execution, and Mary and Caroline were forced to retire to their own room
above flairs. These childish ill-natured sisters then began to throw snow balls
at the windows, nor would they desist, till they had cracked three or four
panes of glass: this, however, put an end to their pelting, and they ran into
the house with their dirty clogs on, up the best stairs, and bouncing against
their cousins' door, demanded entrance. Receiving no answer, they called them
every abusive name they could think of, and thumped and kicked as if they had
been breaking through the door.

Mary now rang the bell, which communicated with the housekeeper's room, where
Mrs. Davenport's own maid generally sat. Mrs. Anne upon coming up, found the
Miss Easys had brought chairs and tables out of their own bed chambers, and
piled them up in such a manner, that if the little prisoners had unlocked the
door (which opened inwardly) they would all have tumbled upon them and probably
have hurt them much. She attempted to take them down, which irritated Amelia to
so great a degree, that she flew at her, and began pinching and thumping her in
a threatening tone, commanding her to desist.

Anne was a good tempered young woman, but had no notion of receiving a blow
from any one, especially when she was conscious she had given no just
provocation. She therefore made not the least scruple of returning it. Upon
which Sophia, who had all along been encouraging her sister, ran now to her
assistance. The poor maid seeing that she was likely to come off the worst,
disengaged herself from her antagonists, and made all the haste she could down
stairs. Sophia and Amelia were pursuing her, when they heard Mrs. Davenport's
voice in the hall, who was that moment come home. They turned short, went up
stairs (three steps at a time) into their own room, and locked themselves in.

Anne immediately informed her lady of what had happened, making an apology for
the liberty she had taken in striking Miss Amelia, but that she really had done
it in her own defense. Mrs. Davenport replied, it was a pity she had been
forced to go such lengths, but she could not blame her for what she had done.
She then desired her to remove the chairs, etc. and send Mary and Caroline down
to her in the library. The little girls obeyed, and were ordered to relate the
circumstances of the affray, which they did immediately, but without either
justifying their own conduct, or condemning that of their cousins. Their mama
had never had any reason to doubt their veracity; she approved very much of
their behavior, and undertook herself to settle the quarrel.

When dinner was served, Mrs. Davenport sent Mary to tell them, that both
dinner bells had rang; but they told her (through the door) that they were not
hungry, and did not choose to come down. Mary whispered this to her mama, upon
which Mrs. Davenport repeated it to her husband and brother, who were very
desirous to know what had been the matter which she promised to inform them of,
when the servants had withdrawn.

According to her promise, as soon as the desert was upon the table, she
related the whole affair, and concluded with saying, that she should take no
notice of them, and that she supposed when they were tired of being alone they
would come down. "Upon my word," said Mr. Easy, they give themselves great
airs; but I Am quite of your opinion, the less notice we take of them the
better; they mortify themselves, not us.

"Certainly," said his brother, if we send up to them, it will directly confirm
them in the opinion they entertain of their own consequence.

It was therefore settled, that nobody was to go to them, not even a maid to
help them to undress, or to take them any refreshment.

Tea came up, but still the Miss Easys did not make their appearance.

The following morning, when Ann went up to Mary and Caroline, they inquired if
she had seen Sophia and Amelia?

"Oh, yes," Ma'am, said she, they were down before it was light, teasing the
scullion (the only servant up) for something to eat; but Bridget, who is not
over civil, told them they must wait with patience till Mrs. Davies was
stirring, as she had shut up the larder over night: then they went up again,
and began making a monstrous noise. At seven Mrs. Davies gave them some bread
and butter, but they abused her, because there was no water boiling to make
them tea, though she told the dairy maid to give them some milk, warm from the
cow; they are now sitting in the breakfast parlour, before the fire, with their
feet on the sender, talking against every body in the house.

I must not here omit a good natured action performed by Mary and Caroline.

When they quitted their room, they saw their cousins' door open, upon which
they went in, and found the carpet rolled up in a heap, the bed curtains
twisted round the posts, the pictures turned with their faces to the wall, and
the whole apartment in confusion.

They knew this would make their mama very angry, and though they had so much
reason to be offended with their cousins, they immediately began putting every
thing in order, to prevent them from getting into farther trouble. This took a
great deal of time to accomplish, and though they made as much haste as
possible, the clock struck nine before they had quite finished -- they were
therefore forced to neglect their morning's exercise, which Mrs. Davenport
generally looked over, immediately after breakfast. They were now in a great
dilemma; they wished much to screen Sophia and Amelia from their mama's anger;
but it could not now be done, but at the expense of their own veracity, as Mrs.
Davenport would not fail to ask how they had been employing themselves.

They had never deceived their mama in the most trivial affair, and therefore
resolved to declare the whole truth, and rely upon her indulgence in pardoning
the offenders.

They accordingly met her upon the stairs, and begged her, as an indulgence to
themselves, not to say any thing about what had passed to their cousins.

Mrs. Davenport embraced them, and commending them for their good nature,
promised to attend to their request, and all three entered the breakfast room
together.

"Here they come," said the eldest, as they opened the door, "now for a sermon!"

Though Mrs. Davenport distinctly heard this impertinent speech, she did not
choose to notice it, but sat down to the table, and without speaking a word to
her nieces, ordered Caroline to wring for the tea kettle. Sophia did not offer
to move, though she sat close to the bell; Caroline endeavored to reach it
over her cousin's chair, but finding that impracticable, she whispered, Pray
Sophia, move a little; upon which Sophia without rising, took hold of her chair
with both her hands, and bounced herself away with such violence, that she
overthrew a screen that stood behind her. Amelia burst into a loud laugh, but
still her aunt took no notice. The hot water was brought in, and Mrs. Davenport
made tea. She gave a cup to each of the girls, but Sophia and Amelia refused
it, saying, "they chose coffee."

Mrs. Davenport. The coffee will not come up till your father and uncle come in
from their walk.


Sophia, Amelia. Then I choose to have tea.


Mary offering sugar. Some sugar, cousins?


Sophia. No, I choose honey.


In short, they refused in the most disobliging manner every thing that was
offered to them, and were growing still more impertinent, when their father
entered, accompanied by Mr. Davenport and his sons.

They took their places, and, as they had agreed among themselves, spoke to
every body but Sophia and Amelia.

As soon as breakfast was over, Mr. Easy, addressing himself to his two
daughters, told them, he was going to write to Mrs. **** their governess, and
acquaint her that they would be in Q -- e S -- e the following Monday.

Sophia. I am glad of it, Sir.


Amelia. So much the better, I Am sure.


Mr. Easy. It is very fortunate you should both be of that opinion, and if you
are so exceedingly fond of school, without doubt you will be glad to hear, I
mean to give strict charge to Mrs. **** upon no account to permit you ever to
dine or drink tea with any of my friends, who used formerly to notice you.


Sophia. Just as you please, Sir.


Mr. Easy to Caroline. Well, then, my dear little girl, will you ask your maid
to see that your cousin's clothes are packed up by tomorrow night, as they will
set off at eight the following morning.


Amelia. We shall not be dressed by eight, Sir.


Mr. Easy. I shall order the horses at that hour, and I desire you will be
ready time enough to take a proper leave of your uncle and aunt, to whom you
have many obligations.


Sophia. Are we to go by ourselves, Sir?


Mr. Easy. No, I shall go with you as far as --, where one of Mrs. D's
assistants will meet, and conduct you to town.


Sophia. (whispering her sister.) And a charming journey we shall have!


"Come," said Mr. Easy, you had better both leave the room; I see you are
determined to behave ill, and whilst you continue in this perverse humor, the
less we have of your company the better.

His daughters took the hint, and flapping the door after them, went grumbling
and muttering into the next room.

"I do not know what to do with those girls," continued Mr. Easy, their
ingratitude shocks me. I had no idea their dispositions were so untractable, or
I should never have thought of troubling you with them so many weeks.

"I am sure," replied Mr. Davenport, we have not considered it as any trouble,
but they certainly are not pleasant girls to have in the house.

Mr. Easy. I wish you would advise me what method to pursue. I sometimes think
of taking a house in town, and providing a good governess, for I am convinced
that school is not the place for them: It is impossible Mrs. -- can attend to
all; a hundred little things must pass unnoticed; on the contrary, a governess
at home has nothing to do but to attend to them alone, and if she is a sensible
woman, she will know how to correct their faults, and at the same time engage
their affections.


Mr. Davenport approved this plan, but thought it a dangerous one to carry into
execution, as so much depended upon their choice of the person. They talked a
long while upon this subject: at length, in consequence of a proposal made by
Mr. Davenport, it was settled in the following manner: viz. as Mr. Davenport
meant in future to spend the first part of every year in town, for the sake of
having proper masters for his children, there could be no reason why Sophia and
Amelia should not then leave school, and live entirely with them: by these
means they would have proper attention paid to their education, without running
any hazard whatsoever.

This scheme was highly pleasing to Mr. Easy, it rid him at once of all his
anxiety, and he felt himself infinitely obliged to his brother and sister for
this great proof of the sincerity of their friendship.

At dinner Sophia and Amelia said little. Mr. Davenport generally asked the
former to drink a glass of wine with him, he omitted the compliment that day,
but Sophia helped herself out of the decanter that stood between her and her
sister, who immediately followed her example.

When Mrs. Davenport rose from table, George followed her out of the room, and
asked leave to have the conclusion of the fairy tale read out before his
cousins went away: his mama told him he might read it to them and his sisters
that afternoon: he thanked her for this indulgence, and ran immediately to
fetch the book. Having called his brother, and found out the place where they
had left off, he began as follows:

She, (that is, Benevolenta,) soon found out that Melpomene was in the palace
of Horridona, a fairy, who made a common practice of stealing away children
with the cruel design of returning them to their parents with perverted minds
and unhappy tempers. With this view she indulged them in every wish, whether
innocent or wicked: she threw all sorts of temptations in their way, and at the
same time, by her example and advice, eradicated every good principle that
might serve to resist them.

Benevolenta was shocked to find this poor little princess in so terrible a
situation, and was resolved to use all possible means to relieve her. She
immediately summoned the powerful genii Boccadindo, and entreated him to assist
her. Boccadindo brought with him the little Fidelio: this amiable little
creature had been brought up with the tenderest care and attention by a fairy
aunt. To a beautiful figure was added the most engaging disposition, and the
most benevolent heart. Hearing from the fairy the situation of the princess, he
begged her to permit him to exert himself for her relief "Alas! my child," said
Benevolenta, "her mind, I fear, is already perverted."

"Let us hope not," said Boccadindo; she must not be lost; and if the power of
example can be of any service to her, she cannot have a better pattern of
goodness than Fidelio.

Fidelio returned the genii thanks for the good opinion he entertained of him,
and kissing the fairy's hand, conjured her to employ him in the undertaking.

Benevolenta expressed the fears she entertained for his own safety, and
promised to yield to his entreaties, provided the genii would give him a
talisman sufficiently powerful to repel any rude attacks, the evil counsels of
Horridona might make upon the integrity of his heart.

"Never fear, Madam," replied Boccadindo, he has no need of talismans to
preserve him free from guilt; such precautions are needless, his own heart, and
the education he has received, are talismans of much greater power than any he
can be furnished with.

The fairy now no longer hesitated, she gave her consent to the undertaking,
and the genii presented Fidelio with a slipper, which, upon putting on his
foot, would immediately procure what money, clothes, etc. he might want for his
journey.

Fidelio was now transported with joy: it had been foretold he would one time
or other have it in his power to redeem a princess from captivity, and by the
force of his example to reclaim her from the paths of vice. His generous heart
exulted at the idea that the time for the accomplishment of the prophecy was
come, and the eagerness he testified, proceeded purely from the desire of doing
good, and not from any selfish views with regard to his own interest.

Boccadindo now took his leave; Fidelio put on the enchanted slipper, and
immediately the ground opened beneath him, and a little white horse appeared,
ready bridled and sadled. The young prince mounted him, and was presently out
of sight.

In the mean time the king and queen of Rosyland had issued a proclamation,
promising honors and riches to that person who should bring the princess safe
to their arms. Many were induced to undertake this cause, by the flattering
prospects before them, but they all returned without any success, not having
patience enough to follow the adventure, as they were wholly unacquainted with
the abode of Horridona.

Fidelio was equally ignorant of the situation of her palace, but by his
unceasing exertions, and unrelenting fortitude, succeeded at last in the
discovery. He traveled nineteen days through unfrequented deserts and dreary
woods; on the 20th, just before sunset, he found himself in a large plain, at
the farther end of which he perceived the palace of Delights, as it was
erroneously styled by the owner. The walls were ebony, the porticos of solid
gold, the window frames and roof of the same metal. The western sun shone full
upon it, and made it, when contrasted with the dark gloom of some lofty pines
that grew on each side, a most beautiful object. Fidelio was delighted to
behold the end of his journey, and immediately galloped toward it. Upon his
arrival at the grand entrance, he dismounted, and taking the slipper from one
of his saddle bags, carefully deposited it in his bosom, and telling his little
horse he had no present use for him, it immediately disappeared. He ascended a
flight of ebony steps, with gold ballustrades, and entered a lofty hall,
surrounded with a colonnade of ebony pillars, the bases and chapiters
ornamented with gold, and wreaths of gold flowers twisted round the columns.
The dome wore the appearance of the starry firmament on a frosty night.
Opposite the great door was an arch, which served as an entrance to the bottom
of a grand staircase of solid gold, which led up to a long gallery of white
marble, whose walls were inlaid and the floor of different colored marble;
this opened into a suite of apartments, whose elegance was equal to their
magnificence. He had already passed through twenty-nine rooms, every one
varying from the other; he at length came into an octagon one of pea green
marble, hung all round with large festoons of white and red roses, whose
fragrancy perfumed the apartment -- a small fountain of scented water rose in
the middle. There were six niches, in which were placed alabaster statues of
exquisite workmanship. On the opposite side of the room to that by which he had
entered, was a green silk curtain; upon drawing this aside, he found himself in
a portico of white marble, which commanded a view of the park and gardens
belonging to this beautiful palace. On the north the prospect was bounded by
mountains, whose tops were covered with snow; these however, were at so great a
distance, and the intervening country so beautiful, that, far from affording a
dreary aspect, they added new charms to the scene. The palace stood upon a lawn
of the finest verdure, watered by a wide river that meandered through the
adjacent country, and at length emptied itself into the sea, which terminated
the view on the south. The flower garden, which was of great extent, was
bounded by a colonnade of white marble; this was hollow and transparent, so
that at night, lamps were lighted in the inside, and altogether it had a very
pleasing effect. A delightful concert was heard on the water, on which a number
of boats were sailing. A magnificent bridge was thrown over it, and the whole
prospect together was so enchanting, that Fidelio for a moment forgot the
princess, and stood wrapped in astonishment. Whilst he was gazing round with
admiring eyes, he observed a party of young men and women below, who were
making signs to him to come down: he immediately recollected himself, and
hastened to join them. They paid him a thousand compliments, and offered their
services in showing him the beauties of the place. He thanked them for their
politeness, and told them he only wished to be introduced to the fairy. "You
may have that pleasure," they replied, "in a few minutes. She presides at our
table, and we are in momentary expectation of a summons to attend her. You will
be perfectly charmed with her; the beauties of her person are only rivalled by
the brilliancy of her wit; and when once you have passed a few minutes with
her, you will never have resolution enough to quit her palace."

While they were yet speaking, a band of martial music struck up, immediately
numbers of people issued from all parts of the garden; those who were on the
water landed in great haste, and the whole multitude eagerly crowded toward a
large building that had, till then, escaped Fidelio's observation. Those with
whom he had been conversing joined the rest, and by the force of others pushing
forward, he at last entered an immense banqueting house, lighted up with a
profusion of lamps; it was, however, kept very cool, the windows being all open
and shaded with green silk curtains. In the middle was a table that could be
enlarged or contracted at pleasure, so that of whatever number the company
consisted, it always appeared full. The entertainment was magnificent; the most
exquisite viands were served in great abundance in massy gold. The company
being all assembled, a large folding door was thrown open, and twenty beautiful
young girls entered the hall, dancing to the sound of the music above
mentioned; they each of them held a large wreath of flowers, with which they
formed a sort of triumphal arch for the fairy to pass through. Soft music was
now heard, and Horridona entered, her train born by a page, whose dress
entirely consisted of precious stones.

Fidelio was now presented to the fairy, who asked him in an affable tone of
voice, "What had led him to her palace?" Totally unused to deceit, he found it
difficult to conceal the true motive of his journey; but knowing how fatal such
an avowal must prove to the success of his cause, he replied with hesitation,
that it was "curiosity." Horridona expecting him to have launched out in praise
of the edifice and its owner, was not a little disappointed at his answer. She
smiled at his confusion, and turning to his companions, "You must inspire this
young man," said she "with a little more courage; our magnificence confounds
him; he will like us better when he knows more of us; in the mean time you must
give him confidence; he is by far too bashful." To say the truth, Fidelio hung
down his head, and looked to great disadvantage, but he had sufficient cause to
be disconcerted. The fairy appeared to him the most hideous figure he had ever
beheld: independent of the frightfulness of her person, it required but a small
degree of physiognomy to discover in her face that her mind was equally
horrible. But now she gave the signal for the commencement of festivity.
Fidelio suffered himself to be led to the table; but although the greatest
dainties were offered him by his ^ompanions, he could not be prevailed upon to
cast a single morsel. His fright had taken away his appetite; he still
continued to hang his head, now and then stealing a look at those who sat next
him, many of whom he shortly perceived were entertaining themselves with
ridiculing his confused air. Melpomene instantly rushed into his mind; he
quickly recovered himself, and casting a look of eager inquiry all around him,
endeavored, but in vain, to see the princess. His prudence now suggested to
him, that the only way to get intelligence of her, was to recommend himself to
the person in whose power she was, by conforming in some degree to the manners
of her court.

Clovis and Lydia, who sat on each side of him, congratulated him on the return
of his spirits. Young and giddy they had no idea of pleasure existing any where
but in Horridona's palace. It is true, when first they were introduced to her,
they were, like Fidelio, startled at her figure; but as they were then but
children, and their principles unfixed, they were soon reconciled to her
appearance, and being deceived by the false glare of happiness that shone in
the feasts and balls with which she daily entertained them, this horror
gradually wore off, and they now considered her in the same light as they had
described her to Fidelio.

This young prince, no longer embarrassed, gave attention to all that was
passing. The conversation (interrupted by loud bursts of laughter) was such as
I am pursuaded would afford no amusement to my readers, were it to be repeated.
Fidelio could join but little in it: he was even sometimes almost tempted to
stop his ears.

The meats being removed, a magnificent desert, with the most curious wines,
was placed on the table. In the middle was a temple made of little diamond men
and women, carrying baskets of sweetmeats; they marched up to the top of the
table, knelt to the queen, and then dividing into two parties, presented each
of the company with a basket; meeting at the bottom, they joined hands, and
danced back to the temple to the sound of a harp, which was played by a diamond
boy sitting on the dome of the temple. None of the figures in this curious
piece of mechanism were more than seven inches high. It was near midnight when
they quitted the banquetting-room: intoxicated with the liquors they had been
drinking, they reeled after the queen into a large myrtle bower, where they
were each presented with a goblet filled from a fountain whose water had the
property of recovering those who drank it from the effects of intemperance.
Here the party separated; some returned to the palace, and spent the remainder
of the night in gaming, others again sat down to drink; dances were made in
different parts of the gardens, but they were conducted without the least
decorum, and all was riot and confusion. In the mean time Fidelio, who had left
the table at an early hour, had made a discovery that gave him no little joy.
Fatigued with the noise and nonsense that prevailed among the company in the
hall, he stole away unperceived, and going into the park which was already
illuminated, rambled about for some time: at last he crossed the river, and
directed his course toward the wood that fronted the palace. Here he was
preparing to rest himself from the fatigues he had lately undergone, when the
voices of some children caught his ear; he immediately hastened toward the
place from whence they seemed to proceed. He perceived a small palace of white
marble: the portico was lighted up, and the doors being open he entered a hall,
where a number of beautiful children were running and jumping about.

Upon seeing Fidelio, they immediately surrounded him, and began pulling off
the diamond fringe with which his mantle was trimmed, others ran away with his
sword-knot and shoe-roses; but as there was not finery enough for them all,
what little there was, quickly became an object of contention. Words were soon
succeeded by blows, and all the measures Fidelie took to pacify them were of no
effect. Amidst the confusion of voices, he frequently heard the name of
Melpomene pronounced: he soon discovered her to be one of the foremost in the
battle. Her little face was distorted with fury, the stowers which had
ornamented her dress, were torn to pieces; roaring and stamping with vehemence,
she pleaded her birth as a distinction that entitled her to the jewels.

The uproar still increasing, at last brought some of their nurses, who, upon
seeing the manner in which they were engaged, ran back and immediately returned
with a quantity of toys and sweetmeats to quiet them. Our young prince now
stepped forward, and apologized for the trouble he had occasioned. They replied,
it was a pity he had come at all, the children were all of the sweetest
dispositions in the world, and he was highly blameable in not providing himself
with jewels enough for them all. It was in vain that Fidelio urged as an
excuse, his accidentally coming near the place; they would not listen to him,
and it was not without a great deal of grumbling, and upon condition that he
brought something for the children, that they gave him permission to call again.

"Fortunate Fidelio!" said the young fairy to himself as he retired from the
wood, you have found the object of your search. But this joy was of short
continuance; for when he reflected on the situation of the unfortunate
Melpomene, the prospect of her deliverance appeared to him at a greater
distance than ever. "Alas!" exclaimed the almost desperate Fidelio, of what
presumption have I not been guilty, in offering my service to the queen of
Rosyland, toward the recovery of her daughter! Were she instantly removed to
the palace of ALMANZOROASTER, and placed under the guidance and protection of
the best and the most powerful of the genii, even there it would require the
labor of years to eradicate from her bosom those seeds of vice which Horridona
has plentifully sown, and diligently cultivated. And shall I, who am myself a
child, pretend to combat and to overcome obstacles which would impede the
progress of Almanzoroaster, and that too in the habitation of Horridona, in the
midst of dangerous instructions, and equally dangerous examples? Can my weak
eloquence persuade her to virtue, when every other hand presents a new
allurement to pleasure, and every other tongue a fresh incitement to vice?
Detained by the united powers of sin, folly, and Horridona, what presumption
must it be in a child to pretend to break her chains? No, the freedom of
Melpomene must be effected by a stronger arm than that of the inexperienced
Fidelio. And yet, after a moments recollection within himself, with what face
can I meet the fairy Benevolenta, and tell her that I had entered the Palace of
Pleasure, but had returned without Melpomene? That I had discovered the
princess, but had not the courage, the generosity to attempt her deliverance?
How can I tell her that I am a coward, unworthy of her confidence, and the good
opinion of the genii Boceadindo! It must not be; the prophecy shall be
fulfilled. I swear by the enchanted wand of the mighty Almanzoroaster, that I
will not relinquish the palace of Horridona till the deliverance is effected by
nature or Fidelio.

George was here interrupted by the arrival of some company to tea, which
unluckily prevented the conclusion of the fairy tale from being read that
evening. I say unluckily, as the book then disappeared, and though searched for
the next day in every corner of the house, was no where to be found. Many were
the conjectures formed upon this occasion by the little Dave ports: their mama
could easily have set them right, as she was privy to the affair.

She had seen Sophia steal behind George's chair, and (as she thought
unobserved) snatch up the book and put it in her pocket. When inquiries after
it were made the next day by the children, this good lady was surprised to see
with what sang-froid Sophia persisted in denying any knowledge of the
transaction. Shocked to the last degree, she forbad any thing farther being
said on the subject, and diverted their attention by the introduction of
another book, equally entertaining and more instructive. Mrs. Davenport was
unwilling to pain her brother by the knowledge of his daughter's behavior, and
therefore declined taking any notice of it at that time; but no sooner did she
retire to her own dressing room, than she wrote a letter to her governess, in
which she entreated her in the strongest terms to watch over her pupil during
the time she was to remain in Q -- S -- e, and to do her utmost to eradicate
the hateful vice she had contracted.

This letter produced much mortification to Sophia, after her return to school;
for Mrs. S. affisted by the hint she had received, convicted her in many
untruths, for all of which she was punished with the greatest severity.

The following day, as the young people were sitting together after breakfast,
Harry Lively came in, and informed the Miss Easys, that he was going to ride
with his papa to the next town, and that knowing they were to set off the next
morning for school, he came to inquire if he could execute any commissions for
them. "O yes," said Sophia, "I want a hundred things, but I suppose there is no
getting them in this nasty Yorkshire." -- "Why not, cousins?" said Charles; "I
wish you had told me what you wanted, and I think I could have contrived to
have got them some way or other. You may get any thing at York." -- "Yes,
indeed fifty miles off; you are none of you so kind as to send so far for any
body but yourselves." -- "Yes," said Charles, they could have come very well
with papa's books the other day; but I dare say, if you will write down what
you want, Harry will get them for you if they are to be had in the town of --.

Sophia now taking out her pencil, with the assistance of Amelia, wrote a long
lift of articles, which they desired Harry Lively not to show to any body, nor
would they permit him to read it out. -- "But," said the poor boy (whilst they
were cramming the paper into his waistcoat pocket,) "I don't know at what shops
these things are sold." -- "Poh," cried Sophia, cannot you remember when I tell
you, the three first are to be had at the haberdashers, the two next at the
grocers, the two that come afterward at the toy shop, the three next at the
stationers, and the five last at the pastrycooks. There, that is all, now go, my
dear; make haste, I dare say your papa is waiting; but do you hear, you need
not go sending all these things here tonight -- that will be quite foolish of
you -- I should not wish to have them before tomorrow; so you need not put
yourself out of the way by calling here in your way back. Good bye, I Am sorry to
give you so much trouble -- and then, if you should not be able to meet with
any of these articles, --

"I Will let you know," replied Harry. -- No, no, not for the world -- no, I
don't want to hear -- if you get them, why, then you will send them tomorrow, if
not, it cannot be helped.

A servant now informed Master Lively, that his papa had called for him, upon
which Harry took his leave, not very well pleased with the success of his
visit; for though his meaning was sincere, when he offered his services, he had
no idea of receiving such a multiplicity of commissions.

As soon as he was gone, "pray, cousins," said Charles, will you accept of a
trifle which my brother and I have been making for you?

Sophia. Oh, yes, we'll accept of any thing you please to offer us.


Charles. It is nothing of any great value, but if --


Sophia, Lard, child, don't make so many speeches -- let us see what it is;
there is no need of making such a fuss about it.


Charles now ran out of the room, and returned immediately with a planetarium
in his hand.

Sophia. What is this the present? What is it?


Charles. It is a planetarium.


Sophia. Now I am just as wise as I was before.


Amelia. Lard, sister, did you never hear of a planetarium? it is what they
conjure with.


Caroline. Conjure.


Amelia. Yes, conjure.


Charles. I never heard that before.


Amelia. I cannot help that, it is certainly very true.


Charles. Dear me, Amelia, you are mistaken, it is to show the motion of the
planets round the sun.


Sophia. Well, it may be vastly clever to those who comprehend it.


Charles. I was not quite sure whether you would understand it, so I wrote out
this little paper to explain it to you.


Amelia. Ay, to be sure, it was impossible that we should know so much as you:
you are all so mighty clever.


Sophia. So, you made it all yourselves?


Charles. Yes; the plate is made out of an old doll's tea-board that belonged
to Mary; so we covered it with paper, painted the circles, and varnished it
with thick gum-water. The sun is made of clay, and so indeed are the planets;
but then we stuck gold leaf on the sun to make it look like brass, because the
sun in papa's planetarium is made of brass.


Amelia. Well, well, let us see the paper. Did you copy it from the book of
astrology that lies on my uncle's table?


Charles. I copied part of it from Adam's Essays on the Globes and Astronomy,
Amelia.


Amelia. Well, once more, let me read it [opening the paper.] So! it is written
in your best hand! Well, hem! [reading.]

"The Copernican system consists of the sun, seven primary, twelve secondary
planets, and the comets. The seven planets, Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, and the Georgium Sidus, move round the sun in orbits, included
one within the other, and in the order here used in mentioning their names;
Mercury being that which is nearest the sun. These seven, which revolve round
the sun as their center, are called primary planets: the twelve small planets
revolve round the primary ones as their center, and are at the same time
carried round the sun with them; they are therefore called secondary planets,
moons, or satellites. The Georgium Sidus is attended by two moons, Saturn by
five, Jupiter by four, and the Earth by one. All of these, except the last, are
invisible to our naked eye, on account of the smallness of their size, and the
greatness of their distance from us."


Sophia. So, this is the Copernican system. I wonder why it is called so.


Amelia. Why! because the sun in the middle of the planetariums is always made
of copper, not of brass, as Mr. Charles told us.

This new proof of Amelia's self-conceit and ignorance was so perfectly
ridiculous, that the little Davenports could not refrain from laughter. Amelia
was highly affronted, and, in an angry tone of voice, insisted on knowing what
was the occasion of their merriment. Mary apologized for her rudeness, but
owned that it was impossible to help it.


Charles. To be sure, it was rude to laugh, but you made such a droll mistake!
I wonder you should be ignorant that it was so called from Copernicus, a Dane,
who lived, if I am not mistaken, in the fifteenth century. The ancients
believed that the sun was the center of the system; but Ptolemy, an Egyptian
philosopher, treated this notion as a false one, and supposed the earth as the
center, and the sun and planets describing their orbits round it. But this
opinion was totally rejected by Copernicus, who revived the old system, and
established it upon firm and indisputable proofs.


The conversation now turned upon another subject, and they remained without
any more disputes till they went up to dress for dinner. Mrs. Davenport was far
from wishing her children to give up much of their time to the ornament of
their persons, but the always insisted upon their being very clean and neat.
Mary and Caroline had the care of their own clothes, and their mama looked them
over from time to time, to see that they kept them in proper order.

As they were sitting at table, during dinner, one of the servants delivered a
note to Sophia, which, upon opening, she found was from Harry Lively; she
immediately guessed the contents, and coloring, crumpled it up, and put it in
her pocket. Mr. Easy saw her confusion, and accordingly when dinner was over,
asked her from whom she had received the paper she was so desirous of
concealing.

Sophia. Oh, it is nothing of any consequence, Sir.


Mr. Easy. I should rather suspect the contrary, as you blushed exceedingly
when you looked at it, and seemed fearful of being observed by any one. I shall
think you extremly blameable if you do not show it of your own accord to your
aunt, as you ought certainly to keep no secret from her; and I Am certain that
if you have got into any difficulty, she will, with her usual indulgence, do
all in her power to assist you.


Sophia. No, Sir, I Would rather not show it; it can be of no sort of consequence
to my aunt.


Mrs. Davenport. I should wish you voluntarily to make a friend of me upon all
occasions. Mary and Caroline would not, I am convinced, keep a secret from me
upon any account; and why should you behave differently?


Sophia. I don't see any harm, Ma'am, in not showing you every letter I
receive, I assure you, Ma'am, there is nothing about you in it.


Mrs. Davenport. Nothing about me! Do you then suppose that it is from a motive
of curiosity that I wish to see your note?


Sophia. I don't know what it can be else.


Mr. Easy. For shame! for shame, Sophia! You judge of others by yourself. But
to conclude the matter at once; I do not choose you to receive any letter
whatever without acquainting your uncle, aunt, or myself with its contents; I
insist therefore upon your showing it immediately.


"Well, then, there it is," said Sophia, tossing it into the middle of the
table, -- "there is more fuss made about it than it is worth."

Amelia cast her eye upon it as it lay, and perceiving Harry Lively's name,
eagerly snatched it up, and threw it under the table, as she was as unwilling
as her sister that it should be seen, knowing that it must infallibly bring
them both into a scrape.

Mr. Easy immediately desired her to pick it up; he was vexed at their
behavior, and was determined not to give way to them.

Amelia at first hesitated whether or no she should obey her father; but upon
his repeating this command, in a raised tone of voice, she thought it better to
comply, and accordingly, with an unwilling hand, delivered it to him.

Mr. Easy just looked it over, and then read as follows: "Harry Lively presents
his compliments to the Miss Easys; when he offered his services this morning,
he really meant to be of use to them; but if they had considered his offer as a
mere compliment, they could not have treated him worse. He returns the list
they furnished him with, and as he understands Mr. Easy is to accompany them,
hopes they will have a safe and pleasant journey to town."

The contents of the paper that was enclosed greatly vexed and surprised Mr.
Easy: it contained a pack of unintelligible names, all calculated to raise a
laugh against poor Harry.

Mr. Easy severely reprimanded his daughters for this piece of mischief: it was
a proof, he said, both of their ingratitude and ill-breeding; he was now
convinced that their dispositions would not bear indulgence, and that, for the
future, they must expect none from him, as he was determined to try what effect
severity would have upon them. He accordingly desired them to go up into their
own apartment immediately, and upon no account, to make their appearance till
the horses were ready the following morning. Sophia and her sister never saw
their father so angry before; they had no excuse to make for their behavior,
and not wishing to be farther exposed before their cousins, they instantly
obeyed his commands. Upstairs they found Ann packing up their clothes; the
planetarium lay upon the table, and she was just going to put it in their
trunk, when Sophia snatching it from her, threw it to the other end of the
room. "What a fool you are to let it lie there," said Amelia. "Mrs.
Setto-rights," meaning Mrs. Davenport, "will spy it out, and make mischief of
it; you had better put it out of the window at once."

"A good thought! returned Sophia, open the window, and out it shall go!
plannatum, or foolatum, or whatever it is called."

While this scene was passing above, Mr. Easy was lamenting the necessity there
was of treating his daughters with the utmost rigor: he had hoped to have made
companions and friends of them very early in life, but they had, by their late
behavior, destroyed his hopes, and he looked forward to nothing but opposition
to the plans he had formed.

Amelia and Sophia, contrary to their father's expectation, were punctual to
the time appointed for their departure. They were very sulky all breakfast
time; and when they heard that the horses were put to, rose up with an
eagerness by no means consistent either with gratitude or common politeness, as
it plainly evinced their impatience to leave those relations who had showed so
much true kindness toward them. Mrs. Davenport desired they would write to her
as soon as they had reached Q -- S -- e, that she might know if they had got
safe to the end of their journey. They promised to comply with her request, but
did not think it necessary to thank her for the interest she took in their
welfare. They jumped into the chaise, hardly taking any leave of their cousins,
who stood amazed at their behavior. Mr. Easy promised to return in a few days,
and tenderly embracing his sister and nieces, followed his unpromising
daughters into the carriage, which drove away immedately.

Mr. Davenport and his sons mounted their horses at the same time, meaning to
accompany them for a few miles.

When they were all out of sight, Mrs. Davenport, who had been watching them
down the avenue, turned to Mary and Caroline, and kissing them, said, "my dear
little girls will, I hope, make a proper use of the scenes they have been
witnesses to, and carefully avoid the many errors which their cousins, for want
of proper advice, have fallen into."

Mary and Caroline promised their mama they would be more attentive than ever
to the advice she was so kind as to give them from time to time, and Mary
expressed her happiness at the prospect there was of her cousins amendment,
when they should all live together, as Mrs. Davenport could then pay the same
attention to their morals, as she had done to those of her own children.

"At present, my dears, "said Mrs. Davenport," they seem but little inclined to
listen to any thing for their good. I have endeavored to be of use to them,
but all to no purpose: yet I cannot bring myself to think that their hearts are
bad: I rather wish to suppose the impropriety of their behavior proceeds from
a childish heedlessness that has grown to an alarming height, by keeping
company with girls more foolish than themselves. However, when we all live
together, I shall labor without ceasing to correct their faults, and hope one
day or other to make them worthy of their father's affection."

Mrs. Davenport then desired her daughters to put on their hats, and come with
her into the grounds. They passed through that part of the garden directly
under the windows of the bed-room which the Miss Easys had occupied. Caroline
perceived something laying on the grass, and running to see what it was, felt
mortified and surprised to find the little planetarium entirely spoilt. She
picked it up, and with tears in her eyes, "see, mama," said she, "what these
ill-natured girls have done. My brothers were so happy whilst they were making
it for them, and now see what it is come to!" -- "Poor Charles," said Mary,
"how sorry he and his brother will be!" -- "This is of a piece," replied Mrs.
Davenport, "with their behavior to Harry Lively; this almost makes me despair
of their amendment. I look upon ingratitude as a great crime, and when carried
to this height, it fills me with apprehension for their future conduct. But do
not let your brothers see this, as I know it will give them pain, and their
good nature deserves a better return." -- "I Will take it into my own room,
directly, mama," returned Caroline; "to be sure it is now of no use, but yet it
would be a pity to throw it away, so I Will keep it for my brothers' sake, and
whenever I look on it, I shall think of their good nature, and remember how
ungrateful my cousins were about it." -- "I would wish you, my dear girl," said
her mama, "to make use of every circumstance that may strenghten your affection
for Charles and George, but I should rather wish you to throw the planetarium
away, than that it should serve to remind you of any unfavourable opinions you
may have formed of your cousins."

"Why, mama," said Caroline, "to tell you the truth, I was very glad to see my
cousins at first, and I expected to pass many happy days with them; but they
turned out to be such ill natured girls, and so different from what I and my
sister wished them to be, that I really don't care if I never see them again."

Mrs. Davenport. You must remember whose children they are, and confider how
nearly related they are to you. Remember too, you will in future all live
together, and if you don't agree then, --


Mary. But, mama, Sophia does not like any body who is not as mischievous as
herself.


Caroline. Mama, I dare say we should have been very good friends if we had but
joined in their schemes.


Mrs. Davenport. If, Indeed, their friendship is only to be purchased at that
price, I do not desire it to subsist between you. No, my dear girls, it must be
your part to set them a good example; and the happiness you enjoy from a
consciousness of doing right, must unavoidably prove, in the end, an inducement
to them to imitate you.


Mary. But it will be so uncomfortable, if the are always cross.


Mrs. Davenport. Depend upon it, they will then alter their behavior: they
considered themselves here as only upon a visit; far from their ^^^verness'
control, and not accountable to any one for their conduct. The case will then
be different; their home will be with us, and they will not have it in their
power to associate with such girls as I am convinced have corrupted them at
school.


Caroline. I shall like going to London, we shall learn to dance then; shall we
not, mama?


Mrs. Davenport. Yes, my dear, you will have much more business on your hands
than you have now. You will likewise have a music master, and the year after
you will learn drawing and Italian.


Mary. Italian! Is that at all like French, mama?


Mrs. Davenport. It resembles it a little; and you will find less trouble in
acquiring it, as you have already been so thoroughly grounded in the French
language.


Caroline. And drawing, how pleasant it will be to draw!


Mary. I should like to draw as well as Miss Lively does.


Mrs. Davenport. It will entirely depend on yourself, as you will be instructed
by the best master that can be had in that line.


Mary. And pray, mama, when is the journey to take place?


Mrs. Davenport. In January next.


Mary. That Is a year hence.


Caroline. And how long shall we stay in town?


Mrs. Davenport. Four months.


Caroline. "January, February, March, April. Oh! we shall just get into the
country time enough to see the leaves open, just when the weather begins to
grow warm.


Mary. And pray, mama, did you not once say we were to learn to ride?


Mrs. Davenport. The year after next.


Caroline. I shall like that, then we can ride out with papa and my brothers.


Mary. But then, Caroline, you know mama does not ride, and so we shall lose a
great deal of her company.


Caroline. O, I forgot that; I wish, mama, you would learn to ride.


Mrs. Davenport. I was never fond of it, my dear children, and it is now too
late to begin. But as you both express a liking for that mode of exercise, I
should choose you by all means to learn, as I should then be perfectly easy with
regard to your safety whenever you went out.


Caroline. Pray, mama, did my uncle intend to call upon old Joseph this morning?


Mrs. Davenport. He did, my dear: I hope the poor old man is better this
morning: he was very bad yesterday.


Mary. Yes, mama, George told me he never saw him look so ill before: the
weather has been so bad lately.


Mrs. Davenport. He is so infirm, that every change affects him.


They now entered the house, and the two little girls went to their studies.

About the usual dinner time, a servant arrived, sent by Mr. Davenport, to let
his family know he should not return that night, as old Joseph was at the point
of death, and he could not leave him in that state. George and Charles likewise
remained at the cottage. Upon making some inquiries, Mrs. Davenport found that
when her brother stopped there in his way to town, Joseph was very ill, and as
he was to pass through the town where the physician lived, he immediately went
forward with all diligence, and meant to continue his journey with the same
speed, that he might return as soon as possible to his old friend. The servant
added, the physician had since arrived, and found his patient in a worse state
than either his master or Mr. Easy had suspected him to be; in short, he had
declared it to be impossible he should survive that night.

Mrs. Davenport and her two little girls were sensibly affected with this news:
they had no appetite for their dinner, and though they sat at table, hardly eat
any thing.

There was a large medicine chest in the housekeeper's-room, the physician was
acquainted with its contents, and had desired a few of the articles to be sent
to him at old Joseph's cottage. Mrs. Davenport likewise sent her husband a
large wrapping gown, and a great coat to each of her sons, as it was very cold
weather to sit up all night. In the course of the night old Joseph breathed his
last. Upon Mr. Easy's return, he settled a small annuity upon the widow and her
granddaughter, and Mr. Davenport placed them in a small cottage within his
domains. The Midsummer holidays Miss Easys spent at school; Mrs. Davenport's
request of a letter from them was never complied with, a circumstance which
gave her no little pain.

Much as she wished'to produce a reformation in these wayward girls, yet she
could not help anticipating a little of the anxiety which would attend the
execution of her plan; these reflections would sometimes throw a damp over that
mild cheerfulness for which she was so much admired. But now the time arrived
for their long-projected journey, the house was already taken in Berkley
Square; some of the servants were on their way to town, and the day was fixed
for the departure of the remainder of the family. Upon their arrival in town,
they sent to inform Mrs. S. the governess.

Sophia and Amelia, who were not acquainted with Mr. Davenport's intention of
passing a few months of the winter in town, were not a little surprised at the
summons to leave school. Mrs. Davenport received them with that affection
which, though so ill merited on their part, she could not withhold from the
children of a brother she so tenderly loved.

Mr. Easy seldom resided any length of time together in London, when he did, he
had lodgings in St. James's street, but as his brother was now in town,
apartments were prepared for him in Berkley square.

Mrs. Devenport's arrival in town was soon known by her numerous acquaintance,
who were all eager to pay their respect to her; her time was so fully employed
in receiving and paying visits, that she found herself totally unable to pursue
her usual domestic employments. She therefore intimated to them, that as she
came to London solely for the purpose of procuring masters for her children, it
was not her intention to launch out into all the dissipations of a gay life.
These hints had a desired effect, and Mrs. Davenport soon began to find her
accustomed pleasure in inspecting the education of her children. She had
engaged a governess for them, and had taken no small pains and trouble to
procure one in whom she could confide.

This was a mortifying stroke to Sophia and Amelia; they had at first thought
their aunt meant to take the care of their education entirely upon herself,
without the assistance of a governess. This idea had given them much pleasure,
as they concluded that in London she would find but little time to attend to
them.

But how were they undeceived when Mrs. Davenport told them she had engaged
Mrs. Elwin to be always with them, and to superintend their lessons when she
was forced to absent herself from home. Still, however, they were not without
hope, this governess might prove more ignorant than themselves, or if this were
not the case, perhaps they should be able to impose upon her, coax her into
compliance with their idle fits, or else lead her such a life as would induce
her to leave the situation. But when this lady came, before she had been one
week in the house, they found that none of these schemes were likely to succeed.

Mrs. Elwin proved to be a person every way qualified for the charge she had
undertaken. Having had much experience in the education of young people, she
had acquirrd a degree of penetration that enabled her to discover the source of
all their actions; and as she never suffered a bad trait to pass unnoticed,
Sophia and Amelia, notwithstanding the plans they had concerted together, began
to find it necessary to attend a little to their behavior.

Their school began in the morning at seven; eight was their breakfast hour;
from that time till ten, the music master attended Sophia and Amelia on
Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays; Mary and Caroline on the intervening days; on
Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, whilst their cousins were employed with
their music master, Sophia and Amelia took lessons in drawing.

Mrs. Davenport joined them at ten, when Mrs. Elwin assisted her in instructing
them in history and geography. At one, the carriage was always ready to set
them down in Hyde Park, or if the ground was very damp, to take them airing. At
three they returned home to practice on the harpsichord, and dress for dinner,
which was served at four o'clock to Mrs. Elwin and her four pupils. After
dinner they read French and Italian, and learnt to dance. At eight they left
their governess, and went to drink tea with the rest of the family with whom
they staid till ten, when (after prayers) they went to bed.

Sophia and Amelia were by no means pleased with this arrangement of their
time; it required too much application to study to meet with their approbation,
and the opinion they entertained of their new governess, may be gathered from
the following anecdote:

When this lady had been with them about a fortnight, Mrs. Davenport went out
of town for a few days; it was during her absence that Caroline was one night
kept awake by a violent toothache. Upon examining her mouth, Mrs. Elwin found
it necessary to have immediate recourse to a dentist; she accordingly ordered
the carriage, leaving Mary and the two Miss Easys some French history to get by
heart. In about two hours she returned with Caroline in high spirits, having,
upon the loss of her tooth, found herself entirely freed from pain. Mary
immediately said her lesson perfectly, but her cousins had only learnt a few
lines, and those very imperfectly.

Upon inquiry, Mrs. Elwin found that they had been out of the school-room most
of the time she was absent, and as this was strictly forbidden, she thought it
requisite to know what they had been about. Observing ink upon Sophia's
fingers, she knew they must have been writing, and in order to discover what,
and to whom, she questioned them very closely; but they both affirmed they had
not had a pen in their 05 hands. At this moment one of the housemaids entered
the room with a letter in her hand, which she gave to Sophia, saying at the
same time, "John says, Ma'am, that the man at the post office says that the
letter is above weight, and John wants to know if he is to pay for it."

Mrs. Elwin told the maid she need not wait, and taking the paper from Sophia,
broke it open: it was addressed to a young lady who had been her great friend
at school, and contained the following lines:

"Dear T --,
"After my promise to correspond with you, you have been, no doubt, much
surprised at my never having written; but you must know I am so watched, that I
have found it impossible till this moment, when one of my Argusses is in the
country, the other attending one of my sweet little cousins to have a tooth
pulled out."

"You know when I left the den at Q -- e S -- e, I expected to be a little more
at liberty, but lo, and behold, three days after our arrival at the Hanover
Square mansion, and odd kind of a stiff quizzical looking creature was
introduced to us upon our return home from a walk, as our governess. --
Governess, thought I; why, surely, our good Mrs. Davenport is sufficiently
vigilent without the assistance of another Duenna; but my thoughts were little
to the purpose; one spy, it seems, is not enough, and another we have. But this
is not all, this Mrs. Elwin has introduced many detestable practices, such as
confining her pupils on back-boards, collars, stocks, etc. As for me, it
surprised me not a little to be measured for a back-board. You know I lest mine
in Q -- e S -- e, where I and Mrs. S. have had many a good battle about it; but
to be measured for a new one! -- I Will be hanged if I had not a great mind to
knock her brains out with it when it came home. I did contrive to flounce it
down on the hearth the second day, and nearly broke her toes; for she sits
close to the fire, though we are to keep on the opposite side of the room, the
sweet cousins and all, who like it of all things. Upon my word, it would
positively make you sick to see us in our school, as the Duennas are pleased to
call it. Close to the fender sits kind Mrs. Elwin opposite to her, our tender
hearted aunt; then comes a huge table loaded with French, Italian and English
grammars, delightful treatises on geography, history, and I don't know what
all; then, on four high stools, Amelia, myself, sleek sensible Mary, and
elegant little Caroline, sit perched like the four candles on the ball-room
chimney piece in Q -- e S -- e. But this does not last long, for we have little
to learn by heart, but a good deal of desk-work (as you call it) such as making
extracts from history, copying maps, writing down the latitude and longitude of
places I never heard of before, and never wish to do again; then we translate
French and Italian, and the duce knows what all. By the bye, I return you your
paper of riddles, for I do believe riddles would be a profanation in this
house, where we are all so mighty learned. Would you believe it, I had a half
an hour's lecture for tying up my garters the other day while we were kneeling
at prayers in the school-room? For my part I thought it a mighty good
opportunity, but our good governess thought otherwise, and talked so much about
what my duty was, and how much I ought at those times to think of what I was
about, that she positively made me sick.

"Amelia desires me to tell you to give the enclosed letter to her croney, Lady
Susan T --, when you see her, and desire her not to answer it.

I wish I were in your case; you have left school, and are to come out next
year; as for me, it is true I am younger, but I don't see why I am not to come
out at sixteen as well as you; instead of that, I am to be immured up with
these nasty Davenports till nineteen, when I promise you I will play sine
pranks in spite of past lectures. Did you ever see dumb-bells? They are great
lumps of lead enclosed in leather, which we poor nuns are made to hold in our
hands, and swing backwards and forwards, to open the chest, as they say; and
this slavish task is set us when any of our masters don't come to their hour. I
can tell you, it is well for all their skulls that these weights are fastened to
my wrists. They say they do it lest they should fall on my toes; but I Will be
hanged if they don't suspect me. A propos of masters, that old quiz ******, is
still our dancing master; he is the most ridiculous, provoking, unsatisfied
animal I ever knew, except some people whose names you may guess. But I shall
not have time to seal my letter before Cerberus comes home, if I do not now
sign myself

Your faithful crony, SOPHIA EASY."


The letter enclosed in the above was much in the same strain. Mrs. Elwin read
them over cooly. The sarcasms thrown out against her gave her much less pain
than the principles from which they proceeded. When she had finished the
perusal of them, she leisurely folded them up, and put them in her pocket,
desiring Sophia and Amelia to finish their lessons, and forbidding Mary or
Caroline to hold any conversation with their cousins till Mrs. Davenport
returned, to whom she intended to refer the matter. Sophia and Amelia looked
mighty silly upon this discovery being made of their sentiments, and still more
so, when their aunt came home the next day. As they had committed an
unpardonable fault in writing letters unknown to Mrs. Elwin, this affair was
not to be passed over with slight admonition; especially as Mrs. Davenport had
long observed that their dispositions could be wrought on more by severity than
gentle means.

They were accordingly sentenced to be shut up for a fortnight in separate
rooms, in all which time they were only to be seen or spoken to by their
governess: nor were they to be idle during this confinement; they read to Mrs.
Elwin, and had such extracts to get by heart, as were calculated to convince
them of the impropriety of their conduct.

Upon the expiration of a fortnight, their annt gave each of them a letter, in
answer to the two that had been intercepted. In these epistles (written by Mr.
Davenport) arguments were offered that tended to show the ingratitude and folly
of turning into ridicule methods taken for our improvement by those who are
kind enough to interest themselves in our welfare.

Sophia and Amelia were much struck with these arguments, and I feel peculiar
satisfaction in assuring my readers their relations had never again any great
cause to be displeased with them. They were not incorrigible, their hearts were
at the bottom good, and the happiness of eradicating those weeds that had so
long choked up their nobler sentiments, fell to the lot of Mrs. Davenport, who
well deserved this reward for her care and attention.


