A COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, ON A VARIETY OF SUBJECTS. IN PROSE AND VERSE.

-- NEWARK -- PRINTED BY JOHN WOODS. 1797.

A COLLECTION OF ESSAYS.
But where to find that happiest spot below --
Who can direct, when all pretend to know?
GOLDSMITH.
IT is a common place observation "that man is born with a capacity to enjoy
happiness." Each one believes this true in theory, and imagines, however others
have failed of practically verifying it, he shall certainly be an illustrious
instance of its exemplification. His predecessor has blindly mistaken the way,
and he has found it; but at the close of life, when he is taking a
retrospective view of his journey, he finds that he has been pursuing a
phantom, like those who went before him, and while, with the wise man, he
exclaims that "all is vanity," he feels, on his dying bed, experimental
evidence, that the only real "good under the sun, is for a man to eat, and
drink, and enjoy the fruit of his labor, for that is the gift of God."

Something here is in the wrong. Either happiness is not to be obtained in this
world, or those who seek it mistake the road which leads to it. Undoubtedly the
former is the fact -- though I believe, much more felicity might be enjoyed
than there is, if people knew how to seek for it. If the intellectual faculties
of man, did not participate in his joys and sorrows, his tranquillity would but
rarely be disturbed, where objects for sensual gratification were within his
reach. Having satisfied the claims of hunger and thirst, and protected his body
from inclement seasons, his remaining care would be, to sooth the calls of
sensuality, by indulgence to the full. But this is not the case. Man is created
with a sensual, and a mental, capacity for enjoyment. -- These are not
unfrequently in direct opposition at each other, where the senses desire what
reason disapproves. Notwithstanding they are often at variance, yet they are
perfectly reconcilable; and when in harmony, a rational indulgence of the one,
will contribute much to the gratification of the other. But the passions get
the start in infancy, and by the time that reason begins to exercise its
influence, they have generally become so headstrong, that they turn a deaf ear
to her advice, and like Jehu, drive furiously after their enemy.

The infant scarcely opens its eyes before it cries for the moon. It is a
pleasing object to its sight, and reason has not yet taught it to know the
impossibility of its indulgence. The schoolboy finds his gratification, at
times, in his bow and arrow, in his popgun, in his skates, his hoop and his
whistle -- and, although actual possession at this time of life, affords more
lasting contentment, than at any subsequent period, yet, even now, it is
fleeting; it fades with the novelty of its object, and is forgotten almost as
soon as known. How soon will the boy forget his whistle, when his comrade
produces a jews harp? And how readily does the jews-harp give place to the top?
as childhood draws to a close, the childish sports are laid aside, and the
young man places his happiness in his horses, his beauty, the favorable
reception which he may meet with among the young ladies, or on some other
object equally trivial. It is not enough that he possesses these -- but they
must be pre-eminently his. So long as his horse is the handsomest and most the
subject of commendation, he is contented with it. But no sooner does his
townsmen appear with a handsomer horse, and a fine new chaise, than his own
looses half its value, and immediately he sets his thoughts at work to invent
how he can surpass his comrade in both. Suppose he does it. His happiness is
again dissipated the moment he sees an acquaintance in his phaeton, drawn by
his span and driven by his servant. -- Should he procure these, his felicity
would again be destroyed by the first coack and four which he saw.

A small part even of our temporal happiness consists in actual possession.
While an object of desire is contemplated in futurity, we behold in it nothing
but that which promises pleasure. When obtained, though it may possess all that
which made it desirable while at a distance, it is found usually to possess
more. The rose blossoms on a briar bush, and the sun too long beheld, destroys
the sight. To illustrate the foregoing, we will turn our thoughts, for a
moment, to a child, and follow him in his progress to old age. His first great
wish, which promises felicity, is to have his petticoats exchanged for a boy's
dress. He soon wants a penknife, a top or a pair of skates. These afford him no
permanent satisfaction, until he can open the first, spin the second, and run
upon the third. After he has learned these, do they satisfy him? No; he now
longs to be of age. At twenty-one years, he wants to be in business by himself,
to have a house, and to be married. A wife cannot render him contented without
children. Is he contented with these? He now must have an estate to educate
them, and to secure them from poverty, if he should die during their childhood.
How many anxieties does he feel on their account? If one of them is sick, the
parent takes no rest until he thinks him out of danger. When he is in health,
his solicitude is transferred to some other concern for the good of his child.
After his children are reared up to manhood, he is uneasy until they are
married and settled in life. His next wish must be gratified, for without it,
this is of no importance; he must see their children* and be convinced that his
name will be perpetuated to posterity; else all his former cares, and
anxieties, are not worth the trouble they have cost. Does this gratify him? Is
he now ready to resign up all to them, and be laid down in peace? No; all the
solicitude, the disappointments, and mortifications, he has met with in this
world, do not alienate his affections from life; nor does his experience yet
make him feel that permanent happiness cannot be procured. He will tell you
that it cannot, before he is ten years old, but he never practically believes
it until on his deathbed. I have known a man, of nearly four score years, who
had lived in sorrow all his days, and had struggled with poverty and sickness,
during his whole life, who had been blind for about a year. Often has he told
me, that all the troubles of his life were not half so burdensome as the loss
of his eye sight. He had enjoyed it longer than the period usually allotted to
man, and it had served him only to witness scenes of pain and wretchedness; yet
he thought that if he could only have his sight restored to him, if it was but
just enough for him to walk about, he should be perfectly happy. -- Just such
creatures we are. When we possess a blessing, we know not how valuable it is,
nor how much our happiness depends upon it, until we are deprived of it. Some
future good allures us; and, when obtained, we find it not to possess that for
which we so earnestly sought it; and away our wishes fly to something still
remote -- which, when ^btained, serves us in the same manner. And if we were to
push on, like Alexander the Great, to the conquest of the world, like him, we
should sit down and cry when it was vanquished; not because we had possessions
enough, but because there would be nothing more to seek for.

Providence has so formed us, and so variegated our lives, with good and evil,
pleasure and pain, happiness and misery, that we may not become so attached to
this world, as to be unwilling to prepare for another. He has sent us here as
guests to an entertainment, in which there are nourishing and poisonous
ingredients. He has taught us how to distinguish between them -- has set before
us the strongest motives to improve the one, and to shun the other, and left us
to exercise our own discretion. Such was the case with Eve, and such has been
the case with all of her descendants. The forbidden fruit "was fair to look
upon," and she eat it; and by eating it, she lost paradise -- tainted the whole
of her descendants, and, from her, they inherit the same disposition. They,
like her, wander about in pursuit of happiness. She enjoyed it in paradise, and
knew it not until it was forfeited. When forfeited, she sought in vain to find
it on earth. She lost it for her children, and they will, like her, seek it in
vain, unless they pursue it in that road which will re-conduct them to paradise.

THE MATRIMONIAL CREED.
WHOSOEVER will be married, before all things it is necessary that he hold the
conjugal faith; and the conjugal faith is this: That there were two rational
beings created, both equal, and yet one superior to the other -- and the
inferior shall bear rule over the superior; which faith, except every one keep
whole, and undefiled, without doubt, he shall be scolded at everlastingly.

The man is superior to the woman and the woman is inferior to the man; yet
both are equal, and the woman shall govern the man.

The woman is commanded to obey the man, and the man ought to obey the woman;
and yet there are not two obedients, but one obedient.

For there is one dominion nominal of the husband, and another dominion real of
the wife.

And yet there are not two dominions but one dominion.

For, like as we are compelled by the christian verity to acknowledge, that
wives must submit themselves to their husbands, and be subject to them in all
things;

So we are forbidden by the conjugal faith to say, that they should be at all
influenced by their wills, or pay regard to their commands.

The man was not created for the woman, but the woman for the man;

Yet the man shall be the slave of the woman, and the woman the tyrant of the
man:

So that in all things, as aforesaid, the subjection of the superior to the
inferior is to be believed.

He, therefore, that will be married, must thus think of the woman and the man.

Furthermore, it is necessary to submissive matrimony, that he also believe
rightly the infallibility of the wife.

For the right faith is, that we believe and confess, that the wife is fallible
and infallible;

Perfectly fallible and perfectly infallible; of an erring soul and unerring
mind subsisting; fallible, as touching human nature; and infallible, as
touching her female sex.

Who, although she be fallible and infallible, yet she is not two, but one
woman; who submitted to lawful marriage to acquire unlawful dominion, and
promised religiously to obey, that she might rule with uncontroled sway.

This is the conjugal faith; which, except a man believe faithfully, he cannot
be married.

HAPPINESS: NOW JUDGED OF.
IMPERFECTLY can we judge of real happiness or misery from external appearance.
-- We are seduced and deceived by that false glare which prosperity throws
around bad men; we are tempted to imitate their crimes, in order to partake of
their imagined felicity.

The pageant of grandeur displayed to public view, is not the ensign of certain
happiness. We must follow the great man into the retired apartment, where he
lays aside his disguise, in order to form any just conclusion. We must have a
faculty by which we can look into the inside of hearts; then should we behold
good men in proporti^n to their goodness, satisfied and easy; attr^cious
sinners always restless and unhappy. We must not fix our affections on those
allurements which vanish at the approach of death, but strive to obtain
virtuous accomplishments that endure to all eternity.

GAMING.
GAMING is the curse that spreads the widest, and sticks the closest to the
present times: All ranks and degrees of people are infected with it; it is the
livelihood of many, and so countenanced by all, that it is almost scandalous to
forbear it, and esteemed downright ill-breeding to expose it. But wherever
you are, if cards are called for, let it be a signal for you to take your
leave. Nor let the proposal of a trifling stake be a bait to induce you to sit
down: Adventurers heat themselves by play, as cowards by wine; and he that
began timorously, may, by degrees, surpass the whole party in rashness and
extravagance. Besides, as avarice is one of our strongest passions, so nothing
flatters it more than play. Good success has an almost irresistible charm, and
ill prompts us to put all to the hazard, to recover our losses; either way,
nothing is more infatuating, or destructive.

This is but a faint sketch of the mischiefs attending gaming, even upon the
square; but, where it is otherwise, which often happens, as numbers have found
to their cost, what can save the wretched bubble from imminent and inevitable
ruin; or who can enumerate the snares, the blinds, the lures employed by
sharpers, to entrap their prey, and ratify the premeditated mischief? To be
safe, then, keep out of the possibility of danger. Strangers, however dazzling
their appearance, are always to be mistrusted. Even persons who prided
themselves on their birth, rank and fortune, have been found confederates with
these splendid pick-pockets. And to play with your friends, is an infallible
receipt to lose them; for, if you plunder them, they will abandon you with
resentment: and, if they plunder you, they will decline an interview, that must
be attended with secret ill will, if not open reproaches. To avoid all these
hazards, play not at all; but, when you find yourself giving way to the
dangerous temptation, by casting your eyes on those who gain a livelihood by
these execrable means, let their detested reputations, and the contempt always
connected with them, deter you from the detestable ambition of making your way
to fortune by the same infernal road; or, if that reflection proves ineffectual
for your preservation, look with horror on the numbers of meagre faces that
haunt gaming houses, as ghosts are said to do the places where their treasure
is buried, who earn an infamous livelihood, by being the tools and bawds of
those very people to whom they owe their ruin, in order to reduce others to the
like wretchedness.

THE POOR MAN's APOLOGY For marrying a POOR WOMAN.
MY lot was cast among those to whom fortune deals her favors sparingly:
nature, as if to make amends for the niggardliness of the capricious goddess,
made me heir to a constitution, though not the most robust, equal to the
station heaven had allotted to me; and I thought my condition enviable, endued
as I was with fortitude sufficient to encounter poverty in wedlock. All my
acquaintance cried shame on the man who had been so blind to his interest, and
in the most unreserved terms censured me for shaking hands with beggary. The
custom of this thrifty age, indeed, and the oppressive temper of the times,
gave a color of justice to a censure apparently dictated by friendship.
Nevertheless their remonstrances made but a transient impression on a mind like
mine, which had armed itself against the vicissitudes of the world by the
following reflections, previous to the solemn engagement into which I had
entered.

Every man who marries without a fortune, pledges himself to the state for his
industry; after having turned the matter in my mind, I am the more convinced
that my country has a similar claim upon me. But shall I marry to gratify the
inclinations of others, perhaps to humor their caprices? or indulge a wish of
my own? Some friends I have, who are very importunate with me to be directed by
them -- one tells me, he has had in his eye for me, ever since my birth, a lady
who is immensely rich, but monstrously hunchbacked withal, and arrived at the
sober age of sixty -- from her having been unsolicited so long, I must needs
suppose her to be the refuge of her whole sex. Now, should I, in a fit of
insanity, for nothing short of a derangement of my intellects could urge me to
the rash act, link myself to decrepidate, and her disposition be as crooked as
her person, where should I hope for redress? Could this friend of mine dissolve
the tie, or I recall my words? No, the words are irrevocable, the bond
indissoluble, "till death does us part." To wish that death would step in, to
rid me of my encumbrance, by summoning away my joke fellow, or myself, would be
sinful; besides that such a wish would be fruitless for she might live long
enough to break my heart. At her age, the turbulence of the passions is
supposed to be calmed, it is true; but were the forty years younger, would that
better my situation? Upon consideration I think it would not; by the time a
woman sits down to serious housewifery, her marriage portion is spent in the
indulgencies, which she expects forsooth in consideration of her dower. Hence I
conclude, that my friend, in his recommendation of a wife to me, is actuated by
no other motive than his pride, which would be wounded by his owning a poor
relative. So help me God then, I will choose for myself, and woo happiness in a
person whose disposition I think congenial to my own.

THE GRUMBLER. Madeira is not bad, but RUM is good.
"FOR every creature of God is good." "Rum is one of these creatures." To a man
in his right mind it would only be necessary to say ergo; but as this number
may light upon some not in a situation to comprehend the whole meaning of ergo,
I will put the inference in language suited to their capacities, ergo, Rum is
good. If there is one of my readers who is not in perfect good humor on
hearing this phrase, it must be some churlish old bachelor, too nigardly ever
to buy rum enough to make himself happy. These reasonings are just, the first
quotation is taken from the sacred book, the second is as undeniable as the
first; and as to the inference, witness ye dram-drinkers who love a good suck
in the morning -- witness ye bucks and blades, who sit in the tavern and drink
rum nekus till your vociferous brawls set the house in an uproar -- witness ye
tavern hunters, who spend your time and your estates in defense of this great,
but simple truth that rum is good. Rum is good, and so is Arsenic, and a man
who prefers a sudden death to a lingering one would sooner swallow the latter
than the former. I speak of the immoderate use of rum. Rum is good -- for a
wound -- a dislocated limb -- and a thousand other things; but swallowed in
large draughts, is as certain death as arsenic. -- To depict the whole
catalogue of evils which attend the free use of rum, is beyond my abilities,
and would do no good. It has been done a thousand times to no purpose. There
are men who drink too much rum: There are others who do not drink enough -- at
each of these I shall grumble. As I have taken a parson's text, I may as well
take his mode too, and divide my work into firstlys and secondlys: And

Firstly, In grumbling at those who drink too much, self-interest is at the
bottom. No sooner do I seat myself in my neighbor's house, than he brings out
his bottle of rum, orders a picher of water, and I must drink a little of his
old spirits and water -- If it is winter, it will warm my stomach and cure my
head ache, -- if it is summer, 'its a fine cooling thing, and as good for the
headache as any thing in the world. The next thing is to visit me and taste my
old spirits. Your common six shilling rum does not answer, it must be old
spirit. Now as I cannot but just suport my family with the necessaries of life,
this needless expense is irksome, and complied with, only from a false
delicacy. Besides, I shall soon love it. The appetite furnished by nature, is
well and easily regulated; but when ^nce viciated by unwarily getting into such
habits as this, there is no knowing where it will end. I wish they would treat
me with a cup of cold water.

Secondly, As ^o those who do not drink enough -- A neighbor called on me a
few days since before breakfast on business; the effluvia from a half point of
rum met me as soon as he opened his mouth. He is a clever fellow, and a man of
some interest; but if he had drank a quart that morning, instead of a half
point, his family might have been worth ten times more ten years hence, than
they will if he lives ten years. The young "dasher," who has drank enough to
make him mischievous, who gets a rail to break open windows, and finds the rail
has got him down and will not get off, ought to have drank more; for then he
would have fallen before he touched the rail, and it easier lying alone than
under a rail. Young gentlemen of good fortunes and prospects, who are apt to
get high, as they call it, are unpardonable in not drinking more rum. -- They
can afford it. A little rum or brandy makes them boisterous and mischie^ous,
and as ungovernable as Balaam's ass; whereas a good s^^g would still all these
tumultuous passions, and lay them quietly to rest. Besides, these boisterous,
mischievous fr^eks waste their estates, and the example is pernicious; because
young men of lower rank are apt to think if they imitate a gentleman of
fortune, even in his foibles, they shall be gentlemen themselves; whereas if
these young gentlemen were to drink deep enough to kill themselves, it would
save their estates, and nobody would think of imitating them.

A little drinking is a dangerous thing;
Drink deep, or taste not the West-Indian spring.
THE FORCE OF SLANDER.
"On Eagles wings immortal Slanders fly,
"While virtuous actions are but born to die."

NOthing sooner discover^ imbecility in a man than credulity (this is a
sentiment of the celebrated Fielding). Nothing can be more improper, and
nothing has a more fatal tendency in leading us into errors. The credulous man
believes every flying report, however injurious to his neigbour, without
looking into the character of his informant, or tracing the calumny to its
original source. It is from this want of circumspection in general, that
Slander is permitted to exercise, without even the smallest molestation,
whatever her dark malicious tongue may invent. This hyperbolical incendiary no
sooner wispers her infernal purpose, than poor simple credulity sounds the
ignoble to^sin of alarm, and inoffensive, deserted innocence looks in vain to
an ungrateful world for that protection, heaven and justice will only grant
her. Weep not, unerring virtue, I greatly bear up against the attacks of
scornful inhuman men -- they may erect the sharp-poized blade of calumny; and
wield the triumphant falchion of slander, but let them remember that their
victory is mortal, that yours is the reward of Eternity. The rich man may pride
in destroying the only comfort, the virtuous solace of the indigent -- his
reputation -- but let him also remember that the day of retribution will come
when all his boasted millions shall not purchase him one moment of the poor
man's happiness. "For Death, stern Death does vastly change the scene!" Where
rests the ashes of Alexander, or the manes of Clitus? They are both lost in
decay and scattered by the winds of heaven. The master's, perhaps on some
cobler's dunghill, the servant's on the fertile banks of the Granick! The
sting of slander, though pungent and mutinous, can only wound the bosom of
guilt; but like all other incorrigible vices it seldom attacks those of its own
species, but is continually in ambush for innocence. The beasts of the forests,
the fowls of the air, the fishes of the sea, and the veriest reptiles on earth,
live in perfect unison with those of their own species; nor do they wi^h to
diminish the happiness or tranquillity of each other: but ungrateful man,
possessing as he does, the far more superior advantages of the brute creation
-- intellectual and improved knowledge -- with all the vast endowments
erudition, experience, and even religion can bestow; the sacred commandments
and the natural bond of fellowship that ought to exist between man and man,
delights more in the destruction and downfall of a fellow being, in rendering
him contemptible in the eyes of the world, than offering him that assistance
and protection, which he himself finds essentially necessary, to guide him
through the rough ocean of life with propriety. -- To view the rest of mankind
as I do myself, it appears impossible for such a monster to exist, as he who
would assassinate, without cause, the tenderest part of a man, his honor and
reputation. Yet experience, that unerring monitor, has proven it, and since
credulity has propagated it, I look farther than the too confined limits of
earth for redress. I stand the unshaken guardian of my reputation (though none
shall know me by this intricate declaration) and look with sovereign contempt
on the machinations of a credulous world, who claim more my pity than
resentment. Still it surprises me to find the motto that heads this, so
perfectly congenial to the dispositions of mankind.

YOU OUGHT TO BE CAREFUL,
"AND who does not know that," said a young pragmatical coxcomb, before he had
heard the rest of the sentence, "True my friend," I answered if knowing was
all that was necessary to induce people to do as they ought, preaching would be
little wanted, and the world would go round without so many jolts and tosses,
and many of the egregious errors as well as the smaller evils and cross
accidents of life would be avoided. "But who ought to be careful? I don't
understand you sir, do you mean me?" "Yes, you" I answered, "in company with
all the rest of the world; for observe them, from the philosopher down to the
fool -- from a Washington to the most contemptable jacobin inclusive, and you
will not find one of any age, sex, class, or denomination, but what at some
time or other may feel obliged by having a friend at their elbow to whisper
them to be careful. And the traveller is in duty bound to stand centry in turn,
during his watch, as he has too much gratitude soon to forget the gentle
admonitions and affectionate cautions he has r^ceived from his good friends,
while he has been passing through the world.

Ah! and travelers too ought to be careful not to take a cup too much when
they are to travel in the night l^st they should get a sore eye against a post
or a fence, that should be so uncivil as not to move out of their way, as they
are advancing on each side the ro^d with their graceful bows, their g^^^^el
s^llies, their wonderful evolutions and other pleasing attitudes, so highly
entertaining to bystanders.

Some have gone so far as to suppose that even lawyers oug^t to be careful and
not to persuade people into uncertain lawsuits, by being positive they will
recover; when they have doubts in their own minds whether by being positive
they can lead them safe out again. It was said of them in old time, that they
took great se^s -- that was an evil under the sun, which the present generation
seems freed from -- but if that was a fault, what name shall we give to those
who, if they cannot do better, take less than the fee table, and for the sake of
purchasing business offer writs at half price? If any such can be, the law has
given them two names already, Pettifoggers and Barr^t^rs, and annexed
punishments as disgraceful as such contemptible practices deserve.

And why ought not Doctors to be careful? The old ones, lest their pockets
being full and their feelings less accute they grow remiss and inattentive to
the calls of distress. And the young medical Pettifoggers, who rush into the
practice without a previous education or regular study, who know little more of
medicine than some of the names, yet call themselves of the Faculty because
they have the faculty of charging equal to the first rate practitioners --
Surely such men ought to be careful when the lives of citizens are thus put in
jeopardy by cofiding in their sk^ll. But the evil will never be fully remidied
till the people themselves grow so caref^l as not to trust them.

These are not all -- what remains must he reserved till another opportunity.

R^^^^ATION.
NEXT to life, (...) dearer to man than reputation or a good name: Slander is
therefore the basest kind of r^bbery.

"Who steals my purse i^ al^ trash, it is something, nothing;
"'It Was mine, 'its his, has been slave to thousands:
"But he who fil^hes from me my good name,
"Robs me of that which not enriches him,
"And makes me poor indeed."
There are two kinds of slander, malicious and inconsiderate. Malicious slander
consists in circulating reports against a person with a design to injure him.
This is the height of malevolence. Such slanderers regard not whether they
utter truth or falsehood; for to create misery is the sole object they have in
view, their guilt is therefore lessened but in a small degree by the
consideration that what they report concerning another is truth. "Truth may be
made instrumental to the success of malicious designs, as well as falsehood;
and if the end be bad, the means cannot be innocent." Inconsiderate slander
ar^ses from a propensity in human nature to hear and tell some strange thing.
Those who are guilty of this mean no wrong. "Their error consist in the want of
that regard to the consequences of their conduct, which a just affection for
human happiness, and concern for their duty, would not fail to produce. "And it
is no justification to say that they entertained no bad design." The truth is,
we ought always to be actuated by a wish to promote the happiness of others.
This will keep us from every kind of slander, and seal our lips against the
utterance of any thing which can injure another, whether it be true or false. A
tale bearer reveals s^crets, but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth
the matter.

THE TALKER.
WHAT do folks say? is the question -- a question that has more influence on
the manners of mankind, than all the laws of society. Folks must talk -- the
more they talk the better. Who can resist the influence of what folks says?
When I hear a man say he does not care a farthing what folks talk about him, I
cannot believe him.

Most people believe that the good order of society depends wholly on
construction of the laws; I do not: the good opinion of our neighbors, and the
people within the circle of our acquaintance has ten times more influence on
our conduct and department in life, than all the laws that have been enacted
from the day of Solomon to the present time. -- How shall we obtain this
opinion if folks don't talk? and talk a great deal too. I always feel uneasy
when I hear people finding fault with their neighbors for talking about folks.
It is, as necessary to good order in society, as winds and storms to produce a
salubrious atmosphere. We may curse folks for talking, and curse again, so much
the better; this discovers the good effect it has. At first we resent the
injury; but folks talk again; we then begin to consider whether we have given
occasion for the observations; if so, we shall reform, at least be more
circumspect in our behavior. Few of us are such veterans, as to move on in
defiance of the good opinion of the people among whom we live. But folks that
talk a great deal, tell false stories, and often injure the reputation of our
neighbors; this is a temporary evil; winds and rain often do great mischief:
no argument that they are unnecessary: it is not at all surprising* that in our
great zeal in a good cause, we should sometimes trespass, and pass bounds of
rigid truth. What great injury is done? our neighbor perceives that we are
watching and talking about his conduct in life, and will set a guard over all
his actions, lest he give occasion for folks to talk in future. Talk away may
friends, and keep talking; enjoy secrecy if you please; no matter; your friend
has always his bosom friend to whom he can entrust the secret; and you may be
sure it will not fail coming to the ears of the person talked about: it all
tends directly to the formations of manners, and surely must be the only reason
why there is so much talking about each other.

FRAGMENT.
THOSE qualities which are only brilliant, have ever more enemies than
admirers; but those which are the offspring of the heart obtain the suffrages
of all. You cannot outshine other men without wounding their pride; whilst you
astonish them, you often irritate; and whenever you are personal you are
assuming.

CARDS, etc.
"Whence sprung he occursed l^ve of play,
Which begg^rs thousands in a day? --
Speak sorc'r^ss* speak (for thou can tell)
Who called the treacherous card from hell --
Is man a thief who steals my pelf? --
How great his th^ft who robs himself!
Is man who gulls his friend, a cheat? --
How heinious then is self deceit!
Is murder justly deemed a crime!
How great his guilt who murders time?"
COTTON.
TO combat a dangerous but fashionable vice -- to incline the wavering, to
snatch from destruction the unhappy gamester, is the object of the present
relation.

In vain has reason often exerted its voice, or prudence loudly declaimed
against this practice, fraught with so many woes -- let us then try the force
of example.

The only heir of an opulant family, possessed of a person in the highest
degree amiable, to which were united all the virtues which can ameliorate the
heart or dignify mankind -- Honorious stood superior to the admiring multitude.
Who that was acquainted with him did not admire the strength of his judgment,
the goodness of his heart and the benevolence of his temper. He was not similar
to the stoic, who can view with indifference the misfortunes of mankind, and
render his heart unsusceptible of the ennobling touches of philanthropy. No!
his soul was of a sweeter temperament; he sprang forth with transport to the
exercise of charity. The voice of widows blessed him, and the hearts of orphans
leaped w^^h rapture at his name. Such was Honorius when the amiable Amelia
captivated his affections and resigned to him her heart and hand. Her soul was
unison with his, and the temple of benevolence was erected in her bosom. This
event therefore, instead of diminishing their sensibility of their sufferings
of the unfortunate seemed only to augment it. Gratitude spoke their praises
with her thousand tongues, and mercy, sweet mercy hovered with expanded wings
around their habition. The murmurings of ingratitude, the ripenings of
discontent and the bewailings of misery were unknown within their walls. Age
crept imperceptibly on, and the cup of life was quaffed without the admixture
of one bitter ingredient.

But, alas! how soon d^d the curtain drop on his happiness! how soon were his
prospects of pleasure beclouded! Frequently importuned by his friends to spend
the winter at the capital of -- he at length complied. Unfortunately, whilst
immersed in the routine of pleasure, he so far lost the prudence which
distinguished him, as to suffer a love of play to gain an ascendency over his
mind.

Alas! how altered did he soon become. Instead of the sprightly, the vivacious,
the benevolent Honorious* he now was melancholic and gloomy, and the
fickelness of fortune at the gaming table, and the consequent uncertainty of
his estate arrested the outstretched arm of charity. No longer did the relation
of misfortune excite the tear of compassion -- no longer did his soul flutter
to relieve the distressed. All the soft emotions of humanity were forgotten --
all the effusions of a generous heart ceased. -- Neither were these the only
attendants of this detestable vice. Intoxication which debases man to a brute
-- profanity which challenges the august majesty of heaven, and a thousand
other vices, which are the off^pring of this one crowded upon him.

The tender heart of his wife could not endure this -- the beauteous flower
drooped and died. Her soul was wafted by kindred spirits to the bosom of "her
father and her God," and, as it entered the regions of b^autitude, it dropped a
tear on her altered Honorius.

As for himself, having in one unlucky night lost all his fortune, and seeing
no friendly hand extended to assist him, despair with all its horrors seized
upon his soul. Recollection preyed like a vulture* on his heart -- reflection
represented him the murderer of his wife -- each hope of happiness was toppled
down, and all his sanguine expectations blasted. Alas! shall I relate the sad
catastrophe, and how in the frenzy of his soul, "he rushed irreverent,
unprepared, uncalled into his maker's presence," and with his own guilty hand
finished his sad existence.

Reader! if your soul is moved with pity for the fate of Honorius, fly the
siren shores of gaming, avoid the rock on which his bark was shiprecked.

EUGENIUS.

"There Is time enough yet."
THE absurdity of procrastination is so conspicuous, that no one can deny the
fatality of its consequences.

The inimitable Prompter* by making use of every text of homespun scripture,
has endeavored to expose the folly of those people, who neglected their present
concerns, with this excuse, that there is time enough yet. There is a certain
inherent proneness, in human nature, to indulgence and an exemption from mental
and corporeal exercise. The stupidity of the mind is, perhaps, more
unpardonable than that of the body; because those who are born to independent
fortune, can easily be excused from manual labor, but not from mental; for no
one, however opulent he may be, can be pardoned for a misuse, or a suspension
of his natural faculties -- many are bred to the knowledge of letters and the
liberal arts, who are as necessary members of society, as the farmer or
mechanic -- yet if their abilities are not improved, with vigor they are
insufferable -- There Is time enough yet, is the language of the venerable
Minister, who neglects his study till Saturday noon, and then picks up some old
sermon, or concludes to supply the place of a studied discourse the next
Sabbath, with an extemporary exhortation -- There Is time enough yet, replied a
factiou^ ^^yer, being asked when he was to make preparation for a future state
-- "when I have acquired a large estate, when I have gloriously crept into
Congress, when I have become a senator, or perhaps his excellency, and shall
have resigned, I mean to attend to these things. O, fie, There Is time enough
yet." The repetition of this phrase sounds with solacing harmony, to the
neglected Maid, who has lived five and twenty or thirty years, in hopes and an
earnest looking for of those days when she shall be provided with an help meet
for her languishing self -- The honest tradesman neglects to pay his debts, as
long as his creditors do not sue him, saying there is time enough yet -- at
length, he is saluted with the unwelcome voice of the sheriff, who regards not
the person of any; then he is not only obliged to pay the contract, but the
necessary costs and court fees, and one shilling duty on this writ, says the
lawyer, which he never forgets.

When I began to write, I meant to give every vice of this kind a proper
scouring* but as I am in haste I must desist for this time, and when I have a
convenient season I will proceed, for there is time enough yet.

PILL GARLIC.

"Yet no man remembereth that same poor man."
IN the book of Ecclesiastes, we find related in a very familiar and simple
apologue, the siege of a certain city. It was little and thinly inhabited, but
it was invaded by a powerful King, and menaced by great bulwarks. Instant
capture must have ensued, had not a certain poor man, whose mind was bet^^^
stocked than his purse, delivered, by the wi^ of his plans, the city, and freed
the inhabitants from their terrors. Here we naturally anticipate a lively
picture of the gratitude of the besieged, toward this political savior. Too
many statues could not be erected in honor of such gallantry and enterprise,
too many she^^e^ of silver could not be given to relieve the poverty of him,
who had so well deserved. We might suppose that the wealthy citizens would pay
liberal tithes to one, by whom their all had been saved. Chaste dames and coy
virgins, exulting that their purity had not been violated, by a licentious
soldiery, would naturally crowd around their protector, and the blushes of a
thousand cheeks attest that modesty had not been injured by the brutal
ravisher. But he, who would draw his conclusion, and imagine that even useful
poverty must necessarily be recompensed, would prove himself a rash and
unobserving man. We might allow the benevolence of his own heart, but what
should we think of his knowledge of the hearts of others? That men are not
always grateful for signal favors, that poverty is ever contemptible, even
when accompanied by merit, may be learned in the course of every days
experience, may be learned from the sequel of the story, which began this
sermon. Though all men, natives of the besieged city, had such occasion to
recollect their benefactor, yet the mortifying conclusion of the narrative, is,
that in the words of my text, no man remembered that same poor man!

However penury may be disdained by those selfish men, whom legacies and
avarice have enriched, we find, that the best friend of man abounds in
benedictions of the poor. In the sermon on the Mount, a much more accurate and
eloquent discourse, than any of MASILLON's, the poor in spirit are especially
named, and a kingdom promised them surpassing all the thrones and
principalities of Europe. It was not the magnificent palace, it was not the
Usurers bank, it was the poor man's hovel, it was the recess of the forlorn
outcast which the son of the carpenter visited.

To the poor the Gospel was preached, it was a poor widow whose two mites shone
more brilliantly in the eyes of one, not likely to be dazzled, than al^ the
gold of those opulent contributors, who cast (...) much to the Jewish trea^ury.
The rich man querying concerning future life, is ^old that a sale of his
possessions, and liberal donations to the poor are essent^al to salvation.
While Wealth and Power and Rank were neglected, poor Shepherds enjoy^^ the
honor of a glorious annunciation. The compa^ions of the son of Mary were not
the opulent Pharisee, and the Roman patrician, but the poor fisherman of
Galilee. When dispatched to exercise the functions of apostleship, they were
forbidden purse or scrip. The wealthiest of them was worth but thirty pieces of
silver, and those Judas gained by speculating upon his Savior. The close of
the bargain might prove that poverty was better than riches. His title to the
cash proved more rotten than a Georgia purchase. As he was hanged for his
pains, his money raised him for a time, but then "it was fifty cubits higher
than he dreamed of."

THE LAY PREACHER.

"And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder and said,
Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also."
FROM my attachment to simplicity in writing, I read Stern more attentively
than Stackhouse, and prefer a story in Genesis to a volume of Gibbon. -- It
appears to me that, notwithstanding the sarcasms of Voltaire, and other French
infidels, that mode of writing, which finds a ready way to the heart, was never
more successfully achieved, than by the Orientals. The other evening, as I was
turning over agreeably to my usual practice, the pages of scripture, I dwelt
with undescribable pleasure upon cer^ain passages in the life of the patriarch
Abraham. I had passed the afternoon, in what is called modish company, and yet
could not avoid remarking that the extreme selfishness of men and women of the
world, led them, even at a moment, when they assembled for ostentatious
civility, to behave discourteously. If such rudeness, I murmured to myself, be
in a refined age, let me view the behavior of those of old time, before
dancing masters were discovered, and when the message cards were not sent by
one Patriarch's lady to another. I found as I expected, that even herdsmen and
shepherds had as much genuine politeness as Lord Chesterfield, and that a
country maiden, the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milcah, could behave with
as much propriety, as though she had been educated in a boarding school. The
story of this pastoral girl's conduct I wish to tell at large, and with that
the delicacy of fashionable readers would allow me, on this occasion, so much
pedantry as to quote the original. But, as a whole chapter in Genesis might
appear too long, and disproportionate for a short sermon, I will attempt to
narrate in my own words.

Abraham a most affectionate parent, perceiving that his life declined, and
zealous with the anxiety of old age, for an establishment for Isaac, entreats a
confidential steward of the household, that he would not suffer the
inexperienced heart of his son to be captivated by the Canaanitish beauties. At
the earnest request of the patriarch, the servant binds himself to solicit for
Isaac a wife of his own rank, religion, and country. After sanctioning this
promise by one of the most tremendeous oaths among the Jewish usages, he
harnesses his camels, and departs for Mesopotamia. On his arrival at the
suburbs of Nahor, a city of that country, fatigued with a tedious journey, and
tender of his drudging camels, he makes them kneel by a well of water, to take
their necessary refreshment. In this weary moment, Rebekah appears; and the
first accents that fall from the parched tongue of the traveller, were to
solicit a little water from the pitcher, which she carried, " And she made
haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder and said, Drink, and I will
give thy camels drink also."

Let us now gaze earnestly at these simple, yet beautiful features.

The female whose courtesy is thus recorded, was ^ women of some distinction in
those pastoral times. Her father was of a sto^k abundantly respectable, for he
was allied to Abraham, and her brother was the opulent Laban, whose cattle
strayed on a thousand hills. Engaged in domestic duty, she meets a stranger, in
the garb, probably of a hireling, as he is called, in the text "servant," be
grimmed with dust, and having no claim to her favor. She is asked for water,
which she cheerfully gives, and the careless reader will not be aware of the
extent of the obligation, if he had not surveyed a map of Palestine, and
adverted to the sandiness and thirst of the soil. In that arid region, a brook
was a more joyous sight to a panting shepherd, than a bumper would be now to
the votary of wine. The invaluable well spring eagerly sought, and abstinately
contended for, by different tribes, was, from the nature of the earth, at such
a distance below the surface, that to obtain water was a work both of toil and
time. But, forgetting her home, forgetting herself, and "disdaining little
delicacies," she thinks only of the sufferings of the wayfaring stranger, and
with that " kind charity" which the Apostle emphasizes, with that genuine,
disinterested civility, beyond the court of Versailles, the tedious descent of
the well she repeatedly tries, and the cooling pitcher imparts, not only to the
man, but even to his unpetitioning beasts. "Drink," says the generous girl,
and, trust me that I can feel likewise for your burdened companions, "for I
will give thy camels drink also." This was benevolence such as is not generally
found. It was eminently disinterested, prompt and diffusive. It was
disinterested; for the tongue which she cooled was not that of a youthful
gallant, trolling the oily phrases of flattery. He who drained the pitcher,
which the assiduity of Rebekah filled, was an old man, a servant and a
stranger. It was prompt; for she "hasted," and she "ran to do do good; and drew
water for "all the camels," though the troop consisted of ten. It was
diffusive; for they were minutely regarded no less than their proprietor.

I warmly wish that the manners of many, who deem themselves polished, were at
the present day, as excellent as those of this primitive well bred woman.
Frequenting no assemblies but those of the next green, or meadow, receiving no
lessons of good breeding but those which her own warm heart dictated, we find
her deportment graceful, though she never paid a dancing master, we find her a
maid of honor, though she never saw a court! True politeness, unlike that of
men of the mode, consists in actually rendering little services to our
neighbor, rather than in the ostentatious promise of great ones. Indifferent to
its own ease, it thinks much of another's, discerns the latent wish, and
supercedes the necessity of asking favors, by seasonably bestowing them.

THE LAY PREACHER.

"Remove sorrow far from thee: For sorrow has killed many, and there is no
profit therein."
DRY up your eyes, then, ye mourners, for grief will not restore the friends
you have lost, nor abate the edge of misfortune, but as oil and the whetstone
to the razor, it will sharpen that which is already too acute, and the bleeding
heart will show a still deeper wound. Why will you strive to add one drop to
this "vale of tears," which, trust me, is already too full, why court the
acquaintance of grief, that sorry companion, who* sobbing and silent as he
journeys with you through the wilderness of this world, multiplies every brake,
and adds ten fold horror to the gloom. You have various and real ills to
encounter in your sore travail; the climate is vaporous, and you must be sick,
men are treacherous, and you will be deceived* poverty will sometimes start up
"like an armed man" before you, and your careful days be like those of an
hireling. But be of good cheer, and repeat not in the day of adversity with
erring Solomon, that laughter is mad, nor impertinently inquire of mirth what
does she, but believe with my predecessor Stern, that comfortable assertion,
worth a million of cold homilies, that every time we smile, and still more
every time we laugh, it adds something to the fragment of life.

No profit therein: No verily; the man of sorrow, who with sullen Ahab refuses
to eat bread, and changes his time for tears, is engaged in one of the most
barren and least lucrative employments, you can conceive. Sighs I have always
considered as the very canker of the heart, and sobs the grand epitomizers of
existence. Child of melancholy! If sorrow has killed many and there is no
profit therein, banish it from thy shades, for why, in the pathetic language of
Ecclesiastes, should thou die before thy time?

But who are those fair forms, the one with folded arms, and the other with
bounding steps ministering. O kindly handmaids at the bed side of a
philosopher. I see his pallid cheek already flush, I hear his voice utter a
bolder tone, wrinkles are no more seen on his brow, and not a solitary tear
traces a lonely way down his cheek, for Patience and Mirth are before him. At
their salutary approach, the troop of cares, the family of pain fly
disconsolate, and free the vacant heart, from their torturing sway. Gentle and
benignant spirits, meekest patience, and chirping mirth, whether my cottage is
unroofed by the storm, or my couch thorned by disease, whether friends grow
lukewarm, or lovers be put far away let your gay forms appear and the load of
life will no more be irksome. For well I know your pleasing arts. I well
remember your numerous topics of consolation, your music, your song, your
carlessness, Mirth, and Patience, your philosophy and resignation. Sorrow, as
the wise son of Sirach, tells us, may kill many, but ye can make alive: Come
then to the unfortunate, and let the adverse hour be your favorite hour of
visitation.

THE LAY PREACHER.

"Watchmen, what of the night?"
TO this query of Isaiah the watchmen makes I think but a simple reply; and
tells the prophet what, if he had the least smattering of astronomy, he must
have well known before, "That the morning comes, and also the night." Any old
Almanac could have said as much. I think that night, however sooty and
illfavoured it may be pronounced by those who were born under a day star,
merits a more particular description. I feel particularly disposed to arrange
some ideas in favor of this sable season. -- I know that the majority are
literally blind to its merits, they must be prominent indeed to be discerned
by the closed eyes of the snores, who think that night was made for nothing but
sleep. But the student and the sage are willing to believe that it was formed
for higher purposes; and that it not only recruits exhausted spirits but
sometimes in^orms inquisitive, and amend wicked ones.

It is a moral duty to succor the neglected and ^esolate. It is not duty
perhaps, so much as inclina^ion, which urges the Lay Preacher to sermonize,
while others slumber. To read numerous volumes in the morning, and to observe
various characters at noon will leave but little time, except the night to
digest the one, or speculate upon the other. -- The night therefore, is often
dedicated to composition, and while the light of the pale plannets discovers,
at his desk the Preacher, more wan than they, he may be heard repeating
emphatically with Dr. Young, "Darkness has much Divinity for me." He is then
alone, he is then at peace. No companions near, but the silent volumnes on his
shelf, no noise abroad, but the click of the village clock, or the bark of the
village dog. The Deacon has the^ smoked his sixth, and last pipe, and asks not
a question more, concerning JOSEPHUS, or the Church-Stillness then aids study,
and the Sermon proceeds. Such being the obligations to night, it would be
ungrateful not to acknowledge them. As my watchful eyes can discern its dim
beauties, my warm heart shall feel and my prompt pen shall describe the use^
and the pleasures of the nocturnal hour.

Watchmen, what of the night? I can with propriety, imagine this question
addressed to myself, I am a professed Lucubrator, and who so well qualified to
deliniate the sable hours, as "A meagre, muse rid mope, adust and thin."
However injuriously night is treated by the (...) moderns, the vigilence of the
ancients could n^ overlook its benefits and joys. In as early a recor^ as the
book of Genesis, I find that Isaac, thoug^ he devoted his assiduous days to
action, reserve^ speculation till night. "He went out to meditat^ in the field
at the eventide." He chose that sad that solemn hour, to reflect upon the
virtues of ^ beloved and departed mother. The tumult an^ glare of the day
suited not with the sorrow of (...) soul. He had lost his most amiable, most
genuin^ friend, and his unostentatious grief was eager for privacy and shade.
Sincere sorrow rarely suffers its tears to be seen. It was natural for Isaac to
select a season to weep in, which would resemble the color of his fate. The
darkness, the solemnity, the stillness of eve were favorable to his melancholy
purpose. He forsook therefore the busting tents of his father, the pleasant
"south country" and "well of Lahairoi," he went out and pensively meditated on
the eventide.

The Grecian and Roman Philosophers firmly believed that "the dead of midnight
is the noon of thought." One of them is beautifully described by the Poet, as
soliciting knowledge from the skies, in private and nightly audience, and that
neither his theme nor his importunity were forsaken till the sun appeared and
dimmed his "nobler intellectual beam." We undoubtedly owe to the studious
nights of the ancients most of their elaborate and immortal productions. Among
them it was necessary that every man of letters should trim the midnight lamp.
The day might be given to the Forum or the Circus, but the night was the season
for the statesmen to project his schemes, and for the Poet to pour his verse.
Night has likewise with great reason been considered in every age as the
ostronomer's day. Young observes with energy, that "an (...) ^^vout astronomer
is mad." The privilege of contemplating these brilliant and numerous myriads
(...) planets which benifit or bedeck our skies is pecullar to night, and it is
ou^ duty, both as lovers of moral and natural ^^auty, to bless that season,
when we a^ indulged with such a gorgeous display of glittering and useful
light. It must be confessed that the seclusion, calmness, and tranquillity of
midnight is most friendly, to serious and even airy contemplations. Milton, in
one of his poems, says fervently, Let my lamp, at midnight hour
Be seen in some high lonely tower
-- To unfold
What worlds or what vast regions hold,
The immortal mind that has forsook
Her mansion in this fleshly nook.


But the night is not only propitious to speculative, but likewise to gay and
social men. Even the rigid Dr. Johnson was so convinced that late hours were
auxiliary to the feast of reason and the flow of soul, that he used to declare
"no man, but a scoundrel went to bed before midnight." This expression was
perhaps too strong, and he would not have used it, had he lived in a farm
house. But his love of the conversation of men of letters and his experience
that fancy is generally most wakeful, when dullness sleeps, tempted him to
employ a phrase which must startle every labourer, who, by mere lassitude of
limb is compelled early to retire.

But night is friendly to playful no less than to metaphysical, and abstract
thought, not only the author and statesman watch, but likewise the sons of
sociability and glee. Those, who eat "the bread of carefulness," go soon to
bed, to digest their meal, and leave the darkened hours to be enjoyed by men of
genius, or wasted by men of pleasure. St. Paul avers that they that be drunken
are drunken in the night, and I know that its broad mantle is frequently
employed to cover excess from the world. Still, the arrival of night is greeted
by many, who wish neither to sleep nor drink it away. Conversation often holds
a levee at midnight, and wit and sentiment and song like the Fairies, assemble
and sport before the cock crow. I think it treason to this sable power, who
holds divided empire with day constantly to shut our eyes at her approach. --
To long sleep, I am decidedly a foe. As it is expressed by a quaint writer, we
shall all have enough of that in the grave. Those who cannot break the silence
of night by vocal throat or eloquent tongue may be permitted to disturb it by a
snore. But he, among my readers, who possesses the power of fancy and strong
thought, should be vigilant as a watchman. Let him sleep abundantly for health,
but sparingly for sloth. It is better sometimes to consult a page of philosophy
than the pillow.

THE LAY PREACHER.

"Do thou well to be angry for the gourd?"
OR to fret, at any of the petty accidents of life? Thou discontented mortal,
undoubted descendant from Jonah, and his peevish tribe, why do thou suffer a
cloud to gather on they brow, because there is a little one, no bigger than a
man's hand, rising in the sky? Be serene thyself, and it will import little
whether it remains or blows.

Of all vile habits, that of fretfulness is the least tolerable. Many offensive
things, which vulgar people do, are sometimes laid aside, and their neighbors
are occasionally freed from annoy. But fret^^^^ness is a kind of perpetual
motion, excited no less by a creaking door, than a fit of the gout. It is a
voracious monster, and feeds upon minute as well (...) vast vexation. Let us
strive, therefore to pluck off this blister from the heart, and, even in the
hottest, and the most oppressive days of life, care not whether the shelter of
a "gourd" be extended over us, or taken away. I have always grieved over since
the schoolmistress bid me read, with a loud voice, Jonah's journey to Ninevah,
that the prophet should chafe, like the rouzed brute of the forest, because a
gourd, a short lived plant of the night had wilted. It appears to me, even if
the su^ beat fiercely upon his head, and the east wind blew sharply upon his
breast, that the prophet might have found so much alleviation of his
misfortunes in beholding "sixteen thousand" people, and "a^ so much cattle"
spared from destruction that a dea^ "gourd" would not give him the spleen. I
cannon help feeling a degree of indifference, and perhaps aversion toward this
fretting messenger to the Ninevites. I have a profound respect for all, an^ a
warm affection for most of the other prophets* Many were courtly, as well as
ingenious writers* I admire the sublimity of Isaiah, the sensibility o^
Jeremiah, and the generous zeal of Ezekiel. Eve^ the lowly Amos, the herdman of
Tekoah, thoug^ the narrowness of his education has induced a degree of rudeness
in his writings, still I believe to be as honest a prophet, as ever uttered a
prediction. But as for Jonah, setting aside his disobedience* selfishness, and
vanity, he was so sulky, and so morose a mortal that I could never like his
character, or his principles. I am not so uncharitable, as to wish that he had
actually been digested by the whal^ which swallowed him, but he ought to have
kept n^ better company; for not the "great Leviathan" (...) the deep ever
floundered more impatiently in (...) element, than discontented Jonah, in the
voyage (...) life.

On a review of what I have thus far written, (...) believe that there is no
occasion to look so far ba^ as the history of an ancient prophet for an
instance (...) anger employed upon trifles. If I should lift the window sash of
my study, I should discern, who^^ companies fretting and fuming for the "gourd."

Walking in a studious mood, by the side of ^ neighbor's garden fence, I
observed him stamping upon the ground with such disorder, that I concluded he
was in convulsions, or practicing a dance of St. Vitus. Humanity urged me
toward him and I meditated medical rather than moral aid. But to my eager
question of "what aileth thee," he replied to my astonishmant, that the bugs
had blighted all his Cucumbers, and was not that enough to make a wise man mad?
I endeavored to compose his perturbated spirits, and quoted to him Seneca upon
tranquillity of mind, and part of one of Raffi's homillies, but all in vain. He
appeared to be possessed; and it required an abler exorcist than myself to
drive his Devil away. I retired and, thinking of Jonah and his "gourd" could
not help allegorizing a little in Bunyan's manner. My neighbor Irritable's
forefathers, quoth I, probably cultivated cucumbers without the wall of
Ninevah; they fretted when the fruit was cut off, and my worthy friend here, I
find has not yet been cured of the family taint!

THE LAY PREACHER.

"And he said unto me -- what see thou? -- And I said A BASKET OF SUMMER
FRUIT."
IN every annual revolution there are certain periods, at which men indulge
ideas of association, whence they may derive, either the pleasant or the
profitable. Thus, the gradual approach of cheerful spring, the youth of the
year, naturally induces us to speculate upon the youth of human life: The naked
boughs and dropping leaf of the autumnal tree remind us of mortal decay. On the
first of January we ponder on the past, and project for the future: By the
command of custom, we note the anniversary of our birth, and, by the command of
the law, times to weep and to laugh we observe with religious solemnities.

These periodical habits are of peculiar utility, and deserve to be studiously
cherished. They beget serious reflection and communion with one's self. They
suggest at least, plans of reformation. "In castle building," as a sagacious
philosopher has remarked, "no man is a villian." Though our intended good deeds
terminate, as they began, in reverse* still it is better for our thoughts
merely to hover round the temple of virtue than to be utterly stagnant. Among
the forcible arguments ingeniously urged, by the pious advocate for the
observance of the sacred day, that is not the least impressive, which proves
that by going melancholy to church we shall at length, go religiously there.

For these and other reasons, a s^^mon on the season may be useful. Whatever
recalls man from low cares to extended views, whatever rouzes insensibility and
exites to gratitude, and a love of nature is surely meritorious. The Lay
Preacher, since the commencement of his weekly labors, has seen, and has
attempted to moralize the natural operations of January, of May, and of June.
The beginnings and middle of a favored year have passed in review before him;
but the rich maturity remains to be considered and extolled. Though the curious
and dissipated of our cities boast of their expensive exhibitions; though, with
rapture, they gather round the tortured quadrupedes of Lailson and of Rickets,
still there are " sights," easily and cheaply to be seen; which are
incomparably more amusing and gorgeous. To the buteous SHOW of the season, men
and brethren, you are invited, not by the advertisements of an adventurer, not
by a jugglers devices, but by the voice of Nature. Her tickets are inscribed on
the green leaf, and the corn blade, and her spacious amphitheatre is open to
you without a see. All may now, discern in reality, what the prophet saw, in
the obscurity of a vision " A basket of s^mmer fruit," ripe and plenteous,
testifying the goodness of the year, and crowning it with gladness.

Spring and Summer are periods of expectation. The ^armer beholds the corn fall
into the bosom of the ground, and the young shoots rise, but all is
uncertainty, till the produce is gathered into the garner. Many an anxious look
is cast up to the varying sky, lest the former and latter rain should too
scantily, or too copiously descend, lest the sun should too fiercely glow, or
mildewing vapor float, on vegetation. But, when the grass is dried and
secured, when the mellow fruit of the orchards is melting into his casks, and
the harvest moon lights his reaper to the last wheat sheaf, then is solicitude
appeased, and he, exultingly, exclaims "I have finished."

The present, is the very period, in which harvest that "consummation" so
"devoutly to be wished" by every husbandman, takes place. Of those divines, who
use themselves to preach occasional sermons, I percieve it is the practice, to
paint, and to praise the benefits of that particular year, in which eulogium is
composed. But although of the numerous good days which happy Americans have
reckoned, those, which compose the current year, have shone among the fairest,
yet, it is not the design of this discourse to speak only of the fruit basket
of the present season. Our baskets are always full, ours are those regular
alterations of heat and moisture, which beget plenty to the husbandman, for we
have "a south land," and "springs of water," we have the "upper and the nether
springs."

At all times, America seems a privileged quarter of the globe. "Fruit" ever
abounding, subject to no tithe, and eaten in tranquillity marks our happy
distinction. These topics being slightly considered, the patience of the
reader shall be relieved by the close of the sermon.

Whatever historical volumes, or system of geography we peruse, we find that
most countries are exposed either to baleful vicissitudes of climate, or the
capricious violence of tempest, drought, or inundation. In the hallowed volume,
almost every verse allusive to the natural history of Palestine, in old time,
contains some memorial of the irregularity of its seasons. Agreeably to modern
travelers, the inhabitants of many parts of the East, still smart under the
scourge of the elements. In Syria, rain is not witnessed, for months, and who
has not heard of the scorching sands of Arabia? The Nile, the grand fertilizer
of Egypt, like an over fond parent, sometimes smothers the object which it
cherishes. -- Cairo the mart of nations, sometimes bemoans in dust, her scanty
harvests. "And Mecca, saddens at their long delay." If we survey regions of
happier temperature, still the journals of their weather mark extreme
variaableness, and, in many years, their "baskets of summer fruit" are not high
piled. We can scarcely look at a paragraph of foreign news in our Gazetts,
without remarking a melancholy narrative of the scarcity of corn, and of a
famished populace, clamoring for bread. But why* my countrymen do you suffer
these calamities? What year is of such Egyptian sterility, that ye can be asked
the question, proposed to the prophet, in my text, and not answer, like him?
The rains do not descend, nor the floods come in such torrents, as to drown our
plains. The green corn is not burned by vertical sun beams, nor overthrown by a
mighty wind. The fields regularly yield meat; and, in our Samaria, there is no
gate, where the portress is Famine.

When the harvests of America are ripe for the sickle, the product is
completely ours without deduction. According to Brydone, a lazy lording eats
what the slavish Secillian peasant has sown. But here, no Melchizidek claims a
tithe. The moderate taxes of a Federal government wring not a penny from the
farmer. Lolling luxury is excised for its Coach, but the Plough and the Cart go
^ree.

To close the enumeration of our blessings, we pluck our full ears, and we eat
them, in safety. In France, the "dogs of war," have trampled the vines of
Champagne, and weeping Flanders has exchanged the tilled for the "tented
field." But thanks to our supreme Guardian -- thanks to Washington, and the
"peace makers," we behold the "baskets," the orchards, the vales of "summer
fruit" and not a single pike, not a distant gleam of horrid steel mars the
view. Fortunate America, like Israel of old, you "dwell in safety, alone," your
"heavens drop down dew," and your "fountain is upon a land of corn."

THE LAY PREACHER.

"I hear that there be divisions among you, and I partly believe it."
IN the social state, obviously framed for the promotion of the common good, a
credulous man might suppose that there would be no divisions -- But this
mistake, observation if she had only half an eye, and peeped with that through
a gl^ss darkly, would correct. Where only two or three are gathered together,
some unsocial, malevolent passion will start up, and forbid their unanimity.
But in great and political bodies, among old and rival nations, opinions being
as numerous as the individuals who harbor them, there the clash of faction an^
the clash of swords will be so often heard that there will be no room left to
doubt "divisions."

I believe that I have, somewhere, hinted to my readers that a newspaper lies
occasionally on my ta^ble.. But I survey that weekly map of human life more
with the feelings of a moralist than of a politican, and shed tears, rather
than wine at the intelligence of a victory. If the public papers recorded the
happy marriage, and not the sudden death, if they painted the tranquillity of a
Federal, and no^ the turbulence of a French, government, every son o^
sensibility would peruse them with rapture. But, especially, at this jarring
period, when our ears ring with " the worlds debate," it is most painful to
turn over pages, which, crowded with recitals of battles* sieges, assassination
and slaughter are nothing more than the records of animosity. The old world i^
rent in pieces by "division." Nothing but "wars" and "fightings" can satisfy
the restlessness of France, the pride of England and the stately ambition of
Germany. In France there is jangling in the cabinet, as well as the shock of
hostile lances in the field. How many wise, how many virtuou^ men have felt the
edge of a revolutionary axe, b^^cause they differed in sentiment from a
revolution^ary tribunal. How many Brittons have found untimely deaths in the
dykes of Flanders, who might have been gathered like a shock of corn in his
season had not "divisions" among the nations urged the^ far from peace and the
plough. However men man talk of universal benevolence and the amiableness of
the charities of life, yet we hear every day, of division among them, and we
are forced fully to believe it. In our own country, though the weapons of war
are sheathed, yet "divisions," frequent and pernicious like the tares and
thorns in the parables, arise, and mar the peace of the community. -- Among the
borders of Pennsylvania, "division" touched with the brand the head of the
wisky still and the fiery spirits of insurgency blazed against a government,
the first and fairest on the earth. Division has been the President of many a
"club" and "self-created society:" a scowling monster, more ugly than the
"green dragon," whose den we was wont to haunt. Division has looked askance at
the treaty, and has even with audacious front adventured to assail Washington,
but he steadfastly smiled and she vanished away.

Men disagree and divide in minute no less than in momentuous questions. My
parishoners inform me of various divisions and I partly believe them. -- Thus I
hear that two young girls of equal pretensions to wit and beauty, cannot
possibly live in friendship together, for, like the Caesar and Pompey of
Lucian, one cannot bear a rival, and the other is impatient of a superior. I
hear that two neighboring shopkeepers will not even look at each other, nor go
to the same tavern, nor walk the same side of a street; all in consequence of
an unlucky division. The counties will contend for years, which shall enjoy the
privilege of a shire, and where the Courthouse shall stand, and thus cut out
work for lawyers even before a place is provided for them to wrangle in.
Neighbors will squabble about an old tree and an old horse, and expend 100
dollars in court fees, to determine which shall have the mighty privilege of
putting out the fire by piling on the wood of the one, and of having a neck
broke by riding the other. But what is a more preposterous division than any
yet enumerated, is what is called an eclesiastical dispute. To such an absurd
height has this species of contention been carried, that in despite o^ the
opinion of the saint, that a believing wise may convert an infidel husband,
church doors have been shut against a converted female for pairing with (...)
unconverted mate. Last of all, to end this disgust^ing catalogue of
"divisions," christians professing to worship in concert have pulled each other
by the ^eard, in asserting who should be their minister, an^ have warred
furiously to know, where the templ^ of peace should be erected.

THE LAY PREACHER.

OBIDAH and the HERMIT: An Eastern Tale.
Know this great truth (enough for man to know,)
Virtue alone is Happiness below.
POPE.
EARLY in the morning, Obidah, the son of Abensina, left the caravansera, and
pursued hi^ journey through the plains of Indostan; being vig^orous with rest,
animated with hope, and incited by desire, he walked swiftly forward over the
valleys and saw the hills gradually rising before him. A^ he passed along, his
ears were delighted with the song of the bird of Paradise; he was fanned by the
last flutters of the sinking breeze, and sprinkled wit^ dew by groves of
spices; he sometimes contemplated the towering height of the cedar which
ador^^ed the hills, and som^times caught the gentle fr^^grance of the flowers
which enamelled the plains thu^ all his senses were gratified, and care entire^
banished from his heart.

In this manner he continued his journey till the sun approached his meridian,
and the increasing heat preyed upon his strength; he then looked carefully
round him, to discover some more agreeable and shady path. On his right hand he
saw a grove, that seemed to wave its shades, as a sign of invitation; he
entered it, and found the coolness and verdure irrestibly pleasant. He did not,
however, forget whither he was traveling, but found a narrow way bordered with
flowers, which appearing to have the same direction with the main road, he was
pleased that, by this happy experiment, he had found means to unite pleasure
with his business, and to gain the rewards of diligence, without suffering its
fatigues. He, therefore, for a time still continued to walk, without the least
remission of his ardor, except that he was sometimes tempted to stop by the
music of the birds, whom the heat had assembled in the shade; and sometimes
amused himself with plucking the flowers which grew on either side, or the
fruits that hung upon the branches. At last the green path began to decline
from its first direction, and to wind among hills and thickets, cooled with
fountains, and murmuring with the falls of water. Here Obidah paused for a
time, and began to consider whether it were safe for him to forsake any longer
the known and open road; but remembering that the heat was now in its greatest
violence, and that the plain was dusty and uneven, he resolved to pursue the
new path, which he supposed only to make a few meanders, in compliance with the
varieties of the ground, and to end at last in the common road.

Having thus calmed his solicitude, he renewed his pa^e, though he suspected he
was not gaining ground. The uneasiness of his mind inclined him to lay hold on
every new object, and gave way to every sensation that might sooth, or divert
him. -- He listened to every echo, he mounted every hill for a fresh prospect,
he turned aside to every cascade, and pleased himself with tracing the course
of a gentle river that rolled among the trees, and watered a large region with
innumerable circumvolutions. In these amusements the hours passed away
uncounted, his deviations had perplexed his memory and he knew not toward what
point to travel. -- He stood pensive and confused, afraid to go forward lest he
should go wrong, yet conscious that the time of loitering was now passed. While
he was thus tortured with uncertainty, the sky was overspread with clouds, the
day vanished from before him, and a sudden tempest gathered round his head. He
was now roused from his danger to a quick and painful remembrance of his folly;
he now saw how happiness is lost when ease is consulted, and lamented the
unmanly impatience that prompted him to seek shelter in the grove, and despised
the petty cur^osity that led him on from trifle to trifle; while he was thus
reflecting* the air grew blacker, and a clap of thunder broke his meditation.

He now resolved to do what remained yet in his power, to tread b^^k the ground
which he passed, and try to find some issue, where the wood might open into the
plain. ^e prostrated himself on the ground, and commended his life to the Lord
of nature. He rose with confidence and tranquillity, and pressed on with his
^^bre in in his hand, for the beasts of the desert were in motion, and on every
hand were heared the mingled howls of ^age and fear, and ravage, ^^d
expiration; all the horrors of darkness surrounded him; the winds ^oared in the
woods, and the torrents tumbled from the hills.

Thus* forlorn and distressed, he wa^^ered through the wild, without knowing
whither he was going, or whether he was every moment drawing nearer to safety
or destruction. At length not fear but labor began to overcome him; his breath
grew short, and his knees trembled, and he was on the point of lying down in
resignation to his fate, when he beheld, through the brambles, the glimmer of a
taper. He advanced toward the light, and finding it proceeded from the cottage
of a hermit, he called humbly at the door, and obtained admission. The old man
set before him such provisions as he had collected for himself, on which Obidah
fed with eagerness and gratitude.

When the repast was over, 'Tell me, said the hermit, by what chance you have
been brought hither; I have been now twenty years an inhabitant of the
wilderness, in which I never saw a man before. -- Obidah then related all the
occurrences of his journey, without any palliation.

'Son said the hermit, let the errors and follies, the dangers and escape of
this day, sink deep into thine heart; remember, my son, that human life is the
journey of a day. We rise in the morning of youth, full of vigor, and full of
expectation; we set forward with spirit and hope, with gaiety and diligence,
and travel on a while in the straight road of piety, toward the mansions of
rest. In a short time we remit our fervor, and endeavor to find some
mitigation of our duty, and some more easy means of obtaining the same end. we
then relax our vigor, and resolve no longer to be terrified at crimes at a
distance, but rely upon our own constancy, and venture to approach what we
resolve never to touch. We thus enter the bowers of ease, and repose in the
shades of security. Here the heart softens, and vigilence subsides; we are then
willing to enquire whether another advance cannot be made and whether we may
not at last turn our eyes upon the gardens of pleasure; we approach them with
scruple and hesitation, we enter them, but enter timorous and trembling, and
always hope to pass through them without losing the road of virtue, which we,
for a while, keep in our sight, and to which we propose to return. But
temptation succeeds temptation, and one compliance prepares us for another; we
in time lose the happiness of innocence, and solace our disquiet with sensual
gratifications. By degrees we let fall the remembrance of our original
intention, and quit the only adequate object of rational desire. We entangle
ourselves in business, immerge ourselves in luxury, and rove through the
labyrinths of inconstancy, till the darkness of old age begins to invade us,
and disease and anxiety obstruct our way. We then look back upon ourselves with
horror, with sorrow, with repentance; and wish, but too often vainly wish, that
we had not forsaken the ways of virtue. Happy are they, my son, who shall
learn, from thy example, not to despair, but shall remember, that though the
day is past, and their strength is wasted, there yet remains one effort to be
made; that reformation is never hopeless, nor sincere endeavors ever
unassisted but the wanderer may at last return after all his errors; and he who
implores strength and courage from above, shall find danger and difficulty give
way before him. Go now, my son, to thy repose; commit thyself to the care of
omnipotence, and when the morning calls again to toil, begin a new thy journey
and thy life.'

PITY.
When I hear one say to his neighbor in adversity, "I am sorry for your
misfortunes," it sounds very much, in my ear like, "bring me my slippers."

"Lord what a feeble pi^ce
Is this our mortal frame!
Our life, how poor a trifle it is
Which scarce deserves a name!"
PSALM XC. ONE moment's considering of poor feeble man, will remind him that

"Our moments fly apace,
Nor will our minutes stay;"
but I am apt to think that the greatest part of mankind* are very thoughtless,
with respect to one of their most material rules of life: -- and thereby
conduct their customs and manners, entirely contrary to what the Psalmist will
allow of. For my supposing as I do, a number of reasons follow; which to my
mind are fully sufficient to prove how thoughtless man is that

"His life's a shadow, light and vain,
Still hastening to the dust."
I frequently see men who have attained to the common age of man, and who to
appearance, must soon bid an eternal adieu to this vain world, exert
themselves, and devote all their time, in reaching to grasp the " Root of all
evil;" unmindful of the short time they have to remain, where " thiev^ ^^an
break through and steal." Their life like a s^adaw flies away; and all their
worldly earnings are left behind; perhaps to be hoarded up by some other "
self-tormentor." When I observe those kind of mortals, I always think that they
have forgot " that man must die."

Those classes of people who waste most of their lives in gaining popularity*
in hopes to be some day or other " great m^n," I certainly think, let slip from
their mind the idea " that man must die."

Great numbers of parents who now inhabit this changeable world; wrongly
preclude their children, from their birth to the age of 21 years, from all
kinds of the comforts of this life because they think they are too young, and
that when they attain to the age of manhood, a large space of time is before
them, for to be occupied with the pleasures which before, were justly due them.
These thoughtless people I am prone to think do not recollect " that man must
die."

When any person launches into the world and first begins in business, supplies
the numberless outlets of Wealth, and thinks that "there is time enough yet"
for to add to the capital stock; reason dictates me to say, that such
unthinking persons have forgot " that man must die."

When I read of six or seven years bloody war between two nations either to
establish or abolish Aristocracy, or to obtain some other worldly end; -- I
quickly guess that such nations do not think " that man must die."

Frequently we hear mankind planning out something or other for to take place,
several years hence, or that they will do so and so, next week, next year, and
some times twenty years, without even allowing room for this great proviso "
that man must die."

Lastly; -- When a young, wealthy couple needlessly delay entwining themseles
with Hymen's bands, who will deny but what they have forgot " that man must
die."

THE RAMBLER.

MASKS.
Artificial ones are worn by the Venetian ladies: Most of the American wear
masks; they are not, however, made of silk, or velvet, or pasteboard.

"Let us get up early."
SOLOMON could hardly have written three thousand proverbs and a madrigal to
his love, with such wisdom and wit, if he had not by the air and scenery of the
morning, corroborated his health and kindled his fancy. -- Whether active as a
king or indolent as a lover, he perceived that early hours were auxiliary both
to business and pleasure, and therefore judiciously advises to rise with the
lark.

In our climate, a midsummer morning's dream not SHAKESPEARE himself should be
permitted to tell. Blankets and pillows look so dull and warm, and green grass
and trees so cheerful and refreshing, it is wonderful the sluggard cannot even
with half shut eyes, discern such wide extremes, and prefer strolling in the
fields to tumbling in bed.

But in the course of my parochial visitations, my early tap at many a door is
often answered by a voice, exclaiming from behind a curtain; it is the voice of
the sluggard. The cock has crowed thrice and certain robbins have sung two
hymns and a ballad, before half my acquaintance have "girded their loins,"
buckled their shoes and combed their hair. Yet these creatures, not content
with the naps of the night, swathe themselves, like so many Egyptian mummies,
in a sheet, four hours after sun rise, and then have the impudence to rise and
talk about business, and the beauty of the day.

The princely poet, author of our excellent text, when exhorting to summer
enjoyments, points out to the night season, nor to the "inner pavilion" of the
palace, but informs us that his "bed is green," and his love displayed in the
open air.

The gallant Solomon could invite the blushing belle of Egypt to a morning's
stroll into the vineyards and give her his love, amidst the dews of dawn. Well
were thou called wise, thou gallant prince, if it were only for thy knowledge
of the female heart. Well did thou know that the buds, of beauty, like the
blossoms of Shinah, stealing fresh vigor from slumber, expand all their
sweetness to the morning ray. In our time the torpid admirer snores, amidst the
evening fog, the praises of his mistress, while the sprightly strains of his
serenade are obtruded by the thick mists of midnight.

In close parlours and the long winter's eve, we may pore over rent rolls and
engross marriage settlements. Let the city lover, in cork soalec laces,
goloshoes and flannel, court the delicate maiden, in the close cap and
comfortable bed gown. But he, that would woo the buxom Health, must "Brush with
hasty step the dews away," must not seek thee behind fire screens, or lolling
on a sofa, but must erect a lodge in the village; and before the day break, and
the shadows flee away, when the rose and the mandrake give a sweet smell,
listen for thy jocund song, mingling with the matin of the lark. In lieu of the
ticket for the foetid theater, or the card for the crowded ball room, the
American lover should bid good morning to his fair one's night cap, and salute
her with the early call of arise, my beloved, and come away, for the flowers
appear on the earth and the time of the singing of the birds is come. Yet
modern enamoratos in compliment to the indolent delicacy to the day, shoe their
bootees "with felt" and whisper "I charge you, O ye daughters, by the roes and
the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up nor awake my love, till she please.

But the morning air breathes not for lovers alone. If the philosopher will
arise and meditate at the morning ^ide, though he may not rival the fame, he
may attain the hale old age of FRANKLIN.

The divine by the light of the rising sun, may catch hints from creation,
which may serve to raise the affections of his flock to him who divided the
light from the darkness.

The merchant who opens his compting house windows to the earliest breath of
morn, may perhaps find a reward in the custom of the early purchaser.

The lawyer who has groped the preceding day in the intricacies of special
pleading, when he views the peaceful face of morning, and is enlightened by the
beamy sun, may perchance, from the serenity of the hour be led to con the
grateful eulogium of "blessed are the peace makers."

While the blythe husbandman, whom Providence has ordained to mingle pleasure
with profit, finds amidst his lowing herds, bleating sheep and flushing fields
an excitement to the task of the coming day.

THE LAY PREACHER.

COMMON SENSE, in Dishabille. Win Gold, and wear it.
MANY suppose the plain meaning of this text is, lay your earnings out in
clothes; others have thought it referred to gamblers. They would do well to
understand it literally. If you have been so unfortunate as to win money at the
card table, I should choose to see it sparkling in a pair of paste knee
buckles, or dingling in a gold watch chain, or pearl key, rather than trusted
again to the disposal of these fickle arbitrators, hearts, diamonds, clubs, and
spades. Whatever may be your opinion of law decisions, I verily believe thy
money would stand a better chance with lawyer, judge and jury. If gamblers win
gold let them wear it. I am inclined to think the sage authors of good old
English proverbs intended something more here than has been observed. Their
adages are brim full of meaning; so full of good wholesome every-day fare, that
the sickly stomachs of your Lord Chesterfields, and your humble servant
Smokeface, cannot digest them. -- But the Prompter, whose writings have a much
more conspicuous place in the library of Common Sense than my Lord
Chesterfield's, is not so squeamish; according to him, "they contain the
experience, the wisdom of nations and ages, compressed into the compass of a
nut-shell." This, I hope, will be a sufficient apology for my frequent use of
those old sayings, homespun expressions, and coarse ideas, so offensive to
those, who are "more refined than refinement, more sensible than sense:" or, as
I understand it, just as foolish as folly. Now I believe if we crack the shell
of this nut I have sent you wrapped up in this sheet of paper, you will find no
jest, that will burst your sides with laughter, but this wholesome viand, "Earn
industriously, and spend prudently," which will not only afford you nourishment
from the first of January to the last of December, but prevent thee from taking
a single pill from the doctor, and keep you warm in the coldest winter day. As
this is a large mouthful, and so full of nutriment, I advise thee, if thou have
a good store of last year's corn, meat and cider, to lay it by until next week;
in the mean time, if I have an hour's leisure, I will set down and pick it to
pieces, with my pen, as my manner is, and have it better prepared for thy use.

Earn industriously, and spend prudently.
THIS is the construction Common Sense is pleased to put upon my last week's
text. If the interpretation seems too rigid, and bears too hard upon your pride
and vanity, it is only to qualify you to enter the " little end of the horn,"
with a good grace, that you may find the cornucopia at the other. Clerical
method would divide my lecture into two heads; the division is natural; I will
follow it. -- First, Earn industriously. When the sun has begun his daily task,
expanded the flowers and set all the busy agents of vegitation to work, if
these do not afford you a sufficient stimulus to industry, walk out to your be
hive: these little laborers shall preach you a better sermon against indolence
than you will often hear from the pulpit. If, after observing their activity
and economy fifteen minutes, you do not profit by the lecture, let them sting
you for a drone. "Spend prudently." Never lay out more at the tavern, after sun
set, than you have earned, before sun rise; nor even that, if your last year's
taxes are not crossed out from the collector's book. Dress in homespun three
years, and if vanity or decency require, you may wear superfine the fourth.
What folly lays out in sheepskin gloves in ten years, if managed by prudence,
might fill a small purse -- Are not white dollars worth more to a farmer than
white hands? If your finances are small, be not ambitious of walking up three
pair of stairs. A second story has often proved an introduction to the gaol. A
humble cottage is a good beginning. Enter at the "little end of the horn," and
you may see, a^ the other, an elegant house, large enough for the thrifty
farmer. Check fancy; exercise your judgment, learn her character, find out her
disposition, prove her economy -- Whose? -- The woman's you intend for a wife.
Remember she is to be the steward of your house, the governess of your
children, and the very key to your strong box.

"Then went Sampson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot."
STRONG as he was, such a journey debilitated him. It was not the length of the
way from Timnah; it was not the rugged road, nor the irksomeness of a hard
trotting mule; it was not a stroke of the sun, nor a bleak air that shook the
nerves, and prostrated the life of Sampson; for not one of these circumstances
is ever glanced at by the historian; no, he saw, in one of the stews of Gaza, a
venal beauty and was undone. His wit evaporated, his wisdom turned babbler, he
lost his vigilance, his eyes and his life.

One licentious indulgence excites to another. The blandishments of his
courtezan allured to the cells of the whole sisterhood. He lays his head in the
lap of voluptuousness, and gives full scope to criminal desire. For it came to
pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was
Delilah.

Let us ponder a little the history of these unlucky amors. A sketch of the
wars and vicissitudes of passion is of more interest than the narrative of a
battle or siege, or the annals of an empire.

To display a striking, as well as useful contrast, it may be correct to view
Sampson, before he entered the gates of Gaza, and after his acquaintance with
two bad women.

His first was by no means a love adventure. It was in the style of chyvalry
without a damsel. Lurking in the vines of rude territory, a lion roared against
our juvenile hero, who as it is in a lively manner expressed, rent his
verocious adversary, as he would have rent a kid. A bold encounter, but not
half so dangerous as the smiles of the lady in the valley of Sorek. Mere brute
force, however was not the sole attribute of Sampson. For seven days he
tortures the ingenuity of thirty friends to resolve an enigma. He had the palm
of wit and the chaplets of victory; by his art he destroys the property, and by
his arm the life of his enemies. Not only the family of his father, Manoah, but
the whole circumjacent region must have rung with the praises of this youth of
promise; and even indifferent men, and abstract reasons would alertly from such
imposing premises draw the happiest conclusion.

But behold how, in one hour, so great riches come to naught. Thus far, what a
tissue of brilliant atchievments do we admire! The next scene is madly
mortifying. In the very summer of the ensuing page of his story what are the
humiliating particulars of his downfall? Sampson, the valiant, the witty and
the wise, is the dupe of female jugglers; is enticed; is overcome. In the arms
of a "twining Lais" of the Philistines, his supernatural strength melts away.
He awakes out of his lethargy of pleasure, and hopes to go out, as at other
times, rejoicing in his might. But the energy of the soul is no more. He, whom
once nothing could restrain, is bound. He grinds in the prison house, and
dwindled into a buffoon, is invested with his motley to amuse the rabble.

In the life of this extraordinary personage it is a matter of regretful
speculation that the field of honor should be changed for the valley of Sorek.
Hence an abundant crop of evil. It was not the Philistines, it was impure
passion that extinguished the discernment of Sampson. He never saw any object
clearly, after he went to Gaza, and saw an harlot. It is true, he saw Delilah,
but probably, through the obscurity of nocturnal hours. Of her arts, of her
perils, he surely ha^ but an imperfect vision. Hood winked by pleasure, ^e
could not see the seven locks of his head, scattered on the toilet of a woman.
The scissars of a gypsey proved sharper than the sword of enemies; and the
flowing hair of the hero, once covered with laurel, is now tortured into
meretricious ringlets, or periwigs some pimp in Delilah's antichamber.

Genius, said the amiable clergyman, with whom I studied divinity, is
invariably connected with strong passions. When men, exquisitely organized,
indulge pleasure, it is with that species of fervor, noted in the oriental
page -- it is with all their hearts, and with all their soul, and with all
their strength, and with all their mind. The insensible lounger, the self
engrossed coxcomb, may sleep upon the knees of Delilah, and wake again to puny
life. But of that opiate of joy, of that golden cup of abomination, which the
harlot presents, if you sip, man, of feeling, you will "drain the chalice to
the lowest and foulest dregs." Keep the high and safe ground; -- beware of
sliding down the slope of pleasure. It conducts you to some vale of Sorek,
beneath whose roses are the serpent and the dagger. Go up to Parnassus and see
the muse -- An excursion to Gaza to see a mortal beauty, is not half so
exhilerating.

THE LAY PREACHER.

"G^ve no man any thing."
BUT, says the man of trade, "credit is the life of business." The man of much
splendour also exclaims, "it is the support of elegance, taste and fashion; and
if we owe no man any thing, what will become of our elegant buildings; and to
whom would belong our wares and merchandise?" To him, who earned them by early
rising and the sweat of his brow.

"I don't like the text, sir, and it is nothing less than sedition to preach
it" -- whistles through his pipes one, who carries a barber's shop on his head,
and a pedlar's wares at his heels. Poor simpling, Beri Hesden pities thee, and
the spirit of charity bids him turn from thee and pass on to his labors. Every
man must get a living -- and he will get a living, says the preacher -- (Yorick
is dead, and Beri Hesden will use as many ifs as he pleases) -- if he works by
the rule of honesty, squares his labors by conscience, and settles his accounts
with heaven.

Parson Sly, who is something of a wit, in looking over this part of my
ratiocination, observed, "if they find it as hard to settle accounts with
heaven as we do with them on earth; it will be like the disenchantment of
Dulcinea." You must know, gentle reader, that a bunch of parish tax-bills lay
uncredited before him.

Owe no man any thing. In this short sentence is found more of the rule of
happiness, than in all the ranting of philosophic numskulls, methodist
spouters, and theatric madness. The deacon will have it that the congregation,
in following this maxim, would not appear half so respectable. The preacher
believes that they would look twice as heavenly; and that the upper galleries
would have occupants. Mr. Hodgkinson and Williamson would, without doubt, lose
by it, and the venerable bench of lawyers fare less sumptuously. Instead of
benefit n^ghts and pleas gratis, all would be for the benefit of self good
fellowship. There would be no skulking in blind allies to escape Monsieur
Catchpole, and avoid the payment of honest debts. Our great men would be
dressed in plain suits, eat food more agreeble to nature, and enjoy much
sweeter sleep. Beauty would walk forth arrayed in modest garb, and the lovely
blush of health would beam rapture to the gazing eye. Your Fanny Williams's
would shut up shop, and the simpering beau skulk behind the counter, or retire
to the breaking up of clods and ^apping old soles. The handicraft's-men and
daily labourer would carry on business with regularity, return to their houses
without the dread of finding their fire places prepared with due bills, or
their fine wrought furniture carried off by some sturdy bailiff. Imports would
greatly diminish, national debts be cancelled, and the olive tree shade the
empire of man. The splendor of unfeeling pride would be transformed, by the
wand of equity, to simplicity of manners* and humble demeanor. The plough
would glitter in the field, the wilderness blossom like a garden and the craggy
shores echo peace and happiness to the roaring ocean.

This -- owe no man any thing, put into practice (by way of anti^lima^) would
save many a fat landlady the trouble of being eternally at the tap; and her
smoking helpmate the disagreable task of chalking down and rubbing out.
Laughing John the ploughman, and funny D^^k the tinker, would cease traveling
from town to town but sing more merrily and clasp with heart^er glee their
jolly brothers. Even the toping sexton would not deny that the fashionable
practice of living upon tick had deprived many a poor sinner of sound sleep and
old friends. It has done more mischief to agriculture, commerce and the fine
arts, than all the yellow fevers and French quarrels can to America.

BERI HESDEN.

ON JUSTICE.
WE shall mention the most likely means of paying what we owe. The first means
is diligence in business. Most men depend on business for an honest livelihood;
and it is Paul's be not slothful in business. Make no unnecessary delay, nor
set about it with a slack or an unskilful hand. A due distribution of time and
labor, and a punctual adherence to it, are means of diligence. Yield not to
langor nor the importunity of companions, nor to a taste for any pleasure,
however innocent, so far as to break an engagement, or neglect the duties of
your profession. See thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand
before kings.

It is agreeable to kings and great men to have their commands obeyed, and
their business done without delay. They may prefer the c^^pany of one that is
slothful and social, but they empl^y a man diligent in business. The hand of
the diligent makes rich. There are few professions, where the reward is not an
exact proportion to diligence. Servants of the state and of the church have
usually a fixed salary.

If a sense of duty cannot influence them* they might consider that diligence
is a mean of adv^^^^ment, and extreme negligen^^ of degrad^tion: If negligence
be indulged, it w^^^ soon grow ex^.

They might consider further* that a habit of ^^ attention to the duties of
th^^r (...) will grad^^lly extend to their domestic as^^^, and all w^ll go
(...) disorder.

The second mean of paying what we owe i^ frugality, or the avoiding of expense
whenever it can possible be avoided. Many trades depend on small profits, and
the ordering a household is a detail of minute particulars He that despises
small things shall fall by little and little. They who have families, and a
growing expense, must study to regulate it so as to render to all, their due.
It is one of the duties of marriage to unite in this study. Of a virtuous woman
it is said, the heart of her husband does safely trust in her. While providing
for his family abroad, he trusts to her frugal management at home. She will do
him good and not evil all the days of her life. Her frugality is not suspended
by fits of sloth, nor frustrated by fits of extravagance. She looks well to
the ways of her household, takes the charge and oversight of every thing with a
skilful and watchful eye. She works with her hands, neither eating the bread
of idleness herself nor allowing her children and domestics to eat it. She
makes fine linen and she sells it; whatever is not needed for her family she
turns to account by merchandise.

She considers a field and buyeth it, she makes a purchase with du^
consideration and suffers not the loss nor discredit of a foolish bargain. She
planteth a vineyard with the fruit of her hand, with what she has gained by
industry.

APHORISMS.
LET not prosperity elate thine heart above measure -- neither depress thy soul
unto the grave, because fortune bears hard against thee.

Her smiles are not stable -- therefore, build not thy confidence upon them. --
Her frowns endure not forever, therefore, let hope teach thee patience.

To bear adversity with fortitude and dignity, is highly commendable -- but to
be temperate in prosperity, is the height of wisdom.

The MORALIST.
HEALTH is so necessary to all the duties, as well as pleasures of life, that
the crime of squandering it is equal to the folly; and he that for a short
gratification brings weakness and disease upon himself, and for the pleasure of
a few years passed in the tumults of diversion and clamors of meriment,
condemns the maturer and more experienced part of his life to the chamber and
the couch, may be justly reproached, not only as a spendthrift of his own
happiness, but as a robber of the public; as a wretch that has voluntarily
disqualified himself for the business of his station and refused that part
which Providence assigns him, in the general task of human nature. There are
very few conditions more to be pitied than that of an active and elevated mind,
laboring under the weight of a distempered body; the time of such a man is
always spent in forming schemes, which a change of wind hinders from executing,
his powers fume away in projects and in hope, and the day of action never
arrives. He lies down, delighted with the thoughts of tomorrow, pleases his
ambition with the fame he shall acquire, on his benevolence with the good he
shall bestow. -- But, in the night, the skies are overcast, the temper of the
air is changed, he wakes in langour, impatience and distraction, and has no
longer any wish, but for ease, nor any attention but for misery. It may be said
that disease generally begins that equality, which death completes; the
distinctions, which set one man so much above another are very little perceived
in the gloom of a sick chamber, where it will be vain to expect entertainment
from the gay, or instruction from the wise, where all human glory is
obliterated, the wit is clouded, the reasoner perplexed and the hero subdued;
when the highest and brightest of mortal beings finds nothing left him, but the
consciousness of innocence.

SUMMER's FAREWELL, AN ODE.
TO summer's sweets I bid farewell!
To thee, O! warbling Philomel,
To all the lovely winged tribe,
Which in thy regions now reside,
I bid adieu! adieu ye flowers,
Ye mild, ye placid, gentle showers:
Farewell ye skies of azure blue,
Ye thrills of birds, adieu! adieu.
To lovely meads, to cloud-capt-hills,
To murmuring brooks, to perling rills,
To gentle streams, to rural bowers,
To groves with their attractive powers,
I bid adieu! adieu ye vales,
Ye fragrant, spicy, zeph'rous gales;
Farewell ye banks of verdent hue,
Ye woods, ye fields, adieu! adieu.
To scaly tribes, to spangled scenes,
To cool retreats, to sylvan themes,
To lowing ki^e, to bleating flocks,
To mountains of romantic rocks,
I bid adieu, adieu ye plains
Ye woodland nymphs, ye rural swains;
Farewell ye drops of pearly dew,
Ye pleasing shades, adieu! adieu.
To spreading tents, to humble cots,
To pebbling brooks, to shelly grots,
To soothing strains, to dying lays,
To nature's mild and gentle rays,
I bid adieu! adieu ye lawns,
Ye tender kids, ye sportive fawns;
Farewell ye tints which gild the view
Ye orient beams, adieu! adieu.
OCTOBER.
The fading many-colour'd woods,
Shade deep'ning over shade, the country round
Imbrown; a crowded umbrage, dusk and dun,
Of every hue, from wan declining green
To sooty dark.

THE great business of nature, with respect to the vegetable creation, at this
season is dissemination. Plants having gone through the progressive stages of
springing, flowering and seeding, have at length brought to maturity the
rudiments of a future progeny, which are now to be committed to the fostering
bosom of the earth. This being done, the parent vegetable, if of the herbaceous
kind, either totally dies, or perishes as far as it rose above ground: if a
tree or shrub, it loses all its tender parts which the Spring and Summer had
put forth. Seeds are scattered by the hand of nature in various manners. The
winds which at this time arise, disperse far and wide many seeds which are
curiously furnished with feathers or wings for this purpose. Hence plants with
such seeds are, of all, the most universally to be met with; as dandelion,
groundsel, ragwort, thistles, etc. Other seeds by the means of hooks, lay hold
of passing animals, and are thus carried to distant places. The common burs are
examples of this contrivance. Many are contained in berries, which being eaten
by birds, the seeds are discharged again uninjured, and grow where they happen
to light. Thus carefully has nature provided for the distribution and
propagation of plants.

The gloom of the falling year is in some measure enlivened, during this month
especially, by the variety of colors, some lively and beautiful, put on by the
fading leaves of trees and shrubs.

Those virgin leaves, of purest vivid green,
Which charmed ere yet they trembled on the trees,
Now cheer the sober landscape in decay:
The lime first fading; and the golden birch
With bark of silver hue; the moss-grown oak,
Tenacious of its leaves of russet-brown;
The ensanguin'd dogwood; and a thousand tints
Which Flora dressed in all her pride of bloom,
Could scarcely equal, decorate the groves.
To these temporary colors are added the more durable ones of ripened berries,
a variety of which now enrich our hedges.

The common martin, whose nests, hung under the eaves of our houses, afford so
agreeable a spectacle of parental fondness and assiduity, usually disappears in
October.

ON EDUCATION.
THE improvement of the mind, has ever been observed by the judicious, to be
one of the noblest employments of an intelligent being: Not only because this
part constitutes the true dignity of man; but because by such pursuits, the
rational soul receives the most sublime and permanent ideas. The mind of man
may be compared to a garden overspread with noxious weeds; which, however
luxuriant the soil, will strike the eye with a piteous show of wretchedness,
unless we apply the sk^lful hand. To see the fatal effects arising for the want
of rightly improving the mental powers, cast your eye upon the human race, and
take a view of certain societies and individuals among men. -- Behold the tawny
savage! To what cause shall we impute his inhuman cruelties and want of
sensibility? Is it not to this? His not cultivating and calling into exercise
the softer feelings of the soul.

View the intemperate infamous sot, sunk below the common herd of the plain.
And why? Because his reason is sacrificed to his passion and his passion
controled by his appetite.

Why does the griping miser live an hermit, and pine away over his delicious
hoard? Because, blinded by ignorance and sordid passion, he views the means of
happiness as the object itself.

O education! by thy auspicious aid, the mind is freed from baneful weeds; it
is the influence of thy beams, which nourishes the young and tender plants, and
brings them to maturity. -- To thy shrine permit us to fly for redress of the
many ill constructed and effeminate ideas instamped upon our minds from our
early infancy. -- Permit us under thy protection, to improve the talents put
into our hands, in a manner which shall be most conducive to our own interest,
and beneficial to community. May the generous efforts of the patrons and
promoters of science in our land, still continue to be successful, still
encouraged to Train young minds in wisdom's learned loir,
And teach them virtue's summit to explore.


THE ARGANUM OF THE COLLEGE.
"MY father desired me, Sir, to ax you, said a physical disciple to a certain
eminent pharmacopolist, "that I might attend you to all your patients, as you
know, Sir, it is the last year of my time" -- "You shall, Bob, you shall,"
replied the master; "Come, get your hat." They entered the sick man's chamber,
and the usual circumstances occurred, such as feeling the pulse, etc. After
assuming an appearance of profound thought, the vender of galenicals told the
wife of the sick man, with much gravity that her husband was in extreme danger,
and that she had contributed to his malady by giving him oysters. The woman
imagined the apothecary dealt with the devil, at last owned the fact -- When
they had quitted the house, Bob enquired with much earnestness of his master,
how he could possibly know that the patient had eaten oysters -- "You foolish
boy," replied the other, "I saw some shells under the bed." The next time Bob
went alone, and returned to his master with a ghastly visage, and told him the
patient was dead by eating a horse -- "A horse, Bob," rejoined the Esculapian
chief, "how do you know that?" "Oh, easy enough, Sir -- I looked under the bed,
and saw a bridle and saddle!"

DESCRIPTION OF A MAN.
Written by a Woman.
A MAN, he is like to -- but stay;
To what he is unlike who can say?
And yet we can scarce do without him:
Love sets in his breast
Like a hen on her nest,
And his chickens are scratching about him.
When he is pleased I am squeezed,
When he is not I am teas'd,
And I never can tell where to find him;
He is like an old horse,
Worth but little, and cross,
And a woman is foolish to mind him.
If he chance but to smile,
And look pleasant a while,
And come chatting around like a chicken,
He is like a gay lark,
But a false hearted spark,
And his feathers are scarcely worth picking.
But when he is vexed,
Confused and perplexed,
Deceitful and vicious,
Base, false, and malicious,
He is like -- hard to speak it myself --
He is like to -- alas!
Like a snake in the grass,
He is then, only then, like himself.
His head's like a butcher's full shop,
Beef, mutton and pork, or what not;
His heart's like a pail of old swill,
Which the offal contributes to fill:
In short to a wife,
He is like a case knife,
To cut up my cake for my cheese;
Like a saint when he is civil,
But if not, like the devil;
But will turn to whatever he please:
To a hog, to a dog,
To a hare, to a bear,
Whose cruelty yields to no man;
Like a moose, like a goose,
Like a mule, like a fool,
Like a lane, like a ^ane,
Like a leaf, like -- in brief,
He Is like every thing else, but a woman.
Why a GARDENER is the most extraordinary Man in the World.
ADDRESSED TO A LADY.
BECAUSE no man has more business upon EARTH, and he always chooses good GROUNDS
for what he does. He commands his THYME, he is master of the MINT, and fingers
PENNYROYAL. He raises his CELERY every year, and it is a bad year indeed that
does not bring him a PLUMB. He meets with more BOUGHS than a minister of state.
He makes more BEDS than the French king, and has in them more PAINTED LADIES.
He makes RAKING his business more than his diversion, as many other gentlemen
do; but makes it an advantage to his health and fortune, which few others do.
His wife has enough of LAD'S LOVE, and HEART'S EASE, and she never wishes for
WEEDS. Distempers fatal to others never hurt him: he walks the better for the
GRAVEL, and thrives most in a CONSUMPTION. His greatest pride, and the world's
greatest envy is, that he can have YEW when he pleases.

ANECDOTE.
DR. BUTLER, BISHOP OF DURHAM.
THIS acute and pious Prelate was anxious to have it established by authority,
that those who passed near a Church should pull off their hats. "This," said
he, "will occasionally oblige persons to think of that great Being for whose
worship they were designed; which, I fear, many persons, from dissipation, from
negligence, and from ignorance, are but too apt never to let occupy their
thoughts."

DESCRIPTION OF A WOMAN.
Written by a Man.
A WOMAN is like to -- but stay --
What a woman is like who can say?
There Is no living with or without one --
Love bites like a fly,
Now an ear, now an eye --
Buz, buz, always buzzing about one.
When she is tender and kind,
She is like to my mind,
(And Fanny was so I remember.)
She Is like to -- Oh dear!
She Is as good very near
As a ripe melting peach in September.
If she laugh and she chat,
Play, joke and all that,
And with smiles and good humor she meets me.
She Is like a rich dish,
Of ven'son and fish,
That cries from the table 'come eat me.'
But she will plague you, and vex you,
Distract and perplex you,
False hearted and ranging,
Unsettled and changing,
What then do you think she is like?
Like a sand? Like a rock?
Like a wheel? like a clock?
Aye like a clock that is always at strike.
Her head's like the Island folks tell on,
Which nothing but monkies can dwell on,
Her heart's l^ke a lemon -- so nice,
She carves for each lover a slice:
In truth she is to me,
Like to wind like to sea,
Whose raging is like unto no man;
Like a mill,
Like a pill,
Like a flail,
Like a whale,
Like an ass,
Like a glass,
Whose image is constant to no man;
Like a flower,
Like a shower,
Like a fly,
Like a pie,
Like a pea,
Like a flea,
Like a thief,
Like -- in brief,
She Is like nothing on earth, but a Woman.
THE AUCTIONEER.
A FINE Woman for sale -- who buys -- will you make us a bid gentlemen -- one
of the best of women -- She will do you good and not ^vil, all the days of her
life -- She seeks we^l and flax and works willingly with her hands -- Bid
my dear friends, if you would make a fortune, bid or she is gone -- and you
shall (...) l^^k upon her like again. Solomon, that Auct^^^ (...) of old, who
bought and sold so many women, s^ys her pri^^ i^ far above r^^ies -- will you
not bid -- way do you despise her clothing because it is the work of her own
hands? -- alas, my friends, you do ^^t know the value of her -- I will cry her
(...) -- ^^nd her back -- I will keep her for mys^lf. -- (...), my friends, is
an article which will (...) -- (...) -- (...) -- make us a bid -- "One hundred
^o^lars," one hundred dollars, once -- "two hundr^d d^llars" -- "three hundred
dollars," three hundred dollars, once -- twice -- bid or she is go^e -- a fine
^^^cle -- (...) dr^p as an (...) her mouth is sweeter than oil -- "four hundred
dollars," four hundred, once -- "five hundred dollars," five hundred dollars,
once -- now is your time -- hear her talk -- I have decked my bed with covering
of tapestry, with carved works and with fine linen -- O what a glorious
creature -- a fine piece of goods this -- Come, she says, let us take our fill
of love until morning. "A thousand dollars" -- one thousand dollars once, twice
-- I shall cry no more -- gone -- you have got her, But her end is bitter as
wormwood -- her feet go down to death and her st^ps take hold on hell.

HOW TO MAKE EXCUSES.
IN forming excuses, according to the common practice, the following rules are
to be observed --

1. The same excuses as seldom repeated as possible --

2. That the excuses be as various and as plausible as possible.

3. By way of maxim -- every kind and degree o^ excuse deserves to be tried,
because there is much less inconvenience in postponing a debt than in paying
it, and the advantages of giving words and parting with money are all on the
side of the former.

To example these rules permit me to sta^e a case. Y. Z. owes me a bill, I sent
it in on the first day of July. Now mark the excuses in s^ccession.

July 1. "O! this is M -- bill, call ^gain any time next week."

9. "Not at home." When will he be at home. "Any time tomorrow."

10. "Has a gentleman with him." W^^^s (...) hour. "Oh, ah! this is the b^ll --
(...) -- h^^^ Look on it Monday." Monday. "Not at home; gone to the courts."

Thursday. "Leave the bill, and I Will look over it."

23. "Just gone out."

29. "I am busy now, tell your master I Will call on him when I go out."

August 16. "Bless me, I quite forgot to call; this bill is not discharged;
bring me a receipt any time tomorrow or next day."

17. "Gone to Locan, and wont be at home until next month."

September 12. "What, did I not pay that bill before I went out of town? Are
you going farther?" Yes. "Very well as you come back, I Will settle it." Calls
and he is gone to dinner at the Rock.

15. "Plague on this bill, I don't believe I have so much cash in the house,
can you give me change for a 100l. note?" No. "Then call in as you pass
tomorrow."

18. "Not at home."

25. "Appoint a day! d -- me, what doe^ your master mean. Tell him I Will call
upon him, and know what he means by such a message."

October 14. "What, no discount?" Sir it has been due this two years.

"There is your money then." These guineas are light. "Then you must call
again, I have no loose cash in the house."

And here ends the payment of L9 14 6 with three of the guineas light!

THE MEDDLER.
YOUTH is certainly the season for embracing the golden opportunity of
improvement, and tinue to behave to my children with this candor and imbibing
principles which will adorn, and g^^e an useful dignity to the man. The breast
free from every inquietude is never exposed to the in^^^^ion of those cares,
which are the troublesome ^^^^nts of manhood. It is left at leisure to do good,
and apply to those pursuits which w^^l render their followers more useful,
virtuou^ and conspicuous actors on the extensive theater of human life. It is
possessed of a sprightly vigor for the attai^ment of knowledge, assisted by
ambition and a generous, glowing emulation, which animate most strongly to the
pursuit. The imagination though not so strong and faithful, is yet more lively
and active than in manhood, and better fitted to make its wanton excursions
into the fields of science, and cull the choicest flowers they can boast.

As Youth is favored by Nature with great advantages in the acquisition of
knowledge, and great openings for improvement; it is at the same time exposed
to frailties and errors, from which a more advanced age is totally exempt.

Through a love of novelty it is prone to (...) every pursuit, and imitate not
^ore the virtues ^h^n the vices of it associates, and like a mirror receives
and reflects wh^tever object is before it, whether the image be inviting by its
beauty or forbidden by its deformity.

The frailty of youth often g^ves way to vicious (...) which extend their
influence to the remotest (...) life. Like cha^^^^rs engr^^ed on the ^^der
b^^k, which open ^^d appear more plain as the tree grows l^^ger, these ha^^^s
will have a m^re p^lpable and unbecoming appearance as nearer ^ppro^ches are
made to the (...) of l^fe. It must certainly b^ the (...) creature (...) spend
the (...) part of the drama, to see that every thing may be properly carried
on; for a youth of irregularity entails misery on old age, renders it a burden
to itself, and to others an object of pity and disgust.

How happy and blissful must be the last days of him whose youth has been spent
with propriety. -- The review of that part of life which will obtain a smile of
applause from the conscience, will enlive^ the prospect of those fields which
are yet to be passed in the journey and make them both pleasing and inviting.

Children like tender oziers take the bow,
And as they first are fashioned always grow.
How particularly attentive then should perents be to the junior years of their
children -- to instill into their minds the principles of virtue and morality
and to watch over their actions, and prevent them from too hastily forming
puerile connections.

Husbands at home and husbands abroad compared.
IT has often been observed (perhaps with two much justice) that some men who
are excellent compar^sons abroad, are more serious at home than their families
could at all times wish. Many instances o^ the kind ^t this moment present
themselves ^^^my recollection. Tommy Dobbi^s, who i^ the sprigh^he^^ yo^^g
fellow in the world when out among his compa^^^r^ is as ^u^e as a mac^^rel in
the presence of his wife and children -- with his associates, he is all whi^,
ple^santry and glee, and his tongue is everlastingly upon duty: with his will
in a domestic ^^te a-t^^^, they mutually yawn at each other, a^e as p^r^^n
onions of their words as if (...) had been ^mposed upon every syllable. Mrs.
Dubb^^^ (...) blessed wi^h (...) f^^ulty of speech like the rest of her sex,
and is ever ready to exercise her voluble talents; but as (...) deary seldom
condescends to answer any of her questions, and often reprimands her for her
imp^^^^ence, she finds it necessary to be as silent as her husband. -- During a
long winter evening when Tommy had been in one of his most talkative humors at
home, twenty words on his part, and seventy on the part of his wife, were as
many as ever escaped the lips of this taciturn pair in about three hours and
forty five minutes -- But though Tommy was so extremely silent under his own
roof, he was not sulky and morose, as many of this class of husbands are --
William Wisdom, for example possesses, in an eminent degree all the sprightly
talents of my friend Dobbins, and sets the company in a roar wherever he
appears, except at home -- But, like a cock upon his own dunghill, he there
assumes a magisterial air, and seldom deigns to speak without a frown or menace
-- If Mrs. Wisdom kindly enquires after his heal^h, he expresses his
astonishment at her impudence, for presuming to trouble him with her nonsense
-- She asked him one day how he liked a chicken, which he seemed to devour with
a keen appetite -- "I should l^ke it much better, answered the gloomy tyrant,
if you would but hold your tongue, and not let me have any of your sauce with
it" -- Such characters as these, and others which resemble them, are more
common than is imagined -- Many husbands seem to think they are submitting to a
loss of dignity, if they condescend to talk familiarly and tenderly to a wise,
and that it is necessary to assume authoritative airs, that due subordination
may be preserved -- these men certainly entertain too high an opinion of
themselves, or make an improper estimate of the consequence of the woman --
perhaps both these considerations may operate in puffing up the pomposity of
one of these lords of the creation -- it is not to wives only that these su^len
creatures display their heirs; their behavior to their children is perhaps as
brutal and as unjustifiable, and all without being able to assign a reason for
it -- On the contrary, they probably entertain the highest esteem and affection
for both mother and children, and would execrate any one who should dare to
speak disrespectfully of either -- at the same time, however, they seem afraid
of being suspected to entertain a partiality in their favor, by affecting a
moroseness and severity which disgrace them, when if their real sentiments and
feelings were perfectly known, they would appear as amiable at home as they do
in their convivial parties.

Without meaning any compliment to myself, give me leave to s^ate some accounts
of my own conduct, relative to domestic matters -- I have a wife whom I esteem
and love; and I have sons and daughters who share my tenderest affection,
because they deserve it. I have the pleasure to add, that I have all the reason
to imagine they are never happier than in my company -- My wife experiences
from me all the attention of the lover, all the respect which is due from the
sincerest friend -- I am on such familiar terms with my children, that they
treat me with the freedom of a brother, though they venerate me as the best of
fathers -- instead of looking on me with that dread and terror, which severity
and sullenness inspire, they make me their confident, and consult me upon all
occasions -- If I approve their little schemes and projects of amusement, I
declare my approbat^on in the strongest terms; If they do not perfectly
correspond with my ideas of rectitude* I admonish them not to prosecute such
pursuits; but this is done with so much gentleness and good nature, that they
seem perfectly convinced of the propriety of (...) conduct, and thank me for my
attention to them -- ^hile I confamiliarity, they will conceal nothing from me,
they have no secrets among themselves which they should dread to have
communicated to me; but the morose father is unacquainted with the plots and
contrivances of a progeny compelled to keep their distance; they fear his
disapprobation of the most innocent transactions, and therefore keep their
councils among themselves, in consequence of which their little foibles grow
imperceptibly into vices, from their having no confidence in a father who
nipped them in the bud.

MATERNAL ARTIFICE. A TRUE STORY.
TWO young gentlemen of fashion and fortune, students of law, some years ago
rented an elegant double set of chambers, and lived together in Gray's-Inn. The
apartments were on the ground floor, and the windows looked into and had an
easy communication with the charming garden belonging to that ancient seminary.
One Sunday morning, being at breakfast, with the window open, they observed a
very beautiful young woman in the garden, with a child in her arms equally
beautiful: she passed them several times, sedate and unobserving, but at length
her attractions becoming too irresistible, they spoke to her, and with much
earnestness invited her to partake of their breakfast. The beautiful nursery
maid, however, was inflexible; she resisted all entreaties, and in some time
retired. For the whole day nothing else was thought of but her, and a thousand
schemes devised to entrap her into the chambers.

The next morning, like a bright ray of returning Phoebus, she appeared in her
former station, and the hearts of the young heroes felt, with redoubled force,
the increasing energies of her charms; invitations were reiterated, but she
still remained inexorable, and, as on the preceding morning, left the garden at
a particular hour. One of the youths followed, and watched her, but he was
observed, and the game evaded his pursuit. In this manner did this
extraordinary phoenomenon appear, and torment for several days; until at length
it was settled that, upon her next visit, one of the youths should contrive to
secure the child, and give it in at the window to the other. This scheme was
accordingly exe^uted, on a supposition that the maid, or mother, would soon
follow: but alas! the device failed, for from that moment to this, neither maid
nor mother ever troubled them with inquiries, or has since been heard of!

In justice to the generosity of these young gentlemen, we must not omit, that,
having waited until evening with the greatest solicitude, they made the
laundress who had (...) the child, pr^cure a nurse for it and provide it with
necessary accommodation. It is now fourteen years of age, a boy of the most
promising part^, and edu^^ting, with a view of a liberal profes^ion, at one of
the first academies in the vicinity of the metropolis.

From the very laughable "Tales in Verse" by GEORGE COLMAN, jun. "written in an
elbow chair," and emblem^tical of their ^ase, ^llusively f^^led "My night Gown
and Slippers," we borrow the following. LODGINGS for SINGLE GENTLEMEN; A TALE.
WHO has ever been in London, that overgrown place,
Has seen " Lodgings to Let" stare him full in the face;
Some are good, and let dearly; while some, it is well known,
Are so dear, and so bad, they are best let alone.
Derry down.
Will Waddle, whose temper was studious, and lonely,
Hired lodgings that took single Gentlemen only;
But Will was so fat he apppeared like a ton! --
Or like two single Gentlemen rolled into one.
He entered his rooms; and to bed he retreated,
But, all the night long, be felt fever'd and heated;
And though heavy to weigh, as a score of fat sheep,
He was not, by any means, heavy to sleep.
Next night 'twas the same; -- and the next; -- and the next;
He perspired like an ox; he was nervous and vexed;
Week passed after week; till by weekly succession,
His weakly condition was past all expression.
In six months, his acquaintance began much to doubt him;
For his skin, "like a lady's loose gown, hung about him;
He sent for a Doctor and cried like a ninny,
"I have lost many pounds -- make me well -- there is a guinea."
The Doctor looked wise: -- "a slow fever," he said:
Prescribed sudori^icks, -- and going to bed.
"Sudori^icks in bed," exclaimed Will "are humbugs;"
"I Have enough of them there, without paying for drugs."
Will kicked out the Doctor: -- but when ill indeed,
Even dismissing the Doctor don't always succeed;
So, calling his host -- he said -- "S^r do you know,
"I Am the ^at Single Gentleman, six months ago"
"Look'e, landlord, I think" argued Will, with a grin,
"That with honest intentions you first took me in;
"But from the first night -- and to say it I Am bold --
"I have been so damned hot, that I Am sure I caught cold."
Quoth the landlord -- "till now, I never had a dispute;
"I Have let lodgings ten years; I Am a Baker to boot;
"In airing your sheets, Sir, my wife is no sloven,
"And your bed is immediately over my Oven."
"The Oven!!!" says Will -- says the host, "why this passion?"
"In that excellent bed died three people of fashion*
"Why so crusty, good Sir?" "Zounds!" -- cries Will in a taking,
"Who would'nt be crusty, with half a year's baking?
Will paid for his rooms; cried the host, with a sneer,
"Well, I see you have been going away half a year,"
"Friend we cannot well agree -- yet no quarrel" -- Will said;
"For one man may die where another makes bread."
PREFACE.
I AM convinced, that it is impossible for one person to please all mankind,
for t^ere is such a variety of opinions predominent, that no one system or
pamphlet, will meet with universal approbation; but it appears to me requisite,
that something of this kind should appear in public -- and, as I have been
solicited by numbers, to attempt a brief narration, with particulars, relating
facts concerning many occurences that happened in the county of Morris, and
state of New Jersey, in the year 1788 -- As I am convinced that many erroneous
ideas have been propagated, therefore the generality of people are destitute of
real facts -- I am sensible that it is natural for men to censure each other
with burlesque, and say, they had not sagacity adequate to discover the plot;
but after an intrigue is discovered, every person that had not an active part
in it, thinks his own sag^city would have been sufficient to discover the
deception -- but this we know, that only few men are ever satisfied, and when
any curiosities are presented to them, they are zealous in the pursuit of
knowledge, and anxious to know their terminations, and many will anticipate
great gain, and contribute liberally until the fraud is detected; I shall
therefore be as brief as possible, as it is my intention to eradicate many
capricious notions from the minds of many who have imbibed witchcraft and the
phenomina of hobg^blins It is evident, that l^gerdemain has been very
conspicuous and prevalent even from the earliest periods of time, and many have
been imposed upon by these deceivers; and credulous honest people have had
ideas imbibed to that degree, concerning witchcraft and legerdemain, that they
were deal to philosophy -- and reas^ning was insufficient to eradicate th^se
notions, until they were t^ught by the schoolmaster of ex^^^ience; and then,
the compensation they r^ceived, was to regret the loss of their time and
interest.
.

It is well known that many impositions have been inflicted upon mankind, by
particular persons in every country; and in the earliest periods of time, many
remarkable occurrences took place, that much surprised the greater part of
mankind, induced them to believe that such wonderful phenomina could not take
place, only by a supernatural power.

Every person that is acquainted with human nature, or has studied the
disposition of mankind, must be fully convinced of the deception of man, and
certainly know, there are persons, whose abilities, disposition and genius, are
in every respect, adequate to the profession of deceivers. And many of their
co-temporaries confide in their abilities, integrity and veracity, to that
degree, that they will sacrifice their property, through ignorance, to support
a vicious, ignoble, defrauder. Nor is this much to be wondered at, if we
contemplate the avaricious disposition of men, who are ever in search of
objects in futurity, especially such as have a tendency to produce gain, they
will pursue with the greatest alacrity, anticipating joys which, upon a near
approach, elude the grasp. It is obvious, that some illiterate persons have a
genius adequate to prepossess themselves in favor with many, and by an
enegmatical behavior, induce some to form eminent opinions of their merit, at
the same time it was paradoxical. And if we suppose that every generation grows
wiser, we must believe that ignorance has been gradually extinguishing for some
hundred years past; and it is almost incredible to believe, that any
impositions could be practiced upon mankind at this enlightened period: but
although knowledge is more diffuse, human nature is still the same, and Judas
like, will perpetrate enormous deeds to satisfy an avaricious mind. And if we
admit the same disposition to reign predominent, in the deceived, as the
deceiver then let the deceived pay their money to the deceiver, who has been at
trouble and cost in obtaining his art of extracting, for those who go to the
sc^ool of experience may expect to pay dear for their tuition.

The Morris-Town Ghost DELINEATED.
A DIABOLICAL intrigue invaded the county of Morris, in the state of New
Jersey, in the year 1788. This unequalled performance, has taken vent and is
promulgated througout the continent, and deserves the attention of every
person. But before I proceed any further, I think it requisite to advert a few
minutes to the general character of that place.

It is very conspicuous that many of the people in that county, are much
attached to machinations, and will spend much time in investigating
curiosities. I don't say whether such a turn of mind is to be imputed to
indigence or owing to the operation of the climate: this I submit to the candor
of every person to determine within himself -- it is obvious to all who are
acquainted with the county of Morris, that the phenomena and capricious notions
of witchcraft, has engaged the attention of many of its inhabitants for a
number of years, and the existence of witches is adopted by the generality of
the people.

I was once in Morristown, and happened to be in conversation with some
gentlemen, who had, as it were, the faith of assurance it witchcraft. They
informed me that there were several young women who were bewitched; and they
had been harrased so much by witches for a long time, and all their experiments
proved abortive, and the young women were so much debilitated they were fearful
they would never recover their healths. They related several occurrences, that
I think too simple to mention; but one instance was, "That an old lady was
churning, and being much fatigued, and unable to obtain butter, she at last
concluded that the witches were in the churn, and immediately had recourse to
experiments, which were, that of heating several horse-sh^es, and putting them
into the churn alternately -- she burnt the devil out, and immediately obtained
butter."

I perceived that the generality were apprehensive of witches riding them, and
the greatest evidence of a witch was, if a woman had any deformity, or had
lived to that age to cause wrinkles in her face, she had the appella^ion of a
witch. There was another occurrence that happened on Sunday. They informed me,
a man was driving his sheep from his grain, and an accident happened as they
were jumping ove^ a fence, one of the sheep broke its leg. The man for some
time before supposed that the same sheep was bewitched. About the same time, an
aged old lady returning from church, her horse unfortunately stumbled, she fell
to the ground and broke her leg -- This was received as an indication that she
was a witch: And in fact, if a horse had the belly-ache, or any beast was in
^gony of pain and behaved uncommon, the general opinion was, that the creature
was bewitched.

It is my opinion, that persons actuated by such capricious notions, are
pre-disposed for the reception of marvelous curiosities whenever they occur.

I shall now proceed to detail as near as possible, relative to the
transactions of that phenomena, Legerdemain and Hobgoblins, that happened in
Morristown, in the year 1788.

This transaction has occupied the attention of many* and caused great
wondering through the state, and every person is eager to acqu^re a thorough
knowledge of the real transactions; and I hope this will have a tendency to
eradicate such capricious notions from every rational mind -- The chief
conductor of this deception, was Ransford Rogers, a native of Connecticut, in
New England. He was an illiterate person, but very aff^ble, possessed of a
genius adequate to prepossess himself into favor with many, and great facility
to display his abilities with the geatest brilliancy. He resided in the state
of Massachusetts for a number of years, and from thence to the state of
New York. His place of residence, before he came to New Jersey, was Smith's
Clove, where he taught a school. During his residence at Smith's Clove, two
gentlemen from the county of Morris, who had been long in search and digging of
mines, but had always proved unsuccessful for the want of a person whose
knowledge descended into the bowels of the earth, and could reveal the secret
things of darkness. There was also, a prevailing opinion, that there was money
deposited in the bowels of the earth, at Schooler's mountain, with an
enchantment upon it -- that it could not be obtained without a peculiar art in
legerdemain, or to dispel the hobgoblins and apparitions. These gentlemen, in
pursuit of a man that could work miracles, accidentally found Rogers, and after
a short conversation, made known their business to him, and concluded that he
was the man every way calculated to their wishes, for he was very fond of
giving hints of his extensive knowledge in every art and science, but careful
not to go so far as to demonstrate his propositions. He had a pretended copious
knowledge in chemistry; and could raise or dispel good or evil spirits. He then
agreed with those gentlemen to supply them with whatever was requested -- This
was a noble man indeed! Now they concluded the man was found who could supply
them with all things; and one who was endowed with power and sagacity not to be
exceeded by finite wisdom!

But although Rogers had engaged to exhibit miracles, knowing that he must seek
inventions, he thinking it too great ^n undertaking, began to regret, fearing
that he was not able to perform: but after he had undertaken, and given hints
of his knowledge and abilities, and being solicited by the gentlemen to
proceed, he could not elude what he had advanced, but resolved to have recourse
to experiments and stratagem to prove his assertions. He was then solicited to
remove to Morristown. Those gentlemen, with indifatigable pains, procured him a
school, three miles from Morristown. This was satisfactory to Rogers being
confident of their integrity, and perceiving their flexibility and readiness to
administer to his relief, he thinking himself happy with such noble
concomitants, left Smith's Clove, with the greatest alacrity, and took his
ab^de about three miles from Morristown, where he presided over a common
English school. This was a place every way suitable for a man of his
profession, for they were pre disposed for his reception, fond of marve^l^us
exhibitions, which he was able to facilitate with the greatest alacrity -- his
was in August 1788 While he presided over this school, he gave satisfaction to
his employers, and manifest proofs of his integrity. By this time he had
possessed himself in favor with many, but it is likely they expected reward.
Sometime in S^p^ember, as he had been importuned to exhibit his art in r^^sing
and dispelling apparitions, and prove his abilities as he had asserted. He then
finding himself deficient, and perceiving it requisite to have an assistant in
order to carry on nocturnal performances, with the greatest secrecy. He then
obtained leave of his employers, to absent himself a few days and return to New
England for his family and some other business, upon his promise to return as
soon as possible.

While he was in New England, he contracted with a person, a schoolmaster, to
return with him, insuring him a school that would be very lucrative. -- Rogers,
agree^ble to his promise, was as brief as possible, and returned with his new
companion to Morristown, where he was saluted by persons of eminence and
congratulated by many after his long absence. This was in September 1788.

Rogers now being furnished with an assistant, he is able to facilitate
nocturnal performances with the greatest dispatch. As it was now the last of
September, many soliciting Rogers to exhibit his art in raising and exp^sing
apparitions, as he had engaged. The first obj^ct that is to be now attended to
is, to obtain a suppo^ed hidden treasu^e, that lies dormant in the earth at
Sch^oler's M^untain.

To (...) us notion had been of long standing, and (...) p^, among the greater
part of Morristown, as they said there had been repeated efforts made to obtain
the treasure, but all had proved abortive; for whenever they attempted to break
the ground, there would many hobgoblins and apparitions appear, which in a
short time, obliged them to evacuate the place. [It is well known, that persons
being apprehensive of seeing apparitions, their imagination causes them to
arise; but they always imputed their disappointments, to the misman gement of
their conductor, as not having sufficient knowledge to dispel those
apparitions, that impeded them from obtaining the treasure.]

Rogers, after gathering information from every quarter, and hearing the
obstructions that debarred them from obtaining immense riches, was now
satisfied this was the time for him to fulfill his former assertions.

He then secured the veil of ignorance upon their head^, with an intention to
extract money from their p^ckets; therefore, after deliberation, he thought
necessary to convene a number of gentlemen at a certain place in order to
consult what method must be taken to obtain the above mentioned treasure. This
meeting was the greatest secrecy, and their number about eight.

Here R^gers communicated to them the solemnity of the business and the
intricacy of the undertaking, informing them there was an immense sum deposited
at the abovementioned place; and there had been several persons murdered and
buried with the money, in order to retain it in the earth. He likewise informed
them, that those spi^its must be rais^d and conversed with, before the money
could be obtained. He likewise declared, that he could by his act and power,
raise them apparitions, and the whole company might hear him converse with
them, and satisfy themselves that there was no deception. This was ^e^e^ved
with belief and admiration by the whole com^any, without ever investigating
whether (...) was probab^e o^ p^ssible. -- This meet^ng ^^e^el^^^, terminated
with great assurance, they all be^^g ^^nfident of the abili^ies, knowledge and
power of Rogers.

By this time it appeared to those gentlemen, that the hidden treasures of
darkness which had so long lay dormant in the earth, was to be obtained by the
power of this mighty man!

Rogers informed them, that he should have interviews with the spirits; and as
the apparitions knew all things, they must be careful to walk circumspectly,
and refrain from all immorality, or they would stimulate the spirits to
withhold from them the treasures.

These gentlemen now under apprehensions of vast riches, began to propagate
their intentions to particular friends, and there was such a prospect of being
rich, that many were anxious to become members; and additions were added unto
it daily, of such as expected great riches. The company convened almost every
evening until their number increased to about forty. During this time, none had
interviews with the spirits except Rogers, and he communicated their
conversation to the society, which was admitted as real facts.

Now you will observe, that it is highly necessary, that Rogers would have
associates, in order to facilitate his maneuvers and avoid detection. During
this time, Rogers and his connections had recourse to several experiments in
compounding various substances, that being thrown into the air would break with
such appearances as to indicate to the beholders to arise from a superna^ural
power. He had composi^ions of various kinds: Some by being buried in the earth
for so many hours, would break and cause a great explosion, which appeared
dismal in the night and would cause great timidity.

The company were all anxious to proceed and much elevated with such uncommon
curiosities A night was appointed for the whole company to convene, and it
happened to be a m^st severe stormy night, but every man was punctual in his
attendance Some ^ode eight, some twelve miles, when the incleme^cy of the
weather was sufficient to extinguish health.

At this interview they were all much aston^shed with an unexpected interview
with the spirit, who related unto them the importance of their regular
proceedings, or they could not obtain their desire. The spirits informed them,
that they must meet on such a night, at a certain place, about half a mile from
any house in a field, retired from traveling and noise: and they must form
certain angles and circles, and they must proceed in drawing their lines and
forming their circles as Rogers directed, and then be careful to keep within
the circles, or they would provoke the spirits to that degree, they would
finally extirpate them from the place.

The night appointed for them to convene, being now arrived, they all with joy,
fear and trembling, convened at the appointed house, about half a mile from the
field. This field was environed on the north and west by a thick wood. The
circles and angles being drawn the preceding day, they all proceeded from the
house about ten o'clock in the evening, with peculiar silence and decorum* and
entered the circles with the greatest solemnity, and being fully sensible they
were surrounded by apparitions and hobgoblins.

Upon one part of the circle was erected four posts, in order to spread a
cloth, and form a tent, where Rogers could preside, as governor of the ghastly
procession. The number that entered these circles were about forty. This number
was walking alternately during the whole procession. It is not to be wondered
at, if people were timorous in this place; for the candles illuming one part of
the circle, caused a ghastly, melancholy, direful gloom, toward the woods, ^^r
it was a dark night. Every person must suppose that this is a suitable place
for the pretended ghosts to make their appearance and establish their faith in
hobgoblins, apparitions, witchcraft and the devil.

After they had been rotating within the circles for a considerable time with
great decorum, they were instantaneously, shocked with the most impetuous
explosion from the earth at a small distance from them -- This substance was
previously compounded, and secreted in that place a few hours before. The
flames rising at a considerable height, illuminated the circumambi^^^
atmosphere, and presented many drea^ful objects, ^r^m the ^^pp^sed ^^^med
grove, which was instantaneously involved in obscurity.

I^medi^te^y after the pretended ghosts made their appearance, with a ^^di^us
groan. They remained inv^sible to the company, but conversed wi^h Rogers, in
the hearing of the company -- this was in Nov. 1788. The spirits informed them,
that they had possessions of vast treasure, and could not give them up unless
they proceeded regular, and without variance; and as fortune had discriminated
them to receive the treasure, they must deliver to the spirits, every man,
twe^ve pounds, for the money could not be given up by the spirits until that
sum was given to them. They must also acknowledge R^gers as their conductor,
and adhere to his precepts* and as they knew all things, they would detect the
man that attempted to de^^aud his ne^ghbor. These pre^ended ghosts had a
machine over their m^u^hs, that caused such a variation in their voices, that
they were not discovered by any of the company during the processi^n, which
lasted until about three o'clock in the morning.

N^w the whole company confide in Rogers and look to him for protect^on to
defend them from the ^^ging spirits; and after several ceremonies Rogers
dispe^^ed the apparitions, and they all re^u^ed from the field w^ndering at the
miraculous things that happened, b^ing fully persuaded of the existence of
hobgoblins and apparitions -- By this time they could revere Rogers, and
thought him s^mething more than man.

(...) far, every pr^j^ct te^minated agreeab^e to his wish; and he had such
i^fluence over them, wi^^ a ^espotic power, that it is my opinion, had he (...)
of them to (...), he would have been justified and defended by the rest!

After this c^nference was over, and all agreed to deliver the apparition^
twelve pounds, as soon as possible. R^gers, perce^ving (...) every man was not
under ci^^um^tances to give twelve p^unds, his generosi^y therefore induced him
to reduce the sum to six pounds, and those who were not able to produce that,
to g^ve four pounds.

Rogers to confirm them in the faith, pretended to have nocturnal interviews
with the spirits, and communicated to the society, therefore, they convened
some of them almost every night, and as fast as they could get the money, they
would convene and deliver it to the spirits; and whenever they met in a secret
room, the door and window shutters being made fast, and R^gers communicating
his interviews to the compa^^, unu^u^l noises would be heard ab^ut the hou^e*
that would cause great timidity. Groanings, and wrapping upon the house, the
falling of boards in the chamber, the gingling of money at the window, and a
voice speaking, "Press forward!" The superficial machine that was over the
mouth of him who spoke, ^o much altered his voice, that no one could detect him.

The spirits declared that they were sent to deliver that s^ciety great riches,
and they could have no re^t until they had given it up; but the money they
requested, was only an acknowledgement for such immense treasures. Methinks I
hear every m^n anticipating future greatness, but I expect time will defeat the
enterprise.

There was now a sort of emul^tion among them, who should first deliver the
money to the spir^ts, but some of them was weak in faith, which caused
animosities and disputes among them; and meetings were called almost every
night during the winter. The reader will observe one circumstance in
particular, that occasioned the business to continue through the winter* which
was* the money that the spirits requested, must be silver or gold, and the
current money then in Je^sey, was loan paper: This money did not circulate only
in that state, and no person would take it in lieu of silver and gold, only at
one quarter discount. This therefore had a tendency to continue the business
through the winter, as it was almost impossible for some of them to get silver or
gold; but all of them were very industrious seeking the sum required. They
would give almost any discount or interest that any man pleased to ask. They
would mortgage their farms and dispose of their cattle at half price, rather
than fail in obtaining the required sum.

It is very obvious why Rogers and his associates, the supposed spirits,
requested silver or gold, for they wanted to carry it out of the state, and
paper money would have been of but little service.

Sometime in March, the money being chiefly deposi^ed in the hands of the
spirits. Rogers fearing that something might happen, pretended to have
nocturnal interviews with the spirit, likewise several persons, especially
those who had the most faith and men of veracity were called out of their beds
in the night by the spirits, and directed how to proceed.

These gentlemen immediately made known to the company their interviews with
the spirit; and when the company were convened in a private room* the pretended
spirits were out side of the house, gr^aning, gingling of money, telling them
to have faith, be of good cheer, and keep secret all transactions, and in May
next they should receive the treasure. -- This was in March 1789. They all
returned with joy, fear and wondering, being very liberal, waiting impatiently
for May to come.

Now Rogers and his associates have received the greater part of the money, and
they are full of machinations, how they shall postpone the business the next
meeting, for all expected to proceed to Schooler's Mountain the next May, and
receive the treasure.

The night appointed being now arrived, they all convened in a large circle in
an open field, waiting for the ghosts to appear and give them farther
directions, and proceed with them to the place where the money was deposited.
Immediately the ghosts appeared without the circle, with great choler, and
hedious groanings, wreathing themselves in various positions, that appeared
most ghastly in the night -- then upbraiding the company declaring they had not
proceeded regular, and some of them was faithless, and had devulged many things
that ought to have been kept secret; and by their wicked dispositions and
animosities that had taken place among them, debarred them at present, from
obtaining the treasures. The pretended ghosts, raging to that degree at the
misconduct of the company, that Rogers, who appeared or pretended to be very
much frightened with the rest, with all his art and pleading was scarcely able
to pacify the raging ghosts!

At this the company confiding in Rogers, looked to him for protection. The
ghosts informed them, they must wait patient^y, until some future period. They
were now so much timidated, that they thought but little about money, at length
Rogers, after a variety of ceremonies by his art and power, dispelled the
frightful apparitions, and tranquillity, once more, resides within the circle.

They now returned from the circle, still retaining their belief, reve^ing and
adhering to Rogers in all things. Thus far they have been seduced. They have
given their money to Rogers and his associates, instead of apparitions; and are
waiting for the spirit to return and lead them to anticipated fortunes.

Had Rogers now halted, and not proceeded upon another project, he would have
been feared and respected; and the capricious notions of witchcraft,
hobgoblins, and the devil would have prevailed among them, with prejudice, fear
and ignorance, until this day. But this diabolical intrigue and the succeeding
one, has d^ffused light, and eradicated ignorance from the minds of many. This
scene ended the first of May, 1789.

It is evident that Rogers did not intend to proceed any further upon such
diabolical intrigues; but sometime in the fall preceding the termination of the
first scene, two young men from New England, took up their abode in the county
of Morris: Some time the fore part of the winter, one of them took up his abode
in Morris. Rogers at that time taught a school three miles out of town, but
soon quitting his school there, removed to Morristown. These young men soon
became very intimate with Rogers, which was the cause of another diab^l^cal
intrigue, altho^gh their behavior was circumspect -- Som^time ^n April these
young men left Mo^ristown, and removed about twenty miles, but still con^^nuing
a correspondence with Rogers, by letters and frequent visits.

Alth^ugh these two men were removed at the distance of twenty miles from
Rogers, it (...) a favorable opportunity for them to gain pr^s^lites; as it is
evident they seduced many, and some of eminent char^cters, that would have
joined the company and proceeded in anticip^ting great ^iches, but Rogers
thought it not proper to admit them, as appeared from the corresponding letters
wi^h Rogers and the fire club.

I before mentioned, that the business of the former company terminated the
first of May, and as Rogers and his former associ^tes have succeeded so well,
in ex^racting money with new inventions, that Rogers again undertakes, with
great alacrity upon a new project.

A company now convene, that consists only of five. They proceed upon various
maneuvers, rotating the room in order to raise the spirit, while they were
performing many ceremonies, va^ous noises were heard around the house: The
rattling of a wagon -- groaning -- striking upon the windows, etc. Then each
one taking a sheet of paper, extending his arm, holding ^he paper out at the
door, waiting for the spirit to write upon one of the papers, how they should
proceed! After waiting some time, each one folding his paper, proceeding
regular around a table, then opening their papers on one of them was a writing,
directing them to convene upon such a night, and the spirit would give further
directions how they must proceed. Previous to this, Rogers had prepared the
writing, but wanted more time for consideration; therefore they were dismissed
with orders to convene on such a night.

The night arrived -- they convened at Rogers's house in order to receive
information from the spirit, that Rogers and one of the associates pretended
they had inte^views with.

After they had all conve^ed, the first maneuver was, b^ (...) dec^iver and
^he (...) in p^^yer upon t^eir bended knees; then p^ (...) to their age proceed
rota^^ng the ^o^m, as many t^mes as their was p^ in (...) ^^d a ta^le, each one
drawing a sheet of p^per (...) and Rogers folding them, de^^ve^ed to (...);
then ^hey proceeding, in order, a (...) d^stance from the house, and drawing a
circle, about twelve feet diameter, they all stepped within it, unfolding their
papers, ext^nding them with one arm, tell with their faces to the earth,
continuing ^n prayer with their eyes closed, that the spirit might enter within
the circle, and write their directions upon the papers; then Rogers giving the
word " Amen!" prayer ended, and each one folded his paper -- (...), and march^d
into the house; then unfolding their papers, the w^it^ng appe^red upon one of
them, to the great astonishment of most of the company.

This writing was to be kept s^^e in the hands of one of the ass^ciates, to
ex^ibit when occasi^n ca^^ed, in order to gain pro^ylites, relat^ng to the
mysteries of the paper. The contents of the paper was, that the company must be
increased to eleven members, and each one must deposit to the spirit the sum of
twelve pounds, silver or gold. This writing Rogers and his associa^es prepared
previous to this time, therefore, the meeting was dismissed, and each one
exerted his influence to gain prosylites.

Rogers and his associates now finding the minds of many fl^xible, res^lved to
p^^ceed upon some new pr^j^ct, that might have a tendency to prove more
lucrative. R^gers therefore, wr^pping ^^msel^ up in a sheet, went to the house
of a certain gentleman in the night and called him up, by wrapping at the doors
and windows, and conve^sed with him ^n such disguise, that the gentleman
thought he was a spirit. The pretended spirit relating to him, that he had vast
tre^sures in his possession, and a company was in pursuit of it, and ^e c^uld
not give it up un^es^ some of the members of the church j^^red them, such as I
shall menti^n; (...) said (...), I am the spirit of a just man and am (...) to
g^ve you information how to proceed and put the ^cting of it into your hands;
and I (...) with you and give you directions when you go amis^; therefore fear
not* but g^ to Rogers and inform ^im of your interview with me -- F^ar not, I
am ever with you!

This gent^eman, not apprehending any deception, believed it to be a spirit.
Early in the morning he went to see Rogers, and found every thing that the
spirit related to be fact; ^e theref^re was c^nv^nced, that it was from a
supernatural power

He then went to info^m those members belonging to the church, as the spirit
had directed him He found them very flexible -- giving great heed to his
declaration, and anxious to see cu^^^sities. But whether these church members
were induced by se^f motives, or by a zeal to help their fe^low creatures I do
not say; but the plan that Rogers and (...) associates had in view, is very
obvi^us, for ^his could not be obtained only under a cloak of religion. After
this n^ne were admitted to join the company only th^se of a truly moral
character, either belonging to the church or ab^ng, from profane c^mpany, and
walking circumsp^ctly. This was in June, 1^89.

The com^^^y now in^reased daily of aged, al stem^ou^, (...), jud^cious, simple
church membe^^. -- It is now in a (...); and Rogers having put it into the
hands of another to conduct, he and his associates were busy every night, in
dispurse, appearing to pa^ticular pers^ns, especially those who were most weak
in s^ (...) up in the right, and (...) the (...) without ceasing* for they we^e
just (...) them, that they should have great (...) they would persevere in
faith.

Roge^s and ^is associates, under the title of spirits, had ordered the
conductor, that the company must consist of thirty seven members; and every
member must dep^sit into the hands of the spirit, twelve pounds si^ver or gold.
-- The company now convened, about twenty in number, the spirit had ordered the
con^uctor to proceed in certain maneuvers, in orde^ to obtain directi^ns from
the spirit, that would be satisfactory to every member, for some were deficient
in f^^th. Rogers and some of the associates always convened with the rest,
wonde^ing at such marvelous things. -- This was policy that they might not be
suspected.

While they were fitting in the room, several no^ses were heard around the
house; groaning, wrapping at the windows, g^^gling of money, etc. The spirit
then spoke these words, "LOOK TO GOD!" They all were amazed at such things, and
Rogers with the rest wondered! They fell upon their knees to pray; and after
this ceremony was past, all arose and walked alternately around the room, five
times; then parading around a table, and each man drawing a sheet of paper from
a quite, it was folded up, and all hustled together, and each man taking one,
and tying a white handkerchief round his head and l^ins, they all marched wi^h
great decorum into a meadow about one hundred yards from the house. Previous to
this, Rogers having prepared a writing, and when going to the meadow, he put
the blank paper into his pocket, and ^ook the writing ou^, unnoticed by any o^
the company. After they arrived in the meadow at the appointed p^ace, they
^^^ated a circle five times, about thirty feet diame^e^ -- then they all
stepped within the circle, and unfolding their papers, they all fell wi^h their
faces to the earth, with one arm extended, ho^ding the paper, that the spir^t
might enter within the circle and write u^ (...), how they mu^^ proceed. They
we^e ordered (...) up, upon their perils, bu^ to c^^^inue fervent in (...). In
ab^ut ten minutes the c^mmand^r gave the word, " Amen!" They all (...), and
(...) their p^pers, they we^e ^^^l^ed to^^ther; then each man (...), they
marched al^e^nate^y (...) the place into the h^^se, (...) great (...). -- They
a^l parading (...), the next (...) was to see if the spirit had given them any
directions how to proceed; then each one unfolding his paper, the writing
exhibited plain on one of their papers in a most curious manner. This writing
was so elegant, that they were much astonished, thinking it a miracle, or
supposing that the spirit entered the circle and wrote the contents, while they
were on their faces at prayer.

The contents of the writing was, O faithless man! What more need I exhibit
unto you! I am the spirit of a just man* sent from Heaven to declare these
things unto you; and I can have no rest until I have delivered great
possessions into your hands; but look to GOD, there is greater treasure in
Heaven for you! O faithless men! Press forward in faith, and the prize is
yours! It (...) mentioned various chapters in the Bible, that the members must
peruse, and particular psalms for them to sing; and the company must consist of
thirty seven members; and each man must deposit into the hands of the spirit
according to his circumstances, not exceeding twelve, nor less than six pounds;
and the money must be given up as soon as possible, in order to relieve the
spirit from his exigencies, that he might return from whence he came.

Rogers and two of his associates were present and appeared to be astonished
with the rest, but were not suspected by any of the company.

They all agreed, that as fast as any of them could get the money, it should be
given to the spirit; but they must meet at such a place, and give it up in a
legal manner. A few days after this about twelve members convened, but only
seven had the money ready to appropriate unto the spirit.

The manner of their proceeding was, they convened in a room, and after several
ceremonies and prayer being ended, they arose, and rotated the room,
alternately, several times; then went with the greatest decorum, into a meadow,
about one hundred yards from the house and drawing a circle about twenty feet
diameter, they stepped within it, waiting for the spirit to make its appearance.

After a short time, the spirit whistling at the distance of about sixty yards
from the circle, the commander then left the company and went to converse with
the spirit; he soon returned with orders from the spirit, that all those who
had the money, should retire to a certain tree, about forty yards from the
circle. Now those who had the money went with the commander to the tree. The
spirit appeared about twenty yards distant from the tree, with a sheet around
him, jumping and stamping, repeating these words, " Look to GOD!" Those that
stood by the tree made a short complicated prayer, and laying the money at the
root of the tree for the spirit to receive, they retired to the company. They
all returned to the house, observing the greatest order, trembling at every
noise and gazing in every direction; supposing they were surrounded by
hobgoblins, apparitions, witches and the devil. Rogers and two of his
associates pretended to give up the money which was only blank paper.

This pretended spirit was one of the associates with a white sheet around him,
and a machine over his mouth that his voice might not be de^^cted by any that
knew him; and immediately after the spirit had deposited his money, this spirit
takes it to himself, which was about forty pounds.

Previous to this, Rogers pulverized some bones and had given it to the
commander, declaring that it was the dust of their bodies, and each man must
have some of this powder in a paper sealed, as a token of the spirits
approbation, and that he was one of the company. This powder was to be kept
secret, and no one to touch it upon his peril. A sufficient quantity of liquor
was also prepared, which ^^e spirit had ordered to be used very freely; then
each one taking a hearty dram, they all united in fervent prayer, after which
the meeting was concluded.

It is very obvious that spiritous liquors, when taken in large q^^ntities,
will augm^^^ the ideas of men and induce them to anticipate profit and
pleasure, although they are inaccessible in futurity. -- Some of the members
caused great disturbance, by their divine* inadvertantly, to excess in that
powerful stimulus, but it is something pleasing to see aged, sober, abst^^ious
men with their ideas raised, put on cheerfulness and viva^^^y.

Thus they proceeded as above mentioned, in giving their money to the spirit
every few evenings. -- The spirits brought to the commander several
curiosities, that were to be exhibited to the company in order to confirm their
faith, but were to be delivered to the spirits whenever they called for them.

Various ceremonies were performed that I shall omit as they are too simple to
mention, but every means were taken in order to make the members use liquor
freely, the spirits gave unto the commander a compounded ma^s that was to be
made into pills, and each one to take a pill at every meeting, and except he
used very freely of liquor it would operate in making his mouth and lips swell;
thus they caused some to drink to exc^ss through fear, although they before
observed the greatest temperance, and in fact some drank to that degree, to
obviate the effects of the pill, that they were almost incapable of navigating
in the night.

Thus the company had increased to about thirty-seven in number; and the
greater part had given the money to the sp^rits and circumstances prevented or
delayed the rest from doing it, although every one was as bri^^ as p^ssible and
spared no pains to procure the money.

The company were now all engaged being much augment^d with the prospect of
being rich and s^on expected to reap the harvest with pleasure, and receive
their anticipated gain; but an accident now occurs, that terminates in the
discovery of the plot, which is this: One of ^he aged members that had one of
these papers, supposed to contain some of the dust of the body of the spirits,
as I before mentioned* was to be kept secret and no one to touch it. This man,
leaving it accidently in his pocket one day in the house, his wife happened to
find it, broke it open and perceiving the contents, feared to touch it
supposing it to be witchcraft: She went immediate^y to the priest for advice --
He, not knowing i^ composition was unwilling to touch it for fear it might have
some operation upon him.

When her husband discovered what she had done, he was much terrified,
declaring that she had ruined him forever, in breaking open that paper. This
made her more solicitous to know the contents; and she declaring not to devulge
any thing, he told her the whole of their proceedings; she insisted on it, they
were serving the devil, and thought it her duty, to put an end to such
proceedings. This made great disturbance in the company, and Rogers and his
associates were in disguise every night, appearing to particular persons as
spirits, in order to confirm them in the faith and prevent a discovery. At last
one evening Rogers having drank too much of the good creature, taking a sheet
with him rode to a house of a certain gentleman in order to converse with him
at a spirit; but making many blunders the woman thought it was a man, but after
conversing with him some time, and going to prayer, Rogers departed declaring*
that he was the spirit of a just man.

In the morning as soon as it was light, the man went out where the spirit
appeared, and as there had been a heavy dew that night, he perceived the tracks
of a man, and following him some distance to the fence where he perceived a
horse had been tied; he then tracking the horse to the door where Rogers lived
-- But as Rogers was not within, he followed the same track to the house of a
certain gentleman, about half a mile distant, where he found Rogers; and as the
gentleman of the house had, the evening before, lent Rogers a horse, together
with many other circumstances, sufficient to convict him. The authority was
then consulted, and judging him culpable, he was immediately apprehended and
committed to prison.

This detection greatly alarmed the whole company, as they were unwilling to
believe that Rogers was the spirit, even when the clearest evidence
demonstrated the fact, but Rogers declaring his innocence, was in a few days
bailed out, by a gentleman that I shall call by the name of compassion, and to
this gentleman Rogers ought ever to pay a debt of gratitude and benevolence.

After Rogers was clear of the gaol, he perceived he was among his enemies, he
therefore made his flight, but being pursued and apprehended the second time,
he confessed his faults, and owned that for his conduct and the expressions he
had used in his projects, he deserved punishment; but fortune favored him, and
he once more eluded their hands.

Now many threatenings and horrid imprecations proceed from many after this
man, who only a few days before, they revered and thought him a superior being.

The cause of these imprecations being cast after him is very obvious, that is
while he continued with them in parables, working miracles, he promised them
vast riches, but now he is gone, their hopes are all eradicated. But ought not
the county of M -- to perpetuate and honor the name of Rogers for eradicating
ignorance and causing the light of reason to illume the minds of many, where
obscurity had reigned for many years?

There have been various reports propagated concerning the sum that Rogers and
his associates obtained from the believers of witchcraft, but the whole amount
was about five hundred pounds. But after Rogers had taken the veil from their
eyes, and extracted money from their pockets, they were unwilling that he
should have any compensation, but insisted that he should be brought to condign
punishment, therefore Rogers is detected in his knavery, and his ass^ciates are
unknown to the world; but had Rogers persevered, and avoided detection until
all had given in their money, he would have left them in ignorance waiting with
patience, for the return of the spirit, as was the case with the former
company; but his being detected, and confession, demonstrated to every person
that there was neither witchcraft nor black art in any of his performances,
which they thought to proceed from supernatural power. I am confident that this
occurrence is sufficient to exterpate all capricious notions of witchcraft,
wizzards, hobgoblins, apparitions and frightful imaginations from the mind of
rational beings.

I am confident that there are many such kinds of impositions transacted by
particular persons, and many illiterate and vulgar readily believe that they
have power sufficient to call into being the souls of those dead bodies that
have long slept dorment in the earth* But let reason be our guide, and we shall
soon exclaim against such capricious declarations -- But one half of the world
will not investigate whether these things are either probable or possible, but
proceed with alacrity, upon the affirmation of others. Again, there are some,
that are as destitute of honesty as the devil is of holiness, and will
persevere in hopes of gain, and will grasp at every opportunity to take
advantage, but when they are outwitted, they will exclaim against knavey and
plead innocence.

It is obvious to every person that it is among the most vulgar and illiterate
part of the world, where the capricious notions of witchcraft and hobgoblins
reside. But in those parts of the world where learning and science has
prevailed, every idea or pretension toward raising demons are excluded. The
Laplanders the most ignorant beings on earth, pretend to work miracles, raise,
demons, and predict future events, and many with weak intellects and tremulous
readily adhere to their fantastical declarations; but nature is uniform in her
course, and deviates not, and when such wonderful phenomenon presents, as I
have been treating of, we may reasonably expect that is the production and
craft of vicious persons, to support their indolence. But the flexibility and
readiness of man, to adhere to ca^cious declarations, when interest occurs, is
very o^ ou^, and impositions only proceed from a wan^ sagacity and
deliberation, to investigate whether (...) proposi^ions are compatible with
philosophy or (...) course of nature.

In the above mentioned o^currence, many emine^^ characters, possessed of
morality and veracity had (...) misfortune to be led captive in pursuit of
anticipa^^ riches, conducted by an inferior who was as dest^ of honesty, as
Lucifer of holiness. But the prospe^ of wealth are often so enchanting as to
exclude wisdom from the wise and discernment from the most sagacio^^

In the foregoing treatise, I have mentioned only the most eminent
circumstances, accompanied with fac^, as I thought it needless to advert to the
more min^^ proceedings, for some of them were too simple to (...) exhibited to
a continent where arts and sciences reside. But if it should be thought
requisite, and would ente^tain the curious or illume the simple, with pleasure
I would detail every particular maneuver, that was transacted by the followers
of imaginary hobgoblin^* It is not from malevolence, or any antipathy against
any person or place, that induced me to write the above mentioned transactions,
but purely to enlighten the minds of the simple, and free them from the
imaginar^ fear of witches, apparitions and hobgoblins which d^^ not exist. And
as this relation proceeds from one the wishes happiness to all mankind, and the
author, altho^ unknown, hopes that no one person or persons will b^ offended at
the relation of facts, when there are n^ names mentioned, providing they had an
active part with the anticipating fire-cl^b.

This Pamphlet is chiefly intended for the perusal of the good Economists in
Morris County.

Gentlemen, yours in amity, PHILANTHROPIST.

COURT OF KING's BENCH, WESTMINSTER. SITTING OF JUNE TWENTY-FOUR, Before LORD
KENYON and a SPECIAL JURY. THE KING v. WILLIAMS, FOR PUBLISHING PAINE'S AGE OF
REASON.
Mr. Erskine's Speech on the part of the Prosecution:
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
THE charge of blasphemy, which is put upon the record against the printer of
this publication, is not an accusation of the servants of the crown, but comes
before you sanctioned by the oaths of a grand jury of the country. It stood for
trial upon a former day; but it happening, as it frequently does, without any
imputation upon the gentlemen named in the panel, that a sufficient number did
not appear to constitute a full special jury, I thought it my duty to withdraw
the cause from trial, till I could have the opportunity which is now open to me
of addressing myself to you, who were originally appointed to try it. I pursued
this course, however, from no jealousy of the common juries appointed by the
laws for the ordinary service of the court, since my whole life has been one
continued experience of their virtues; but because I thought it of great
importance, that those who were to decide upon a cause so very momentous to the
public, should have the highest possible qualifications for the decision. That
they should not only be men capable from their educations of forming an
enlightened judgment, but that their situations should be such as to bring them
within the full view of their enlightened country, to which in character and in
estimation, they were in their own turns to be responsible.

Not having the honor, gentlemen, to be sworn for the king as one of his
counsel, it has fallen much oftener to my lot to defend indictments for libels,
than to assist in the prosecution of them. But I feel no embarrassment from
that recollection; since I shall not be found today to express a sentiment, or
to utter an expression inconsistent with those invaluable principles for which
I have uniformly contended in the defense of others. Nothing that I have ever
said, either professionally or personally for the Liberty of the Press, do I
mean today to contrad^ct or counteract. On the contrary, I desire to preface
the very short discourse I have to make, with reminding you, that it is your
most solemn duty to take care that it suffers no injury in your hands. A free
and unlicensed press (in the just and legal sense of the expression) has led to
all the blessings both of religion and government, which Great Britain or any
part of the world at this moment enjoys, and is calculated still farther to
advance mankind to higher degrees of civilization and happiness. But this
freedom, like every other, must be limited to be enjoyed, and like every human
advantage, may be defeated by its abuse.

Gentlemen! the defendant stands indicted for having published this book, which
I have only read from the obligations of professionly duty, and which I arose
from the reading of with astonishment and disgust. Standing here with all the
privileges belonging to the highest counsel for the crown, I shall be entitled
to reply to any defense that shall be made for the publication. I shall wait
with patience till I hear it. Indeed, if I were to anticipate the defense which
I hear and read of, it would be defaming by anticipation, the learned counsel
who is to make it. For if I am to collect it, even from a formal notice given
to the prosecutors in the course of the proceedings, I have to expect, that
instead of a defense conducted according to the rules and principles of English
law and justice, the foundation of all our laws, and the sanctions of all our
justice, are to be struck at and insulted. What is the force of that
jurisdiction which enables the court to sit in judgment? What but the oath
which his lordship, as well as yourselves, have sworn upon the gospel to
fulfill. Yet in the king's court, where his majesty is himself also sworn to
administer the justice of England -- in the king's court -- which receives its
high authority under a solemn oath to maintain the christian religion, as it is
promulgated by God in the Holy Scriptures, I am nevertheless called upon as
counsel for the prosecution to produce a certain book described in the
indictment to be the Holy Bible. No man deserves to be upon the rolls of the
court, who dares, as an attorney, to put his name to such a notice. It is an
insult to the authority and dignity of the court of which he is an officer;
since it seems to call in question the very foundation of its jurisdiction. If
this is to be the spirit and temper of the defense; if, as I collect from that
array of books which are spread upon the benches behind me, this publication is
to be vindicated by an attack of all the truths which the christian religion
promulgates to mankind, let it be remembered that such an argument was neither
suggested nor justified by any thing said by me on the part of the prosacution.
In this stage of the proceedings, I shall call for reverence to the Sacred
Scr^ptures, not from their merits, unbounded as they are, but from their
authority in a christian country -- not from the obligations of conscience, but
from the rules of law. For my own part, Gentlemen, I have ever been deeply
devoted to the truths of Christianity, and my firm belief in the Holy Gospel is
by no means owing to the prejudices of education, (though I was religiously
educated by the best of parents) but arises from the fullest and most continued
reflections of my riper years and understanding. It forms at this moment the
great consolation of a life, which, as a shadow, must pass away; and without
it, indeed* I should consider my long course of health and prosperity (perhaps
too long and too uninterrupted to be good for any man) only as the dust which
the wind scatters, and rather as a snare than as a blessing. -- Much, however,
as I wish to support the authority of Scripture from a reasoned consideration
of it, I shall repress that subject for the present. But if the d^fence shall
be as I have suspected, to bring them at all into argument or question, I shall
then fulfill a duty which I owe not only to the Court, as Counsel for the
Prosecution, but to the Public, to state what I feel and know concerning the
evidences of that Religion which is reviled without being examined, and (...)
without being understood.

I am w^ll aware (...)* by the communi^ations of a free pre^ (...) the errors
of mankind, from age to age* have been d^s^ip^ted and d^spelled, and I
recoll^^t that the wo^ld, under the banners of reformed christianity* (...)
struggled throu^h persecution to the noble eminence on which it stands at this
moment* s^^^dding the blessings of humanity and science upon the (...) of the
earth. It may be asked, by what m^ans the information would have been effected*
i^ the books of the reformers had been suppressed* and the errors of condemned
and exploded superstit^ons had been supported as unquestionable by the (...)*
founded upon those very superstitions formerly, (...) p^esent upon the
doctrines of the estab^ished church? Or how, upon such principles, (...)
i^formation, civil or religious, can in future be effected. The solution is
easy: -- Let us examine what are the genuine principles of the liberty of the
press, as they regard writings upon general subjects, unconnected with the
personal reputations of private men, which are wholly foreign to the present
enquiry! They are full of simplicity, and are brought as near perfection, by
the law of England, as perhaps, is consistent with any of the frail
institutions of mankind.

Although every community must est^bl^sh supreme authorities, founded upon
fixed principles, and must give high powers to magistrates to administer laws
for the preservation of the government itself, and for the security of those
who are to be protected by it; yet, as infallib^lity and perfection belong
neither to human establishments nor to human individuals, it ought to be the
policy of all free establishments, as it is most peculiarly the principle of
our own constitution, to permit the men unbounded freedom of discussion, even
by de^ec^ing errors in the constitution or administration of the very
government itself* so as that decorum is observed, which every state must exact
from its subjects, and which imposes no restraint upon any intellectual
composition* fairly, honestly, and decently addres^ed to the consciences and
understandings of men. -- Upon this principle, I have an unquestionable right,
(a right which the best subjects have exercised) to examine the principles and
structure of the constitution, and by (...) manly reasoning, to question the
practice of its administrators. I have a right to consider and to point out
errors in the one or in the other; and not merely to reason upon their
existence* but to cons^der the means of their (...) ^lly such free* well
intentioned, modest, and dignified communication of sent^ments and opinions,
all nations have been gradually improved, and ^^lder laws, and purer religions
have been establ^shed -- The same principles, which vindicate civil contentions
honestly directed, extend their protection to the sharpest controversies on
religious faiths. This rational and legal course of improvement, was recognized
and ratified by Lord Kenyon, as the law of England, in a late trial at
Guildhall, when he looked back with gratitude to the labors of the reformers,
as the fountains of our religious emancipation, and of the civil blessings that
followed in their train. The English constitution, indeed, does not stop short
in the toleration of religious opinions, but liberally extends it to practice.
It permits every man, even publicly, to worship God according to his own
conscience, though in marked dissent from the national establishment, so as he
professes the general faith, which is the sanction of all our moral duties, and
the only pledge of our submission to the system which constitutes a state. Is
not this system of freedom of controversy, and freedom of worship, sufficient
for all the purposes of human happiness and improvement? And can it be
necessary for either, that the law should hold out indemnity to those who
wholly abjure and revile the government of their country, or the religion on
which it rests for its foundation? I expect to hear, in answer to what I am now
saying, much that will offend me. My learned friend, from the difficulties of
his situation, which I know, from experience, how to feel for very sincerely,
may be driven to advance propositions which it may be my duty, with much
freedom, to reply to; and the law will sanction that freedom. But will not the
ends of justice be completely answered by that right, to point out the errors
of his discourse in terms that are decent and calculated to expose its defects;
or will any arguments suffer, or will public justice be impeded, because
neither private honor and justice, nor public decorum, would induce my telling
my learned friend, that he was a fool, a liar, and scoundrel in the face of the
court, because I differed from him in argument or opinion? This is just the
distinction between a book of free legal controversy, and the book which I am
arraigning before you. Every man has a legal right to investigate, with modesty
and decency, controversial points of the christian religion; but no man,
consistently with a law, which only exists under its sanctions, has a right,
not only broadly to deny its very existence, but to pour forth a shocking and
insulting invective, which the lowest establishments, in the gradations of
civil authority, ought not to be permitted to suffer, and which soon would be
borne down by insolence and disobedience, if they did.

The same principle pervades the whole system of the law, not merely in its
abstract theory, but in its daily and most applauded practice. The intercourse
between the sexes and which, properly regulated, not only contiues but
humanizes and adorns our natures, is the foundation of all the thousand
romances, plays, and novels, which are in the hands of every body. Some of them
lead to the confirmation of every virtuous principle; others though with the
same profession, address the imagination in a manner to lead the passions into
dangerous excesses. But though the law does not nicely discriminate the various
shades which distinguish these works from one another, so as that it suffers
many to pass through its liberal spirit, that upon principle might be
suppressed, would it, or does it tolerate, or does any decent man contend that
it ought to pass by unpunished, libels of the most shameless obscenity,
manifestly pointed to debauch innocence, and to blast and poison the morals of
the rising generation? This is only another illustration to demonstrate the
obvious distinction between the work of an author, who fairly exercises the
powers of his mind, in investigating doctrinal points in the religion of any
country, and him who attacks the rational existence of every religion, and
brands with absurdity and folly the state which sanctions, and the obedient
tools who cherish the delusion. But this publication appears to me to be as
mischievous and cruel in its probable effects, as it is manifestly illegal in
its principles; because it strikes at the best, sometimes, alas! the only
refuge and consolation amidst the distresses and afflictions of the world. The
poor and humble, whom it affects to pity, may be stabbed to the heart by it. --
They have more occasion for firm hopes beyond the grave, than those who have
greater comforts to render life delightful. I can conceive a distressed but
virtuous man, surrounded by children looking up to him for bread, when he has
none to give them, sinking under the last day's labor, and unequal to the next,
yet still looking up with confidence to the hour when all tears shall be wiped
from the eyes of affliction, bearing the burden laid upon him by a mysterious
Providence which he adores, and looking forward with exaltation to the revealed
promises of his Creator, when he shall be greater than the greatest, and
happier than the happiest of mankind. What a change in such a mind might not be
wrought by such a mer^iless publication? Gentlemen! Whether these remarks are
the overcharged declamations of an accusing Counsel, o^ the just reflections of
a man anxious for the public freedom, which is best secured by the morals of a
nation, will be best settled by an appeal to the passages in the work, that are
selected by the indictment for your consideration and judgment. You are at
liberty to connect them with every context and sequel, and to bestow upon them
the mildest interpretation. [ Here Mr. Erskine read and commented upon several
of the selected passages, and then proceeded as follows:]

Gentlemen, it would be useless and disgusting to enumerate the other passages
within the scope of the indictment. How any man can rationally vindicate the
publication of such a book, in a country where the Christian Religion is the
very foundation of the law of the land, I am totally at a loss to conceive, and
have no ideas for the discussion of! How is a tribunal, whose whole
jurisdiction is founded upon the solemn belief and practice of what is denied
as falsehood, and reprobated as impiety to deal with such an anomolous defense?
Upon what principle is it even offered to the court, whose authority is
contemned and mocked at? If the religion proposed to be called in question, is
not previously adopted in belief and solemnly acted upon, what authority has
the court to pass any judgment at all of acquittal or condemnation? Why am I
now, or upon any other occasion, to submit to your Lordship's authority? Why am
I now, or at any time, to address twelve of my equals, as I am now addressing
you, with reverence and submission! Under what sanction are the witnesses to
give their evidence, without which there can be no trial? Under what
obligations can I call upon you, the jury representing your country, to
administer justice? Surely upon no other than that you are sworn to administer
it under the oaths you have taken. The whole judicial fabric from the king's
sovereign authority to the lowest office of magistracy, has no other
foundation. The whole is built, both in form and substance, upon the same oath
of every one of its ministers to do justice as God shall help them hereafter.
What God? And what hereafter? That God undoubtedly who has commanded kings to
rule, and judges to decree with justice, who has said to witness, not by the
voice of nature, but in revealed commandments -- Thou shall not bear false
testimony against thy neighbor; and who has enforced obedience to them by the
revelation of the unutterable blessings which shall attend their observances,
and the awful punishments which shall await upon their transgressions. But it
seems, this is an age of reason, and the time and person are at last arrived,
that are to dissipate the errors which have overspread the past generations of
ignorance. The believers in Christianity are many, but it belongs to the few
that are wise to correct their credulity. Belief is an act of reason, and
superior reason may, therefore, dictate to the weak. In running the mind along
the long list of sincere and devout Christians, I cannot help lamenting, that
Newton had not lived to this day, to have had his shallowness filled up with
this new flood of light. -- But the subject is too awful for irony. I will
speak plainly and directly. Newton was a Christian -- Newton, whose mind burst
forth from the fetters cast by nature upon our finite conceptions -- Newton
whose science was truth, and the foundation of whose knowledge of it was
philosophy. Not those visionary and arrogant presumptions which too often usurp
its name, but philosophy resting upon the basis of mathematics, which, like
figures, cannot lie. Newton, who carried the line and rule to the uttermost
barriers of creation, and explored the principles by which, no doubt, all
created matter is held together and exists. But this extraordinary man, in the
mighty reach of his mind, overlooked, perhaps, the errors, which a minuter
investigation of the created things on this earth might have taught him, of the
essence of his Creator. What shall then be said of the great Mr. Boil, who
locked into the Organic structure of all matter, even to the brute inanimate
substances, which the foot treads on. Such a man may be supposed to have been
equally qualified with Mr. Pain to look up through nature to nature's God. Yet
the result of all his contemplation was the most confirmed and devout belief in
all which the other holds in contempt, as despicable and driveling
superstition. -- But this error might, perhaps, arise from a want of due
attention to the foundations of human judgment and the structure of that
understanding which God has given us for the investigation of truth -- Let that
question be answered by Mr. Lock, who was, to the highest pitch of devotion
and adoration, a Christian. Mr. Lock, whose office was to detect the errors of
thinking, by going up to the fountains of thought, and to direct into the
proper track of reasoning, the devious mind of man, by showing him its whole
process, from the first perceptions of sense to the last conclusions of
ratiocination, putting a rein besides upon false opinion, by practical rules
for the conduct of human judgment. But these men were only deep thinkers, and
lived in their closets, unaccustomed to the traffic of the world, and to the
laws which practically regulate mankind.

Gentlemen! in the place where we now sit to administer the justice of this
great country, above a century ago, the never to be forgotten Sir Matthew Hale
presided; whose faith in christianity is an exalted commentary upon its truth
and reason, and whose life was a glorious example of its fruits in man,
administering human justice with wisdom and purity drawn from the pure fountain
of the christian dispensation, which has been, and will be, in all ages, a
subject of the highest reverence and admiration. But it is said by the author,
that the christian fable is but the tale of the more ancient superstitions of
the world, and may be easily detected by a proper understanding of the
mythologies of the heathens. Did Milton understand those Mythologies? Was he
less versed than Mr. Pain in the superstitions of the world? No, they were the
subject of his immortal song; and though shut out from all recurrence to them,
he poured them forth from the stores of a memory rich with all that man ever
knew, and laid them in their order as the illustration of that real and exalted
faith, the unquestionable source of that fervid genius, which cast a sort of
shade upon all the other works of man -- He passed the bounds of flaming space
Where angels tremble while they gaze;
He saw, till blasted with excess of light,
He closed his eyes in endless night.
But it was the light of the BODY only that was extinguished; "The celestial
light shone inward, and enabled him to justify the ways of God to man." The
result of his thinking was nevertheless not the same as the author's. The
mysterious incarnation of our Blessed Savior (which this work blasphemes in
words so wholly unfit for the mouth of a Christian, or for the ear of a court
of justice, that I dare not, and will not, give them utterance) Milton made the
grand conclusion of the Paradise Lost, the rest from his finished labors and
the ultimate hope, expectation, and glory of the world.

A Virgin is his Mother, but his Sire,
The power of the Most High; he shall ascend
The Throne hereditary, and bound his reign
With Earth's wide bounds, his glory with the Heavens.
The immortal poet having thus put into the mouth of the angel, the prophecy of
man's redemption, follows it with that solemn and beautiful admonition,
addressed in the poem to our great First Parent, but intended as an address to
his posterity through all generations.

This having learned, thou have attained the sum
Of wisdom, hope no higher, though all the stars
Thou knew'st by name, and all the ethereal powers,
All secrets of the deep, all nature's works,
Or works of God in heaven, air, earth, or sea,
And all the riches of this world enjoy'st,
And all the rule, one empire; only add
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable, add faith,
Add virtue, patience, temperance add love,
By name to come called Charity, the Soul
Of all the rest: then will thou not be loath
To leave this Paradise, but shall possess
A Paradise within thee, happier far.
Thus you find all that is great, or wise, or splendid, or illustrious, amongst
created beings; all the minds gifted beyond ordinary nature, if not inspired by
its universal author for the advancement and dignity of the world, though
divided by distant ages, and by the clashing opinions, distinguishing them from
one another, yet joining as it were in one sublime chorus, to celebrate the
truths of Christianity, and laying upon its holy alters the neverfading
offerings of their immortal wisdom.

Against all its concurring testimony, we find suddenly, from the author of
this book, that the bible teaches nothing but "lies, obscenity, cruelty, and
injustice." Had he ever read our Savior's sermon on the Mount? Against all
this concurring testimony, we find suddenly, from this publication, that the
Bible teaches nothing but lies, obscenity, cruelty, and injustice. Had the
author or publisher ever read the sermon of Christ upon the Mount, in which the
great principles of our faith and duty are summoned up? -- Let us all but read
and practice it, and lies, obscenity, cruelty, and injustice, and all human
wickedness would be banished from the world!"

Gentlemen, there is but one consideration more, which I cannot possibly omit,
because I confess it affects me very deeply. The author of this book has
written largely on public liberty and government; and this last performance
has, on that account, been more widely circulated, and principally among those
who attached themselves from principle to his former works. This circumstance
renders a public attack upon all revealed religion from such a writer,
infinitely more dangerous. The religious and moral sense of the people of
Great Britain, is the great anchor which alone can hold the vessel of the state
amidst the storms which agitate the world; and if I could believe for a moment,
that the mass of the people were to be debauched from the principles of
religion, which form the true basis of that humanity, charity, and benevolence,
that has been so long the national characteristic, instead of mixing myself, as
I sometimes have done, in political reformations, I would rather retire to the
uttermost corners of the earth to avoid their agitation; and would bear, not
only the imperfections and abuses complained of in our own wise establishment,
but even the worst government that ever existed in the world, rather than go to
the work of reformation with a multitude set free from all the charities of
christianity, who had no sense of God's existence, but from Mr. Paine's
observation of nature, which the mass of mankind have no leisure to
contemplate; nor any belief of future rewards and punishments to animate the
good in the glorious pursuit of human happiness, or to deter the wicked from
destroying it even in its birth. But I know the people of England better. They
are a religious people, and with the blessing of God, as far as it is in my
power, I will lend my aid to keep them so. I have no objections to the freest
and most extended discussions upon doctrinel points of the christian religion,
and though the law of England does not permit it, I do not dread the reasoned
arguments of Deists against the existence of christianity itself, because, as
was said by its Divine Author, if it is of God, it will stand. An intellectual
book, however erroneous, addressed to the intellectual world upon so profound
and complicated a subject, can never work the mischief which this indictment is
calculated to repress. -- Such works will only employ the minds of men
enlightened by study, to a deeper investigation of a subject well worthy of
their deepest and continued contemplation. The powers of the mind are given for
human improvement in the progress of human existence. The changes produced by
such reciprocations of lights and intelligences are certain in their
progressions, and make their way imperceptably, as conviction comes upon the
world, by the final and irresistible power of truth. If christianity be founded
in falsehood, let us become Deists in this manner, and I am contented. But this
book has no such object, and no such capacity: it presents no arguments to the
wise and enlightened. On the contrary, it treats the faith and opinions of the
wisest with the most shocking contempt, and stirs up men, without the
advantages of learning, or sober thinking, to a total disbelief of every thing
hitherto held sacred; and consequently to a rejection of all the laws and
ordinances of the state, which stand only upon the assumption of their truth.

Gentlemen! I cannot conclude without expressing the deepest regret at all
attacks upon the christian religion by authors who profess to promote the civil
liberties of the world. For under what other auspices than christianity have
the lost and subverted liberties of mankind in former ages been reasserted? By
what zeal, but the warm zeal of devout christians have English liberties been
redeemed and consecrated? Under what other sanctions, even in our own day, have
liberty and happiness been extending and spreading to the uttermost corners of
the earth? What work of civilization, what commonwealth of greatness, has this
bold religion of nature ever established? We see, on the contrary, the nations
that have no other light than that of nature to direct them, sunk in barbarism
or slaves to arbitrary governments; whilst, since the christian era, the great
career of the world has been slowly, but clearly advancing, lighter at every
step, from the awful prophecies of the gospel, and leading, I trust, in the end
to universal and eternal happiness. Each generation of mankind can see but a
few revolving links of this mighty and mysterious chain, but by doing our
several duties in our allotted stations, we are sure that we are fulfilling the
purposes of our existence. You, I trust, will fulfill yours this day!"

A Mr. Fleming, one of the Clerks of the Bank, was the only witness called on
the part of the prosecution. He said, he purchased the book in question, of the
defendant, at his shop, on the 7th of February last.

The Notice which Mr. Erskine mentioned in his speech was here read, and Mr.
John Martin, the attorney for the defendant, readily admitted that he had sent
it to those who were concerned for the prosecution.

Mr. Kyd made a very learned and ingenious speech for the defendant. He said he
would endeavor to discharge the important duty which he owed to his client, in
a manner, that was consistent with the dignity of that court, and with that
decency and solemnity which, he felt, belonged to the subject. The question
was, whether the author, when he wrote this book, felt as he wrote, and
expressed himself as he felt. He humbly submitted, that the inferences which
Mr. Pain had drawn from the premises, were such as he might have drawn with a
fair and honest intention. Whether those inferences were just or not, was
totally a different question. But, if his lordship and the gentlemen of the
jury could discover no wicked or malicious intent, they would not punish a man
for a mere error in judgment. If the jury could collect no wicked intention in
the author from reading the whole of this performance, he contended he was
completely protected under the right which he and every other man had to
exercise the powers of his mind in discussing any controversial points of
religion. Supposing then the book had been written innocently, he might infer,
as a general proposition, that it was also published with an innocent
intention. At the same time he admitted, that what was so written, might be
published from a malicious motive, for which the publisher would be amenable to
the laws of his country. The learned council next selected several passages
from this performance, to show, that the author felt the most profound
reverence and veneration for the supreme being, and denied the truth of
revelation only because he could not reconcile it to the character and
attributes of the Deity. It was stated in that publication, that the law of
nature was engraven on every man's heart, and that he might clearly collect the
knowledge of that duty which he owed to his creator from a contemplation of his
works. Mr. Kyd next endeavored to justify the charges made upon the Bible by
the author, by a variety of passages which he selected, but which, at the
desire of his lordship and the jury, he did not read, but only referred to
them, and contended, that if those passages were found in any other book, they
would be considered as indecent and immoral. He appealed to the writings of Dr.
Lairdner, Dr. Bentley, and other eminent divines in support of the right of
free discussion, upon all subjects of a controversial nature. He then spoke in
severe terms of this prosecution, which he said, would never have been
instituted, had it not been for Bishop Watson's Apology, which had been very
widely circulated, and had excited a curiosity to read the book, to which it
was an answer; and to gratify that public curiosity, it was that this book,
which, he believed, had been first published at Paris, was afterward published
in this country. Mr. Kyd insisted, at a great length, upon the freedom of
enquiry, and a free press, and gave the reformation and revolution as two
instances of the inestimable blessings which had resulted from them to this
country.

Mr. Erskine made a most eloquent reply. He said, he was bound, in respect to
his learned friend, as a member of a most honorable profession, to suppose,
that he was placed in a very irksome situation, to be called for on a defense
so exceedingly difficult to make and so extremely delicate to manage, without
violating that common decency that was due to a court of justice. He could not
therefore help considering him as entitled to a considerable degree of
indulgence. Mr. Erskine here adverted to several of the passages selected from
the Old Testament by Mr. Kyd, and explained the reason of the introduction into
the sacred writings. The history of man, he said, was the history of man's
vices and passions, which could not be censured without adverting to their
existence, and many of the instances that had been referred to were recorded as
memorable warnings and examples for the instruction of mankind. -- Mr. E. next
entered most forcibly and deeply into the evidences of christianity,
particularly those that were founded on that stupendous scheme of prophecy,
which formed one of the most unanswerable arguments for the truth of the
christian religion. -- "It was not," he said, the purpose of God to destroy
free agency by overpowering the human mind with the irresistible light, and
conviction of revelation, but to leave men to collect its truths, as they were
gradually illustrated in the accomplishment of the divine promises of the
gospel. Bred as he was to the consideration of evidence, he declared he
considered the prophecy concerning the destruction of the Jewish nation, if
there was nothing else to support christianity, absolutely irresistible. The
division of the Jews into tribes, to preserve the genealogy of Christ, the
distinction of the tribe of Judah, from which he was to come; the loss of this
distinction when that end was accomplished; the predicted departure of the
scepter from Israel; the destruction of the temple of Jerusalem, which imperial
munificence in vain attempted to re-build to disgrace the prophecy; the
dispersion of this nation over the face of the whole earth, the spreading of
the gospel throughout the world; the persecution of its true ministers, and the
foretold superstitions which for ages had defiled its worship -- these were
topics upon which Mr. Erskine expatiated with great eloquence, and produced a
most powerful effect on every part of the audience. He concluded with a
vindication of the authors of this prosecution. He said, they were men of the
highest character and greatest consideration in the country. Many of them were
charged with the offices of religion, others of them were clothed with the
robes of magistracy; most of them were men of deep learning and thinking; and
all of them justly entitled to the thanks of the public for their noble
exertions in the cause of religion and virtue.

LORD KENYON's CHARGE.
GENTLEMEN OF THE JURY,
Being now in possession of all the facts of this ease, and convinced, in my
own mind, what conclusion ought to be drawn from them, I am not sure, that it
is necessary to say any thing at all to you upon the subject. Gentlemen, before
you proceed to decide on the merits of this, or any other cause, it is proper
to see whether the parties litigating stand in a fair light before you. I was
extremely hurt when the learned Counsel for the defendant thought fit to state
to you, with very considerable emphasis, and a very determined tone of voice,
that this was a scandalous prosecution. I cannot help wishing that this
sentence had not been uttered. -- Who commenced this prosecution, I certainly
know not. But from what fell from the very learned Counsel who just sat down, I
am inclined to suppose it proceeded from a society of gentlemen instituted for
the most important of all purposes, for preserving the morals of the people; a
society composed of Clergymen, and Laymen of the most respectable characters in
the kingdom, who, feeling how the country is overrun with profligacy and
wickedness, which boldly raise their heads in defiance of the law of the land,
were determined to see whether, in the first place, by admonition and advice,
they could not stop the torrent of vice and immorality; and secondly, if that
should fail, to try what could be done by punishment. If people with the very
best intentions carry on prosecutions that are oppressive, the end may not
always perhaps sanctify the means. But the manner in which this prosecution has
been conducted, is certainly not oppressive; for instead of proceeding in the
more expensive mode, the prosecutors went before a Grand Jury of the country:
and it was necessary to obtain the opinion of that Grand Jury before the party
could be put in process. -- Gentlemen! we sit here in a Christian Assembly to
administer the laws of the land, and I am to take my knowledge of what the law
is from that which has been sanctioned by a great variety of legal decision. I
am bound to state to you, what my predecessors in Mr. Woolston's case (2
Strange, 834) stated half a century ago, in this Court of which I am an humble
member, namely, that the christian religion is part of the law of the land.
Christianity from its earliest institution met with its opposers. Its
professors were very soon called upon to publish their apologies for the
doctrines they had embraced. In what manner they did that, and whether they had
the advantage of their adversaries, or sunk under the superiority of their
arguments mankind for near two thousand years have had an opportunity of
judging. They have seen that Julian, Justin Martyr, and other apologists have
written, and have been of opinion the argument was in favor of those very
publications. The world has lately been favored with another apology from a
most learned and respectable prelate, who calls his work An Apology for the
Christian Religion. I shall not decide between the merits of the one and the
other. The publications themselves are in the hands of the world: and I
sincerely wish in the concluding language of the work to which I have just
referred (I do not affect to use the very words) I sincerely wish that the
author of the work in question may become a partaker of that faith in revealed
religion, which he has so grossly defamed, and may be enabled to make his peace
with God for that disorder which he has endeavored to the utmost of his power
to introduce into society. We have heard today, that the light of Nature, and
the contemplation of the works of creation are sufficient, without any other
revelation of the Divine Will. Socrates, Plato, Xenophon, Tully -- each of them
in their turns professed they wanted other lights; and knowing and confessing
that God was good, they took it for granted that the time would come when he
would impart a farther revelation of his will to mankind. Though they walked as
it were through a cloud, darkly, they hoped their posterity would almost see
God face to face. -- This condition of mankind has met with reprehension
today. But I shall not pursue this argument. Fully impressed with the great
truths of religion, which, thank God, I was taught in my early years to
believe, and of which the hour of reflection and inquiry, instead of producing
any doubt has fully confirmed me in. I expected the learned Counsel for the
Defendant would have differed the case of the publisher from that of the author
of this work; that he would have endeavored to convince you that whatever guilt
might belong to the author, nothing was imputable to the publisher. He has,
however to my utter surprise, exactly reversed the case. He tells you it was
originally published at Paris in 1794; that the feelings of the author's
friends were wounded by this work, which I call a nefarious publication, and
that it was in a great measure forgotten; and you are now called upon to judge
of the merits or demerits of the publisher, who has brought forth a still-born
work, forgotten by every body, till he ventured in defiance of the verdicts of
mankind on the author's political works to send it forth among the inhabitants
of this country. Unless it was for the most malignant purposes, I cannot
conceive how it was published. It is however for you to judge of it, and to do
justice between the public and the defendant."

The jury instantly found the Defendant -- GUILTY.

At a stated meeting of The Republican Society of the Town of Newark, held in
the Society Chamber, on Monday evening, the 14th July, 1794, and in the Year of
American Independence the Nineteenth, it was

On Motion, Unanimously Resolved,

THAT Capt. Thomas Ward and Stephen Wheeler, be a Committee to wait upon
Citizen Alexander C. Macwhorter, and present him with the thanks of this
Society, for the Oration which he delivered the 4th inst. in the Presbyterian
Church of this Town, to his fellow citizens, at their desire, and request the
favor of a copy for publication, and if favored with a copy, to cause the same
to be published.

Extract from the Minutes. AARON PENNINGTON, Secretary.

AN ORATION DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH JULY, 1794.
THIS auspicious day, my fellow citizens, is the epoch from which we date our
national existe^ce; it ranks first in our American calander. From one extreme
to the other of these extensive states, does this anniversary of freedom and
independence call forth the patriotic citizens of Americ^ to mirth and festive
joy. The birthday of kings, their accessions to their thrones, and the periods
of their victories, when thousands of their fellow men have fallen, constitute,
in general, the great festivals of the earth; but in the view of reason and
philosophy these are days of sorrow not of joy. We, on the contrary, assemble
to celebrate a day, the first in the annals of time, which gave to a kind equal
rights and equal privileges -- How striking the contrast! the one sinks and
degrades, the other exalts and ennobles the human character -- How august the
contemplation! that through the various changes and national revolutions which
the historic page unfolds, this should be the first p^^^^d of time, when in
truth and reality man became re-invested with that equal liberty, which the God
of nature gave him. It is right therefore, that we commemorate this joyous day;
and in the commemoration thereof, what contemplations, my fellow citizens, more
useful and instructive, than the causes from whence resulted this our great
revolution. The principles on which it was defended and supported -- the
distinguished rank it takes among the other revolutions of the earth, and the
conduct of its brave defenders in the days of danger and distress.

A British political writer observes, that the American war originated in
parliamentary jobbing, and its great purpose was to transfer enormous masses of
English property into loans, funds and taxes, to form that corrupt ministerial
phalanx called the friends of government; while this faction, like a malignant
disease, was draining the vital substances of Britain, and even armies and
navies were merely its ramifications.

If this representation of the cause of the American war be true, and such a
faction, or such a parliament, could obtain such an ascendency in Britain as to
draw forth the vital substances of that nation to effect such purposes, how
awfully wretched must have been our situation and circumstances had they been
enabled to rear and establish the standard of corruption on our American shores
-- instead of rejoicing this day, we should have been mourning -- instead of
celebrating the triumphs of freedom, we should have been languishing in the
shackles of despotism.

The frequent representations which were made in England of the wealth of the
Americans by the British officers, who had served here against the French, and
who had fared sumptuously at the American tables, roused into action the
contemplations which had long been entertained by the government, to raise a
revenue in America.

Early in 1764, the question of right to tax was brought forward in the house
of commons, and so strong was the impulse of avarice, and such the influence
which a corrupt administration had acquired at this period, that not a person
in the house ventured to controvert the right. Afterward however, many
illustrious characters came forward in the opposition; and the names of those
whose motives were pure and incorrupt will ever brighten and adorn the page of
American freedom. They improved us in the knowledge of our political rights,
and confirmed us in the support of them. The first, the foremost, and I may
add, the most sincere, was the celebrated Colonel Bar, for whose noble
defense of virtue, and America, in opposition to the whole house; "May recorded
honors gather round his monument and thicken over him."

Subsequent to the revolution of 1688, the most prominent features in the
British system of politics was "That taxation could only result from
representation," or, in other words, that the property of the subject could
never be taken without his consent. But the influence of corruption and the
anxiety to draw resources from America to support its sooted stream, in all its
branches, from the king on the throne down to the lowest ministerial hireling,
had opperated such an entire dereliction of principles, that when the question
of right, as before observed, first came forward, there was not an advocate in
its favor; and they considered the future opposition as merely the petulance of
discontent and not the voice of reason.

From hence, my fellow citizens, we have this instructive lesson, never to
permit a departure from a political principle of freedom, known, established
and felt to be right -- it augurs corruption in the government, and will never
be attempted from motives pure and virtuous.

To supply the privileged and pampered orders of state, the heart of poverty
in Britain had been probed, from every quarter, for many years, and for new
sources they turned their baleful eyes across the atlantic.

America was seen like a fair flower rising in the wilderness, untouched and
unblighted by the breath of corruption. The hierarchy of that country ever
closely united with the ministry and with hands equally impure, as anxiously
desired to grasp and enjoy the flower -- it was as strongly inculcated that the
establishment and support of a Bishopric in America, with its desirable
appendages, was as essential to the support and preservation of the mother
church, as the obtaining a revenue was essential to the support of the state*
Thus united with these views and these desires, they commenced the operation
from whence resulted the glorious revolution which we this day celebrate.

But let us turn, my countrymen, from that barren waste "in which no salutary
plant takes root, no verdure quickens," to a soil, as I willingly believe, pure
as the limped stream, and fertile in every great and good qualification.

It is the observation of an elegant writer, "That the Americans, dispersed
throughout an immense continent, free as the wilds of nature which surrounded
them; amidst their rocks, their mountains, the vast plains of their deserts, on
the confines of those forests, in which all is still in its savage state, and
where there are no traces of either the slavery or the tyranny of man; seemed
to receive from every natural object a lesson of liberty and independence -- as
far removed from riches as from poverty, they were not corrupted either by the
excess of luxury or the excess of want. Feed us with food convenient for us,
lest we be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord, or lest we be poor and
steal and take the name of our God in vain," was their united prayer.

From this natural equality in which man is more jealous of his rights than
perhaps in any other state of society, flowed a greater effusion of knowledge
than falls to the lot of mankind in general, as they better understood their
rights, so were they more ready to repel every unjust invasion of them.

The principle, that representation and taxation must go together, was well
understood in America; there were comparatively few, so illiterate, but knew it
to be a political axiom; none so insensible but felt it as their only security
against the grasp of oppression -- this principle individuals in America
opposed in their public prints to the repeated attempts making in Britain to
bring forward bills to tax them; and illustrated it with a strength of argument
that sunk beneath contempt the vile and slavish yell of the minions of
despotism, that all opposition to government was rebellion, and rebellion
treason.

The plan however progressed in Britain, and when matured, was brought into
action; it was like putting fire to the train; the noble sentiment of Freedom
or Death spread quick as the electric flame from one extreme of our continent
to the other, and roused, as it were, instantaneously, three millions of people
in support of their right.

The forming a Congress by a representation from the then different Colonies,
circumstanced as they were, is a phenominon in political science, and the
strongest evidence of the happy effects resulting from a general diffusion of
knowledge among the people; spread over an immense tract of territory,
strangers to each other, with different customs, manners and local prejudices,
under strong collisions of interest, flowing from commercial rivalships and
disputed boundaries of territory, reason and policy required their union under
one head, to render effectual the defense of their freedom. Contrary to the
expectation of their enemies they ^obly sacrifi^ed every private and party
consideration, and immediately complied with the requisition. And here let me
ask, in the language of a celebrated orator, "What memory teems not with the
recollection of the wisdom, the eloquence and perseverance of our confederated
states^en," -- c^st^ed together to vindicate the injured r^ghts of their
country, they assembled with hands and hearts p^re as the cause in which they
were e^^^ged. No f^^tion -- no corruption found ad^on here; th^^r councils were
not warped by (...), nor the^r resolutions confounded by (...) he^^ and
animosity -- the good of their coun^^^ (...) their object (...) every
difference of opinion, as to the means of obtaining it, was discussed with the
calmness of reason, seeking for truth, and not with the keen personal invective
only aiming at party superiority. And to the honor of our country would it be,
could we in truth pass this eulogium from the Congress of '75 to every
subsequent Congress of America. Their compositions united a manliness of
sentiment with an elegance of style that seemed inspired by the pure spirit of
the cause in which they were engaged, and will go down to posterity as
illustrious monuments of American genius.

To show to you, my countrymen, the character of these our youthful politicians
in the mind of the unprejudiced in Europe; permit me to repeat the language of
the first statesman and orator of Britain: "The representatives of America
(said he) meet with the sentiments and temper, and speak the sense of the
continent. For genuine sagacity, for singular moderation, for solid wisdom,
manly spirit, sublime sentiments and simplicity of language, for every thing
respectable and honorable, the Congress of Philadelphia shine unrivalled. They
are viewed as the northern constellation of glorious worthies illuminating and
warming the New World." These eulogiums resulted from that policy, spirit and
union, which they exercised in the support of their grand principle, that no
American could be taxed without his consent, expressed by himself or
representative, which right they contended, our ancestors derived both from
nature and the British constitution, and transmitted, unmarred, to their
posterity; and to the honor of our country be it remembered, that this
principle, as their leading star, was unremittingly pursued from the gloom of
unsuccessful supplication to the splendour of victory and acknowledged
sovereignty.

But let us pass to a comparative view of this our glorious revolution, with
the other revolutions of the earth, having Liberty for their object. In one
respect, my countrymen, there is a distinguishing difference which gives luster
to the American character. The revolution of this country proceeded from a well
digested knowledge of civil rights, the result of philosophical reflection, and
speculative enquiry. The other revolutions, which have preceded it, have been
caused either by a series of oppressions which could no longer be endured, or
have sprung from the impulse of the moment, occasioned by some unexpected and
violent act of despotism that tortured human nature into action -- the one
pourtrays the reason and reflection of man, the other the limits of his
patience, and the keenness of his sensations. The Romans, so celebrated in
history for their patriotic virtues, were roused from slavery to freedom by the
sight of the poignard reeking with the blood of the virtuous Lucretia.

The death of the chaste Virginia, by the hand of her father to save her honor
from the tyrannic Decimvir, and her body exposed to the public view, impelled
that people again to revolt and to annihilate the order of the Decimvirs, which
had violated the rights of the Roman citizens.

And to come down to more modern times -- the introduction of the inquisition
into the Netherlands by the despotic Philip, -- The terrible spectacles daily
presented by that awful institution of men perishing in the flames on account
of their religion; and the ignomineous death of Egmont and Horn, two popular
favorites, at length tortured the people into that opposition which,
eventually, issued in the emancipation of the seven united provinces. Even the
hardy robust inhabitants of the Alps, since so famous for the Helvetic
confederacy, for a long time, bore the most degrading oppressions until the
manly virtues of a TELL excited them to resistance. Nor is the important
revolution in France, so justly celebrated for the magnitude of its object, and
the transcendant brilliancy of execution, an exception; those heroic and
unconquerable republicans had borne the hard hand of despotism, till forced by
its oppressive weight to avenge their wrongs.

The guardian genius of America, on the contrary, would never permit the fangs
of despotism to fasten on our hallowed soil. And may it forever be our great
characteristic to foresee danger at a distance, and to repel its approach on
principle and rational enquiry.

Where are the liberties of the republics which have preceded us; except the
Swis Cantons* I know of no republican state at this day but has returned to the
dark glooms of despotism, and the name of Republic and Liberty is, with them,
mere sounding brass and tinkling cimbal. The cause of this awful relapse from
freedom to slavery is well worth the enquiry of every American. And the great
source from whence it has proceeded, my countrymen, is the want of general
instruction and information among the people. This forms an unsurmountable
barrier against their investigating their political rights, renders them
inattentive thereto, and obliges them to entrust the sacred deposit in the
hands of a few individuals, whose conduct they are unable to scrutinize, and
subjects them to be carried away credulous victims to the artifice of every
designing demagogue.

But it is time we turn to a summary consideration of the conduct of the brave
defenders of our country in its days of danger and distress. "And what hand
withholds the laurel so justly due to the virtues of our patriotic warriors,"
called from the peaceful walks of private life by their country's danger --
from citizens they became soldiers. What hardships, incident to that situation,
for seven long years did they not endure? Where is the example in history of
equal gallantry and perseverance in every difficulty and danger unsupplied and
unpaid, owing to the impoverished state of their country. In the dark seasons
of the war when the genius of liberty seemed to languish under the pressure of
despotism, and many of her sons, in moments of despondency, sought protection
from the relentless foe; who saw the army discover simptoms of despair, or
heard from them the language of submission?

Permit me here, my fellow citizens, to pay the tribute of praise to the
patriotic soldier who continued on the banks of the D^leware, with their
illustrious commander, after the expiration of their enlistments, and with whom
he was enabled to recross that river and turn the tide of the war by his
victories at Trenton and at Princeton. But why do I particularize? Scarcely a
town in our country but where have been displayed acts which sound their
panegyric -- when the cause of freedom was finally triumphant, and the minions
of despotism obliged to withdraw from its shores, which they had so long
stained with the blood of its citizens, these patriotic warriors gave to the
world an example of the love of country ever to be admired and imitated.
Unsatisfied and unrequited for their long laborious toils and services, the
moment their country ceased to call, they forsook the insignia of War for the
mantle of Peace, and returned to the bosom of that country whose rights they
had so nobly defended.

And here they have pursued the various occupations of civil life with an
industry which distinguishes them in society; and at this day are, almost
unexceptionably, conspicuous examples of attachment to the Rights of Man and
the cause of Liberty in general, in opposition to all arbitrary power --
sentiments that were so strongly impressed in the course of their illustrious
service. The pr^ise, the respect and affection due to distinguished merit, is
the only compensation they can now receive. These will never be withheld while
gratitude is an American virtue; and when time shall cease with them and us,
let their monumenal inscription be "HE FOUGHT AND CONQUERED IN HIS COUNTRY's
CAUSE." It will serve both for Epitaph and Elegy, and endear their memory with
posterity.

The brilliant exploits of the militia of our country ought never, on an
occasion like this, to be passed over in silence. They have ever been
considered as the grand defense of every land of freedom, and in the course of
our struggle for independence, they proved themselves eminently worthy of the
sacred charge. The scenes of Bunker's hill, of Bennington and the Sarratoga
heights, will stand to the latest time, illustrious examples of their prowes
and intripidity. But to enumerate all the glorious deeds of our warring
yeomanry would require time far beyond my present limits. Permit me only to
add, that the militia of New Jersey acquired laurels which will ever be
conspicuous in the volums of American history.

I will not lead you on this occasion to the tombs of our illustrious warriors
who fell in their country's cause -- it would touch the springs of grief in the
heart of sensibility, and draw the sympathetic tear from many an eye. The
renumeration of their names without the annexation of their shining virtues,
would be too melancholy a detail -- and to give to each his characteristic
glory is the pleasing task of the historian. The memory of every son and
daughter of liberty will embalm them as long as time and recollection shall
exist.

And now permit me to close this address, my countrymen, in reminding you that
the preservation of that liberty, which you have so gloriously obtained,
depends on your own knowledge and the right instruction and education of your
children; for you and they can only be thereby enabled to guard the avenues to
the temple of freedom, from the first approaches of tyranny, and to detect both
oppression and anarchy, which are equal evils in all their variety of shapes --
guard with anxious care your present free and glorious Constitution, and afford
at all times your ready exertions to support it in its purity against either
its destroyer or corrupter; for by either its destruction or corruption you
loose your all; in vain you fought -- in vain you conquered.

PATRIOTIC SONGS, SELECTED FOR CELEBRATING THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE.
Hail the day! Its triumphs tell,
Then the power of despots fell --
Raise to seraph strains, the lay,
This is FREEDOM's HOLIDAY.

OLD Homer! but what have we with him to do,
What are Grecians or Trojans to me or to you,
Such heathenish heroes no more I Will invoke,
Choice spirits assist me attend hearts of oak. Tal.
Perhaps my address you may premature think,
Because that I mention no toast as I drink;
There are many fine toasts, but the best of them all
Is the toast of the times lads liberty Hall. Tal.
This fine British building by Alfred was framed,
Its grand corner stone Magnacharta was named;
Fair Freedom then came at integrity's call,
And framed the front pillars of liberty hall. Tal.
The manor our forefathers bought with their blood,
And their sons, and their sons sons have proved the deed good;
By the title we'll live, by the title we'll fall,
For life is not life out of liberty hall. Tal
There Is your sweet smiling courtiers of ribbon and lace,
Those spaniels of power and the country's disgrace;
So supple, so servile, so passive withal,
It was passive obedience lost liberty hall. Tal.
Now this British building has gone to decay,
The master's turned tyrant his slaves in dismay;
The foundation's gone, superstructure and all,
And naught but despair's in old liberty hall. Tal.
The artists would fain there have built it again,
But found no materials excepting a chain;
They left it and came to America all,
And here they have finished new liberty hall. Tal.
Happy asylum, we have thrown off the crown,
And natural reason keeps tyranny down;
No threat's armed by despots appear to appal,
The doors are thrown open of liberty hall. Tal.
In the mantle of honor ^a^h star spangled fold,
Plying bright in the sunshine the burnish of gold;
Truth beams on her breast, see at Washington's ^all,
America's genius in liberty hall. Tal.
Our ships with our allie^ they now sweep the sea,
Their standard is justice, their watchword be free;
The Congress we have chosen, they are countrymen all.
God bless them, and bless us in liberty hall. Tal.
But where is this building, Lord Bute fain would know,
Its neither at Richmond, St. James's nor Kew;
It Is a place of no mortal architects art,
or liberty hall's an American's heart. Tal.
LIBERTY TREE -- 1775.
IN a chariot of light, from the regions of day,
The goddess of liberty came;
Ten thousand celestials directed the way,
And hither conducted the dame.
A fair budding branch from the gardens above,
Where millions with millions agree,
She brought in her hand, as a pledge of her love,
And the plant she named liberty tree.
The celestial exotic stuck deep in the ground,
Like a native it flourished and bore;
The fame of its fruit drew the nations around,
To seek out this peaceable shore.
Unmindful of names or distinctions they came,
For Freemen like brothers agree;
With one spirit endu'd, they one friendship pursued,
And their temple was liberty tree.
Beneath this fair tree, like the patriarchs of old,
Their bread in contentment they ate,
Unvex'd with the troubles of silver and gold,
The cares of the grand and the great.
With timber and tar they old England supplied,
And supported her pow'r^ on the sea
^er battles they fought, without getting a groat,
For the honor o^ liberty tree.
But hear O ye swains, ('it is a t^le most profan^)
How all the tyrannical powe^^,
Kings, Commons, and Lords, are uniting amain,
To cut down this guardian of ours.
From the east to the west, blow the trumpet to arm,
Through the land let the sound of it flee,
Let the far and the near -- all unite with a cheer,
In defense of our liberty tree.
FRENCH LIBERTY.
WHEN first the great Senate of Frenchmen agreed,
From corruption and bondage, to die or be freed.
By troops all surrounded -- defenseless -- unarmed,
Composed and collected, they sat unalarm'd!
CHORUS.
Such was their love of liberty, their ardor to be free.
And with the gallic heroes, let, surrounding
powers agree.
The tidings roll,
From pole to pole,
'Till freedom crowns the day:
And round the globe to all the race,
Her banners display.
Undaunted and firm as the Senate of Rome,
Unappall'd in their councils -- before them their doom --
"We'll die or be free!" To the people they cry!
"We'll die or be free!" Hark the people reply! Chorus.
Majestic they rose in a warlike array,
And drove from their stations, the tyrants away;
The heads of the nation, confounded to see --
Surrendered, and glad to surrender or flee. Chorus.
In vain all the crowns against the people combine,
The whole human race are now forming the line,
While Frenchmen the first in the field lead the way,
And call to the nations around, "Come away!" Chorus.
In battle triumphant see freedom appear!
Over heaps of the dead -- rushing on with the spear!
Inspired with ambition a country to save,
And give the invaders a part for their grave. Chorus.
Exulting the news! let the trumpet of fame,
Aloud to the slave, and the despot proclaim;
They boasted to slaughter, to waste, and reduce;
But soon gallic power made them sue for a truce. Chorus.
Unshaken and firm -- let the despots unite,
Let the statesmen and placemen get hirelings to write,
While armies from conquest to conquest pursue,
The cause of the people shall flourish anew. Chorus.
Great heroes of freedom, when ages are gone,
When Kings are forgotten, and tyrants unknown,
Your fame will be echoed from shore unto shore,
'Till nations, and people, and time is no more.
CHORUS.
Such is our love of liberty -- our ardor to be free,
And with the gallic heroes, let, surrounding
powers agree.
The tidings roll,
From pole to pole,
'Till freedom crowns the day:
And round the globe to all the race,
Her banners display.
SONG, Composed for the Fourth of July.
TUNE -- "RULE BRITANNIA, etc."
WHEN exiled Freedom forced to ro^^,
Sought refuge on Columbia's shores,
The lovely wanderer found a home,
And this the Day that made Her ours.
Hail Columbia! Columbia Hail! to THEE
The praise is due, that MAN IS FREE!
In her defense, the patriot crowd,
Rushed to the field, of horrid Death:
They sealed their triumphs with their blood,
And hailed her with their dying breath.
Hail Columbia, etc.
'Twas not Columbia's cause alone,
At stake, the Rights of Mankind lay:
That cause, shall distant nations own,
And hail, with joy, this festive Day.
Hail Columbia, etc.
It Is the World's Day Star, and shall last
'Till Slav'ry's shadows be withdrawn:
And lo! that Night is almost past,
And Europe's day begins to dawn.
Hail Columbia, etc.
How bright will be its noontide ray!
When Universal Freedom reigns,
When not a Despot clouds the day,
And not a Slave on earth remains.
Hail Columbia, etc.
Mankind shall never this Day forget,
Its brave Defenders' worth shall own;
Shall love the Memory of FAYETTE,
And shout the name of WASHINGTON.
Hail Columbia, etc.
A SONG.
UNFOLD, father Time, thy long records unfold,
Of noble achievements, accomplished of old;
When man by the standard of liberty led,
Undauntedly conquered, or cheerfully bled:
But now 'midst the triumphs these moments reveal,
Their glories all fade, and their luster turns pale;
While FRANCE rises up and proclaims the decree,
That tears off their chains, and bid millions be free.
II.
As spring to the fields, or as dew to the flowers,
To the earth parched with heat, as the soft dropping showers;
As health to the wretch, that lies languid and wan,
Or rest to the weary -- is freedom to man!
Where freedom the light of her countenance gives,
There only he triumphs, there only he lives;
Then seize the glad moment, and hail the decree,
That tears off their chains, and bids millions be free.
III.
Too long had oppression and terror entwined,
Those tyrant-form'd chains that enslaved the free mind!
While dark superstition and nature at strife,
For ages had locked up the fountain of life;
But the demon is fled, the delusion is past,
And reason and virtue have triumphed at last;
Then seize the glad moment, and hail the decree,
That tears off their chains, and bids millions be free.
IV.
France, we share in the rapture thy bosom that fills,
While the genius of liberty, bounds over thine hills;
Redundant henceforth may thy purple juice flow,
Prouder wave thy greenwoods, and thine olive trees grow.
While the hand of Philosophy long shall entwine,
Blessed emblem, the laurel, the myrtle and vine,
And Heaven through all ages confirms the decree,
That tears off their chains and bids millions be free.
FINIS.

