CURSORY REMARKS ON THE LAWS CONCERNING USURY, AND On some late proceedings, IN
CASES OF USURY.

BY W. SHELDON, OF NORWICH, CONNECTICUT.

Suffer me that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock on. JOB xxi. 3.

NORWICH: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN TRUMBULL. May, 1798.

INTRODUCTION.
AS the following pages may possibly be read by persons who are unacquainted
with the merits of the transactions, therein alluded to, which have occurred at
Norwich, in the State of Connecticut, it may not be amiss to give a brief
statement of the same. It is generally known that since the commencement of the
present war in Europe, the trade of America has been extended beyond any former
example. This increase of trade has occasioned a great demand for money; and
although many Banks have been established, in different parts of the continent,
their funds have not been sufficient to answer the demands of the Merchants. In
consequence of this deficiency, recourse has been had to rich individuals, who,
thinking their money, like merchandise, should bear a price in proportion to
the demand for it, have, I understand, purchased Notes and Bills of Exchange,
at 3, 4 and 5 per cent per month discount, in the large towns, such as
Philadelphia, New York and Boston. This practice has, on a smaller scale,
extended to some of the more inconsiderable places, and, among the rest, to
Norwich; where notes have, it seems, been purchased at a discount of 2 per cent
per month. This desperate situation of money affairs has alarmed some of the
good citizens of Connecticut to a very considerable degree; insomuch that at
Norwich, and, I am informed, at another place in Hartford County, (the only
places in the United States, or in the world, I believe, that ever possessed
such worthy guardians of the public weal,) societies have been formed to crush
this alarming evil, as it is called, by means of the Statute against Usury. The
Society at Norwich is headed by a Mr. Eli^ Hyde, an Attorney, whose common
Informer is a person of the name of Cyrus Bishop. The Deputy Informers of the
Society are a Mr. -- Ames, (not the honorable Mr. Ames, Reader,) Mr. Bissel,
Mr. Davison, etc. There are several persons belonging to the Society whose
names I do not know; but I am told they are people who are not of a description
to have much to do with either buying or selling of Notes: This circumstance,
however, proves them to be the most proper men in the world for the business
they have engaged in; they being perfectly disinterested -- for although they
laid informations, against different gentlemen, to the amount of about four
thousand Dollars, one half of which was to come to them, if they succeeded,
they meant to pocket their own two thousand Dollars, merely for the public
good.

ONE of these causes came to a hearing before the City Court in the month of
January last. It was then contended by the Counsel for the Defendant, that the
action was brought before a wrong Court, the City not having authority to ^y
causes of that nature. The members of the City Court, actuated no doubt by the
purest motives, decided that they were competent to try this cause: but from
their decision the Defendent appealed to the Superior Court. In March last the
Superior Court sat at Norwich, and the Judges decided that the City Court had
no jurisdiction of the cause, it being the province of the County Court to try
it. This determination of the Judges of course annulled all the writs that had
been issued by Mr. Hyde, who had to pay costs and begin de novo. But with what
muscles shall I relate the catastrophe of this great affair! When Mr. Hyde's
new writs arrived, (the morrow after this determination of the Judges,) it was
discovered that the Defendants had all been supplied with other writs the
evening before! and the worst part of the business is, there is great room to
suspect that some of their friends have stepped in between them and the
Society, and demanded the 4000 Dollars in question. I hear that on this
occasion the surprise and dismay of Mr. Bishop was equal to that of Parson
Adams, when he fell from his imaginary throne into a Tub of Water. Nor was that
of Mr. Hyde exceeded, when the weighty hand of Mr. Daggeu fell, like thunder,
on the table of the House of Representatives, and he said "Sit down Mr. Hyde."

SUCH is the present state of the business. What will be the final issue of it
is more than I can determine. I shall however proceed to enquire what the end
of it ought to be.

CURSORY REMARKS, etc.
THE attention of the people of America, from some of the best to the basest,
from the Governor and Legislature of New York, to the Connecticut Societies,
having lately been turned, in a considerable degree, to the subject of Usury,
it has been a matter of some surprise to me to observe, that no one has
undertaken a thorough investigation of the principles of Usury laws. In order
to promote inquiry on the subject, I shall take leave to offer a few cursory
remarks relative to it, in hopes that some person possessing better
information, may be induced to produce a more perfect work. I conceive that the
best manner of treating the question will be 1st, To give a brief history of
the laws respecting Usury. 2. To consider them in their relation to Religion.
3. To take a view of their Moral tendency. 4. To examine the justice of them.
5. To inquire into the necessity for them. 6. To make a few remarks on their
political tendency; And, 7. To compare the proceedings of the Norwich Society
with the law.

CHAP. I. On the History of Usury Laws.
LAWS against Usury have been made in many countries. Probably that of Moses
(Deuteronomy. xxiii. 19, 20,) was one of the first. The Interest of Money was fixed at
12 per centum per annum, by the Roman Decemvirs, and that law existed till the
time of Justinian. The character of Justinian exhibited the paradoxical
extremes of avarice and profusion. The disorder of his finances was such as
would hardly admit of being remedied; but in order to improve them, he reduced
the Interest of money to 4 per cent. per ann. Pandects (l. 22. tit. 1, 2,) and
Code (l. 4. tit. 32, 33.)
In some cases indeed he allowed 6 per cent. and merchants and manufacturers
were permitted to pay 8 per cent. because among them the risque was greater;
but such persons as were the most likely to lend to himself were not to have
more than 4 per cent.

THE Institutes, Pandects and Code of Justinian have been the Scriptures from
which the English Civilians have drawn their legal knowledge. From them they
probably got the idea of laws against Usury. In England there was very little
trade before the sixteenth century, and, consequently there was not much money
in circulation. Scarcity of money always has a tendency to raise the Interest
of it; such at least was the case in England; for from the time of Edward 3d,
to that of Henry 7th, and indeed for several centuries, the Jews and Lombards,
who had money to lend to the Barons, and others, on personal security, could
make from 45 to 50 per cent. for if. Henry the 8th was an avaricious man who
wanted to borrow money cheap, and as he could oblige the Parliament to do just
what he pleased, he got a law passed 37 Hen. 8. c. 9.
to fix the rate of Interest at 10 per cent. This was the first English Usury
law, and this law was repealed by the Parliament of Edward 6th, which declared
the law itself to be "unlawful, and most impious." The Statute of Henry, was,
however renewed by Elizabeth (13. c. 8.) who had it declared, in the preamble
to the Act of Parliament, that Usury was forbidden by the law of God, and
consequently was unlawful. James 1st, (c. 17) reduced the interests of money to
8 per cent, and the Rump Parliament lowered it to 6 per cent. This rate of
interest was fixed in New England, and, I suppose has continued so ever since;
a law of the Rump Parliament, having been considered as of equal authority with
both law and gospel, by many of the first settlers of Mass^chus^s (...). That
act of the Rump Parliament was confirmed by Charles 2d. (c. 13) who wanted
large sums of money to support the licentious ^s and debaucheries of his court,
and his foolish wars against the Dutch. He Indeed endeavored to reduce the
rate of Interest still lower, and employed Sir Thomas Culpepper, and others, to
publish pamphlets on the subject; but the parliaments of those times were not
so manageable as some which had met before. Anne carried on a very expensive
continental war, and in order to raise money on better terms, the parliament
passed a law (12 Ann. St. 2. c. 16.) which fixed legal interest at 5 per cent.
and enacted that whoever took more should forfeit treble the money borrowed.
That statute, although so grossly unjust, is now in force in England, but
almost the only purpose it answers is to distress such people as cannot give
good security, by putting it out of their power to borrow money. The Usury laws
in England have been made sometimes under a pretense of religion, but in
reality they have always been made with a view to enable the government to get
as much money as possible from the people, on the cheapest terms. The
government however cannot now borrow money at 5 per cent. or any thing like it.
The minister cannot get more than about L 45 for L 100 of 3 per cent Annuities,
and the Navy, Victualling and Transport Bills, etc. are at such a discount as
makes the interest on them equal to about 15 per cent. The mon^ed men in
England prefer government security to any other, and as much more than legal
interest can be got for that security, persons in trade who often want to
borrow money, cannot now get any for the paltry consideration ^ 5 per cent;
they are therefore obliged to go without money, as a larger interest cannot be
taken with safety. This state of things has made the money-borrowers clamorous
for a repeal of the Usury Laws, and if the government can find resources by
forced loans, or any better method than borrowing, those laws will doubtless be
repealed.

CHAP. II. On the connection between Religion and Usury Laws.
SOME Lawmakers have pretended, and many religious people believe, that it is
contrary to the Christian religion to take more than a certain sum for the use
or interest of money. This opinion is taken from the law of Moses, (Deuteronomy.
xxiii. 19, 20.) which says, Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother;
usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury.
Unto a stranger thou may lend upon usury, but unto thy brother thou shall
not lend upon usury. Now, whatever Christian carefully examines this passage,
he will find that the law was not intended for any other people than the Jews;
it was to bind them in their transactions between each other only, but like the
rest of their laws and ceremonies, was not extended to either Heathens or
Christians, and even a Jew was allowed to take usury of any person who was not
a Jew. Religious men may, however, be disposed to hesitate about believing me
on this occasion; I will therefore produce the authority of the learned and
Reverend Archdeacon Paley, who was as religious as the best of them. He says
Philosophy, p. 158, 159.
There exists no reason in the law of nature why a man should not be paid for
the lending of his money, as well as of any other property into which the money
might be converted.

THE scruples that have been entertained upon this head, and upon the
foundation of which the receiving of Interest or Usury (for they formerly meant
the same thing) was once prohibited in almost all Christian countries, arose
from a passage of the law of Moses, Deuteronomy. xxiii. 19, 20. Quoted above.


THIS prohibition is now generally understood to have been intended for the
Jews alone, as part of the political or civil law of that nation, and
calculated to preserve amongst themselves that distribution of property, to
which many of their laws were subservient; as the marriage of an heiress within
her own Tribe; of a widow who was left childless to her husbands brother; the
year of Jubilee, when alienated estates reverted to the family of the original
proprietor -- regulations which were never thought to be binding upon any but
the commonwealth of Israel.

THIS interpretation is confirmed, I think beyond all controversy, by the
distinction made in the law between a Jew and a foreigner, unto a stranger thou
may lend upon usury, but unto thy brother thou may not send upon Usury a
distinction which could hardly have been admitted into a law, which the divine
Author intended to be of moral and;universal obligation.

BUT left the consciences of Religious men should not be quieted, or their
doubts removed by the Divine, I will produce the testimony of a Lawyer, whose
opinion is not often controverted; I mean that of Judge Blackstone. He says
Commentary, Vol. 2. p. 455 and sequel.
The enemies to interest in general make no distinction between that and Usury,
holding any increase of money to be indefensibly usurious. And this they ground
as well on the prohibition by the law of Moses among the Jews, as also upon
what is laid down by Aristotle Pelit. l. 1, c. 10.
, that money is naturally barren, and to make it breed money is preposterous,
and a perversion of the end of its institution, which was only to answer the
purposes of exchange, and not of increase. Hence the school divines have
branded the practice of taking Interest, as being contrary to the divine law
both natural and revealed; and the canon law has proscribed the taking any, the
least, increase for the loan of money as a mortal sin.

BUT in answer to this it may be observed, that the Mosaical precept was
clearly a political, and not a moral precept. It only prohibited the Jews from
taking usury from their brethren the Jews; but in express words permitted them
to take it of a stranger: which proves that the taking of moderate Usury, or a
reward for the use, for so the word signifies, is not malum in se, since it was
allowed where any but an Israelite was concerned. And as to Aristotle's reason,
deduced from the natural barrenness of money, the same may with equal force be
alleged of houses, which never breed houses; and twenty other things, which
nobody doubts it is lawful to make profit of by letting them to hire.

THESE authorities and arguments will I presume be sufficient to convince any
man that there is no connection at all between Religion and Usury. No wonder
however that many men are now puzzled on the subject, as that is no more than
has happened before to Aristotle, Cato, Seneca and Plutarch among the heathens;
to Cyprian, Lanctantius, Basil, Chrysostom, Gregory, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine
and Shakespeare, and other casuists, with whole councils among the Christians.
The Parliament of James I. inserted in his Usury law, which allowed 8 per cent.
interest, that this Statute shall not be construed or expounded to allow the
practice of Usury in point of religion or conscience. And the learned Bishop
Sanderson determined that to take six in the hundred is sabbath breaking,
because the plow goes on Sundays. If all these absurdities were to be admitted
as authorities, eveery man who receives interest of any kind should be
denominated a Usurer, and it must be believed, that he who receives only 6 per
cent breaks the Sabbath by so doing: indeed there are very few absurdities
which some of the above named writers have not maintained. Now I not only
differ with them all, after the example of Paley and Blackstone, but I go
farther. I mean plainly and unequivocally to assert, that so far from being
conformable to religion, the existing Usury laws are contrary to the spirit of
both the Jewish and Christian religions. The utmost extent of the law of Moses
goes no farther than an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth -- that is make
good what you have taken wrongfully; if you have taken Usury of a brother
restore it -- but the law against Usury says you shall forfeit both principal
and interest: which is at the rate of all your teeth and eyes for one. The
gospel directs that Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even
so to them Matt. vii. 12.
. Now suppose any one of these religious men should have charged 6, 12, or 18
per cent more than is allowed by law, would they wish, for such an overcharge,
to pay L 124? Impossible! If then they would not choose to be subject to this
law themselves, how can they desire to subject others to it consistently with
this sacred rule; which is the most comprehensive that ever was was laid down,
and contains in itself a whole body of morality and practical religion. It is
disgusting to hear religious tradesmen -- Paper-makers, Carpenters, Coopers,
Bakers, etc. declaiming against Usury, and, like the Pharisee in the Gospel,
thanking God that they are not as Usurers are -- unjust, covetous and
extortioners -- they never charged more than 6 per cent: whereas the true state
of the case is, they make a virtue of necessity, and their not having charged
more is solely owing to their not having money to charge upon. They can see the
more in the eye of their brother but not the beam which is in their own eye.
For what Paper-maker is there who does not, or would not if he could, make 100
per cent profit on every ^ag he grinds? What Carpenter would not make as large
a profit on every Chaise or other article he sells? Are there not Coopers who
ought to be indicted for extortion on every hoop they sell? Bakers too, who
condemn Usury, have not scrupled to sell twelve ounces of Bread for sixpence,
and yet these pious Gentlemen take upon them to assert that they never charged
more than 6 per cent. Might it not with propriety and justice be said of them
Thou that judge another do worse things. If the interest of money is to be
settled by religion, let us have the profits of trade settled by the same rule.
Let us have a maximum for the produce of the farmer's lands -- and let the
profits of the merchant, trader and mechanic be fixed at 6 per cent. How would
tradesmen like this? Not at all, although this would be equally just and
religious with fixing the interest of money, for the law of Moses says, that
Usury is not to be charged to a brother on victuals or any thing else, any more
than on money: therefore if the old laws against Usury are to be put in force,
let us have the old laws against Extortion enforced also Such is the va^ity and
number of cases in which extortions are practiced, that the Ju^an law against
Extortion exceeded an hundred chapters. Cicero ad Familiares, VIII. 8.
.

BUT without proceeding farther, enough has been said to warrant the
conclusion, that what is mentioned respecting Usury in the law of Moses, is not
binding on Christians; and this conclusion will be confirmed beyond all
possibility of doubt or cavil, when we consider that the subject is no where
mentioned in the New Testament. On the contrary an opposite doctrine is every
where inculcated, and the law of retaliation is totally abolished by the
gospel. I may therefore safely assert in the words of the Statute of Edward VI.
that, so far from being religious, the laws respecting Usury are Unlawful and
most impious.

CHAP. III. On the Moral tendency of Usury Laws.
THE next thing I propose to consider is, the moral tendency of Usury Laws. In
this point of view, however, I can see nothing but a total departure from, and
opposition to, all the rules of morality, notwithstanding the preambles to some
of those laws make a whining profession of regard to poor debtors. I conceive
the morality of trade consists in every man making the best bargain he can, and
adhereing with religious exactness to that bargain; whether he be a buyer or
seller, borrower or lender. Now if the rule I have here laid down is right, the
noncompliance with an agreement, must be a breach of morality. The Usury laws
not only sanction this breach, but they authorize the most outrageous
opposition to this rule of morality. They encourage a sharper to agree for the
payment of more than legal interest, and that possibly with a man who does not
know that such laws exist, and afterward to cheat him out of the whole sum,
principal and interest. Indeed they do more for they hold out a lure, and, as
it were, invite the sharper to commit this deliberate piece of villainy; for
one half of the money forfeited by the lender, is to go to the informer. Or
whole gangs of these sharpers may conspire together for the purpose of ruining
men who possess more property than themselves; and though they might not
ultimately succeed in their wicked designs, the laws put it in their power to
disturb the peace of families, and much better members of society than
themselves, for a certain time. If such be morality, then the Robbers of
Greece, the Pirates destroyed by Pompey, the plundering Arabs, and the Banditti
of Italy were good and moral people. For if the Usury Societies pretend that
they are going to get the money of Usurers for the Public Good, the ancient
Societies, I have mentioned, did not act without some pretense equally
plausible. The Greeks robbed because they thought it Honorable The writings of
the ancients prove the truth of this assertion in numerous Instances. For
example, Achilles could boast that he had sacked twelve cities in the Islands
of the Archipelago; and an equal number on the plains of Tray. And the latent
fire of Ulyses, at the Court of Alcinous was roused by the taunting
insinuation, that he was "Perhaps a merchant in pursuit of gain" vide Hom^r.
-- The Pirates pillaged mariners, because they called them Lawful Prey -- The
Arabs plunder because they think it the best and most easy mode of living --
The Banditti of Italy robbed and murdered travelers, because they thought
their doing so was a proof of courage. The principles however on which these
people acted were evidently vicious and immoral; but not more so, I conceive,
than is a law which authorizes a gang of people to associate for the purpose of
plundering those who perhaps never saw them or had at single transaction with
them. Would it not be equally moral, and more honorable to tolerate by a law
the practice of taking a man's property by force and violence? He would then
have a chance of defending himself.

ANOTHER kind of immorality attendant on Usury Laws is their rewarding
Informers; who, in all European countries, at least, are cons^dered as the very
outcasts, dregs and pests of society; whose hand, like that of Ishmael, is
against every man, and every man's hand against them, and with whom none but
men of "like occupation with themselves" will associate. Their word or oath, in
a court of justice, in England, is considered as of no consequence or value,
nor will it have any weight whatever, with a Jury of men of the very meanest
capacity. If then Usury laws have a tendency to reduce men to this degraded and
wretched state, no farther proof or argument need be sought after to convince
the world of the Immorality of them.

CHAP. IV. On the justice of Usury Laws.
THE question respecting the Justice of Usury laws is determined by the laws
themselves. The law of England, on a conviction of usurious practices, enjoins
a forfeiture of three times the amount of the capital loaned. The law of the
State of Connecticut also enacts that Every person who shall take, accept and
receive by any way or means, more than Six Dollars for the use of One Hundred
Dollars, for a year, shall forfeit and lose for such offense, the full value of
the money so lent; one moiety thereof to the public Treasury of this State, the
other half to the Informer who shall sue for and prosecute the same to effect.
Now it will, at first sight, be evident to every person that no man, although
he were more learned than Yelverton, or Littleton, or Coke, or Hales, or
Blackstone, or Mansfield, or all of them together, can ever prove that there is
any justice in such most horrid and barbarous forfeitures. With a Goth, Vandal
or Monk, they might indeed be justice, but never can pass for such in any
enlightened or liberal state of Society. Any thing in the Usury law of
Connecticut, which has the least appearance of justice, is that part of it
which directs the proceedings to be by a bill in equity And even this part is
unjust, for, in strict justice no more than what is paid over and above the
current value of the money, ought to be deducted.
. In that way the lender loses the Interest only, and certainly that is the
utmost extent that any legislature had a right to proceed to: but to take away
the principal, to reduce a man to beggary and ruin, for an action which is not
either immoral or unjust, certainly has much more of the appearance of violence
and robbery, than of justice, in it -- and I am most fully convinced that no
Law makers had a ^ight to pass such laws, as they are evidently both immoral
and unjust. But admitting there ought to be Usury laws, those which now exist
appear to be just the contrary of what they ought to be; for living is at least
fifteen times as expensive now, as it was when the Interest of money was 10 or
12 per cent. In the 12th Century a fat ox and a meal of bread for an hundred
men could be had for two shillings; and twenty horses might be fed for four
pence. In the 13th Century, wheat might be bought for a shilling, and oats for
four pence a quarter, a goose for four pence, a lamb for six pence, and fowls
at a penny for a couple. Such were generally the prices for several ages
afterward; and I have seen a tavern bill for Queen Elizabeth, her attendants
and servants, for a breakfast on Turkeys, Fowls, Claret, etc. which did not
amount to more than 4 s. 8 d. sterling, a little more than a breakfast for one
man costs now. Is it not strange then that legislators should have been so
extremely hard upon money, as to lessen its value in proportion as the value of
(...) other articles of trade increases? Does this look like justice?

ANOTHER species of injustice which the Usury laws sanction, is their
tolerating a species of persecution against men of property. Governor Jay, in
his last speech to the legislature of New York, complains that men of otherwise
irreproachable character are guilty of the practice of Usury. Usury is merely a
speculative point on which men may naturally be expected to differ in opinion.
Governor Jay is an enemy to the practice; but he speaks of it in the language
of a Gentleman. Very different however is the case with the generality of
people, and the Societies, who converse on the subject. They represent people
who have money to lend as a set of Robbers, Swindlers, Extortioners, and I know
not what beside; and they succeed in raising an odium against monied men
amongst unthinking people, who neither understand or examine the matter. It
would be prudent in such people to follow the advice of an ancient writer, who
says, Understand first, and than rebuke. Let them consider that NO MAN IS
OBLIGED TO BORROW MONEY. But if I have money to lend, and another man wishes to
borrow it, surely I have a right to consider his ability to repay it, the
inconvenience I might be put to by lending, the value of money, and to demand
interest accordingly. If he accepts my offer that in itself is a demonstration
that he cannot do better elsewhere, and is it just that after I have done
better than any other person for him, he should have it in his power to cheat
me? If (says Blackstone Comment. Vol. 2. p. 456.
) I borrow L100 to employ in a beneficial trade, it is but equitable that the
lender should have a proportion of my gains. This is certainly agreeable to the
nature and spirit of trade; for if a Farmer has corn, or cattle, or any other
article to sell, or a Merchant has goods for sale, it will be useless for me to
tell them what the price of those articles was ten or an hundred years ago, and
demand the articles at that price: they will insist on the present market
price, and if I will not give that they will go elsewhere. I have paid 16
Dollars for a barrel of Flour; this I should doubtless have been glad to get at
the old price of 5 Dollars, but as I knew it was then worth 16 Dollars to the
seller, I was obliged to pay so much; -- and in justice the case ought to be
the same with money. When money is scarce and much wanted it ought to produce a
larger profit, just as all other articles in trade do.

THERE are great numbers of people in the world who are past labor, and who
have saved a sum of money sufficient to support them in cheap times; but when
the necessaries of life are advanced to three times the amount of their
ordinary value, is it just to oblige such people to take common interest for
their money, and thus to cut them off from two thirds of the nourishments, etc.
which are necessary to the support and comfort of life?

BUT another glaring inconsistency and injustice ^n the Usury law is this --
Money that is lent on usurious Interest is generally, if not always, obtained
by the pressing and, sometimes repeated solicitations of the ^orrower; yet the
lender is to bear the whole burden of pains are penalties, and the borrower is
to be rewarded for his perfidy, if he turns informer, and cheats the lender out
of both principal and interest. Certainly these things ought not so to be. If
men are to be tempted and bribed to violate every principle of good faith and
honor, why are not the penalties of the law to fall equally on the borrower,
seeing, if this is a crime, that he is equally culpable. Nay he is probably
more so, for no doubt he always borrows wi^h a view to his own advantage; and
the advantages on his side are generally much more considerable I know a very
respectable Gentleman who borrowed 20,000 Dollars at New York at 4 per cent per
month, with which he made a clear profit of 1500 Dollars in less than four
months.
than on those of the lender; who, if the borrower happens to fail in his
schemes, frequently loses his money without the assistance of the Usury law.
Upon the whole we may safely conclude that there is no more justice in the law
for defining Usury and punishing Usurers, than there was in that which
condemned women to the flames for having fits, and which reflected equal
disgrace on both Old and New England.

CHAP. V. On the Necessity for the existence of Usury Laws.
THE next thing to be remarked on, is the Necessity for the existence of Usury
laws. This necessity will appear to be very trifling indeed (...) it be once
admitted that money, like every other article of exchange and merchandise, if
left to its own simple operation, will find its own value. That it will do this
is proved by a variety of facts, none of which I think is stronger than that of
the variation in the price of gold and silver, according as it is scarce or
plenty. In China the proportion between gold and silver is as one to ten, that
is, one ounce of gold is worth ten ^unces of silver I suppose this is the
reason why merchants send out silver to China, it being worth near one third
more there than it is here.
. in other parts of the East Indies, the proportion varies from one to eleven,
twelve and thirteen. In ancient Greece it was as one ^o thirteen. In ancient
Rome as one to ten, but in the time of Tiberius it rose to thirteen. During the
reign of the Monks the variations were greater in extent and almost infinite in
number; but when Columbus first discovered America, the proportion was one to
twelve Vide Raynal, Hist. Philos. of Politic Tom. 3. 503.
. From that time the importations of silver from Mexico and Peru, have been
more than a counterpoise to the gold of Brazil, and it now requires near
fifteen ounces of silver, both in Europe and America, to purchase an ounce of
gold; but at times when silver has been scarce and much demanded, I have known
the proportion reduced as low as one to twelve, in England. The relative value
of gold and silver being thus clearly proved to be governed by circumstances,
there can be little doubt, but the value of money, in general, would always be
determined by the quantity, as it ought to be, therefore there can be no
necessity for fixing it by law.

BUT I will mention another fact, which I think will settle the matter beyond
dispute. In peaceable times, when money is plenty in Euro^e, it is never worth
more than 3, 4 or 5 per cent. In England particularly, so late as the year
1792, L 100 of Annuities which pay only 3 per cent. Interest, were worth L 97,
and it was difficult to get 4 per cent. on Mortgages: L^nd also in general did
not produce more than 3 per cent. and in America money was sufficiently plen^y
to raise the Funds considerably above par. It is only in times like these, when
the ruinous war carried on in Europe, and the great increase in the trade of
this country, has made money scarce there, and much demanded here, that more
than a very moderate rate of Interest can be obtained. Where then is the
necessity or propr^ety of preventing the man who possesses money, from taking
advantage of this favorable time, any more than there is for preventing the
Farmer or Merchant from availing themselves of a good time for the sale of
their produce or Merchandise -- or the Jobber in Susquehanna or other lands,
from selling his speculations at 50, 100, or perhaps 500 It is curious to
remark that a person who is actively connected with one of the Societies for
plundering men of property by the Usury law, is now suing a Gentleman on his
own account, for 2500 Dollars on a land Job; for which sum it seems no value
ever was or ever will be given. I may also be allowed to remark in this place
that several members of the Norwich Society are deeply in debt; and the persons
sued have "unjustly detained" the money due to the Society, until the Secretary
of it has been obliged to shut himself up and demand a Letter of License for
five years from his creditors. Thus this great man who was going to force every
body to be honest, has not scrupled to take in every honest and industrious
tradesman from whom he could get credit. The company of Mr. Bishop is pretty
well described in general terms ^ Sam. xxii. 2. And every one that was in
distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented,
gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them. I will here
also observe, that I do not think I am correct in calling the Society the
Norwich Society, as most of the members live in the Town of Lisbon; and
although they have had many ab^tors in Norwich, I believe none, but their
Attorney, lives in the city who is actively connected with them, except also
some Informers. At one time the Society mustered partisans enough to put on the
appearance of popularity, but the people have begun to see the impropriety of
their conduct, insomuch that at the late election for State Representatives,
Mr. Hyde could not collect more than about one fourth of the votes of the
citizens of Norwich, and lost his election. One member of the Society also has
abandoned it, declaring he can no longer pursue the diabolical system; and Mr.
Hyde begins to think it an unpopular business, for I am told he now says he is
nothing more than Attorney to the Society, and has restrained its violence all
that was in his power. Query. -- Is it any part of the duty of an Attorney to
write to a Bankrupt in Philadelphia, desiring him to give all the information
he can concerning Usury cases?
per cent profit if he can? Indeed I should think there is a much greater
necessity for a restraint on people of this description, for it is pretty clear
that where one person is injured by the Interest of money, an hundred are
ruined by jobbing in lands.

CHAP. VI. On the Policy of Usury Laws.
AMONG the governments of Europe there is apparently some Policy in Usury Laws;
for their debts are enormous, and they are almost continually borrowing immense
sums of money. If they were obliged to pay a high interest; they know they
could not borrow enough for their schemes. If governments were obliged to pay
20 per cent Interest, they could no more carry on a seven years war, now, than
they could in those feudal times when they lev^ed their supplies by taking a
tenth, fif^een^h or twentieth part of every man's moveable property. Hence it
appears that though a high in erest would be bad policy for a government, it
would be good pol^cy for a people at large, as they could thereby escape many
evils, and much expense of blood and treasure.

BUT even this unsound pretense of policy, does not attach to the individual
states of America; their debts are but trifling, nor does there appear any
prospect of their being un^er the necessity of increasing them. The interest is
fixed, and it is of no consequence to the state (...) how much the capital
sells per L 100. The Usury laws therefore so far from being advantageous to
America, are on the other hand highly detrimental; for if those laws were
repealed, it is probable interest might for a little time be 10 or 12 per cent.
-- but as soon as the people of Europe understood that so much was legally to
be got here, they would make immense remittances to this country; sufficient, I
have no doubt, to reduce the Interest of money lower than 6 per cent. Plenty of
money would occasion a competition among the lenders, and the conduct of the
Banks at New York proves that if one lets out money for less than is now the
legal interest, another m^st also. An infl^x of wealth could not fail to be of
the m^st essential advantage to a country so extensive and so thinly peopled as
is America; for wherever riches are, industry, improvements and population will
naturally increase: and this country would soon prove to the world that it
could do without Usury laws, as well as did those greatly commercial nations
the Phoenicians, Carthaginians and Venetians.

THE history and experience of all ages and nations proves, that in order for
trade to be successful it must be free; and that the more free money has been
from legal shackles, in any country, so much the greater in proportion has been
the trade of that country. Thus among the Carthaginians, Phoenicians, Vene^ians
and Dutch, where loans were free, trade flourished most extensively: But in the
dark ages of Monkish superstition and civil tyranny, when interest was laid
under a total interdict, commerce was also at its lowest ebb, and fell entirely
into the hands of the Jews and Lombards: but when men's minds began to be
enlarged, when true religion, and real liberty revived, commerce grew again
into credit; and again introduced with itself its inseparable companion, the
doctrine of loans upon interest Blackstone's Comment. Vol. 2. p. 456.
. While interest was prohibited in England there was no trade, and the Jews and
Lombards, who clandestinely followed the practice of Usury, made 45 or 50 per
cent per annum; which demonstrates the absurdity and bad policy of restraints
on money. Henry VIII. El^zabeth, and James I. tolerated interest on loans, not
for the benefit of trade, but to enable themselves to borrow cheaper than of
the Jews and Lombards. However, as money became more free, trade began to
flourish, and England soon became the rival of Holland, which had usurped the
dominion of the seas. The freedom of money in Holland reduced the interest so
low that the Dutch remitted at least Seventy M^llions Sterling into England to
be invested in the English Funds, although they could not make more than about
3 per cent interest there. It is true that the rate of Interest is fixed by
law, in England, but the trade of England was nearly doubled at a time when
money would not produce legal Interes^. -- Now that no one but the Bank will
lend on legal interest, trade is again rapidly on the decline. Hence it appears
that the more free money has been in any country, the greater has been the
trade and prosperity of that country; and if the State legislatures of this
country should think proper to repeal the Usury laws existing here, although a
temporary inconvenience might arise from the Interest being more than 6 or 7
per cent, yet I am confident so great an influx of wealth would be occasioned
by that rise, as would soon reduce the rate of Interest below the present legal
standard. Is not this proved by every other species of merchandise? If an
article produces a high price in any country, is it not sent to that country
from all parts of the world until the price is reduced lower than in any other
country? Wheat was a^ 4 Dollars a bushel in England about two years ago, and
that price occasioned so great an importation as reduced the value to such a
degree as made it most for the advantage of merchants to send flour back to
America. Is it not then more than probable that the case would the same with
money? A^ least I should think it would be worthy the attention of
legislatures, so far as to induce them to try the experiment.

IT is said by some that Usury laws are necessary to restrain the avarice of
creditors, who, if their debtors cannot pay them, either advance the interest
or demand something for forbearance; that they are a restraint upon taking
advantage of a man's distressed circumstances, to extort a large interest from
him, and therefore they are politic. But if some creditors are apt to be hard
on debtors, why do they not borrow of other persons to save the advance of
Interest, or forbearance money, if they can do it on better terms? Their not
doing so is a sufficient presumption that they cannot get the money cheaper, or
perhaps, on any terms whatever, elsewhere. Again, where a man is in distressed
circumstances, who, except a very uncommon friend, would step forward and
relieve him from his distress, without a prospect of an advantage which should
be equivalent to the risk he runs? In this respect the Usury Law is so far from
being politic, that I am convinced many men fall to ruin and decay, because no
one for 6 per cent will advance money to relieve him at some critical
conjuncture; whereas if a man could legally bargain for a compensation of the
risk and danger he exposes himself to, ^he distressed person might be relieved,
he might support his credit, continue his business, and arrive at opulence,
inst^d of dragging on a life of poverty and ^^^^chedness. Why is this clamor
about the c^uelty of creditors? It is a stalking horse to (...) the diabolical
designs of certain persons. No one ever had better opportunities of knowing the
nature of Creditors and Debtors, than had the Lord Chancellor Thurlow, and he
has constantly and uniformly asserted that Where there is one cruel creditor
there are ten cruel debtors. Such too the general experience of mankind proves
to be the case.

There can be no good policy in a law which countenances a combination of
knaves to conspire the ruin of their more wealthy neighbors and creditors.
Their being enabled to attempt this will put a stop to all confidence and
credit. When that is gone there must be a great falling often in trade; for as
the commerce of this country is in a considerable degree, carried on by the
capital and credit of the more wealthy men, who assist the less wealthy, that
capita^ and credit may be withdrawn for want of confidence. Then the trade
which was supported that way will be at an end; Money will daily become more
scarce; the Farmers will want a market for their produce, and this proceeding,
instead of making money plenty at 6 per cent, may be productive of incalculable
evils. Many of these effects of the conspiracy, are already actually felt at
Norwich. But beside these natural evils, the depriving monied men of their
natural liberty of action might be productive of great artificial evils. Those
that are called monied men are few In reflecting on this circumstance it might
at first sight occasion surprise that the Usury Societies and other friends of
the Equality of Property, should wait for a determination of laws to make the
distribution. But on further consideration we shall perceive that the Landed,
Monied and Commercial Interests, united, form a majority of the inhabitants of
most countries, and, except in cases of Usury, are able to secure their
property from invasion by these Societies. In the time of Cromwell a Society of
Fifth-Monarchy men spr^ng up in England, who wanted to establish the reign of
"King Jesus," at they called him, on earth, and themselves as his sole Agents
in the management of worldly goods; but their hopes were rendered desperate by
the restoration of Charles II. Insomuch that one Venner, of Colen^an Street,
London, with his Society consisting of about sixty men, issued forth with arms
in their hands, and began to make violent and forcible seizure in the name of
their King; but the people at large sell on them and destroyed them all. Thus
it is that property is preserved, and its rights secured. Vid^ Bur^el's History
of his own (...) (Introduct.)
in comparison with the great body of the people, and if they are to^ hardly
used it would be no difficult matter for them in their turn to enter into such
a combination and conspiracy as would ruin the government and country. Suppose
the practices of these Societies were successfully and extensively put into
effect, and many men ruined by the same, would it be strange if a principle of
revenge should stimulate the monied interest to withdraw their property from
the Government, from the Banks, from the Merchants, etc. and to lodge it in
their own coffers until they obtained a redress of this grievance? It is easy
to foresee what would be the consequences of such a proceeding. Now as monied
men have the power of doing so much mischief, and do not use that power, I
think they ought to be treated with some indulgence, and not be expossed to be
harrassed and made uneasy by the dregs of society, and persons with whom they
never had a transaction. It appears to me that this restraint upon their acting
according to the rules of nature, of trade, and of common policy, ought to be
taken out of the way.

FROM what has been said before, it evidently appears that prohibiting the
lending of money is altogether impolitic. The present Usury laws are equal to a
prohibition, therefore they must be impolitic also. For what man will now lend
to an individual on personal security at Six per cent? The Funds of the
Government, the Banks, Turnpike Roads, etc. pay more, where the money can at
any time be commanded, which is not the case with individuals. Suppose a man
lends another man 100 Dollars on a note, he will think himself well off if he
gets the money in calling for it three times. If the note should be at two
months, he will get a Dollar discount (at 6 per cent) and if he has to hire a
chaise to go two or three miles, three times, that will cost him nine
shillings, so that the buyer of such a note stands a chance of being half a
dollar out of pocket besides being kept out of his money two or three months,
and taking as much trouble as would cost him a dollar or two more if he was to
hire a person to do the business. As payments are now made it is worth about 2
per cent to collect money, so that it cannot be expected any man in his senses
should enter into the system of lending at 6 per cent. It will therefore be
politic for the legislatures either totally to abolish Usury laws, or increase
the rate of interest, if they wish there should be any trade; for (I say it on
the authority of Blackstone) Unless money can be borrowed, trade cannot be
carried on.

ANOTHER circumstance which indicates the good policy of repealing the Usury
laws, is their being particularly injurious to certain classes of individuals.
Among these are some of the English nobility and gentry who possess entailed
Estates, which they cannot either sell or mortgage without an act of
Parliament. Persons of this description might get money for little more than
legal interest if their friends could give legal security for them; but as that
cannot be done they are obliged to raise money in a very disadvantageous way,
by Post-obit bonds, or Life Annuities. In the latter case a gentleman borrows a
certain sum of money for life, and mortgages the rent of his Estate for the
payment of the Interest, or Life Annuity, as it is called. He also has his life
Insured to the amount of the sum borrowed, at one of the offices, established
in London for such purposes, and the policy remains with the lender; who is
thereby enabled to recover from the office the original sum loaned, at the
death of the borrower. For money borrowed in this way the Interest and premium
of Insurance cannot amount to less than 15 or 18 per cent. per ^nn. when money
is plenty; yet a transaction of this kind is not adjudged to come within the
Statute against Usury.

BUT there it another and more numerous class of men who are much more
materially injured by the Usury laws, I mean the poorer fort of tradesmen.
Persons or Societies who Insure property at sea charge a premium in proportion
to the risk; for example the Premium of Insurance to the West Indies may now be
20 per cent; but in time of peace would be only two per cent. So if a poor
tradesman, who is thought in a hazardous situation, attempts to borrow money he
must pay 24 per cent. -- whereas if he could legally give the security of two
or three of his friends, it is probable the lender would rather let him have
the money at 8 or 10 per cent, than at 24 or even 30 per cent, and run the risk
of his single security and the Usury laws. Such is the difficulty this
description of men often experience in raising money, that they are frequently
obliged to send their goods into auctions and sell them for hal^ what they
cost. I could produce the example of a man in Norwich who bought a hogshead of
sugar for 9 Dollars per Cwt. at three months credit, and sold the same for 7
Dollars ready money, in order to raise a little current cash. Now supposing
there was no more than 10 Cwt. of sugar in the hogshead, he lost 20 Dollars by
the speculation, whereas if he had borrowed the money, he raised, at 2 per cent
a month, it would have cost him only 4 Dollars and a fraction; and had there
been no Usury law so that he could have given legal security, no doubt he could
have borrowed the sum for two Dollars. -- Probably similar instances occur
daily in larger Towns.

THUS in whatever way I view the Usury Laws, I can find in them neither
Religion, Morality, Justice, Necessity or Policy, but they contain abundance of
the directly contrary qualities. As men become enlightened, legislators will
see the necessity for repealing these laws, as they have already repealed
others which were made by the Monkish and gloomy professors of religion, in
earlier times. I could wish, for the honor of Connecticut, that its
leg^slators at their next meeting would try the experiment of either repealing
this law or at least taking away all the unjust penalties it demands. It those
mischievous and gloomy effects which some pretend to foresee should ^esult from
the repeal, it is an easy matter to reestablish the law at any time; but this
cannot be ascertained without a trial. For my own (...) am convinced that the
repeal will always (...) on those legislators by whom it is effected.

CHAP. VII. On the Legality of the proceedings of the Norwich Society.
I UNDERSTAND the Norwich, or rather the L^sb ^n Society consists of about
eight persons, who have entered into regular articles of agreement to prosecute
all cases of Usury may come to their knowledge. Mr. H^de, it seems, has not
degraded himself so far as to sign those (...). Mr. Cy^us Bishop (...)
constituted the Informer General of the (...), but he frequently descends lo
the mea^ office of a pimp Perhaps Mr. Hyde and Mr. Bishop may be surprised at
my making so free with their names* but their wonder will (...) ^hen I inform
them that I do it to return an oblig^ I am under to them, of the same kind. If
they will have the goodness to recollect the speeches they have made conc^rning
me at their meetings, and to individuals, they will then be surprised at the
lenity with when I have treated them. Without seeking it, I have obtained much
more information concerning them than I have m^ntioned; some of which, it is
true, relates to their private characters, with which I have no business; but I
might have stated other, much more severe, facts than any I have hinted at,
relative to their public transactions. My own knowledge of them amounts to very
little indeed, for I have not the honor to be much acquainted with Mr Hyde,
and as to Mr. Bishop I never saw him; or ever heard of him before he assured
his present important office. Allow me to add that as I intend to return to my
own coun^y as soon as peace is made, it will be of but little importance to me
whether the Society succeeds or not, or whether or not the Usur^ law is
repealed; but as I think the proceedings of the Society, and the laws, which
admit of such proceedings, are disgraceful to any government and to human
nature in general, I have as much right as any other man to animadvert on them;
or at least ^s much right as Mr. Hyde or Mr. Bishop have to make speeches
concerning me.
, going from house to house to know if the inhabitants cannot give him "a
little information about Usury." The di^^al or nocturnal meetings of the
Society, are kept in some degree secret; but as some of the members have been
unfaithful, their secrets get divulged. Hence it appears that their
consultations (to use the language of prosaic poetry) in point of principle,
were not excelled by the consultations held at the palace of Pandaemonium, and
for eloquence their debates might be compared to the bella inter intestina,
which has, if I mistake not, been celebrated by a Roman poet. On these
occasions it is determined against whom Mr. Hyde, as the Pope of Society, shall
issue his mandates, or Bulls, commanding the persons fixed on to do homage to
the Society, and to pay to Mr. Bishop 2600 or 600 Dollars, as the nature of the
case may be. This Summons is issued in the manner and form following.

To the Sheriff of the County of New London, his Deputy, or to either the
constables of the town of Norwich, or to either the Sheriffs of the city of
Norwich within the County aforesaid.

GREETING.
BY Authority of the State of Connecticut, you are hereby commanded to summon
-- of said city, to appear before the city Court to be holden (...) the city of
Norwich, within and for said city, on the second Tuesday of January next, then
and there to answer unto Cyrus Bishop of Lisbon in the County aforesaid, in a
plea that to the plaintiff the defendant render the sum of Twenty-Six Hundred
Dollars, which to the plaintiff (be the defendant owes,) and to the treasurer
of the State of Connecticut, and unjustly detains; whereupon the plaintiff
declares and says, that on the eleventh day of November, A. D. 1796, in the
city aforesaid, Benjamin Ames and Jonathan Lawrence, both of said city, applied
to the defendant and wanted the loan of Twenty-Six Hundred Dollars for the term
of six months; -- the defendant then proposed to let them the said Ames and
Lawrence have said sum on the following terms, -- that they the said Ames and
Lawrence must give their note for the Sum of Twenty-Six Hundred Dollars,
payable in six months from the date, and must allow at the rate of two per cent
per month, or at the rate of twenty four per cent per annum, and likewise
procure Simeon Hubbard and Company's, then of said City, indorsement on said
note, assuring the repayment of the money at the expiration of six months from
the date, to which proposal the said Ames and Lawrence by the agency of said
Ame^ agreed to, and then it was on said Eleventh day of November, corruptly
agreed by and between the said Ames and Lawrence, on the one part, and the
defendant on the other part in said city, and the defendant paid over to said
Ames and Lawrence, said sum of Twenty-Six Hundred Dollars, deducting and
retaining therefrom said Usurious Interest Three Hundred and Twelve Dollars,
and then received said Note of hand from said Ames and Lawrence, signed
Benjamin Ames and Company, payable to the defendant in six months from the
eleventh day of November, A. D. 1796, on this express and corrupt agreement --
that the said Ames and Lawrence was to allow more than at the rate of Six per
Cent per annum, viz. at the rate of Twenty-four per Cent per annum on said note
of Twenty six Hundred Dollars, which was included in said note, and the
Plaintiff further says, that said note become due on the eleventh day of May
last past, and on or about said 11th day, the defendant and said Ames and
Lawrence did in said city, in pursuance of said corrupt agreement, and in order
to carry into effect said usurious, wicked, unlawful and corrupt agreement, the
said Lawrence and Ames paid over to the defendant, and the defendant did then
receive (...) not more than at the ra^e of Six per Cent per annum, or Six
pounds upon the Hundred, by force of a wicked and corrupt bargain made as
aforesaid, and the defendant received the full contents of said note, which
contained more than the lawful Interest, and at the rate of Twenty-four per
Cent per annum from the sum actually received, all by the corrupt, usurious and
unlawful agreement made with said Ames and Lawrence, thereby the defendant in
said city, on said 11th day of May, did, against law by a corrupt agreement
receive on the said note of Twenty six Hundred Dollars, more than legal
Interest, by the hands of said Ames and Lawrence, and thereby the defendant by
his wicked and corrupt conduct as aforesaid, has forfeited said sum of Twenty
six Hundred Dollars, the one half to him that will prosecute the same to
effect, the other half to the Treasurer of the State, -- and thereby an action
has accrued to the plaintiff to recover of the defendant said sum of Twenty-six
Hundred Dollars, the one half to the Treasurer of the State and the other half
to himself, which sum of Twenty-six Hundred Dollars the defendant has never
paid in any way or manner, or any part thereof, though often requested and
demanded, which it to the damage of the plaintiff the sum of Twenty six Hundred
Dollars, and to recover the same by f^rce of the Statute law to be disposed of
as the Statute law directs, and costs, this suit is brought. Hereof fail not,
but of this writ make due service and return as the law directs.

Dated in Norwich, the 23d day December, A. D. 1797. ELISHA HYDE, Justice of
Peace.
Thirty-four Cents duty is paid. Certified, per Elisha Hyde, Justice of Peace.
A true Copy of the original writ, Test. Benjamin Tracy, City Sheriff.

THIS writ, with the exception of the name of the Defendant; is copied ad
literam, and it will appear that, however legal it may be, it is not very
logical. I have seen another writ signed by Mr. Hyde which has the following
passage in it. -- To the Plaintiff the Defendant owes, and unjustly detains,
whereupon the plaintiff Declares, and says that within the city aforesaid, the
Defendant Loaned and Lent Six Hundred Dollars to Eliphalet Bulkley and William
Lee, both then of Colchester in said County, which money was lent and delivered
to said Bulkley and Lee in said City on or about the 10th day of June, A. D.
1797, -- which money was returned and paid to the Defendant by said Bulkley and
Lee, on or about the 30th day of August last past and for the loan and
forbearance of said Six Hundred Dollars, less than sixty days from the delivery
thereof it was corrup^y agreed by and between the Defendant and said Bulkley
and Lee for the Defendant to receive of said Bulkley and Lee more than the
lawful interest arising thereon, etc. From the 10th of June to the 30th of
August, I conceive, there are eighty-one days: how the Society made it "less
than sixty days" I am at a loss to imagine. If they calculate no better on
general principles than on dates, I suspect they will find themselves on the
wrong side of the question. Indeed at all events I have no scruple about
believing that the Society will ultimately find that it has been mistaken. For
when these cases come to a full hearing in a court of justice, it will appear
that they are acting on an entirely new system; such as was never heard of, or
thought of, before, in any age or country. It will be discovered that in order
to a conviction the law requires "full evidence." I will not attempt to deny
that in some cases the person who borrowed money at usurious interest might be
admitted as a competent witness by a court of justice; but it is far from being
evident that this practice was contemplated by the framers of the Connecticut
Usury law. On the contrary there is strong presumptive evidence of an opposite
disposition. -- 1st. In the clause (called obsolete by Mr. Swift) which directs
Grand-jurors to present such persons as are of "Evil name for taking excessive
interest." Now if the lawmakers thought that the evidence of a person who had
transacted business with the Usurer was sufficient, what necessity was there
for this clause? 2. If a borrower has made a ^s^r^ous contract with a lender,
there is a proviso in the Statute, in case the borrower is prosecuted for
amount of the loan, which enables him, the defendant, to file a bill in equity,
whereby the plaintiff is obliged to be examined on oath touching the real sum
he lent; and he is to receive that sum only, without interest: Now if the
makers of this law had been of opinion that the evidence of the defendant
alone, would be sufficient proof of usurious practices, is it to be supposed
that they would have enacted a (...) of this nature? 3. These parts of the law
(the presentment and bill in equity) are to be carried into effect on the
evidence of "one credible witness;" but p. 12, it is Always provided, That
nothing in this act be construed to prevent any persons from proceeding upon
full Evidence in the common course of law against excessive Usury, and usurious
contracts. Thus there is a clear distinction made between one credible witness,
and "full evidence." This consideration alone I should think sufficient to
prove that the compilers of the Usury Statute had it not in contemplation to
admit the evidence of one man, and he a party in the transaction, as full
evidence. The legislators of those times must have known that a law so
construed would occasion many frauds, there being in all countries men who, for
the sake of a reward, would invent or forge a case in usury, and swear that
there was usury in transactions were none existed. They knew very well that
there is no method to prevent a man from giving a premium privately on money,
because every man has a natural right to do so if he chooses it; but it appears
to me that the law was only intended to prevent the receiving more than legal
interest by course of law. I know very little of the practice of the courts in
this country. But in England I believe I can safely assert, that there never
was a conviction on the Usury State on the evidence of an Informer: A man of
that description would not dare to show his face on any exchange in that
country. No doubt usurious practices are carried on to a considerable extent in
England, but prosecutions for Usury seldom occur, unless in cases of
Bankruptcy, or Death; and they do not then occur unless it can be proved by the
clear indisputable evidence of Deeds, Books, and disinterested living
witnesses; which is there called full evidence The Usury Statute directs that
in no case whatever shall contracts be made for more than 6 pet cent; but the
Legislature of Connecticut has allowed 12 per cent. per annum to the
proprietors of several (...) Bridges and Turn^ike roads in this State -- should
not this operate a virtual repeal of the Usury law? These kinds of security are
very different to responden^ (...) bonds, and policies of Insurance.
. If the Norwich (Lisbon) Society was in England their witnesses would not only
be thought ineligible, but the members of the Society themselves would be
indicted for a conspiracy: for such their associating, actually is. When a man
voluntarily comes forward with an information on a case of Usury, he it certain
of making himself infamous for the remainder of his life; and few men will run
this risk without a prospect of considerable advantage. I understand the
witnesses of the Society are to swear that they are totally disinterested; but
will any Jury ever believe some of of them? And even if a credible witness
should be examined the evidence of one man does not appear to be full evidence,
and therefore will not warrant the giving of a verdict for the plaintiff. And
when it is considered that the Usury Statute is almost obsolete; that it is so
highly injurious to society as it has been proved to be; that Juries ought to
do strict justice between all parties; and that they are judges of Law as well
as of Fact, a Jury ought to be extremely cautious about going into the practice
of convictions under this Statute.

SUCH indeed the conduct of Juries generally is in regard to old and barbarous
laws. In the cale where a man is killed in a duel the law calls it murder; but
if the duel is fought by mutual agreement, and nothing dishonorable appears on
the part of the survivor, a Jury always brings it in Manslaughter only. Juries
in England are generally very scrupulous in such cases, insomuch that I have
known a verdict of Manslaughter brought in when the Judges charged the Jury to
find the prisoner guilty of Murder. Two instances of this come within my own
immediate knowledge, namely, on the trials of Mr. Patterson and R. England for
killing Genesis Adair, and Mr. Rowles. Lycurgus the Spartan Lawgiver, in his code
of laws, directed that every child born with any natural defect should be put
to death. Draco decreed that every crime should be punished with death. It was
the law, of custom, at least, among the Poles, so late as the 13th century, to
put every old man, who was past labor, and every imperfect child to death. And
by the laws of France, England and Massachusetts Bay, every poor old woman who
happened to be troubled with convulsions, St. V^tus's dance, etc. was condemned
to be burnt for a witch. In the barbarous times when those laws were made, they
were carried into execution: but if they existed now, and a Jury was impanelled
to try a child for being crooked, a man for being old, a boy for stealing an
apple, or an old woman for having fits, would the Jury condemn these several
persons to death on such accounts? No Jury could be found to do this, whatever
the law might say, in any civilized country; in England such Laws as are
barbarous and unjust are always got rid of by what is called Fictions in law.
When the cases in Usury come to be heard, a Jury will no doubt be puzzled to
know how persons who never had a transaction with Cyrus Bishop, can be made to
owe him 4000 Dollars by law. If the law could be made to apply to the case, a
Jury would see the necessity for evading it by a fiction; but the Jurors before
whom these causes are brought will perceive that it never was the intention of
the law to do more than put it in the power of the person aggrieved, or his
heirs to injure the Usurer; they will learn that very few convictions have ever
been had under this Statute; that prosecutions like these of the Society have
never been carried on, or even thought of; and that they cannot either on the
principles of Law, Justice or Honor, give a verdict for Cyrus Bishop and
Company.

NORWICH, 5th MAY, 1798.
ERRATA.
First line of the Note, p. 22. for vanity read variety.


