ALCUIN; A DIALOGUE.

NEW YORK: Printed by T. and J. SWORDS, No. 99 Pearl-street.

1798.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Dialogue was put into my hands, the last spring, by a friend who
resides at a distance, with liberty to make it public. I have since been
informed that he has continued the discussion of the subject, in another
dialogue. The reception which the present publication shall meet will probably
determine the author to withhold or print the continuation.

E. H. SMITH.
New York, March, 1798.
ALCUIN.
PART I.
I CALLED last evening on Mrs. Carter. I had no previous acquaintance with her.
Her brother is a man of letters, who, nevertheless, finds little leisure from
the engagements of a toilsome profession. He scarcely spends an evening at
home, yet takes care to invite, specially and generally, to his house, every
one who enjoys the reputation of learning and probity. His sister became, on
the death of her husband, his housekeeper. She was always at home. The guests
who came in search of the man, finding him abroad, lingered a little as
politeness enjoined, but soon found something in the features and accents of
the lady, that induced them to prolong their stay, for their own sake: nay,
without any well-defined expectation of meeting their inviter, they felt
themselves disposed to repeat their visit. We must suppose the conversation of
the lady not destitute of attractions; but an additional, and, perhaps, the
strongest inducement, was the society of other visitants. The house became, at
length, a sort of rendezvous of persons of different ages and conditions, but
respectable for talents or virtues. A commodious apartment, excellent tea,
lemonade, and ice -- and wholesome fruits -- were added to the pleasures of
instructive society: no wonder that Mrs. Carter's coteric became the favorite
resort of the liberal and ingenious.

These things did not necessarily imply any uncommon merit in the lady. Skill
in the superintendence of a tea-table, affability and modesty, promptness to
inquire, and docility to listen, were all that were absolutely requisite in the
mistress of the ceremonies. Her apartment was nothing, perhaps, but a lyceum
open at stated hours, and to particular persons, who enjoyed, gratis, the
benefits of rational discourse, and agreeable repasts. Some one was required to
serve the guests, direct the menials, and maintain, with suitable vigilance,
the empire of cleanliness and order. This office might not be servile, merely
because it was voluntary. The influence of an unbribed inclination might
constitute the whole difference between her and a waiter at an inn, or the
porter of a theater.

Books are too often insipid. In reading, the senses are inert and sluggish, or
they are solicited by foreign objects. To spur up the flagging attention, or
check the rapidity of its flights and wildness of its excursions, are often
found to be impracticable. It is only on extraordinary occasions that this
faculty is at once sober and vigorous, active and obedient. The revolutions of
our minds may be watched and noted, but can seldom be explained to the
satisfaction of the inquisitive. All that the caprice of nature has left us, is
to profit by the casual presence of that which can, by no spell, be summoned or
detained.

I hate a lecturer. I find little or no benefit in listening to a man who does
not occasionally call upon me for my opinion, and allow me to canvass every
step in his argument. I cannot, with any satisfaction, survey a column, how
costly soever its materials, and classical its ornaments, when I am convinced
that its foundation is sand which the next tide will wash away. I equally
dislike formal debate, where each man, however few his ideas, is subjected to
the necessity of drawing them out to the length of a speech. A single proof, or
question, or hint, may be all that the state of the controversy, or the
reflections of the speaker, suggest: but this must be amplified and iterated,
till the sense, perhaps, is lost or enfeebled, that he may not fall below the
dignity of an orator. Conversation, careless, and unfettered, that is sometimes
abrupt and sententious, sometimes fugitive and brilliant, and sometimes copious
and declamatory, is a scene for which, without being much accustomed to it, I
entertain great affection. It blends, more happily than any other method of
instruction, utility and pleasure. No wonder I was desirous of knowing, long
before the opportunity was afforded me, how far these valuable purposes were
accomplished by the frequenters of Mrs. Carter's lyceum.

In the morning I had met the doctor at the bedside of a sick friend, who had
strength enough to introduce us to each other. At parting I received a special
invitation for the evening, and a general one to be in force at all other
times. At five o'clock I shut up my little school, and changed an alley in the
city -- dark, dirty, and narrow, as all alleys are -- for the fresh air and
smooth footing of the fields. I had not forgotten the doctor and his lyceum.
Shall I go (said I to myself), or shall I not? No, said the pride of poverty,
and the bashfulness of inexperience. I looked at my unpowdered locks, my
worsted stockings, and my pewter buckles. I bethought me of my embarrassed air,
and my uncouth gait. I pondered on the superciliousness of wealth and talents,
the awfulness of flowing muslin, the mighty task of hitting on a right movement
at entrance, and a right posture in sitting, and on the perplexing mysteries of
tea-table decorum: but, though confused and panic-struck, I was not vanquished.

I had some leisure, particularly in the evening. Could it be employed more
agreeably or usefully? To read, to write, to meditate; to watch a declining
moon, and the varying firmament, with the emotions of poetry or piety -- with
the optics of Dr. Young, or of De la Land -- were delightful occupations, and
all at my command. Eight hours of the twenty-four were consumed in repeating
the names and scrawling the forms of the alphabet, or in engraving on infantile
memories that twice three make six; the rest was employed in supplying an
exhausted, rather than craving, stomach; in sleep, that never knew, nor desired
to know, the luxury of down, and the pomp of tissue; in unravelling the mazes
of Dr. Waring; or in amplifying the seducing suppositions of, 'if I were a
king,' or, 'if I were a lover.' Few, indeed, are as happy as Alcuin. What is
requisite to perfect my felicity, but the blessings of health, which is
incompatible with periodical head-achs, and the visits of rheumatism; -- of
peace, which cannot maintain its post against the hum of a school, the discord
of cart-wheels, and the rhetoric of a notable landlady; -- of competence -- My
trade preserves me from starving and nakedness, but not from the discomforts of
scarcity, or the disgrace of shabbiness. Money, to give me leisure; and
exercise, to give me health; these are all my lot denies: in all other
respects, I am the happiest of mortals. The pleasures of society, indeed, I
seldom taste: that is, I have few opportunities of actual intercourse with that
part of mankind whose ideas extend beyond the occurrences of the neighborhood,
or the arrangements of their household. Not but that, when I want company, it
is always at hand. My solitude is populous, whenever my fancy thinks proper to
people it, and with the very beings that best suit my taste. These beings are,
perhaps, on account of my slender experience, too uniform, and somewhat
grotesque. Like some other dealers in fiction, I find it easier to give new
names to my visionary friends, and vary their condition, than to introduce a
genuine diversity into their characters. No one can work without materials. My
stock is slender. There are times when I feel a moment's regret that I do not
enjoy the means of enlarging it. -- But this detail, it must be owned, is a
little beside the purpose. I merely intended to have repeated my conversation
with Mrs. Carter, but have wandered, unawares, into a dissertation on my own
character. I shall now return, and mention that I cut short my evening
excursion, speeded homeward, and, after japanning anew my shoes, brushing my
hat, and equipping my body in its best geer, proceeded to the doctor's house.

I shall not stop to describe the company, or to dwell on those embarrassments
and awkwardnesses always incident to an unpolished wight like me. Suffice it to
say, that I was in a few minutes respectfully withdrawn into a corner, and
fortunately a near neighbor of the lady. To her, after much deliberation and
forethought, I addressed myself thus: "Pray, Madam, are you a federalist?"

The theme of discourse was political. The edicts of Carnot, and the commentary
of that profound jurist, Peter Porcupine, had furnished ample materials of
discussion. This was my hint. The question, to be sure, was strange; especially
addressed to a lady: but I could not, by all my study, light upon a better mode
of beginning discourse. She did not immediately answer. I resumed -- I see my
question produces a smile, and a pause.

True (said she). A smile may well be produced by its novelty, and a pause by
its difficulty.

Is it so hard to say what your creed is on this subject? Judging from the
slight observations of this evening, I should imagine that to you the theme was
far from being new.

She answered, that she had been often called upon to listen to discussions of
this sort, but did not recollect when her opinion had been asked.

Will you favor me (said I) with your opinion, notwithstanding?

Surely (she replied) you are in jest. What! ask a woman -- shallow and
inexperienced as all women are known to be, especially with regard to these
topics -- her opinion on any political question! What in the name of decency
have we to do with politics? If you inquire the price of this ribbon, or at
what shop I purchased that set of china, I may answer you, though I am not sure
you would be wiser for my answer. These things, you know, belong to the women's
province. We are surrounded by men and politicians. You must observe that they
consider themselves in an element congenial to their sex and station. The
daringness of female curiosity is well known; yet it is seldom so adventurous
as to attempt to penetrate into the mysteries of government.

It must be owned (said I) there is sufficient reason for this forbearance.
Most men have trades; but every woman has a trade. They are universally trained
to the use of the needle, and the government of a family. No wonder that they
should be most willing to handle topics that are connected with their daily
employment, and the arts in which they are proficient. -- Merchants may be
expected to dwell with most zeal on the prices of the day, and those numerous
incidents, domestic and foreign, by which commerce is affected. Lawyers may
quote the clauses of a law, or the articles of a treaty, without forgetting
their profession, or traveling, as they phrase it, out of the record.
Physicians will be most attached to livid carcases and sick beds. Women are
most eloquent on a fan or a tea-cup -- on the furniture of the nursery, or the
qualifications of a chambermaid. How should it be otherwise? In so doing, the
merchant, the lawyer, the physician, and the matron, may all equally be said to
stick to their lasts. Doubtless every one's last requires some or much of his
attention. The only fault lies in sometimes allowing it wholly to engross the
faculties, and often in overlooking considerations that are of the utmost
importance to them, even as members of a profession.

Well (said the lady), now you talk reasonably. Your inference is, that women
occupy their proper sphere, when they confine themselves to the tea-table and
their work-bag: but this sphere, whatever you may think, is narrow. They are
obliged to wander, at times, in search of variety. Most commonly they digress
into scandal; and this has been their eternal reproach; with how much reason
perhaps you can tell me.

Most unjustly, as it seems to me. Women profit by their opportunities. They
are trained to a particular art. Their minds are, of course, chiefly occupied
by images and associations drawn from this art. If this be blameable, it is not
more so in them, than in others. It is a circumstance that universally takes
place. It is by no means clear, that a change in this respect is either
possible or desirable. The arts of women are far from contemptible, whether we
consider the skill that is required by them, or, which is a better criterion,
their usefulness in society. They are more honorable than many professions
allotted to the men; those of soldier and barber for example; on one of which
we may justly bestow all the contempt, and on the other all the abhorrence we
have to spare. But though we may strive, we can never wholly extinguish, in
women, the best principle of human nature, curiosity. We cannot shut them out
from all commerce with the world. We may nearly withhold from them all
knowledge of the past, because that is chiefly contained in books; and it is
possible to interdict them from reading, or, to speak more accurately, withhold
from them those incitements to study, which no human beings bring into the
world with them, but must owe to external and favorable occurrences. But they
must be, in some degree, witnesses of what is passing. There is a limited
sphere, in which they are accurate observers. They see, and hear, somewhat of
the actions and characters of those around them. These are, of course,
remembered; become the topic of reflection; and, when opportunity offers, they
delight to produce and compare them. All this is perfectly natural and
reasonable. I cannot, for my life, discover any causes of censure in it.

Very well, indeed (cried the lady), I am glad to meet so zealous an advocate.
I am ready enough to adopt a plausible apology for the peculiarities of women.
And yet it is a new doctrine that would justify triflers and slanderers.
According to this system, it would be absurd to blame those who are perpetually
prying into other people's affairs, and industriously blazoning every
disadvantageous or suspicious tale.

My dear Madam, you mistake me. Artists may want skill; historians may be
partial. Far be it from me to applaud the malignant or the stupid. Ignorance
and envy are no favourities of mine, whether they have or have not a chin to be
shaved: but nothing would be more grossly absurd, than to suppose these defects
to be peculiar to female artists, or the historians of the tea-table. When
these defects appear in the most flagrant degree, they are generally capable of
an easy apology. If the sexes had, in reality, separate interests, and it were
not absurd to set more value on qualifications, on account of their belonging
to one of our own sex, it is the women who may justly triumph. Together with
power and property, the men have likewise asserted their superior claim to vice
and folly.

If I understand you rightly (said the lady), you are of opinion that the sexes
are essentially equal.

It appears to me (answered I), that human beings are molded by the
circumstances in which they are placed. In this they are all alike. The
differences that flow from the sexual distinction, are as nothing in the
balance.

And yet women are often reminded that none of their sex are to be found among
the formers of States, and the instructors of mankind -- that Pythagoras,
Lycurgus, and Socrates, Newton, and Lock, were not women.

True; nor were they mountain savages, nor helots, nor shoemakers. You might as
well expect a Laplander to write Greek spontaneously, and without instruction,
as that any one should be wise or skillful, without suitable opportunities. I
humbly presume one has a better chance of becoming an astronomer by gazing at
the stars through a telescope, than in eternally plying the needle, or snapping
the scissars. To settle a bill of fare, to lard a pig, to compose a pudding, to
carve a goose, are tasks that do not, in any remarkable degree, tend to instill
the love, or facilitate the acquisition of literature and science. Nay, I do
not form prodigious expectations even of one who reads a novel or comedy once a
month, or chants once a day to her harpsichord the hunter's foolish invocation
to Phoebus or Cynthia. Women are generally superficial and ignorant, because
they are generally cooks and sempstresses. Men are the slaves of habit. It is
doubtful whether the career of the species will ever terminate in knowledge.
Certain it is, they began in ignorance. Habit has given permanence to errors,
which ignorance had previously rendered universal. They are prompt to consound
things, which are really distinct; and to persevere in a path to which they
have been accustomed. Hence it is that certain employments have been
exclusively assigned to women, and that their sex is supposed to disqualify
them for any other. Women are defective. They are seldom or never
metaphysicians, chemists, or lawgivers. Why? Because they are sempstresses and
cooks. This is unavoidable. Such is the unalterable constitution of human
nature. They cannot read who never saw an alphabet. They who know no tool but
the needle, cannot be skillful at the pen.

Yes (said the lady); of all forms of injustice, that is the most egregious
which makes the circumstance of sex a reason for excluding one half of mankind
from all those paths which lead to usefulness and honor.

Without doubt (returned I) there is abundance of injustice in the sentence;
yet it is possible to misapprehend, and to overrate the injury that flows from
the established order of things. If a certain part of every community must be
condemned to servile and mechanical professions, it matters not of what sex
they may be. If the benefits of leisure and science be, of necessity, the
portion of a few, why should we be anxious to which sex the preference is
given? The evil lies in so much of human capacity being thus fettered and
perverted. This allotment is sad. Perhaps it is unnecessary. Perhaps that
precept of justice is practicable, which requires that each man should take his
share of the labor, and enjoy his portion of the rest: that the tasks now
assigned to a few, might be divided among the whole; and what now degenerates
into ceaseless and brutalizing toil, might, by an equitable distribution, be
changed into agreeable and useful exercise. Perhaps this inequality is
incurable. In either case it is to be lamented, and, as far as possible,
mitigated. Now, the question of what sex either of those classes may be
composed, is of no importance. Though we must admit the claims of the female
sex to an equality with the other, we cannot allow them to be superior. The
state of the ignorant, servile, and laborious, is entitled to compassion and
relief; not because they are women, nor because they are men; but simply
because they are rational. -- Among savage nations the women are slaves. They
till the ground, and cook the victuals. Such is the condition of half of the
community -- deplorable, without doubt; but it would be neither more nor less
so, if the sexes were equally distributed through each class.

But, the burden is unequal (said Mrs. Carter), since the strength of the
females is less.

What matters it (returned I) whether my strength be much or little, if I am
tasked to the amount of it, and no more; and no task can go beyond.

But nature (said the lady) has subjected us to peculiar infirmities and
hardships. In consideration of what we suffer as mothers and nurses, I think we
ought to be exempted from the same proportion of labor.

It is hard (said I) to determine what is the amount of your pains as mothers
and nurses. Have not ease and luxury a tendency to increase that amount? Is not
the sustenance of infant offspring in every view a privilege? Of all changes in
their condition, that which should transfer to men the task of nurturing the
innocence, and helplessness of infancy, would, I should imagine, be to mothers
the least acceptable.

I do not complain of this province. It is not, however, exempt from danger and
trouble. It makes a large demand upon our time and attention. Ought not this to
be considered in the distribution of tasks and duties?

Certainly. I was afraid you would imagine, that too much regard had been paid
to it; that the circle of female pursuits had been too much contracted on this
account.

I, indeed (rejoined the lady), think it by far too much contracted. But I
cannot give the authors of our institutions credit for any such motives. On the
contrary, I think we have the highest reason to complain of our exclusion from
many professions which might afford us, in common with men, the means of
subsistence and independence.

How far, dear Madam, is your complaint well grounded? What is it excludes you
from the various occupations in use among us? Cannot a female be a trader? I
know no law or custom that forbids it. You may, at any time, draw a subsistence
from wages, if your station in life, or your education has rendered you
sufficiently robust. No one will deride you, or punish you, for attempting to
hew wood or bring water. If we rarely see you driving a team, or beating the
anvil, is it not a favorable circumstance? In every family there are various
duties. Certainly the most toilsome and rugged do not fall to the lot of women.
If your employment be for the most part sedentary and recluse, to be exempted
from an intemperate exertion of the muscles, or to be estranged from scenes of
vulgar concourse, might be deemed a privilege. The last of these advantages,
however, is not yours; for do we not buy most of our meat, herbs, and fruit, of
women? In the distribution of employments, the chief or only difference,
perhaps, is, that those which require most strength, or more unremitted
exertion of it, belong to the males: and yet, there is nothing obligatory or
inviolable in this arrangement. In the country, the maid that milks, and the
man that ploughs, if discontented with their present office, may make an
exchange, without breach of law, or offense to decorum. If you possess stock,
by which to purchase the labor of others -- and stock may accumulate in your
hands as well as in ours -- there is no species of manufacture in which you are
forbidden to employ it.

But are we not (cried the lady) excluded from the liberal professions?

Why, that may admit of question. You have free access, for example, to the
accompting-house. It would be somewhat ludicrous, I own, to see you at the
Exchange, or superintending the delivery of a cargo. Yet, this would attract
our notice, merely because it is singular; not because it is disgraceful or
criminal: but if the singularity be a sufficient objection, we know that these
offices are not necessary. The profession of a merchant may be pursued with
success and dignity, without being a constant visitor of the quay or the
coffee-house. In the trading cities of Europe, there are bankers and merchants
of your sex, to whom that consideration is attached, to which they are entitled
by their skill, their integrity, or their opulence.

But what apology can you make for our exclusion from the class of physicians?

To a certain extent, the exclusion is imaginary. My grandmother was a
tolerable physician. She had much personal experience; and her skill was, I
assure you, in much request among her neighbors. It is true, she wisely
forbore to tamper with diseases of an uncommon or complicated nature. Her
experience was wholly personal. But that was accidental. She might have added,
if she had chosen, the experience of others to her own.

But the law --

True, we are not accustomed to see female pleaders at the bar. I never wish to
see them there. But the law, as a science, is open to their curiosity, or their
benevolence. It may be even practiced as a source of gain, without obliging us
to frequent and public exhibitions.

Well (said the lady), let us dismiss the lawyer and the physician, and turn
our eye to the pulpit. That, at least, is a sanctuary which women must not
profane.

It is only (replied I) in some sects that divinity, the business of explaining
to men their religious duty, is a trade. In such, custom or law, or the canons
of their faith, have confined the pulpit to men: perhaps the distinction,
wherever it is found, is an article of their religious creed, and,
consequently, is no topic of complaint, since the propriety of this exclusion
must be admitted by every member of the sect, whether male or female. But there
are other sects which admit females into the class of preachers. With them,
indeed, this distinction, if lucrative at all, is only indirectly so; and its
profits are not greater to one sex than to the other. But there is no religious
society in which women are debarred from the privileges of superior sanctity.
The christian religion has done much to level the distinctions of property, and
rank, and sex. Perhaps, in reviewing the history of mankind, we shall find the
authority derived from a real, or pretended intercourse with heaven, pretty
generally divided between them. And after all, what do these restrictions
amount to? If some pursuits are monopolized by men, others are appropriated to
you. If it appear that your occupations have least of toil, are most friendly
to purity of manners, to delicacy of sensation, to intellectual improvement,
and activity, or to public usefulness; if it should appear that your skill is
always in such demand as to afford you employment when you stand in need of it;
if, though few in number, they may be so generally and constantly useful, as
always to furnish you subsistence; or, at least, to expose you, by their
vicissitudes, to the pressure of want as rarely as it is incident to men; you
cannot reasonably complain: but, in my opinion, all this is true.

Perhaps not (replied the lady): yet I must own your statement is plausible. I
shall not take much pains to confute it. It is evident, that, for some reason
or other, the liberal professions, those which require most vigor of mind,
greatest extent of knowledge, and most commerce with books and with enlightened
society, are occupied only by men. If contrary instances occur, they are rare,
and must be considered as exceptions.

Admitting these facts (said I), I do not see reason for drawing mortifying
inferences from them. For my part, I entertain but little respect for what are
called the liberal professions, and, indeed, but little for any profession
whatever. If their motive be gain, and that it is which constitutes them a
profession, they seem to be, all of them, nearly on a level in point of
dignity. The consideration of usefulness is of more value. He that roots out a
national vice, or checks the ravages of a pestilence, is, no doubt, a
respectable personage: but it is no man's trade to perform these services. How
does a mercenary divine, or lawyer, or physician, differ from a dishonest
chimney-sweep? The most that can be dreaded from a chimney-sweep is the
spoiling of our dinner, or a little temporary alarm; but what injuries may we
not dread from the abuses of law, medicine, or divinity! Honesty, you will say,
is the best policy. Whatever it be, it is not the road to wealth. To the
purposes of a profession, as such, it is not subservient. Degrees, and
examinations, and licenses, may qualify us for the trade; but benevolence needs
not their aid to refine its skill, or augment its activity. Some portion of
their time and their efforts must be employed by those who need, in obtaining
the means of subsistence. The less tiresome, boisterous and servile that task
is, which necessity enjoins; the less tendency it has to harden our hearts, to
benumb our intellects, to undermine our health. The more leisure it affords us
to gratify our curiosity and cultivate our moral discernment, the better. Here
is a criterion for the choice of a profession, and which obliges us to consider
the condition of women as preferable.

I cannot perceive it. But it matters nothing what field may be open, if our
education does not qualify us to range over it. What think you of female
education? Mine has been frivolous. I can make a pie, and cut out a gown. For
this only I am indebted to my teachers. If I have added any thing to these
valuable seize, it is through my own efforts, and not by the assistance
or encouragement of others.

And ought it not to be so? What can render men wise but their own efforts?
Does curiosity derive no encouragement from the possession of the power and
materials? You are taught to read and to write: quills, paper, and books are at
hand. Instruments and machines are forthcoming to those who can purchase them.
If you be insensible to the pleasures and benefits of knowledge, and are
therefore ignorant and trifling, it is not for want of assistance and
encouragement.

I shall find no difficulty (said the lady) to admit that the system is not
such as to condemn all women, without exception, to stupidity. As it is, we
have only to lament, that a sentence so unjust is executed on, by far, the
greater number. But you forget how seldom those who are most fortunately
situated, are permitted to cater for themselves. Their conduct, in this case,
as in all others, is subject to the control of others who are guided by
established prejudices, and are careful to remember that we are women. They
think a being of this sex is to be instructed in a manner different from those
of another. Schools, and colleges, and public instructors are provided in all
the abstruse sciences and learned languages; but whatever may be their
advantages, are not women totally excluded from them?

It would be prudent (said I), in the first place, to ascertain the amount of
those advantages, before we indulge ourselves in lamenting the loss of them.
Let us consider whether a public education be not unfavourable to moral and
intellectual improvement; or, at least, whether it be preferable to the
domestic method; -- whether most knowledge be obtained by listening to hired
professors, or by reading books; -- whether the abstruse sciences be best
studied in a closet, or a college; -- whether the ancient tongues be worth
learning; -- whether, since languages are of no use but as avenues to
knowledge, our native tongue, especially in its present state of refinement, be
not the best. Before we lament the exclusion of women from colleges, all these
points must be settled: unless they shall be precluded by reflecting, that
places of public education, which are colleges in all respects but the name,
are, perhaps, as numerous for females as for males.

They differ (said the lady) from colleges in this, that a very different plan
of instruction is followed. I know of no female school where Latin is taught,
or geometry, or chemistry.

Yet, Madam, there are female geometricians, and chemists, and scholars, not a
few. Were I desirous that my son or daughter should become either of these, I
should not deem the assistance of a college Indispensible. Suppose an anatomist
should open a school to pupils of both sexes, and solicit equally their
attendance; would you comply with the invitation?

No; because that pursuit has no attractions for me. But if I had a friend
whose curiosity was directed to it, why should I dissuade her from it?

Perhaps (said I) you are but little acquainted with the real circumstances of
such a scene. If your disdain of prejudices should prompt you to adventure one
visit, I question whether you would find an inclination to repeat it.

Perhaps not (said she); but that mode of instruction in all the experimental
sciences is not, perhaps, the best. A numerous company can derive little
benefit from a dissection in their presence. A closer and more deliberate
inspection than the circumstances of a large company will allow, seems
requisite. But the assembly need not be a mixed one. Objections on the score of
delicacy, though they are more specious than sound, and owe their force more to
our weakness than our wisdom, would be removed by making the whole company,
professor and pupils, female. But this would be obviating an imaginary evil, at
the price of a real benefit. Nothing has been more injurious than the
separation of the sexes. They associate in childhood without restraint; but the
period quickly arrives when they are obliged to take different paths. Ideas,
maxims, and pursuits, wholly opposite, engross their attention. Different
systems of morality, different languages, or, at least, the same words with a
different set meanings, are adopted. All intercourse between them is fettered
and embarrassed. On one side, all is reserve and artifice. On the other,
adulation and affected humility. The same end must be compassed by opposite
means. The man must affect a disproportionable ardour; while the woman must
counterfeit indifference and aversion. Her tongue has no office, but to belie
the sentiments of her heart, and the dictates of her understanding.

By marriage she loses all right to separate property. The will of her husband
is the criterion of all her duties. All merit is comprised in unlimited
obedience. She must not expostulate or rebel. In all contests with him, she
must hope to prevail by blandishments and tears; not by appeals to justice and
addresses to reason. She will be most applauded when she smiles with most
perseverance on her oppressor, and when, with the undistinguishing attachment
of a dog, no caprice or cruelty shall be able to estrange her affection.

Surely, Madam, this picture is exaggerated. You derive it from some other
source than your own experience, or even your own observation.

No; I believe the picture to be generally exact. No doubt there are
exceptions. I believe myself to be one. I think myself exempt from the grosser
defects of women; but by no means free from the influence of a mistaken
education. But why should you think the picture exaggerated? Man is the
strongest. This is the reason why, in the earliest stage of society, the
females are slaves. The tendency of rational improvement is to equalize
conditions; to abolish all distinctions, but those that are founded in truth
and reason; to limit the reign of brute force, and uncontrollable accidents.
Women have unquestionably benefited by the progress that has hitherto taken
place. If I look abroad, I may see reason to congratulate myself on being born
in this age and country. Women, that are no where totally exempt from
servitude, no where admitted to their true rank in society, may yet be subject
to different degrees or kinds of servitude. Perhaps there is no country in the
world where the yoke is lighter than here. But this persuasion, though, in one
view, it may afford us consolation, ought not to blind us to our true
condition, or weaken our efforts to remove the evils that still oppress us. It
is manifest, that we are hardly and unjustly treated. The natives of the most
distant regions do not less resemble each other, than the male and female of
the same tribe, in consequence of the different discipline to which they are
subject. Now, this is palpably absurd. Men and women are partakers of the same
nature. They are rational beings; and, as such, the same principles of truth
and equity must be applicable to both.

To this I replied, Certainly, Madam: but it is obvious to inquire to which of
the sexes the distinction is most favorable. In some respects, different paths
are allotted to them, but I am apt to suspect that of the woman to be strewed
with fewest thorns; to be beset with fewest asperities; and to lead, if not
absolutely in conformity to truth and equity, yet with fewest deviations from
it. There are evils incident to your condition as women. As human beings, we
all lie under considerable disadvantages; but it is of an unequal lot that you
complain. The institutions of society have injuriously and capriciously
distinguished you. True it is, laws, which have commonly been male births, have
treated you unjustly; but it has been with that species of injustice that has
given birth to nobles and kings. They have distinguished you by irrational and
undeserved indulgences. They have exempted you from a thousand toils and cares.
Their tenderness has secluded you from tumult and noise: your persons are
sacred from profane violences; your eyes from ghastly spectacles; your ears
from a thousand discords, by which ours are incessantly invaded. Yours are the
peacefullest recesses of the mansion: your hours glide along in sportive chat,
in harmless recreation, or voluptuous indolence; or in labor so light, as
scarcely to be termed encroachments on the reign of contemplation. Your
industry, delights in the graceful and minute: it enlarges the empire of the
senses, and improves the flexibility of the fibers. The art of the needle, by
the luster of its hues and the delicacy of its touches, is able to mimic all
the forms of nature, and pourtray all the images of fancy: and the needle but
prepares the hand for doing wonders on the harp; for conjuring up the 'piano'
to melt, and the 'forte' to astound us.

This (cried the lady) is a very partial description. It can apply only to the
opulent, and but to few of them. Meanwhile, how shall we estimate the hardships
of the lower class? You have only pronounced a panegyric on indolence and
luxury. Eminent virtue and true happiness are not to be found in this element.

True (returned I). I have only attempted to justify the male sex from the
charge of cruelty. Ease and luxury are pernicious. Kings and nobles, the rich
and the idle, enjoy no genuine content. Their lot is hard enough; but still it
is better than brutal ignorance and unintermitted toil; than nakedness and
hunger. There must be one condition of society that approaches nearer than any
other to the standard of rectitude and happiness. For this it is our duty to
search; and, having found it, endeavor to reduce every other condition to this
desirable mean. It is useful, meanwhile, to ascertain the relative importance
of different conditions; and since deplorable evils are annexed to every state,
to discover in what respects, and in what degree, one is more or less eligible
than another. Half of the community are females. Let the whole community be
divided into classes; and let us inquire, whether the wives, and daughters, and
single women, of each class, be not placed in a more favorable situation than
the husbands, sons, and single men, of the same class. Our answer will surely
be in the affirmative.

There is (said the lady) but one important question relative to this subject.
Are women as high in the scale of social felicity and usefulness as they may
and ought to be?

To this (said I) there can be but one answer: No. At present they are only
higher on that scale than the men. You will observe, Madam, I speak only of
that state of society which we enjoy. If you had excluded sex from the
question, I must have made the same answer. Human beings, it is to be hoped,
are destined to a better condition on this stage, or some other, than is now
allotted them.

ALCUIN.
PART II.
THIS remark was succeeded by a pause on both sides. The lady seemed more
inclined to listen than talk. At length I ventured to resume the conversation.

Pray, Madam, permit me to return from this impertinent digression, and repeat
my question -- "Are you a federalist?"

And let me (replied she) repeat my answer -- What have I, as a woman, to do
with politics? Even the government of our country, which is said to be the
freest in the world, passes over women as if they were not. We are excluded
from all political rights without the least ceremony. Lawmakers thought as
little of comprehending us in their code of liberty, as if we were pigs, or
sheep. That female are exceptions to their general maxims, perhaps never
occurred to them. If it did, the idea was quietly discarded, without leaving
behind the slightest consciousness of inconsistency or injustice. If to uphold
and defend, as far as woman's little power extends, the constitution, against
violence; if to prefer a scheme of union and confederacy, to war and
dissension, entitle me to that name, I may justly be styled a federalist. But
if that title be incompatible with a belief that, in many particulars, this
constitution is unjust and absurd, I certainly cannot pretend to it. But how
should it be otherwise? While I am conscious of being an intelligent and moral
being; while I see myself denied, in so many cases, the exercise of my own
discretion; incapable of separate property; subject, in all periods of my life,
to the will of another, on whose bounty I am made to depend for food, raiment,
and shelter: when I see myself, in my relation to society, regarded merely as a
beast, or an insect; passed over, in the distribution of public duties, as
absolutely nothing, by those who disdain to assign the least apology for their
injustice -- what though politicians say I am nothing, it is impossible I
should assent to their opinion, as long as I am conscious of willing and
moving. If they generously admit me into the class of existence, but affirm
that I exist for no purpose but the convenience of the more dignified sex; that
I am not to be entrusted with the government of myself; that to foresee, to
deliberate and decide, belongs to others, while all my duties resolve
themselves into this precept, "listen and obey;" it is not for me to smile at
their tyranny, or receive, as my gospel, a code built upon such atrocious
maxims. No, I am no federalist.

You are, at least (said I), a severe and uncommon censor. You assign most
extraordinary reasons for your political heresy. You have many companions in
your aversion to the government, but, I suspect, are wholly singular in your
motives. There are few, even among your own sex, who reason in this manner.

Very probably; thoughtless and servile creatures! but that is not wonderful.
All despotism subsists by virtue of the errors and supineness of its slaves. If
their discernment was clear, their persons would be free. Brute strength has no
part in the government of multitudes: they are bound in the fetters of opinion.

The maxims of constitution-makers sound well. All power is derived from the
people. Liberty is every one's birthright. Since all cannot govern or
deliberate individually, it is just that they should elect their
representatives. That every one should possess, indirectly, and through the
medium of his representatives, a voice in the public councils; and should yield
to no will but that of an actual or virtual majority. Plausible and specious
maxims! but fallacious. What avails it to be told by any one, that he is an
advocate for liberty? we must first know what he means by the word. We shall
generally find that he intends only freedom to himself, and subjection to all
others. Suppose I place myself where I can conveniently mark the proceedings at
a general election: "All," says the code, "are free. Liberty is the immediate
gift of the Creator to all mankind, and is unalienable. Those that are subject
to the laws should possess a share in their enaction. This privilege can be
exercised, consistently with the maintenance of social order, in a large
society, only in the choice of deputies" A person advances with his ticket.
"Pray," says the officer, "are you twenty-one years of age?" -- "No." -- "Then
I cannot receive your vote; you are no citizen." Disconcerted and abashed, he
retires. A second assumes his place, "How long," says the officer, "have you
been an inhabitant of this State?" -- "Nineteen months and a few days." --
"None has a right to vote who has not completed two years residence." A third
approaches, who is rejected because his name is not found in the catalogue of
taxables. At length room is made for a fouth person. "Man," cries the
magistrate, "is your skin black or white?" -- "Black" -- "What, a sooty slave
dare to usurp the rights of freemen?" The way being now clear, I venture to
approach. "I am not a minor," say I to myself. "I was born in the State, and
cannot, therefore, be stigmatized as a foreigner. I pay taxes, for I have no
father or husband to pay them for me. Luckily my complexion is white. Surely my
vote will be received. But, no, I am a woman. Neither short residence, nor
poverty, nor age, nor color, nor sex, exempt from the jurisdiction of the
laws." "True," says the magistrate; "but they deprive you from bearing any part
in their formation." "So I perceive, but I cannot perceive the justice of your
pretentions to equality and liberty, when those principles are thus openly and
grossly violated."

If a stranger question me concerning the nature of our government, I answer,
that in this happy climate all men are free; the people are the source of all
authority; from them it flows, and to them, in due season, it returns. But in
what (says my friend) does this unrivalled and precious freedom consist? Not
(say I) in every man's governing himself, literally and individually; that is
impossible. Not in the control of an actual majority; they are by much too
numerous to deliberate commodiously, or decide expeditiously. No, our liberty
consists in the choice of our governors: all, as reason requires, have a part
in this choice, yet not without a few exceptions; for, in the first place, all
females are excepted. They, indeed, compose one half of the community; but, no
matter, women cannot possibly have any rights. Secondly, those whom the feudal
law calls minors, because they could not lift a shield, or manage a pike, are
excepted. They comprehend one half of the remainder. Thirdly, the poor. These
vary in number, but are sure to increase with the increase of luxury and
opulence, and to promote these is well known to be the aim of all wise
governors. Fourthly, those who have not been two years in the land: and,
lastly, slaves. It has been sagely decreed, that none but freemen shall enjoy
this privilege, and that all men are free but those that are slaves. When all
these are sifted out, a majority of the remainder are entitled to elect our
governor; provided, however, the candidate possess certain qualifications,
which you will excuse me from enumerating. I am tired of explaining this
charming system of equality and independence. Let the black, the young, the
poor, and the stranger, support their own claims. I am a woman. As such, I
cannot celebrate the equity of that scherne of government which classes me with
dogs and swine.

In this representation (said I) it must be allowed there is some truth; but do
you sufficiently distinguish between the form and spirit of a government? The
true condition of a nation cannot be described in a few words; nor can it be
found in the volumes of their laws. We know little or nothing when our
knowledge extends no farther than the forms of the constitutions As to any
direct part they bear in the government, the women of Turkey, Russia, and
America, are alike; but, surely, their actual condition, their dignity, and
freedom, are very different. The value of any government lies in the mode in
which it is exercised. If we consent to be ruled by another, our liberty may
still remain inviolate, or be infringed only when superior wisdom directs. Our
master may govern us agreeably to our own ideas, or may restrain and enforce us
only when our own views are mistaken.

No government is independent of popular opinion. By that it must necessarily
be sustained and modified. In the worst despotism there is a sphere of
discretion allotted to each man, which political authority must not violate.
How much soever is relinquished by the people, somewhat is always reserved. The
chief purpose of the wise is to make men their own governors, to persuade them
to practice the rules of equity without legal constraint: they will try to
lessen the quantity of government, without changing or multiplying the
depositories of it; to diminish the number of those cases in which authority is
required to interfere. We need not complain of the injustice of laws, if we
refrain, or do not find it needful to appeal to them: if we decide amicably our
differences, or refer them to an umpire of our own choice: if we trust not to
the subtilty of lawyers, and the prejudice of judges, but to our own eloquence,
and a tribunal of our neighbors. It matters not what power the laws give me
over the property or persons of others, if I do not choose to avail myself of
the privilege.

Then (said the lady) you think that forms of government are no subjects of
contest. It matters not by whom power is possessed, or how it is transferred;
whether we bestow our allegiance on a child or a lunatic; whether kings be made
by the accident of birth or wealth; whether supreme power be acquired by force,
or transmitted by inheritance, or conferred freely and periodically by the
suffrages of all that acknowledge its validity?

Doubtless (replied I) these considerations are of some moment; but cannot you
distinguish between power and the exercise of power, and see that the
importance of the first is derived wholly from the consideration of the last?

But how it shall be exercised (rejoined she) depends wholly on the views and
habits of him that has it. Avails it nothing whether the prince be mild or
austere, malignant or benevolent? If we must delegate authority, are we not
concerned to repose it with him who will use it to the best, rather than the
worst purposes? True it is, we should retain as much power over our own
conduct, maintain the sphere of our own discretion, as large and as inviolate
as possible. But we must, as long as we associate with mankind, forego, in some
particulars, our self-government, and submit to the direction of another; but
nothing interests me more nearly than a wise choice of a master. The wisest
member of society should, if possible, be selected for the guidance of the rest.

If an hundred persons be in want of a common dwelling, and the work cannot be
planned or executed by the whole, from the want of either skill or unanimity,
what is to be done? We must search out one who will do that which the
circumstances of the case will not allow us to do for ourselves. Is it not
obvious to inquire who among us possesses most skill, and most virtue to
control him in the use of it? Or shall we lay aside all regard to skill and
integrity, and consider merely who is the tallest, or richest, or fairest among
us, or admit his title that can prove that such an one was his father, or that
he himself is the eldest among the children of his father? In an affair which
is of common concern, shall we consign the province of deciding to a part, or
yield to the superior claims of a majority? If it happen that the smaller
number be distinguished by more accurate discernment, or extensive knowledge,
and, consequently, he that is chosen by the wiser few, will probably be, in
himself considered, more worthy than the favorite of the injudicious many; yet
what is the criterion which shall enable us to distinguish the sages from the
fools? And, when the selection is made, what means shall we use for expunging
from the catalogue all those whom age has enfeebled, or flattery or power
corrupted? If all this were effected, could we, at the same time, exclude evils
from our system, by which its benefits would be overweighed? Of all modes of
government, is not the sovereignty of the people, however incumbered with
inconveniences, yet attended by the fewest?

It is true (answered I) that one form of government may tend more than another
to generate selfishness and tyranny in him that rules, and ignorance and
profligacy in the subjects. If different forms be submitted to our choice, we
should elect that which deserves the preference. Suppose our countrymen would
be happier if they were subdivided into a thousand little independent
democratical republics, than they are under their present form, or than they
would be under an hereditary despot: then it behooves us to inquire by what, if
by any means, this subdivision may be effected, and, which is matter of equal
moment, how it can be maintained: but these, for the most part, are airy
speculations. If not absolutely hurtful, they are injurious, by being of
inferior utility to others which they exclude. If women be excluded from
political functions, it is sufficient that, in this exercise of these
functions, their happiness is amply consulted.

Say what you will (cried the lady), I shall ever consider it as a gross abuse
that we are hindered from sharing with you in the power of choosing our rulers,
and of making those laws to which we equally with yourselves are subject.

We claim the power (rejoined I); this cannot be denied; but I must maintain,
that as long as it is equitably exercised, no alteration is desirable. Shall
the young, the poor, the stranger, and the females, be admitted,
indiscriminately, to political privileges? Shall we annex no condition to a
voter but that he be a thing in human shape, not lunatic, and capable of
locomotion; and no qualifications to a candidate but the choice of a majority?
Would any benefit result from the change? Will it augment the likelihood that
the choice will fall upon the wisest? Will it endow the framers and
interpreters of law with more sagacity and moderation than they at present
possess?

Perhaps not (said she). I plead only for my own sex. Want of property, youth,
and servile condition, may, possibly, be well-founded objections; but mere sex
is a circumstance so purely physical; has so little essential influence beyond
what has flowed from the caprice of civil institutions on the qualities of mind
or person, that I cannot think of it without impatience. If the law should
exclude from all political functions every one who had a mole on his right
cheek, or whose stature did not exceed five feet six inches, who would not
condemn, without scruple, so unjust an institution? yet, in truth, the
injustice would be less than in the case of women. The distinction is no less
futile, but the injury is far greater, since it annihilates the political
existence of at least one half of the community.

But you appeared to grant (said I) that want of property and servile condition
are allowable disqualifications. Now, may not marriage be said to take away
both the liberty and property of women? at least, does it not bereave them of
that independent judgment which it is just to demand from a voter?

Not universally the property (answered she): so far as it has the effect you
mention, was there ever any absurdity more palpable, any injustice more
flagrant? But you well know there are cases in which women, by marriage, do not
relinquish their property. All women, however, are not wives and wards.
Granting that such are disqualified, what shall we say of those who are
indisputably single, affluent and independent? Against these no objection, in
the slightest degree plausible, can be urged. It would be strange folly to
suppose women of this class to be necessarily destitute of those qualities
which the station of citizen requires. We have only to examine the pretentions
of those who already occupy public stations. Most of them seem not to have
attained heights inaccessible to ordinary understandings; and yet the
delegation of women, however opulent and enlightened, would, probably, be a
more insupportable shock to the prejudices that prevail among us, than the
appointment of a youth of fifteen, or a beggar, or a stranger.

If this innovation be just (said I), the period for making it has not arrived.
You, Madam, are singular. Women in general do not reason in this manner. They
are contented with the post assigned them. If the rights of a citizen were
extended to them, they would not employ them -- stay till they desire it.

If they were wise (returned the lady), they would desire it: meanwhile, it is
an act of odious injustice to withhold it. This privilege is their due. By what
means have you discovered that they would not exercise it, if it were granted?
You cannot imagine but that some would step forth and occupy this station, when
the obstruction was removed.

I know little of women (said I); I have seldom approached them, much less have
I enjoyed their intimate society; yet, as a specimen of the prejudice you spoke
of, I must own I should be not a little surprised to hear of a woman proferring
her services as president or senator. It would be hard to restrain a smile to
see her rise in a popular assembly to discuss some mighty topic. I should gaze
as at a prodigy, and listen with a doubting heart: yet I might not refuse
devotion to the same woman in the character of household deity. As a mother,
pressing a charming babe to her bosom, as my companion in the paths of love, or
poetry, or science; as partaker with me in content, and an elegant sufficiency,
her dignity would shine forth in full splendor. Here all would be decency and
grace. But as a national ruler; as busied in political intrigues and cares; as
entrenched in the paper mounds of a secretary; as burdened with the gravity of
a judge; as bearing the standard in battle; or, even as a champion in
senatorial warfare, it would be difficult to behold her without regret and
disapprobation. These emotions I should not pretend to justify; but such, and
so difficult to vanquish, is prejudice.

Prejudices, countenanced by an experience so specious and universal, cannot be
suddenly subdued. I shall tell you, however, my genuine and deliberate opinion
on the subject. I have said that the inequality of the sexes was all that could
be admitted; that the superiority we deny to men can, with as little justice,
be ascribed to women: but this, in the strictest sense, is not true: on the
country, it must be allowed that women are superior.

We cannot fail to distinguish between the qualities of mind and those of
person. Whatever be the relation between the thinking principle, and the limbs
and organs of the body, it is manifest that they are distinct; insomuch, that
when we pass judgment on the qualities of the former, the latter is not
necessarily taken into view, or included in it. So, when we discourse of our
exterior and sensible qualities, we are supposed to exclude from our present
consideration, the endowments of the mind. This distinction is loose, but
sufficiently accurate for my purpose.

Have we not abundant reason to conclude that the principle of thought is, in
both sexes, the same; that it is subject to like influences; that like motives
and situations produce like effects? We are not concerned to know which of the
sexes has occupied the foremost place on the stage of human life. They would
not be beings of the same nature in whom different causes produced like
effects. It is sufficient that we can trace diversity in the effects to a
corresponding diversity in the circumstances; that women are such as
observation exhibits them, in consequence of those laws which belong to a
rational being, and which are common to both sexes: but such, beyond all doubt,
must be the result of our inquiries. In this respect, then, the sexes are equal.

But what opinion must be formed of their exterior or personal qualities? Are
not the members and organs of the female body as aptly suited to their purposes
as those of the male? The same, indeed, may be asserted of a mouse or a
grasshopper; but are not these purposes as wise and dignified, nay, are they not
precisely the same? Considering the female frame as the subject of impressions,
and the organ of intelligence, it appears to deserve the preference. What shall
we say of the acuteness and variety of your sensations; of the smoothness,
flexibility, and compass of your voice?

Beauty is a doubtful quality. Few men will scruple to resign the superiority
in this respect to women. The truth of this decision may be, perhaps,
physically demonstrated; or, perhaps, all our reasonings are vitiated, by this
circumstance, that the reasoner and his auditors are male. We all know in what
the sexual distinction consists, and what is the final cause of this
distinction. It is easier to conceive than describe that species of attraction
which sex annexes to the person. It would be fallacious, perhaps, to infer
female superiority, in an absolute and general sense, from the devotion which,
in certain cases, we are prone to pay them; which it is impossible to feel for
one of our own sex; and which is mutually felt: yet, methinks, the inference is
inevitable. When I reflect on the equality of mind, and attend to the feelings
which are roused in my bosom by the presence of accomplished and lovely women;
by the mere graces of their exterior, even when the magic of their voice
sleeps, and the eloquence of their eyes is mute; -- and, for the reality of
these feelings, if politeness did not forbid, I might quote the experience of
the present moment -- I am irresistibly induced to believe, that, of the two
sexes, yours is, on the whole, superior.

It is difficult, I know, to reason dispassionately on this subject: witness
the universal persuasion of mankind, that in grace, symmetry, and melody, the
preference is due to women. Yet, beside that opinion is no criterion of truth
but to him that harbors it, when I call upon all human kind as witnesses, it
is only one half of them, the individuals of one sex, that obey my call.

It may at first appear that men have generally ascribed intellectual
pre-eminence to themselves. Nothing, however, can be inferred from this. It is
doubtful whether they judge rightly on the question of what (...) is not
intrinsically excellent. Not seldom they have placed their superiority in that
which, rightly understood, should have been pregnant with ignominy and
humiliation. Should women themselves be found to concur in this belief, that
the other sex surpasses them in intelligence, it will avail but little. We must
still remember that opinion is evidence of nothing but its own existence. This
opinion, indeed, is peculiarly obnoxious. They merely repeat what they have
been taught; and their teachers have been men. The prevalence of this opinion,
if it does not evince the incurable defects of female capacity, may, at least,
be cited to prove in how mournful a degree that capacity has been neglected or
perverted. It is a branch of that prejudice which has so long darkened the
world, and taught men that nobles and kings were creatures of an order superior
to themselves.

Here the conversation was interrupted by one of the company, who, after
listening to us for some time, thought proper at last to approach, and
contribute his mite to our mutual edification. I soon after seized an
opportunity of withdrawing, but not without requesting and obtaining permission
to repeat my visit.

Since the last pages of these two or "ALCUIN" were put to pres, the Editor has
received, from the Author, the third and fourth Parts. They are considerably
more lengthy than these now published; but it is proposed to deliver them to
(...). Such persons, (...) continuing their subscription are requested to leave
their names with the Editors or with the Printers.

April24.

