AN ORATION, DELIVERED ON THE TWENTY-SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE. July 4, 1798, IN THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF NEW-BRUNSWICK.

BY JOSEPH WARREN SCOTT, A. B.

Published by Request.

NEW-BRUNSWICK: Printed by A. Blauvelt -- 1798.

The Author of the following oration, had not even the short allowance of a
week to prepare it. This circumstance, with the inexperience of youth, will
plead with a candid public an apology for its many imperfections.

AN ORATION, etc.
FRIENDS and FELLOW-CITIZENS,
WE have convened to celebrate the epoch of our country's freedom. On this
auspicious day, our fathers rose in concert, and declared us free and
independent. To support the generous resolve, they pledged their "lives, their
fortunes, and their sacred honor." Placed in a dignified, though responsible
situation, they proclaimed to the universe a decree, sanctioned by the smile of
Heaven: the attentive universe approved, and well might it approve; for thou, O
Liberty! did then begin, wide as creation, to "breathe thy spirit; to exalt,
illume, inspire the human race: and may thy vital rays over distant regions
diffuse celestial light, sublime, and animate the world."

WHEN on the FOURTH OF JULY, seventeen hundred and seventy-six, the first
legislators of America, dissolved the bonds of political connection with Great
Britain; when on that solemn, that eventful occasion, the dread alternative was
victory or death; a band of heroes came forth to vindicate their country's
injured rights. Highly appreciating the blessings of liberty, they viewed the
carnage of war as the thorn that ever accompanies the rose. With one voice they
declared, that the virtuous freedom of a day, an hour, was of more worth, than
the long ages of eternity in bondage. Impressed with a glowing sense of their
equal rights as men, their high unconquerable souls disdained submission. Fired
with the love of liberty and virtue, disinterestedly animated with the prospect
of futurity, they rushed to battle, to victory or death. The hallowed shrine of
freedom was stained with the blood of thousands, who fought for their country,
and became its martyrs. -- To recount the exploits of America in arms, during
the revolutionary contest, would at this time be unnecessary; they are too
deeply engraven on the memory of her sons ever to be forgotten. Aided by Heaven
her exertions were crowned with success; and that very power who had violated
her rights, was eventually compelled to acknowledge her independence. Hail
Independence! may the day which gave thee birth, be held in grateful
remembrance, till you bright luminary of the heavens "grow dim with age, till
nature sink in years."

WHEN the tempest of war subsided, our citizens mutually congratulated each
other on the pleasing return of peace. The veteran, whose nervous arm had dealt
death and destruction in the well fought field, exchanged the insignia of war
for the implements of domestic and social industry; and the Olive Branch of
peace was entwined round the laurels of victory. Peace is announced, and lo!
the officers and soldiers of our revolutionary army, instantly sheath their
swords and return to civil life; to the bosom of that country, whose rights
they had so nobly contended to establish. Glorious example! unequalled perhaps
in the annals of mankind. May we my young friends imitate their illustrious
patriotism at the present crisis, and be like them, soldiers in war; in peace,
citizens.

THE adoption of that constitution, under which we have the peculiar happiness
to live, confirmed, and gave energy to the American government. By it the
obedient subjects of the laws are protected in the full enjoyment of their
property and liberties, and the magistrate wears the sword of justice, "a
terror to evil doers and a praise to them who do well" Nothing now is wanting,
but the laudable exertions of our citizens, to perpetuate this excellent and
much admired constitution; to preserve our country free and happy, and to
transmit to posterity the brightest inheritance which we enjoy.

TO preserve in its purity and ardor the spirit which produced our national
freedom, is the object of this day's meeting. We are called on in an especial
manner this day, to place before our eyes the noble example of our fathers,
that we also, when the foe shall be at hand, may be prepared to sacrifice life,
property and ease, in support of the well gotten glory and independence of the
American name. We are called upon this day to caution ourselves against every
enemy to the independence of our common country.

LET us then remember, and let this truth be constantly present with our minds,
that tyranny is produced, rather from the licentiousness of the people, than
from the energy of any government: for when the liberty of the nation has
degenerated into licentiousness, the bands of society are torn asunder, the
ties of morality and religion are at once dissolved, and the petty and
tyrannical jurisdictions of the demagogues of the day precede for a short time
absolute ruin, or the strong hand of arbitrary power must be called in, to
support the debilitated, broken and tottering state.

HISTORY sanctions this truth by its high authority. The Athenian legislator
declared, that the stranger who intermeddled with the affairs of the republic,
should be put to instant death -- and if licentiousness and sedition dare to
appear, exemplary would have been the punishment, Athens, the principal of
confederated Greece, defied the unnumbered myriads of Persia; but the intrigues
of Phillip destroyed these two salutary laws: and on that day, the glory and
liberties of Greece perished forever. Rome furnishes many instances to the same
point. Whence arose the triumvirates? Whence the successive and alternate
despotism of Marius and Sylla? Whence the perpetual Dictator's power? In more
modern times, the same cause produced the usurpation and tyranny which marked
the -- Cromwell of England. Such also is and has been the case in France, through
a great part of the revolution, in which barbarity and cruelty have been
multiplied and refined to such a degree, as almost to exceed belief; to cause
the astonished spectator to start back with horror from the awful scene. France
has been the unhappy subject, and Europe the affrighted spectator of a drama
that mocks comparison.

OF all governments, the republican is most exposed to abuses of this kind.
Experience verifies this truth in the most clear and energetic language. In our
country have we seen, and still may we see, a faction avowedly devoted to a
foreign nation, exciting strife, contention and division, in order to throw us
into the arms of France: they calumniate the rulers of our choice; they
propagate the most gross misrepresentations and scandalous abuse against that
bright SUN of Columbia, whose glory shall not fade, whose name shall triumph
over time. They have sought with unremitted diligence to divide the people from
their government; but the wisdom and conspicuous patriotism of those
illustrious characters to whom America has delegated the authority, have
hitherto baffled all their attempts, and the bold iniquity of their proceedings
is exposed to full and public view: their insidious wiles have brought down on
their heads the just resentment of those honest citizens, whom they had for a
while deluded.

IF then our government be from its nature exposed to so dangerous an evil; if
our liberty and independence, made dear by a memorable purchase, may through
our disgraceful supineness be wrested from our hands; ought not all the
energies of our souls to be called into action? should we not tread the monster
beneath our feet? should we not unitedly oppose the hydra demon of destruction,
whose malicious aim is to degrade us below the condition of men, who have
learned to estimate the blessings of freedom.

BUT another subject connected with this, and of vast importance, claims our
immediate attention. Fellow citizens, the enemy is at the door! the enemies of
our happy country are unsheathing the sword against us: dark and latent have
been their machinations to effect our ruin. Rouse fathers! brothers! friends!
rouse and defend your country's rights: gird on your swords of trust, and
forbid that our nation be enslaved: proclaim aloud to the universe, that the
sons of New Jersey are prepared once more, to resume their wonted post,
foremost in the field of battle. Ten thousand ruffians, the engines and slaves
of arbitrary France, shall bite the dust: vengeance shall be glutted with her
unnumbered victims, before NEW JERSEY shall become the vassal of a foreign
power. Blasted be the tongue that shall dare to lisp our disgrace -- not a
soldier of his country shall survive to blush at the recital.

THE French republic, regardless of the laws and usages of nations, the faith
of treaties, and the sacred obligations which bind nations to each other, have
waged the most wanton and unjustifiable war on our commerce, and taken captive
and abused our mariners. They have sown, and endeavored to nourish the seeds of
discord and sedition among us -- they have insulted our government to its face
-- our messengers of peace and conciliation they have treated with the most
studied and unheard of contempt and indignity -- an enormous tribute has been
demanded as the price merely of negotiation -- the demand has been repeated
with a threat of invasion and total destruction: "Remember the fate of Venice;
dread our diplomatic skill."

THE language and conduct of France to the United States must excite in the
breast of every American, the liveliest indignation and most fixed
determination to avenge his country's wrongs. He will prepare himself with
alacrity for the impending contest. -- The idea of submission and tame
servility to the exorbitant demands of France, which will increase by being
granted, is too base to be entertained by free men.

AWFUL warnings are set to us by the treatment which the republics of Europe
have received from that haughty nation. The intriguing artifice of France has
brought Holland from the zenith of her glory to her present state of
degradation and infamy. Amsterdam, once the banking house of the world, the
emporium of wealth and trade, has been despoiled of her treasures, robbed of
her commerce extensive as the ocean, and broken of her naval power once so
mighty, that under the patriotc DEWITT, the empire of the sea was disputed with
England. Belgium, the seat of elegance and the arts, must forget her former
affluence. The delightful plains of Italy have been drenched with blood; and
Rome, mighty Rome; once mistress of the world, lies prostrate at the foot of
France. Venice, the boasted Republic of Venice, that for thirteen hundred years
had not acknowledged a master, has been conquered, bartered away, and her name
is not now to be found among the nations of the earth. Genoa has shared the
same fate of abasement and slavery. Switzerland, the historian's admiration and
the poet's theme -- even Switzerland has been subjugated; more indeed by the
arts and intrigues, than the arms of France. A nation divided, becomes an easy
conquest; in this way France has gone on conquering and to conquer. And shall
the United States share the ignominous fate of Holland, of Venice, of
Switzerland? shall their catastrophe be ours? Forbid it Guardian Genius of
America, forbid it virtue, forbid it O my country. This is the only republic
remaining on earth. France has destroyed the rest: and what is France? A
military despotism, the most flagitious, the most turbulent, the most
portentous the world ever knew.

THE day is come in which we must determine whether we will continue freemen,
or become slaves. And who is here that hesitates in his choice? who is here so
base as to become a tributary or a bondsman? If any, speak, for him do we
account a traitor to his country; for him do we account a wretch, unworthy a
habitation in this land of freemen. To arms then gallant youth of America! your
country calls you to arms. Let the example of your fathers animate you to duty.
I know you scorn to disgrace the names you bear.

THE patriots who gave up their lives a sacrifice in the establishment of our
independence, like guardian angels watch over our land, and commend the conduct
of those youthful warriors who are now dedicating themselves to their country;
listen to, and pursue their salutary admonition. Sons of Columbia! rise and
defend your injured rights, preserve inviolate your freedom and independence;
let not the insolent foe wrest from your hands that first blessing of heaven
for which our blood was shed. Let it not be said that your counselors have
planned the safety of your country without effect, that the martyrs of freedom
have bled in vain; prepare like men to obey the sacred injunctions. A
celebrated general once going to battle addressed his troops; "Fellow soldiers,
behold the roof under which you drew your first breath; lo! the fields that
give you nurture, the cradle in which is hushed to sleep your infant offspring,
the tombs of your ancestors, and the bed of your wives, whom you now go forth
to defend; think on these and prepare for battle." Let us also remember these
pledges of our affection and attachment, and prepare for the conflict.

I SEE the fire of patriotism kindle in every eye -- on each manly countenance
is depicted indignation against the lawless agressors, who have outraged the
perfidy and atrocity of Gothic darkness, and Vandal barbarity: A ferocious
horde whose aim is universal domination, whose means are bribery, corruption
and intrigue. -- No! illustrious heroes, who have fought and bled and died in
defense of American freedom; we will not dastardly relinquish that
independence, which you have purchased for us at so dear a rate: we swear to
you by the swords which we inherit from our venerable sires; and in the
presence of the God of nations, do we this day declare, that we will not,
disgracefully supine, neglect the call of our country; at that sacred call we
will rally round the standard of our liberty, that led on by our illustrious
peerless CHIEFTAIN; we may crush to the dust the wretches who dare dispute the
independence of America.

WITH such sentiments, and such a determination, let the UNITED WORLD appear
against us, we are safe, for the SONS of AMERICA ARE RESOLVED TO BE FREE.

MAY the Supreme Arbiter of the universe, protect and defend our extensive
land. May morals, civilization, and the arts increase; may our country be free,
virtuous and happy.

July 4, 1798.
THE END.

