THE Surprising Adventures AND SUFFERINGS OF JOHN RHODES, (...) SEAMAN OF
WORKINGTON.

CONTAINING

An account of his captivity and cruel treatment during eight years with the
Indians, and five years in different prisons amongst the Spaniards in
South-America.

By a Gentleman perfectly acquainted with the unfor^^^^^^ sufferer.

NEW YORK: Printed for R. COTTON, by G. FORMAN, (...) Water-Street. -- 1798.

INTRODUCTION.
IT is a true observation, that no man knows the strength of his own powers,
until put to that trial which cannot be withstood. The experiences of the man
whose narrative we have now published, is an indisputable testimony of its
truth.

A work of this kind must certainly prove entertaining, if not beneficial, to
the philanthropist; as he will find here recorded facts that displays the
customs, manners, and qualifications of this uncivilized race of mankind, in a
far more correct state than can be expected from transient authors, that build
only upon unstable reports, or vague conjectures. In most publicati^^ that
allots a few pages as an historical relation of Indian manners, laws, or
customs, there is no material variation recorded, otherwise than in their
ornamenting or decorating themselves, and sometimes in their colors: but not a
word said of their different methods of living, feasting, shooting, dancing,
and other singularities that almost every tribe has peculiar to itself* with
the diversity of game they kill; the humanity of some, the barbarity of others,
and a multitude ^^^stances that would be worth the time spent in the
attainment, if adopted by civilized nations.

The groundless and ignorant opinion, that nothin^* worthy of adoption can be
attained by christians from savage and untamed Indians, is a doctrine so
stupid, as it is void of truth.

It is evidently manifest by years of experience, that here the stately and
wise physician may improve in his science, and accumulate additional experience
in his profession; -- the tender parent may learn to inure her offspring to the
vicissitudes of revolving seasons, and secure to it (through God's blessing)
health of body and vigor of spirits; without the application of ill-timed
gallenicals, chymicals and drugs; -- the sage philosopher may be instructed in
his deep researches into the wisdom of creation, and overruling power of a
providence; -- the scholar may be convinced, that excellencies far above the
institutions of man, may be attained by a close application and investigation
of rude nature; and every class of people may be taught how to value health,
liberty, religion, society, and all other gracious dispensations of heaven,
that come under the appellation of mercies and blessings.

It is true, the Indians in their rude state are unacquainted with the moral
precepts of united society, or impulsive obedience, proceeding from
self-created distinctions arising from opulence, accumulated oftentimes by
means of fraud, deceit, oppression, and sometimes by murdering one another; so
that honor is conferred on us according to our possessions (without any regard
to the means) and not according to our merit; but this is not the case with the
poor despised Indians; there esteem and respect is conferred upon wisdom and
virtue; but the possessions of each tribe is all alike; like the apostles of
old, they have "all things in common;" and without our superfluities, they have
sufficiency for all their necessities, and live and die, entire strangers to
most all our calamities.

CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. 1. HOW he was first taken by the Indians, about sixty in number;
stripped naked and loaded with dead game. -- 2d. Their cruelty to him by blows
and bruises, because he could not bring his appetite to their savage way of
eating animals, being seventeen days. -- 3d. His tortures and sufferings, for
not being expert with the bow and arrow, to assist in (...) game. -- 4th. Their
staining him all over his body with a juice. -- 5th. His miraculous escape in
the night after two years bondage. CHAPTER II. 1st. His wandering in the woods
five days, and falling in with another tribe of about one hundred and twenty,
men, women and children. -- 2d. Their tender treatment to him, by light loads,
and plenty of their food. -- 3d. The surprising method the women take with a
new born child. -- 4th. His escape from this tribe after thirteen months
captivity. CHAPTER III. 1st. His wandering in a forest twelve days, and taken
by another tribe of about eighty, mostly grown (...) -- 2d. Their cruelty to
him, and consulting (...) sculping him alive. -- 3d. His joining the remainder
of the tribe next morning, and his narrow escape from death through the women's
ferocity, by the humanity of an^ old chief. -- 4th. An account of a banquet
amongst them which lasted five days. -- 5th. His escape from them during this
festival by means of a little horse, belonging to their Chief, after two years
and a half slavery. CHAPTER IV. 1st. His solitary wandering in the woods nine
days, and again meeting another tribe of about three hundred, all ages and both
sexes: the little horse getting from him the second night. -- 2d. Their tying
him to a tree to shoot him to death with arrows. -- 3d. His deliverance through
the lenity and feeling of the women, and their future kindness of him. -- 4th.
The men's uncommon severity toward him by blows and hunger. -- 5th. An
uncommon method this tribe has to find game. -- 6th. His escape while they were
all drunk asleep, with an intoxicating liquor extracted from Plantane leaves;
after fourteen months slavery. CHAPTER V. 1st. His wandering four days and
again captured by another tribe, of about one hundred. -- 2d. Their painting
him all over black and red, particularly so effectual on his left arm, that it
is visible to this day. -- 3d. The gravity and decorum of this tribe; their
abstaining from many excesses peculiar to the rest; but so lazy and indolent,
that they scarce kill game sufficient to support themselves. -- 4th. His
sufferings with this tribe by hunger, frequently going two days, without the
taste of any animal food; they devouring what they killed themselves. -- 5th.
His escape under pretense of going to seek game, after one year and nine months
bondage. -- 6th. The names of the tribes -- game they kill -- manner of
dressing -- kindling fires -- lodging -- making paint -- bows and arrows --
their marks and persons. CHAPTER VI. 1st. After wandering from this tribe two
days, came to an elegant house, inhabited by an Indian in the service of Spain.
-- 2d. His hospitable treatment. -- 3d. His departure, and taken up as a spy by
a party of Spaniards, and imprisoned one year and two months, at Mataolpa. --
4th. Then conveyed to Massiah and confined heavy ironed for six months. -- 5th.
Removed from thence to Nicaragua and put into a dungeon, ironed, eleven months;
from thence conducted to Granada, and remained a prisoner six months; from
thence to Leon, and confined heavy ironed, under ground, fourteen months; from
thence removed to Guatamala, where being confined in a dark, damp dungeon,
seven months, he lost the use of his left side, and both of his arms and legs.
-- 6th. Being removed from hence on board a ship, for Old Spain, to be sent to
the Mines for life; he made his escape at the Havannah, by getting on board an
English ship, after thirteen years captivity.
ADVENTURES. etc.
CHAP. I.
JOHN RHODES was born at Workington, in the year 1755. -- His first entering on
a seafaring life was when he was about twelve years of age, and his (...)
voyage was from his native place to Ireland, in (...) brig Sally, Capt. John
Steel; in this voyage, they met with some very severe weather, being attacked
with a most violent storm of wind and snow, and reduced to such extremities,
they had no hopes of the vessel weathering the storm, the ship becoming so
extreme leaky, it was impossible to keep her long above water; and the darkness
of the night prevented them from discovering what part of the channel they was
in, or what course to steer with plausible safety. -- Having been within sight
of the Irish shore several days, they was the more apprehensive of danger, by
being driven against a rock, if they could by their exertions keep the vessel
above water; but finding this totally impracticable, and the ship sinking very
fast, they put out the boat, and all hands, consisting of the Captain and seven
seamen, entrusted themselves to the mercy of ^he boisterous waves, although at
the same time, I expecting every minute to be swallowed up in the watery abyss:
this was a trial of youthful fortitude to our young Navigator; and in this
first trial of his courage, the providence of heaven was peculiarly displayed,
(...) in about five hours, they safely landed in Dund^lk Bay, and where they
experienced that hospitable treatment, which characterise the peasantry of
Ireland in cases of real distress -- their liberality is cordial, though the
donation from the circumstances of indigence, may be but scanty; but still they
cast their mite into the ^^a^ury of distress with cheerful alacrity, and only
regret the confined state of their abilities; from this place they proceeded in
another vessel to Whitehaven in England.

After this narrow escape from death, he made several European voyages without
any remarkable occurrence taking place. In the year 1773, the beginning of his
own manuscript Journal, he thus proceeds:

I now entered on board the Juno of Bristol, Captain Clarke, for the
slave trade on the coast of Guinea; we had a good passage, and took in 500 of
those unfortunate, and harmless people, and shocking to relate, no brute animal
could be used with more callous insensibility, and inhuman feeling than those
poor stolen, sacrificed creatures were in the ship: stored in like lumber logs,
chained together without regard to age, sex, or condition, and experiencing all
the inconveniences, and discomfitures unnoticed, that would be as a torture of
agony to another person for an hour: some time in November we arrived at
Jamaica that human slaughterhouse; where the poor Africans were disposed of as
so many horses, and drove home to the tyrant's stables with the lash of the
whip -- here I must leave them, and my execrations on their taskmasters
together.

I here entered a board a brig commanded by a C^eole named Peter Richardson to
go to Rat^n for Turtles. -- In Feb. 1774, we set sail from Montego Bay, and
although the distance from that to the place of our destination is not more than
six days sail, we was (...) weeks before we came to anchor; owing to a calm a
considerable part of the time, and the reverse by powerful contrary winds and
boisterous showers the rest of the time; wherein we was near being lost several
times, for part of the crew being sick, and the remainder almost spent with
continual fatigue, there was barely (...) sufficient to navigate the vessel,
and during the voyage three of the crew (of which myself was one) was washed
overboard and two of them drowned; which rendered the duty hard to the
survivors, being only six left, including the Captain and cabin boy; both of
which was obliged to do their portion of duty in common with the sailors; but
it required very forcible arguments, and even threats of violence from the men,
to bring the Captain under the necessary and self-defence subjection; and even
at one time when it was put to the ballot whether he should be confined o^ not,
and the crew take possession of the sloop; it was an (...) vote, two and two;
then it being determined that a casting vote should be given; it was decided by
lot which man should have the casting vote, and fortunately the lot fell upon
me, and I gave it in his favor; and for my faithfulness and integrity, I
incurred the curses and imprecations of his enemies, without measure; although, I
must acknowledge, my partial vote of seeming friendship, was no less than
deceit and hypocrisy; for I was not in the least disposed from principle to
display any singular favor toward him, had I not my own preservation and
safety in contemplation; for to speak the real sentiments of my mind, I dreaded
the command of the vessel devolving upon the crew much more than the austerity
of the present Captain; who, in every other respect, except in evincing an
ambitious and haughty superiority, was not blameable; for as to the provision
and liquor provided for the company, there was plenty and good; and I (...)
many times thought since, that my giving the (...) vote in his favor, was by
the overruling guidance and will of an all-seeing providence; for in a few
days afterward we experienced a favorable change of weather, and began
catching turtles, and in the space of thirty days we caught between ninety and
a hundred, and proceeded back toward Jamaica; but owing to (...) wind and a
strong current, we were driven through the gulf of Florida, and necessitated
to cast anchor in the river Missisippi -- We stayed here near-three days, and
renewed our voyage, and in about nineteen days arrived safe in Montego bay,
from whence we first failed; and during all this time the Captain was ignorant
of the design of the crew against his liberty, as before related, by which
means there was harmony and peace amongst us all, from that time till the end
of the voyage; had ^e been acquainted with the proceedings of the sloop's
company, o^ even entertained a suspicion of such a circumstance, it would
certainly have been productive of the most dreadful consequences, even at sea;
but if we did struggle through it until our arrival at the destined port, the
Captain would undoubtedly had the whole company put under an arrest, and as
bi^ds of a feather, probably been all hanged together; except the discovery had
been made unto him by an impeachment, then that individual, or more than one,
would, without shadow of doubt, been proportionably rewarded, if they had lived
to come ashore and give their evidence; but this would not have been the case;
for the most execrable vengeance was (...) him or them, that did betray their
accomplices; consequently, when we all was accused as guilty, no one could
produce justifiable testimony of his innocence; for every one would then claim
the prerogative of that plea; for my part I was almost tempted to reveal the
scheme to the Captain several times, but the terror of my mind, in consequence
of the threatened effects prevented it; for I knew it was out of the Captain's
power to shelter me from their vengeance, and of course death would have been
inevitable; so that by my silence the lives of all was preserved, and the mind
of the Captain remained in a state of calm quietude, and whether ever he did,
or not, hear any thing of the transactions, I cannot tell; for I immediately
(after being discharged from the sloop) entered on board another vessel called
the Nancy, Captain Furgas^ue, bound for Honduras, for Logwood and Mahogany, and
this voyage was completed some time in June, without any material occurrence
worth noticing.

I now entered on board a sloop commanded by Captain Woodhouse, called Betsey,
to make another voyage to ^he bay of Honduras. -- On the third of July we set
sail, fully persuaded in our minds that the bay of Honduras was the place of
our destination; but a few days after we was out of sight of land, the Captain
called the whole crew together (consisting of seven hands and a boy) and
informed us that his intention was to go to the Ist^mus of Darien, for mules
and ho^^^ed cattle -- judge our surprise by being thus deceived: every man on
board immediately united in one general voice, to turn the vessel round and go
back to Jamaica; there was no consultation in the case, for the whole crew was
moved as by instinct; and the Captain perceiving such a general determination
possessing the minds of all his men, and that resistance or hesitation would be
attended with effects injurious to his business, and disgraceful to him as a
master of a vessel, thought it most prudent to come to terms of capitulation,
and appease us with fair promises of acknowledgments extraordinary at our
return; but fair promises was not satisfactory to an enraged crew, we expected
and demanded something more substantial than Neptune's promises; and before we
would proceed further on the voyage, we compelled the Captain to acquies^e in
our conditional demands; that was, to allow each man one third additional
wages; to which requisition with reluctance he complied with: -- it must be
observed, that when a ship is at sea, it is quite an improper place for a
Captain to arrogate the prerogative of injustice, or tyrannical insult; there
are no back doors, nor interested peace-officers, or bribed bailiffs, to
oppress the distressed; but the rights of man, prevail there without respect of
persons.

The Captain finding there was no alternative, but the promising to do justice;
all parties became reconciled, and the affair was adjusted to all (...), to
(...) mutual satisfaction of Captain and crew, and we proceeded on our voyage.

In about twelve days we anchored a few leagues westward of Nombrede Dios, and
examining our cargo (consisting chiefly of dry goods, cutlery, hardware, and
toys) and finding it all safe and good; we began to assort it out in such
proportion and commodities, as appeared to us most likely to strike the fancy
of the natives (mostly Spaniards) this took us two or three days; we then
weighed and drawed toward the place, and anchored within a mile of it: the
Captain now dispatched a negro on shore who was fluent in the Spanish tongue,
to acquaint the inhabitants that he wanted a few mules, and some horned cattle;
for which he would exchange sundry European articles, what would suit them
best. This is a traffic that the Spaniards dwelling near the seaside is mostly
accustomed unto, especially with the English.

As soon as the inhabitants received this intelligence, they brought to the
shore a number of mules and horned cattle, a great many more than our Captain
had goods to exchange or, for room to take them; and consequently had his
choice, and after fixing upon about forty mules and thirty horned cattle, he
invited the Spaniards aboard, to choose such articles in return as they please;
and in the interim, the mules and cattle was brought on board and safely lodged
under deck; the Captain during this time was busily engaged with the people in
concluding upon the terms of exchange; and when he found that the cattle was
(...) safe on board, and the vessel previousl^ provided (...) water, and
provisions, he began to assume an haughty tone toward those innocent people;
and shocking to relate, his iniquitous design upon those harmless dealers,
began to manifest itself; for he ordered the crew to seize by force of arms,
those deluded people, and put them on shore without any one article of goods,
or the least acknowledgment of any kind ^or all their cattle: it was in vain
for them to attempt a resistance, or exclaim against the baseness of the
perfidy; there was no other alternative, in the present case (aboard the ship)
but humble supplications and entreaties for justice; and this being ineffectual
to accomplish the integrity of their cause, with aching hearts and
imprecations, they were put on shore, and without delay we put off to sea; but
such a disgust did the crew take at this proceeding of the Captain, that they
solemnly declared to make the affair known, as soon as they arrived at Jamaica;
this resolution was like thunder in his ears; for he was sensible that although
there was no court of justice, that could take recognizance of the affair, so
as to amount to a prosecution for the damage, the injured Spaniards sustained,
yet at the same time he was not ignorant how much his character, as a Captain
and trader, would be prejudiced by this disclosure; and knowing, without
purchasing the confidence of his men, he never could dispose of his ill-gotten
(...) to any advantage; he was under the disagreeable (...) of entering into a
second covenant of peace, (...) with them; for in the first place he deceived
(...) by a ^^ceitful shipping as to his intended course and business; and in
the next place, was guilty of the most base violation of good faith and
honesty, by openly robbing and daringly imposing upon the credulity and upright
intentions of the innocent and undesigning stranger.

His own reflections upon such vile misconduct (and one instance of which he
could not fly from) led him to adopt some measure to pacify his men, and secure
their secrecy; which he did by the following plan -- he promised them on the
faith of their not revealing either of the aforementioned two instances, the
full value of one ^^le each, exclusive of the additional pay to their wages,
for his deceiving them in the first place: to this proposition the crew
acquiesced, for it is not very common that sailors are very particular in their
punctilios of honor, or justice, where money step in between, for that is
generally a very powerful barrier between virtue and vice; for the former too
frequently dwindles away to a shadow, where the other two are united in
substance; and this was the case with us, both Captain and men -- "Old things
was past away and all become new," the poor Spaniards was entirely forgotten,
and conscience soon lulled asleep by virtue of two or three jugs of grog; every
one anticipating the highest marketable price for mules: but behold the vanity
of vain speculations, the great over-see^ of all things, and whose omnisciency
penetrates into the secrets of our hearts, overruled all our flattering hop^^
(...) blasted all our golden expectations; and in the (...) of our career of
self-accumulating pleasure, by the breath of his mouth, it vanished away like
smoke; for the justice of heaven overtook us.

We had been at sea about four days, when the weather began to appear
unfavorable, thick and heavy clouds, accompanied with intervening thunder and
lightning, portended approaching disasters; and the wind veering to a direct
opposite point of the compass, we could do no more than slacken sails, and lay
as still as possible, to prevent being driven out of our course: the weather
becoming more and more furious, and the thunder and lightning increasing with
uncommon vehemence, we began to entertain doubts of our safety* from the ill
consequences of the powder being stru^^ with the lightning -- From these
considerations we began to secure it as well as circumstances would admit; but
during this laborious and dangerous work, the mules began to grow restless with
the fright of the thunder and lightning; and in the issue, the principal part
got loose, and was so ungovernable, that we drea^^ ^very minute the vessel
would be sunk* and between the stamping and kicking of the mules, the noise and
rattling of the thunder, the running to and from and (woeful to say in such a
situation) the oaths (...) of the crew, with the tumbling about of the things
on board, the horned cattle became also outrageous* and (...) ^^ainable, and
even much more dangerous to be (...) than the mules; (...) that we (...) to
think (...) upon what method to take to save (...) a council was called upon
the subject: some was for letting things remain in their present state, and
trust to Providence; others were for killing the horned cattle, and throwing
them overboard; others again was for throwing part (...) all the mules
overboard, that in case we should by stress of weather be drove out of our
latitude, and to have its inclemency to combat with, we should have provision
in store; others again was for retaining as many of the mules as would enable
the Captain to fulfill his engagement -- but to all these proposals the Captain
advanced strong objections; he was for throwing overboard the number of mules
that would fall to the share of the crew when landed, and one more for himself,
so then, he said, every man on board would make an equal sacrifice; but the
sacrifice would not be proportionable to what every man would have left to risk
his life for by protecting; for one would have all, and the rest none.

This partial and self-interested plan, exasperated the crew highly, as it
manifestly proved the covetous disposition of the Captain; this produced
another council amongst the crew, who unanimously concluded, to cast as many of
the mules overboard, as in their opinion would lighten the vessel, for her to
ride on the waves without danger of oversetting; this determination being made
known to the Captain, he complied, although with evident marks of vexation and
regret* but being convinced that some such measure was (...) necessary for the
preservation of our lives, he ex^^^ed himself in common with the men, to hoist
the mules on deck, but in the disordered state they were in, together with the
horned cattle, joined to the tempestuous weather and terrible motions of the
vessel, we found it impracticable to get them on deck, and after seven or eight
hours fatigue in getting up two, we concluded to kill them under deck, and
fixing upon twenty of the worst, as well as our dismal situation would admit
of, we began to stab and choke them with cords and knocking them in the head;
any means that appeared plausible to dispatch them, and even this we found to
be a very difficult undertaking, and after we had done it, the lifting them on
deck was no little labor, but with unwearied diligence and toil we
acco^^plished this arduous task; but before we ha^^^ ^^nished, the sky began to
clear, and the^ (...) came calm, and in about ten hours we was (...) ^^ger; but
the wind still continuing in the same con^^^ point, we could not hoist sail to
proceed homeward^ and it was five days before the wind turned favorable, when
we proceeded forward with a pleasant gale, but being in want of water and fuel
we came to anchor at the mouth of a river for to procure what we wanted and
examine the state of the cattle, and other things that was needful to be done,
after such confusion as we was thrown in during the tempest; but it seems
heaven was not yet pacified for our iniquity, and treacherous conduct toward
the Spaniards, but had more ^^ath in reserve for us; although the origin of the
perfidy must be imputed to the Captain, our acquiescence, by sharing a portion
of the shameful plunder rendered us equally obnoxious and guilty; but it is a
doubt if such a thought ever entered the mind of one of us during the danger,
that it was the vengeance of heaven overtook us for our crime, or that one
supplication was presented to the throne of grace, for deliverance or
preservation; except oaths, curses, and profanation, may be substituted instead
of patience, prayer, and penitence.

That the weight of divine justice followed and rested upon us, in the sequel
will appear; for I (with thirteen years captivity) was the only one favored by
hea^^^ with longer days; for neither vessel, Captain, or (...) heard of after
my leaving the vessel, at (...) being captured by the Indians.

CHAPTER II.
BEING now at anchor about one mile from the shore, where we could easily
supply ourselves with what we stood in need of; it was my lot (and all
circumstances considered as miserable, and unfortunate as it was, a
providential one) to be sent on shore with five negroes (there was but one
white man on board besides myself, exclusive of the Captain and the boy) with
hatchets, cords, and water-vessels to cut wood, and procure water; this was no
difficult matter to do, as there was plenty of both, about ten rods from the
^^^^ing place; trees of an immense size, but the ground so thickly covered with
underwood, consisting of briers, wild vines, young trees, and such productions,
that we could scarce see each other six yards distance, but there being a very
clear stream of good water, but a short distance from our boat; the negro^s
(...) the filling of the water-casks, while I proceeded about a hundred yards
from them to cut wood; before I had cut down one tree, they had provided all
the water, and was gone toward the boat; I continued cutting for about three
quarters of an hour, when I heard their voices as coming toward me, being then
about half a quarter of a mile from our landing place; by the sound of my
ha^chet they could guide their footsteps toward me, and having two more
hatchets with them, we presently had wood enough for our purpose; and while I
was lopping off superfluous branches, they conveyed the substantial pieces to
the water side; when we had nearly finished our labor by their returning but
once more, I was greatly surprised at their long absence, and imputed it to
every cause that reason could suggest with probability; I sat down and waited
with an (...) impatience about fifteen minutes, but hearing, nor seeing nothing
of them, I began to be a little (...) of some misfortune, and again I cheered
my spirits with the thoughts that a part of them might be gone to the vessel
with the water, and the rest waiting their return; but not being able to
compose my mind upon the matter, I resolved upon going in search of (...); but
not taking the shortest course through the (...), as concluding it better
walking where they had been before dragging the woodL I found myself in a few
minutes in a much more pitiable situation than can be conceived; for I saw all
the last load of wood they took from me, laying on the ground -- I proceeded
forward, and as soon as I came so near to the borders of the thick wood, as to
look through from whence we came on shore, I heard (...) confusion of
inarticulate sounds, but still went forward, till to my astonishment and grief,
I saw the boat was gone, with all the water-casks and wood at the river side;
and in two minutes time, beheld but a few yards from me, a party of haggard
Indians (the cause of my companions deserting me was no longer a mystery) I saw
them before they saw me, and endeavored to secret myself from their sight,
which I was fortunate enough to do for a while, but they coming into the track
made by the negroes drawing the wood, it of course brought them very near to
me; I could see them at intervals frequently, through the small openings of the
under wood, and to all appearance in great consternation, by seeing the wood
laying on the ground, and such an opening made; they was presently close to me;
for I dare not move to elude their discovery, or attempt to escape from them,
for their bows and arrows with which they can do destructive execution, would
immediately been fatal, and sealed my eternal doom, as to further ex^^^tence in
this world; and what else could be (...) from such an enraged people,
consisting of (...) sixty uncivilized Savages.

They espied me, O, how welcome would the ^^^senger of eternity been to my poor
agitated soul, when the first pair of glaring eyes gave notice to the (...) of
my discovery: it is beyond the power of language to express, or abilities of a
painter to depict the ago^^^ing tumult and agitation of my soul, at the time.

Before they attempted to approach close to me (being not more than five yards
distance) several of them levelled their arrows toward me, and on the very
point of shooting, when one of the others made a kind of melancholy sound and
held up his hand, which indicated for them to desist for the present, till
further search was made for any more intruders upon their territories; this
being concluded upon, a party of them remained with me, with the venom of hell
in their countenances, while the remainder went for new discoveries; and in
about three quarters of an hour returned, by which I was convinced that my
comrades with the boat, had made their escape, as probably perceiving or
^earing the Indians in time to reach the boat before themselves were discovered.

Being returned, the first instance of their behavior (...) me, was, to make a
circle around the bush (...) ^^uld not conceal me, with arrows fixed; ready
(...) to let fly if I made the least resistance: (...) them now approached me
(which I found wa^ (...) that had before prevented my destruction) and ^^^ing
me very (...), quiet, and humble, which (...) must believe to be the case, they
immediately beg^n to strip me, and in such a savage manner that (...) was much
like the ferocity of a wild beast for the^^ did catch hold in any place, and so
tear to pieces; (...) my jacket and trowsers being pretty good and strong
cloth, I was pulled from one ^o another unmercifully for several minutes, and
thus reduced to perfect nakedness, not a vestige of my apparel left on me;
neither did they seem to pay the least notice to it afterward, but spurned it
contemptibly from them with their feet; if any one article belonging to me in
any measure attracted their curiosity, it was my hat, for that came easily from
my head, and retaining its natu^al shape and perfection, while all the rest of
my apparel lay scattered on the ground in broken fragments; they took up the
hat and viewed it several times, but not once put it on their heads, and in the
end it was left with the other tattered things.

In the next place they began to examine me, and comparing my skin to their's
with great nicety; this seemed to create great astonishment and surprise,
although the color of my skin at this time was none of the whitest; they did not
only view my skin, but turn me about so often and quick that I had the headache
powerfully, besides being almost giddy; for from the (...) they first began to
strip me, till they had done (...) me, could not be much less than an hour;
wh^^ they had done I was on the rack of despairing expectation* what would
follow next, although the terrors o^ (...) had in some degree aba^ed after so
long resp^^^; (...), (...), and sufferings was all the (...) I could deduce
from my situation, (...) in (...) or manner, I could form no ideas; but (...)
mind was "like the troubled sea," one wave of distress and anguish following
another, during their seeming consultation, how to dispose of their poor
helpless captive; it was not more than ten minutes before my suspense was
removed and my fate decreed, and now commences the carrer of my bondage, which
by various rotations and degrees attended with unheard of hardships, by hunger,
thirst, stripes, labor, wounds, cold, nakedness, and imprisonment under the
pressure of ponderous irons thirteen years.

They hurried me away for a mile or little more, to an opening where the ground
was almost clear from trees or underwood, and then immediately loaded me with
dead game of several kinds, and with which I was obliged to travel until
evening; it being now about two o'clock and the most piercing pains, as well as
fatigue I experienced; for being quite naked the briers and other ^^ious shrubs
running up and creeping on the ground, as well as intermixing with each other,
did so scratch and wound both my body and feet, that every limb was stroked
with blood; and with hunger, thir^t, and fatigue, I several times fell down
with my (...), and all the alleviation I received from them, was blows with
their bows or piercing with their arrows till I did arise; as for themselves,
they knew how to use precaution against the effects of the briars, and (...)
had some (very slight) covering on their (...) which protected them.

Well, I traveled till evening, when we came to the umbrage of some large
trees, where I found they did always resort to for their night's retirement,
when the business of the day would admit of it, by killing game sufficient for
their supper and breakfast, to reach home in time: the bones of animals that
was scattered about this spot, almost made me sink to the ground; I conceited
that I traced the vestiges of human sculh, logs, and arms, and expected to be
myself the next sacrifice.

They now unloaded me, and set me to gather fuel for the fire; this I began
with great (...), but I cannot say alacrity, although my terror was in some small
degree abated, as I thought while they had such plenty of animal food, they
would not kill me to feast upon; with these hopes I comforted myself and drawed
from them the best consolation I could, and procured the firewood as fast as
possible, knowing that it could not avail either way, toward rendering my
(...) ^^^ore distressing or dangerous, or remove the perturbation of my mind;
but even if sorrow and trouble had induced me to have been backward in this
work, there was too many eyes around me to admit of it: having provided
sufficiency of ^^ing, they began to clean the game (for till this time they had
been preparing for the night) and in this occupation I was obliged to be (...)
same time some was making a fire; the (...) of (...) being nearly the same with
every tribe, it will be (...) treated on in another chapter: after the fire
(...), and the animals washed at a small brook ^^^ning near the place, but the
greatest part of the entrails remaining in (as it is the blood they principally
have aversion unto) they prepared what they called a barbacue in their
language, and laid the animals thereon without dividing them; and before the
flesh was scarcely warm through, they began to devour it with wolveish
^^^^tites, and devoured an amazing quantity; but it (...) considered their
hunger was very intense, for (...) always go from morning till night fasting,
and (...) of the day is frequently exceeding labori^^ (...) during this
gluttonous feasting, I was not (...) to come near them; but this was no
mortification, for as hungry as I was, my appetite was com^^^ely satiated to
see them tear limb from limb, and (...) entrails hanging to the ground, and
gnawing like ^o many dogs, but without the least sign of covetousness and
anger, for the most plausible marks of cordiality and fellowship seemed to
exist; and when every ^^e was ^pplied, they pointed to the scattered fragments
on the ground, which consisted of bits and scraps of every thing that was
nasty; and called me with an hideous voice to come and partake of it.

I was hungry enough, but at this sight and invitation, I shook my head and
declined their offer; one of them then took a bit and brought to me, putting
^at to my mouth; I with my hand gently put it aside, (...) which he kicked me
and left me, and no further (...) was taken of me; but they began to divert
themselves in a most ludicrous and laughable manner -- (...) scene of their
mirth been at any other time, and any other place, it would certainly excited
in me a hearty risibility; but in my present case, no one can suppose that any
ridiculous gestures, or romantic diversions of the company I was associated
with, could animate my spirits to cheerfulness.

Their amusement consisted in wanton gestures, leaping, springing, tumbling,
laughing, hooping, and frightful distortion of their countenances, with their
mouths so wide open, and awry, that I could sometimes see the roof of their
mouths, and root of their tongues; and for their eyes, they did squint and turn
them innumerable ways, and at the same time extending and contracting their
frightful vissages into so many various shapes and figures, added to their
grins and grimaces, that they did in fact cut a most horrible appearance,
especially to one in my situation: -- (...) then concluded this contemptible
merriment with such a general screeching, screaming, shouting, and display of
antic gestures, tha^ it is impossible to follow them in record, or memo^^, the
transitions was so wild and so frequent, and (...) motions so quick one upon
another. After they had done, their Chief came to me and hinted for me to
imitate some of their ludicrous jestures, and that with a smiling and affable
countenance; but when he found I was inflexible and no persuasions could
prevail upon me to make the attempt, his smiles and (...), was presently turned
into passion and (...) with a stick that lay near, he began to ^^labour my
poor, naked, and already wounded body most unmercifully; and probably would
have beat me to death, but the excruciating pains I felt induced me to stand up
and endeavor to gratify him -- but how far I imitated them, it is easy to
guess; for I (...) and screemed perhaps as loud and as well as any of them; and
this part of the performance I acted without any disguise or hypocrisy, for it
flowed from me voluntarily and fortunately, satisfactorily; and for my motions
and distortions, my anguish caused that without any extraordinary exertions;
but if he had insisted upon any part of the laughing exercises of the evening,
I could not have complied with his request; and happy would it have been for me
if I had known before, that this imitation would have been acceptable, for I
could very well have performed it before receiving his blows.

The amusement of the evening being now concluded, the whole tribe laid
themselves down under the canopy of some large trees that I never could learn
the name of, but whose leaves was as large as common cabbage leaves: -- no
notice was taken of me, any more than closely watched to prevent an escape;
after they had been laid down about half an hour, there came twelve women and
four children which belonged to them, but where they had been I do not know,
but probably to a feast of some other tribe, as they do sometimes visit each
other on such occasions; it is evident they had not been far, for there was no
notice taken of (...) return, neither did they provide themselves any
provision, (...) ^^rectly laid down amongst the men.

A ^^^ature being now hushed to silence, and darkness approaching, words are
insufficient to convey an idea of my tumultuous agitations; at this critical
juncture, how unhappy! how deplorable my condition! divested of all christian
society; almost perishing with hunger, wounds, and nakedness, and surrounded in
the silent hours of darkness, by a crew of infernal savages, and void of all
human feeling; the reflections struck terror to my trembling heart; it almost
provoked me to terminate my miserable existence, and thereby put a period to my
doubts and fears; but not being quite destitute of grace, I ruminated upon
eternal consequences, and endeavored to restrain all such presumptuous
purposes, and calmly resign to this trying dispensation of providence: it was a
lesson of wisdom to my soul; I now knew how to pray in spirit, and be sincere
in my addresses to the throne of grace; I could now look upon all my former
formal show of religion as cold, lifeless empty vanity; as "nothing, less than
nothing," and could in the midst of my distress glorify his holy name, for so
many years preserving me in open iniquity, and religious mockery, and bringing
me at last to see him as he is in spirit and in truth; and under this
encouragement I composed my scattered and confused ideas, and had at intervals
the soothing consolation that the great (...) one, would in his own due time,
manifest his power toward me for good, and point out the means of my delivery;
but to all present (...) of success had I undertaken it, I could not cherish
^^mpse of probability, for the whole country around had the appearance of an
impenetrable forest overgrown with trees and bushes, that rendered such an
attempt totally impracticable.

Being overcome with the issues of the day, I laid me down on the bare ground,
with no other canopy than the heavens, nor no other guardian but my Maker; but
the different emotions of my soul on future uncertainties with this herd of
haggard beings, and the pains I experienced prevented my taking any repose till
dawn of day; when I had scarcely closed my eyes from the watching of a dismal
restless night, but the Chief arose and summoned every one to the duties of the
day; without hesitation I arose, for I knew that would be in vain, and all
hands was diligently employed to prepare the food left over night; and this
operation being much the same as the evening, I need not repeat it more than to
say, it was done with great speed and alertness, and no diversion displayed;
but as soon as they had caten, we all set out for the business of the day.

After both men and women had done, it was again presented to me, but the very
sight was so disgustful that I could not touch it; ^or which they cruelly bea^
me with their bows, two or three blows together, (...) made the blood ^^n in
streams down my (...); (...) the Chief immediately applied a juice, which he
squeezed out of a plant by the fire, this stayed the blood but did not remove
the pain: in this situation, a poor beggar at liberty, was as a King in his
palace to mine; no sympathizing friend, no relievin^ ^^^factor, to pacify
nature's calls.

I was compelled to follow them -- women and all set out, and my occupation I
found would be to carry their dead game; and this day they was uncommonly
successful and loaded me so heavily, that with hunger, pains and weariness, I
fell down thr^^ (...) in the day, and then one of them, that was nearest to me,
would beat me most cruelly till I rise again; for it never happened that every
one was out of sight, and if that had been the case, the women was always with
me; who beheld me with a kind of ferocious fear -- they killed this day one
monkey, two wh^rri^s, two picaries, three tenahas, and one ^urrassoe, and the
woods that we this day traversed, was thicker with thorns and briars than any I
met with, during all my captivity, which wounded my feet and flesh at such a
rate, that I was nearly on the point of giving way to their relentless
severity, and let them beat me to death: When evening came and the same
proceedings taken place as before (and in reality there was never no great
variation) I was beat again for not eating, although in fact I could heartily
have done it off the curassoe (a fine bird as large as a (...)) if I had the
dressing it; but they only put it (...) ^^^arge flame and burnt off the
feathers, and barely warmed it through, before it was devoured, without being
as much as cut open; but yet they do not eat all the inside of beasts or birds,
but separate it in their mouths and spit it out, what they do not find
palatable, and sometimes with their singers.

My ill treatment together with want of food, for I had yet eat nothing but a
few berries that I gathered in the woods, and cold nights brought a disorder
upon me, that terminated in a fever, which rendered me useless and
unserviceable to them for five days; but by the close application of means,
through the skilfulness of the Chief, I was restored, and then more cruelly
used than ever; because during my illness, when I was left alone with some
women, I cooked at times a bit of such an animal as was left, as well and clean
as my strength would permit; for I could not entrust the women to do it, for
their cleanliness was much of a kin with the men's: the first bit of an animal
I tasted, was the second day of my affliction, and seventh of my captivity,
which was part of the leg of a m^nkey, and during my illness I dressed several
little scraps of animals on the coals, but nothing to eat with it; water was
plenty enough: as soon as I was deemed sufficiently recovered to pursue the
labors of the day, my servitude was claimed; but for a day or two they favored
me by helping to carry the game, but then at night I was severely used for not
eating, as they knew from the women that I had eaten in their absence^ th^^
made them judge very hard of me, attribu^^^ (...) abstinence in their presence
to obstinacy, so as not to work; not considering poor ignorant creatures, that
it was their filthyness made the food so nauseously distasteful, neither had
the women understanding or sense enough to explain it to them, and for myself I
had no opportunity to do it in their presence; and in this state did I remain,
sometimes catching a bit and throwing it into the ashes, and so by degrees*
became almost as savage in practice as they were by nature; and on the
seventeenth day, I for the first time eat with their voracity, and from thence
I made no distinction in food, nor scarce any in manner of dressing.

When they found my appetite was come, and I began to assume a little
sprightliness, they behaved with more sociableness, and permitted me to sit
down by them at their meals, but would not permit me to touch a morsel until
they had done; which was sometimes unfortunate, for after a bad day's excursion
I often went almost supperless to bed, after working and fasting all day: they
finding that I could now eat as hearty as themselves, concluded for me to help
procure as well as eat; and for this purpose provided me with a bow and some
arrows, and for the women to carry the game, which I found is their business
amongst all the tribes.

I was in hopes with this new occupation I should (...) some ease and lenity
from them, especially as my feet was becoming accustomed to the travels and my
back growing better; but alas! how vain are all mortal hopes, and flattering
our expectations, when built upon the sandy foundation of theory and deceitful
speculation: one grain of practice will instill more wisdom and knowledge into
the mind of the prudent, than a bushel of theory into the brains of the acute
philosopher.

I being equipped with the weapons of destruction, rally forth in pursuit of
game, but was never permitted to be out of sight: the first day I did not draw
my bow, having no opportunity for so young a marksman to try my skill; no
notice was taken of it at night, there being sufficient killed by the rest; for
we had ^wo deer, three conys, and an armadillo, besides several quams; well, I
next day resumed my calling, but having no chance to try my skill, I again
returned in the evening with all my arrows, and no game; little notice was
taken; the next day I ventured to let fly at a monkey, but missed my mark, and
the same day shot at a picary and equally unsuccessful, and lost two arrows;
this displeased them, and made them look rather frowningly upon me in the
evening: -- the next day after several attempts and losing the arrows, one of
them beat me with his bow severely, and took mine from me, and put his game on
my shoulder, which was only one ^^naha; in the evening I was examined narrowly,
and severely threatened by motions if I did not kill some game; although they
frequently go for several (...) or other without killing any thing; it is
seldom (...) shoot without doing execution, and thereby secure both arrows and
game, but I did lose the arrows ^or nothing -- I should been glad not to have
discovered any game, but the women did sometimes point them to me and I was
obliged to shoot, or complaint would have been made from this quarter; but in
the end I did lose so many arrows, that they reinstated me again into my former
situation of carrying ^he game, and used me with uncommon cruelty during the
remainder of my captivity amongst them.

They have no settled place of residence, but have seven or eight places to
which they resort, and the greatest distance from the two extremes takes them
about five days travel, so according as they fell in with game, they took up
their night's repose at their nearest convenience; they do not build any huts,
for fear of being invaded by other more powerful tribes; and even sometimes the
Spaniards from the interior parts of the country, will come down in a body and
assault them; but they are in much more dread of the Mosketom^n, who frequently
come down the seacoast, and land fleets from large canoes, and then proceed up
into the forest and make great havo^k amongst them; for these hostile
assailants are always so well armed, that the Indians with their weapons cannot
face them.

I never saw any of those terrible enemies of the Indian while I was with them;
but they lived in such (...) dread of them, that if the wind or even (...)
wandering beast did but cause a sudden motion amongst the bushes in the night,
the whole tribe arose, and sometimes traveled about all night to avoid, not to
encounter the supposed enemy, unless they luckily discovered the cause of their
surprise; this sudden disturbance happened amongst them but once while I was
with them; I knew nothing of this terror of their's, till after all my
captivities, and a prisoner amongst the Spaniards.

After being with them about nine months, they painted me all over, so that my
native color was hi^ -- they generally paint themselves every week, and
sometimes oftener; the men black and the women red, and after this first time
of polishing me, I never escaped it when themselves did it: they make their
paint brushes by taking a ^it of stick and chewing one end: their red paint is
made from the seed of a prickly cod peculiar to that country; the only
preparation it requires, is bruising and mixing it with water: the black paint
is made by burning a piece of wood, and mixing the ashes with water.

This tribe is called the Woolaways or sla^ headed tribe. As soon as a child is
born, they provide a couple of bits of board about ten inches long, and four
broad, and placing one against the forehead, and the other against the back
part of the head, they tie them at each end, and thus draw the infant's head by
compressure, increasing the force of the pressure as the child grows, and by
the time it can walk, its head is flat, and bourges out on each side, and
always after continuing in that deformed state, give this tribe a most horrible
appearance, and this give them the name of flat-heads.

This tribe is in general grave and solemn, except after their meals on an
occasion; very robust and strong, with lank coarse long black hair hanging over
their shoulders; and so reserved are they in conversation, that it is very
common for them to travel several hours without speaking: if they meet another
tribe with whom they are on terms of friendship, they frequently pass each
other without the compliment of a salutation. -- All the clothing they wear
consist of a curious piece of bark, which they call polpro: they tear it from
the tree and dry it, and beat it till it has the resemblance of cloth; this
they wrap round their waist, and it hangs almost to their knees: this is all
the ^^vering they have, excepting in stormy nights, the women hold a large
trooly leaf, about two feet long and eighteen inches broad over their heads,
and sometimes cover the boughs of trees with them, as a canopy to sleep under.

They have no marriage rites, but the oldest b^^ takes the oldest girl which is
generally at fourteen or fifteen years of age.

They have no other vessels but calabashes, that grow (...) in the forest; and
things they (...) something like our platters, that the women make of clay and
bake over the fire -- their knives are hard wood formed with flints -- for
spoons they use the palms of their hands -- water is their only beverage in
general, although they do sometimes bruize the plantane and hang them up in
trooly leaves till they are sour, which makes an intoxicating liquor; but maize
or Indian corn will answer the same purpose.

I could discern nothing amongst them to conclude they had any method of
computing time, but have great reason to believe that they live to a great age:
by their gray hair and wrinkles several of the men appeared to me near a
hundred years old. It is very seldom any of the young men die, for if any
ailment befall them, their skill in medicine presently effects a cure; but four
old men died whilst I was with them, and suddenly, which I believe is in
general the case; for neither of those was sick twelve hours; but one woman
died during the time, and she was suddenly taken off in one of our daily
rambles, about forty years of age, without the agonies of death one hour.

When any one die, the rest immediately dig a hole with their hands and sticks,
and deposit the cor^se without the smallest sign of grief.

This forest and the woods abounding on it, consist of mahogany, walnut, ebony,
cedar, cotton, and (...), besides animals of various kinds, such (...) ^^ers,
mon^ies, baboons, deers, whereys, pi^arys, coney^, tenaba^, guanas, land
tortoise, armadillos, quams, and curassoes, with many kind of fish in the
rivers that run through it, and snakes in abundance, with birds of many sorts,
but they look on them as unworthy notice.

Although it was my unfortunate destiny to be a captive amongst this savage race
near two years, I never could become expert enough with the bow and arrow to be
of any service in that respect; for which I did at intervals, especially after
a day's ill success, feel the weight of their blows so cruelly and piercing,
that I began seriously to meditate an escape; for after repeated attempts
before and severely punished, and sometimes detected in the night, I had for a
considerable time been discouraged from any further trials of my cunning: but
such renewed hardships emboldened me to begin afresh, and trust to providence
for its issue; for to be thus excluded all intercourse with civilized people,
and spend my days amongst such a set of inhuman barbarians, wounded my feelings
and loaded my soul with bitter anguish: but no opportunity did present itself
for near three months after my coming to this resolution; for though I advanced
a few yards in the dead of the night, several times toward it, one or other
did look up, which made me immediately pretend some sudden occasion for
stirring; for I was always closely watched and surrounded by night, and it was
scarce ever the case that they were all asleep together, men, women (...)
^^outh; so that if I was but even missed a minute the (...) alarm was gave, and
I did directly make my appearance, although several times cruelly beat even for
disturbing them; for it must not be imagined that they can sleep as found all
the night thus exposed, as others can on a comfortable feather bed; and
consequently that sleep which they do take is precious; the truth of this I can
testify by long experience.

Being thus disappointed, time after time, I again began to despair, and
contented myself as well as circumstances would admit with my deplorable
situation, and thus escaped the weight of their blows for near a month, which
was as a season of heavenly consolation; the greatest part of my wounds were
dried up, and no blood streaming down my naked body. -- I had no other wounds
now but such as I did experience daily by the briars and thorns; but still my
mind was hankering after liberty and christian company, and in the last month
of my captivity, I flattered myself that an opportunity presented; for we
having had better success than common, they gorged in such an amazing quantity
of the food, and drank so much of the liq^^^ before mentioned; squeezed out of
the plantane, that they become surfeited with one, and intoxicated with the
(...) this night I concluded was my opportunity; I impatiently waited till
darkness and drunkenness had bushed them all to sleepy silence; and about
midnight I softly arose, and taking a bit of an animal from the coa^^^ my hand,
I walked from them, but with ^^^tio^s footsteps, for fear either should awake
before I could possibly escape.

Being now, as I thought, on the point of deliverance, I halted about twenty
yards from them for a minute or two to be sure that I was safe, for I could not
think myself secure unless I was some miles distance when they miss me, for
they could travel through the night almost as well as by day, and separating
themselves I should soon been overtaken, and then my life must have been the
tortured sacrifice to gratify their relentless vengeance.

Well, after halting about a minute or two at the distance of twenty yards,
alas! to my dreadful sorrow I heard the yelp; without a moment hesitation I
threw away my meat, and hastened toward them, and fortunately sliped in
amongst the women and laid me down undiscovered; then arising as just out of
sleep, appeared to them innocent; the cry was no longer heard, the yelping
ceased, and every one again betook him to his sleep; but with me it was quite
otherwise: I (...) solicitous for putting my project in execution, but the
tumult that this sudden disorder caused, prevented my designs being
accomplished that night, and when another opportunity would offer 'twas
impossible to conjecture.

I now became quite heartless, and p^aved as earnestly for death as Dives for a
drop, (...) -- I stri^^^ against despondency as much as possible, and (...) all
the sprightlyness and levity I could forcibly muster, for I believe no one will
suppose it was natural, and thus escaped all beating and blows another week.
When being so unfortunate as to be tried again, I was so unsuccessful as to
lose four arrows the first day, and unhappily for me they put such unfavorable
constructions upon my aukwardness, for I never had killed one single animal or
bird, that they entered into a close conversation about me in the evening; and
by their hellish squints and sour grimaces at me, I was convinced was no omen
for good; this made me again begin anew my projections of a plan to escape, and
as I really thought they were devising my death, I was fully resolved if my
life was preserved till night to make one more attempt, and bid defiance to the
infernal yelp by running, as death could now bring no terrors with it; for if
they caught me, death, though cruel, would not be lasting; but in the present
case, 'twas lingering out my existence by dying daily.

Being thus resolved, I waited the approach of solemn silence, and embraced the
season of darkness, ^^d got up, and without making use of my accustomed
precaution to wait the favorable minute, I immediately took to my heels with
all the haste my frightened and trembling spirits would admit, and without
slackening my pace run on without helm or compass, till day light; and
proceeded on as well as I could direct my foot^^^ farther from any of our
former routes, (...) on roots, fruit and berries, (...) days.

CHAPTER III.
HAVING through the goodness of an overruling Providence made my escape from
this infernal crew, I bor^ with the fatigue and trials during my five days
wandering with manly fortitude, and every hour hoping that chance, or more
properly, Providence would direct my footsteps, and bring me to the borders of
this savage forest, and lead me into some, path that would bring me to a
mansion of hospitality.

Thus did I support my drooping spirits, with those phantoms of delusive
expectations, inwardly rejoicing on my approaching happiness -- all nature
seemed to be combined in its attracting smiles, and the whole face of creation
had the resemblance of Paradise, not withstanding the contrast between an
almost barren wilderness, and a well cultivated land; for liberty and eas^
(...) every object a charming, and almost enchanting aspect; and the
refreshment being the promiscuous produce of rude nature, was palitable and
nourishing to my constitution: nothing but the cravings of nature did induce me
to stop to pluck the fruit; not nothing but overcome nature tempt me to lay
down to take the needful repose; and twice in the night I arose and pursued my
unknown course; but the second time it was nearly proving fatal to my life; for
it being dark, I unfortunately in my erring walk, approached near enough to the
nightly retreat of some large beast of prey, as to disturb his repose by the
motion of the bushes: -- I conclude I was not more than ten yards distance when
I heard the horrible howl -- terror sunk into my soul, and almost deprived me
of sense -- to escape by flight I saw no distant prospect, and the critical
situation would not admit of hesitation: -- I immediately ascended the nearest
tree, and scarce was I out of reach but I perceived a huge animal pass it
roaring; but what beast it was, the darkness of the night prevented my
discerning.

This sudden and dangerous surprise, compelled me to remain in the tree till
the approach of morning, and descending, I in a few minutes came to the spot
from whence I had rouzed the terrible enemy of my peace. -- It was an enclosure
of thick bushes, and abundance of decayed leaves of two large trees standing
close by, and plenty of long grass; with a few fragments of carcasses devoured
for ^ood.

The nightly retreat of this animal was much more comfortable and better
secured from the inclemency of the weather, than I had experienced for the two
years I inhabited the same forest; and without doubt if I had happened to have
come when the proprietor was not at home, I should have taken possession of his
dormain for the night; if I did not first discover the scattered emblems of
savage serocity laying without the door; but what would have been the owner's
surprise, or my situation, for to perceive a stranger had taken possession of
his premises, it is not easy to picture -- I might have found him the hospitable
friend or the cruel monster; but at any rate I could willingly dispense with
the former, to be certain of escaping the latter.

I made all the haste possible from this spot, fearing the host might return
and make too free with his guest.

I now again resumed my journey, but my mind was very much agitated with the
occurrences of the night, fearing I should have enemies to encounter that would
display no mercy -- I pursued my route as well as my slight knowledge of the
forest could direct me, and fortunately met with no other disaster but what
proceeded from the terrors and anxiety of mind till the fifth day.

Now commences a new scene of trials: -- Having tra^^^ all the (...) night, and
great part of the fifth (...) and not having an opportunity of quenching my
thirst, I came sometime in the afternoon to a running stream, where I allayed
my thirst and laid me down to rest, but with no intention to sleep, ^or that I
always cautiously avoided in the day time, but being tired and overcome I
accidentally fell into a slumber and sound sleep; and just on the approach of
evening I was suddenly awoke with the yelping of savages, and lifting up my
eyes beheld a crew with the vissage and aspect of hell in their countenances,
about a hundred and twenty in the whole, men, women and children.

I was almost speechless with surprise and terror; I sat up, not having courage
or hardly strength proceeding from the fright to stand; they for the space of
several minutes staring at me and each other; from this seeming deliberation I
drawed some favorable conclusions, that my life would be spared, and having
been so long with the other tribe, it very much lessened the terrors of death;
although death itself, naturally, would have been welcome; because I could form
tolerable correct ideas of what sufferings were coming upon me.

Fortunately for me the paint that the other tribe had from time to time put on
me, with my own long black hair, gave me much the resemblance of one of the
Wool^ways; but still they could easily discover I was not a native, for the
aukwardness of my behavior, (...) the shape of my head, betrayed me that I was
an (...) and in fact they had sufficient reason to conclude I was a Spanish
spy, for I bore a great similitude to them, for they are in general of a dirty
tawney, blackish color, which at that time I was myself; and and if they could
have persuaded themselves to believe me as one of that people, I should not
have been fortunate enough to have died by the bow and arrow, but immediately
have been scalped alive. Such is their enmity and hatred to that nation, for
their unjust and once inroads upon the territories of the Indians, who seldom
make any excursions beyond their own ^^^daries, unless in case of the
defensive, to protect and desend themselves against the power of invaders.

After a few minutes consultation amongst themselves, and I suppose concluding
I was not a Spaniard, they made me rise; but being like themselves almost
naked, which was also in my favor, they had no trouble to undress me, nor
nothing to excite their curiosity respecting the fairness of my skin; and of
course began to load me with dead game, and though they had not much more amongst
them all than the other tribe had, yet this was divided into so many portions,
that my whole load consisted of no more than three game -- two birds and one
small animal, and with this I marched to their place of rendezvous, which may
be about three-quarters of a mile from the spot where they first discovered me.

I imagine I was now about seventy or eighty miles from whence I first made my
escape; for fifteen miles a day was good traveling with me at this time, all
circumstances considered.

When we came to the resting place for the night, it was like the former under
the umbrage of some large trees, and not far from a clear spring; but as
different in relation to cleanliness as it is possible to conceive -- not a
bo^^e or the vestige of animal flesh to be seen; only the ashes, conveniences
for fire and sleeping, and by the large quantities of ashes, it appeared that
it has for a long time been the spot of their nightly resort, the ground being
quite bare for a considerable space round the fire spot, and at the same time
free from all nauseous encumbrances; this was an agreeable omen and I thought
forboded something of civilization; and how the remains of all their food is
disposed of, the reader shall be informed after supper.

We now began to prepare for our evening repast -- my employment toward it was
as formerly, to gather fire wood; this was no sooner done than they began to
kindle a fire after this manner, as do all the other tribes.

One of them take a square piece of wood with a round hole in the middle, and
placing this between his knees, he lays a large piece of dried bark or tinde^
near the hole, then taking a small round stick of (...) harder nature, and
placing it upright in the (...), rub^ it round between the palms of his hands,
like the stirring of chocolate, till the friction causes fire to fly out of the
hole and kindle the bark. -- The manner of making the (...) is as follows --

A large fire is kindled with the dryest wood that can be procured, about ten
yards (...) and two (...), according to the inclemency of the season, and food
they have to dress: a stout pole is now placed along each side of the fire and
about three feet above it, upon four strong forked sticks, one at each corner,
and across the two long poles some others are laid, in proportion to the
quantity of provisions to be dressed; this preparation being completed, the
animals are then held to the fire till all the hair is singed off; then they
are laid upon the a^^^^ mentioned cross sticks till they are roasted, which
(...) generally done before the cross sticks are burnt off, (...) whenever that
is the case, they have others ready prepared to replace them.

Now herein this ^^ibe differ from the other that I escaped from -- they make
their fires alike, but the former take no trouble to clean, or scarce half
dress them, and devour it most voraciously and nasty, leaving all the b^^es and
other filth about them; but this tribe in the (...) place cut up the animal or
bird and dress it, then the women go to the water and wash it almost (...) then
being put upon the ^arbicue, they let it (...) ready before one of them attempt
to touch it, and ^^en it is done they divide it into small pieces and so eat one
piece at a time, and even the first evening ^^artook in common with them, and
^^de a more comfortable meal than I ever did, while a captive with the
Woolaways.

After supper all the bones and entrails was gathered together and thrown into
the fire; by this method of decency they are al^^^^ clean; but sometimes it
happens they are not very successful, and then the entrails are washed clean
and dressed with the meat, and every one share alike, excepting the Chief, who
is generally indulged by an exemption from the entrails; but nevertheless he
very frequently contents himself to partake in common with the rest, and it
very often hap^^^^ they are drove to the extreme of wasting ^^thing, and when
it was the case, I never fared harde^ (...) more sparing than the rest; here
was no partiality (...) of persons: but I was as closely watched as (...) the
others, and sometimes beat, but not often.

This tribe is not so expert at the bow and arrows as the others; they are
equally, if not more diligent, but not a^ good marksmen; they oftentimes miss
and lose their arrows.

This tribe is singular from either of the others I was amongst -- Whatever
game they kill is all dressed the same evening, and what is left after supper,
eat (...) morning cold; I never knew them make a (...) morning, when the
weather would permit their going out; but the other tribes frequently dress
game for breakfast; and again I have known the Woolaways leave all their scraps
about the ground, and in the morning eat it up like dogs, but these always
gather it together into their calabashes.

This tribe are endued with a degree of foresight or cautious prudence, in a
superior measure to the others; for they begin early to train their children to
the use of the bow and arrow; as soon as they are able to walk, they are
supplied with them for amusement, and by degrees as they grow in years, they
become proportionally capable of managing them; and boys, not five years old, I
have known to equal aged people in dexterity; but notwithstanding this early
practice, it is something remarkable they are in general the most awkward, or
at least the most unsuccessful in the daily excursions of either tribe I was in
bondage with: -- I know but one cause to attribute it unto, which is this -- I
never saw one of the elder men attempt to instruct the youth, or the youth the
children, how ^o manage their arms expertly; but all their art, cunning, and
judgment in killing their game, is the m^re result of nature and practice, by
which means they are always imperfect, and never arrive to a degree of accuracy
in their profession: They lose more arrow^ proportionally to their number in
one week, than the Woolaways did in a month -- there was one man of the latter
^ribe that ha^ ^^^^ed twenty head of different game successfully in several
days and not lost one arrow; but this was uncommon perfectness, and it was
frequently the case that we did close the day's excursion with six, eight, or
ten head of small animals or birds, and not one arrow lost.

This tribe scarce ever put the bow and arrow into the hands of children, by
way of using them, until they were ten or twelve years of age, and then took
great pains to perfect them in a little time; and it was seldom they required
more than two weeks training, before they were supplied with the customary
morning compliment of arrows -- in general, five or seven, and from that time
enjoyed every privilege, and partook of (...) the success of the day with the
rest in common; but before this time they only associated with the women and
children, and had nothing but what was gave them.

With the present tribe we are treating of, the difference of conduct was very
material between them. -- These make no difference in age, or sex; but seem to
enjoy themselves more after the manner of civilized nations; although in fact
as stuped and ignorant as the others, as far as bears an affinity to religion,
or knowledge of a Deity.

I had been with them six days without experiencing the least cruelty of any
kind, any more (...) to the lot of every one in common: I fed as (...) well,
and worked no harder; but on the seventh day morning they gave me a bow and
five arrows: I was sensible of my unskillfulness, and dreaded the consequences,
expecting this trial of my activity would turn the scale against me, and my
future treatment be quite the reverse to what was past: I trembled when I took
the arms, with dreadful confusion, on the issue of the day's success, and all
the consolation I could m^ster, was, that they took no notice of the arrows
themselves did lose, and of course I had hopes of meeting wish the same
indulgence; and fortunately for me, my hopes as feeble as they were, was
founded upon happy speculations; for although I lost three of my arrows and
killed nothing, no notice was taken of it: next morning my number of five was
again completed, and I sallyed forth in pursuit of a prize, but having no
opportunity to shoot, I lost no arrows; although in fact I saw several game, but
by feint motions and liste^^^, I did attract the notice of the nearest man to
me, and pretending not to see it, did by this artful contrivance bring him
within sight of it; who concluding himself the most expert archer, would
discharge his arrow, and thus I saved my credit and arrows also: this scheme
answered my purpose two days, but knowing there would soon be an end to this
project of decepti^^^ I began to meditate upon some other plan of ^^^lusion; so
the next day I hit upon a contrivance that I thought would favor me a day or
two^ I have (...) ^^fore that they did lose a great many (...) rows; I thought
I could find some of them by making accute observations; accordingly I was as
watchful as keen eyes could assist me, and had the good fortune to pick up one;
now I thought, I may venture courageously to let fly at the first mark, which I
did at a wherrie, and was lucky enough to strike him, but not to do the needful
execution, for he shook out the arrow and made off; and although I lost my arrow,
I still had my compliment, and endeavored to find another of their's but could
not; and was presently convinced that this plan I had adopted, could not be
long practiced without detection, it requiring so much time in searching for
arrows, especially as I could seldom be out of sight more than a minute at a
time.

Well, it passed on for several weeks, and I had rendered them little or no
service, although I did kill ^^^ing that time, four or five head of game; (...)
was a picarie, the next a quam, the rest has escaped my memory; they finding I
was of little service to them with the bow; employed me very much afterward in
making arrows, and carrying game.

My life henceforward, was not quite so comfortable as formerly; for though they
did not use me with any distinguished cruelty, either by stripes or (...) of
^ood, yet the burden of the day was sometimes (...) laborious; for there being
so many of them, they frequently had load enough for one per^^^ (...) three
hours after setting out; and (...) was (...) first, and had the weight to
trudge under all the day; and at night it was also my employ, to assist in
cleaning and preparing ^or the barbi^^e; which I was exempted from while I
carried arms.

This tribe differ much from the last, in many points of order and regularity;
as the others frequently made use of ridiculous and hideous diversions after
the^^ meals, so on the contrary, these did seldom display any tokens of jolity
or mirth; but they did drink to as great excess, or more so, than the
Woolaways, of the plantane juice, and oftentimes so intoxicated, they was quite
senseless and stupid; but there being so m^^y, it was never the case to find
all in that brutish state together; as it was what I never expected,
consequently I never looked for it; and to the present appearance of
circumstances I had no room to (...) myself with the prospect of an escape.

There are certain times, when they indulge themselves with an amusement or
diversion, but which happened only twice while I was amongst them; but the
odity of the transaction seems to be worth stating. -- One moonshine evening,
after a good supper, but no liquor they had drank this evening, and all the
bones, fragments, and ashes removed, there was a large circular fire made,
about twenty yards circumference, but not so broad in the border, but that a
person could (...) jump over it. -- I was quite at a loss to conjecture what
(...) going forward, when all hands began to be gathering wood that time of
night, and myself also employed; an^ when I saw them begin to place it in a
ring, I began to speculate unfavorably, and my spirits sunk within me; for
although I had received humane treatment amongst them, I also considered they
were Indians and no more, and that I was more a burden than service to them:
as soon as the circle of wood was made, it was kindled, and every man got
inside; I expected nothing less, than that I was going to be their sacrificed
victim; when we was all inside of the fire and it began to burn up all round,
the women kindling it in several places, the men began to jump over the fire,
in and out, without any order; and in this part of the ceremony I was obliged
to assist, and performed with as much bodily activity as any of them; but my
spirits (...) low enough, trembling at what I feared would (...) of this
frightful recreation.

We continued this whimsical diversion, for at least two hours, the women
jumping and skipping about, outside of the circle; but no ridiculous gestures,
or noise with the mouth, accompanied it; but cheerful smiling looks, and the
men frequently intermixing with the women, with the greatest degree of harmony
and concord, and no particular notice taken of me, as if I was, or should be,
in any peculiar measure interested in the scene; and as the fire gradually
declined, so did my doubts comfortably abate, and for the last half hour, I
enjoyed a calm, composed state of mind, (...) free from all oppressing
anxities: when we (...) and danced till the fire was extinguished, there was
another quantity of wood procured and placed round on the ashes and kindled;
and every one laid down outside as near the fire as they thought proper to
sleep; I imagine it must be near midnight before we thus went to rest; and
being in general mostly tired, it was late next morning before our Chief
summoned us to the duties of the day, and the women was all excepted from going
out this day, so that I found it a hard day's labor, being heavy loaded all
day long; and in the mean time, the women had removed all the ashes, and the
place prepared for our night's repose.

Nothing particular took place after this merriment for about three weeks; when
one day we was so unfortunate in our game, as to kill but one small animal
during the day; and this ill success, I presently found to be supported by
them, with a patience and manly ^ortitude, as would do credit to the most
exemplary christian, or profound philosopher; for during the whole evening
after each one had partook of the scanty pittance, that the little animal would
admit of, which was but little more than a taste, and of which I had as
proportionable a share as the rest, there was not the least sign of discontent
or complaint, but the (...) accustomed pleasantry and mirth, as when the (...)
of the day was crowned with abundant suc^ess.

Next morning we arose to resume the daily exploits, and having no breakfast to
provide, it required no considerable time; and accordingly we set out on our
preambulation, and the greatest part of the women and children accompanying us,
and the day proved very successful; so that the women was obliged, before the
close of the day, to retire toward the spot where we was to rendezvous that
night; and for our parts, the men seemed to be very indifferent about killing
any game toward the close of the day, but conducted themselves with a degree
of pleasantry and frolicksome mirth; and the youth and girls exhibited a degree
of gamboling jolity and playfulness far exceeding any thing of the kind I had
before been witness unto, and at the same time conducted with a simplicity of
uncultivated manners, that excluded all indecency on one hand, and need of
modesty on the other; for they seemed to be directed by the mere instinct of
untainted nature; and before this time I could never perceive any particular
marks of respect or notice whereby the youth of either sex did manifest any
distinguishing tokens of mutual friendship toward each other peculiarly -- but
this afternoon I thought there was an appearance of civilized tenderness of the
softest nature between a couple of young Indians -- the man about twenty, the
girl I judged to be about fifteen -- they frequently separated from the company
and withdrew to some more private recluse, and although this created (...) notice
amongst any of the rest, it excited my curio^^^ to an exactness, and wherever
they did withdr^w (...) fixed my eyes upon them, and approached near enough to
be an eye witness to every transaction; and with shame to enlightened nations,
and those that are by education and understanding qualified for examples of
modesty, honor, and virtue, this poor unlearned and savage pair never displayed
one single instance (...) imprudence or misconduct, not even to embrace with
the lips; but at the same time showed an interested fondness that evidenced a
degree of social love.

As the evening approached, we goes toward the place of our night's
retirement, which was a spot I had not been at before, and which the women that
departed from us early in the day, had previously prepared for our arrival;
which was a spot better covered with grass than any one I had seen since my
first being taken by the Woolaways, and shaded with many large and close trees,
and a spring of water as clear a^ crystal: we had nothing now to do but to
dress (...) provisions, for the women had provided fire, clea^^d the food, and
all things in order; but for dress^^^ (...) cooking the animals or birds, I
never (...) of either tribe do it in the absence of the men.

After we had finished our supper and prepared for the night's repose, the
young people began to divert themselves by a strange kind of dancing, performed
after the following manner: -- The girls stood in (...), hand in hand, and the
boys keep running through^^, ^^der their arm^ without any regularity, and the
girls frequently moving round, which often times causing a bauk to the youth,
this created a loud laugh amongst the whole company both old and young; and
every boy did give the one that was baulked a hard blow on his back with their
fist; and after some time spent in this diversion, the girls all squat down in
a circle, and the boys run round them as fast as they could, and sometimes jump
over their heads; and after about half an hour of this merriment, the girls
separate, and with the boys dance about amongst each other in all manner of
figures, impossible for me to describe; for it had the appearance of confusion,
at the some time it was conducted with exact regularity of motion, for the aged
men did still keep hooping after a melancholy manner, as it sounded to me,
although by their movements and stopping, I could easily perceive it was a guide
for the dancers; and the Chief (who was the only one that kept his seat during
the exercise) (...) two or three times snuff with his nose, and make a dismal
noise with his throat, which was a token for them to halt and rest a few
minutes, when they all sat down in pair^ as many as the sex would admit of, but
without any distinguishing choice as partners, any couple that was nearest
together; but one exception there was in this case -- the fond pair that I
spoke of before, did each time couple together, and seemed to notice each other
more than any other couple; and I observed that during the diversion of
jumping, this (...) always jumped over this girl's head, and she also ^^^ering
herself as on purpose for his easier leaping (...) and no other youth attempted
to jump over her during the time: after this part of the evening's recreation
was over, they all sat down in two rows; the boys and men in one row, and the
women and girls in another, facing each other; the Chief still sitting by
himself, and a silence being observed for the space of a few minutes, the Chief
arose, and walked up and down between them, using some odd gestures with his
hands; such as pointing toward the sky, then toward the ground, th^^ to his
own breast, then to his head, then to his sides, and then making a circle on
the ground with his fingers about the size of a coach wheel -- he entered it,
and began to sing very pleasantly, after the Indian manner, in which he was
joined by the whole company, except me; and it being perceived that I was a
silent spectator, not joining in the general harmony, about ten or twelve of
the men arose and began to (...) me with their fists unmercifully; and this
being ^he first time I had experienced any severity from this tribe, it
produced the most alarming and dreadful sensations within me what was coming
forward; but the agitations of my mind was presently calm an^ ^^omposed, by the
Chief's giving a very loud hoop, and the whole company, men, women and
children, immediately began to frisk about in all manner of forms and gestures,
whistling, singing, hallowing, hooping, jumping, dancing, and tossing each
other about in a wonderful man^^; and in this ceremony the Chief was equally
(...) ^^^ged without the least distinction, and I was oblig^^^ (...) make one
of this mo^ley groupe, which I (...) with little reluctance, as I concluded it
was no bad omen. After about a quarter of an hour, every one sat down upon the
grass, and the Chief making a few motions with his hands toward the sky, the
young couple that I have before alluded unto, stood up and approached him, and
immediately the whole company gave a shout, and all rising, began to dance
about with laughing and hooping, excepting the fond couple; who stood still
with the Chief, and in about ten minutes all was quiet, and every one began to
prepare for rest, and in a few minutes we was all laid down for the night.

Now whether this merriment was observed as a ceremony of marriage between the
young man and woman, I cannot tell, for from that time I never discerned any
distinguishable instances of peculiar notice between them, nor no transaction
of the kind ever after with either tribe I was amongst; it is evident that no
peculiar forms of matrimony is generally observed, and what confirms me in this
opinion is, that although many children were born during my being amongst them,
there was but few instances that enabled me to form any probable conjecture who
the father was; notwithstanding, there is every reason to believe, that they
unite in pairs, and I believe observe a strict chastity and virtue for their
adopted partner.

With this tribe there are several very distinguish^^^ customs that seems
peculiar to them; one of which (...) the surprising method the women take with
a newborn child; although the relation may seem incredulous, and founded upon
romantic delusion to the ears of civilized and tender parents and mothers of
children; as I was an eye witness unto the whole instance, I can avouch for
indisputable fact the relation; but whether every woman of each tribe observe
the same customs throughout, I cannot take upon me to declare, as I never was
before or after witness to the birth of a child. What I mean by the birth is;
to see it in a few minutes after it was born; for the Indian men,
notwithstanding their rude uncivilized nature, do always withdraw on such an
occasion, and the women being guided by the pure instinct of nature, and
strangers to those new invented means, and methods to assist, forward, and
sometimes to suppress the course of nature, they very seldom experience any
long space of painful travail, or is the birth attended with any degree of
weakness, pain, or sickness as is usually the case with enlightened and
over*wise people, who from the effects of study, or self-conceit, deem
themselves competent judges of the Almighty's works and ordinations, and
undertake to new modify, or arrange his appointments according to their own
finite ideas and conceptions; and thus the regular and perfect course of pure
nature is perverted to (...) purpose of substituting innovations to the
disgra^^^ of human understanding, and dishonorable to (...), as well as
productive of calamities, diseases, and ^^eath.

These inconveniences never attend the Indian women, that has not been so
unfortunate as to be taught experience by the wise and learned of the age; for
during all my five different captivities, I never knew a woman die in
childbed, nor more than two or three that was not able to follow her daily
exercise as usual in twenty-four hours, although a number of children was born
while I was amongst them.

Their manner of treating the woman and child is as follows: If the woman's
strength will admit of it (and it is very rare that it will not) directly as
the child is born, it is taken to the brook and plunged in over head and ears,
and clean washed, and if the season is cold, it is wrapped up in leaves, and
then the mother enters the brook and washes, and afterward the child is
delivered unto her; and frequently in the space of three or four hours, the
woman can pursue her occupation; but if there is an occasion for her
traveling, as they so often remove from place to place, the child is bound to
the woman's thigh with long grass, and she proceeds forward as if nothing had
happened; but the mother do occasionally halt; and some woman loosen the child
^or it to suck, and then fasten it on again: there is a band of grass round the
legs, the body, and neck of the child; but that round the neck is made very
soft with something like cotton, that they gather from the boughs of a tree;
very much like the downy pu^^ (...) we see on the hosiers and willows in the
spring of (...) year; and in this manner the child is (...) by (...) parent for
about six weeks, when it is in a healthy state; and from that time it is put on
the grass, and left to learn the use of its limbs; for it must be observed that
these women are indulged as much as circumstances will admit of, and permitted
to stay behind when the tribe know their return in the evening will be to the
same spot, which they generally do for a week or more; for when they fall in
with a good haunt for game, it frequently keeps them within a day's ramble, for
ten or twelve days; and at other times it happens they may in the space of
three days be obliged to wander perhaps twenty miles before they fall in with
plenty of game, and sometimes I have known them to be upwards of, fifty miles
from one of their places of resort, and I believe they are at certain seasons
when game is scarce, necessitated to ramble an hundred miles; and when that is
the case, or even shorter distances, the women and children are permitted to
rest themselves as often as needful, and the men in the mean time traverse the
woods and forests, as well as streams of water, in search of animals and fowl,
and if they procure sufficient for the evening repast, they seldom travel late
on such occasions; but the healthy women preparing the most convenient spot for
lodging, they take up their abode for that night; for the men never leave the
women all night alone, besides their consideration of those that have sucking
infants; but it very seldom happens that they do not reach every evening to
some one or other o^ their usual re^^^ting places.

The mothers that give suck do drink a larger quantity of the juice of plantain
leaves than the men, but it is commonly mixed with water, and an herb soaked in
it, that causes it to have a bitterish sweet taste; but the intoxicating nature
of it is much lessened, and it is very seldom a woman that gives suck is
concerned or affected with its powerful properties; but the others oftentimes
drink a little immoderate.

When a woman is near her time, it is not difficult to discover, the father,
because from that time until the woman and child are out of danger, the man is
more particularly engaged in her necessities, and active in rendering any
assistance to her as may seem needful; more so than the rest of the men; but
afterward he manifests little or no singular regard for her distinctly from
the other women.

Whenever the distance unto which the duties of the day call them, requires the
company of all the women, and one or more through infirmities or any calamity
cannot follow the rest through the fatigue of the day, they are excused by
proving this infirmity to the satisfaction of the Chief, who is the physician
in all cases, and then some of the girls are left behind to take care and
provide ^or them, and prepare the place for the company's evening return.

This tribe was remarkably clean and neat to what the Woolaways were.

There was several instances where I had reason to think that the new born
infants died from the effects of plunging into the cold water, for they did not
live four hours, and one of them not half an hour after; there are in general
more children die in proportion than grown people; chiefly between the age of
three months and three years; but it is an uncommon thing to ^^^corpse between
three and ten years, and more so between ten and twenty, and still more between
twenty and fifty.

Amongst this tribe I cannot charge my memory with being witness to one single
fracas or fray to proceed to loud or angry words, although there might be at
times some trifling discordancy proceeding from unforeseen causes, so as to
create temporal animosities; as soon as it began to kindle into a flame of
passion, it was but for the Chief to snuff with his nose and make a few motions
with his hands toward the sky, with a distorted countenance, and all
appearance of tumult (...) wrath was immediately appeased, and from that (...)
buried in oblivion; for I never knew an instance of (...) revival; such was the
esteem and reverence the Chief was held in; but whether his motion toward the
(...) indicated any knowledge of, or belief in a deity, I cannot tell, although I
saw similar instances many times amongst the different tribes, I saw nothing
that had a more plausible appearance of reverence, or address to the Almighty
than this; and even this, such as (...) several times thought was a kind of
adoration to (...) moon and sun; because I have observed them at several times
very busy in these notions in a full moon shine evening; not only the Chief,
but the whole crew; but for days or weeks I never discerned the least notice to
be taken in particular; and for my own part, it was impossible to keep the
christian sabbath, the Jews sabbath, or any sabbath in memory; so as to compose
my mind every seventh day by private ejaculations, or supplications to the
throne of grace; neither did it give me the least concern, for a disposition
abandoned to evil and sin when at liberty, could not be supposed to be much
engaged in religion at his first entrance into such terrible slavery.

It was on a Tuesday when I was first taken, and I recollected the following
days of that week, for my sufferings would not permit them to escape me, but
Sunday passed off with pain, fatigue and drudgery, like the rest, and spent
equally as well as when I was on shipboard, or even better; for now it was
devoted to the support of nature, under the impressions of approaching death in
captivity, and resistless compulsion; but then it was spent in oaths, curses
and profaneness at liberty: before the expiration of three weeks I had totally
forgot the nominal, or numerical day I had been with them, and of course never
knew, nor never kept a sabbath for eight years and six months; and shocking to
relate, during all this time, supported and delivered by the goodness of an
Almighty and benificent providence; protected and preserved from so many (...)
escapes from cruel deaths; I was so estranged to religion, and overloaded with
the iniquities of youth and depravity of morals, that I never saw the
needfulness of, nor could place a considence in the promises of God, and of
course never once had grace enough within me to humble myself in prayer before
the Lord, by confession, supplication, or thanksgiving; one that professed a
religion he did not confide in, and believed in a God that he neither feared,
or served; and in the proper sense of the word I was a ^^^^stian heathen, and
an heathenish devil; and the Lord rewarded me not equal to my desert.

I had been with this tribe about ten months, when an affair happened which
gave me great uneasiness, as I apprehended it would be attended with dreadful
consequences to me* we had been out a whole day and met good success, but on
our return home, and I being loaded with the best of the game, I had the
misforture to fail where it was very muddy and the game sell from my shoulders,
and I upon that, which made it in such a dirty pickle, that one of the men gave
me a hard blow with a stick; I was exasperated, and in my turn struck him again
and knocked him down into the same mud; he immediately gave an hellish cry,
which brought the whole crew around us, and he telling his story first, and had
no time allowed for telling mine, but was immediately tied to a tree and every
one began to prepare his how and arrows; when a (...) who had been witness to
the whole scene, made her appearance with the Chief, to whom she had been to
communicate the tidings of what she had seen; he being a^ that time at some
distance before the rest (for in our return home there was never any exactness
in keeping company as when we set out in the morning) as (...) as he saw me
tied to the tree, he stamped on the ground, and after making a few motions
a^^^al when he (...) pleased, I was released, and we proceeded home peaceably;
and as singular at it might appear, neither the man I particularly affronted,
nor one of the others, ever took the least notice of that transaction from that
minute; even the same evening there was not the least shadow of anger
discernable in one countenance. If any thing while I was amongst the Indians
gave me a favorable opinion of their ideas, sentiments, or passions, it was
this of forgiving injuries; although properly speaking I was not the aggressor,
but at the same time in their imperfect judgment I was, and their being so
easily pacified, manifested a principle of pure sentiments and peace in them
which I myself (and I fear too many others that call themselves christians) did
not possess; for I entertained malice and envy enough afterward.

Sometimes after this affair, we was all terribly (...) in the night by the
howling of a wild beast, (...) every one taking his bow and arrows, we made a
(...) advance, and saw a huge tiger, which instead (...) shunning us, made a
full stand with his fiery eyes (...) daunted, and the glimmering light that
proceeded from the fe^ble rays of the moon, gave him a hideous appearance; but
the Indians was no more dismayed than if it had been a dog, or a deer; they
stood quiet, but prepared to let fly at him as soon as he was free from the
shelter of the bushes; and as the manner of the tigers are to creep upon their
bellies and seize their prey by a ^^dden leap, so he squat down and seemed to
be making flow motions, and await his fav^^^ble opportunity; but as soon as
they perceived him in this situation, they separated themselves into three
parties and surrounded him; so that some as behind, and some each side of him:
the women and children in front of him was in no danger because of the fire, as
no beast of prey will approach a fire -- the party that was behind him had the
best mark, and let fly, but owing to the obstructions and darkness of the
night, their arrows done no execution, more than to rouse him and cause him to
give a howl; he then began to stir himself and advanced toward the fire; but
as soon as he saw it, he turned round, but did not seem to have much
inclination to quit the spot: this motion gave the men on one side an
opportunity to shoot, but with no more success than the others, proceeding from
the fame unfavorable causes; but it put him into a great (...) which caused him
to make a furious (...) toward the fire, which made the women scream (...)
this baulked the animal, and (...) now (...) for the light of the fire to give
(...) of him, she hinder party that had (...) toward him, and with this second
discharge of arrows wounded him so as to make him stagger; the other party that
had hitherto reserved their arrows, now approached, and finished what the
others begun, and left the ferocious intruder a victim to their dexterity: the
distance he was from the women when shot, was not more than ten yards, and they
was huddled up as close to the fire as they could bear the heat; and the men
that shot the last arrows about the same distance.

Well, as all danger was removed, and the perturbation of every mind perfectly
quelled, and a dead tiger no novelty to them, we all laid down again to rest.

As I was always meditating some scheme, or watching every opportunity that had
the least prospect of success toward making my escape, I thought this might be
embraced; for being in the night, and every one closely engaged, I thought it
was probable I might not be missed until such time I was got out of reach, as I
knew they would not concern themselves about me while they had the tiger to
encounter: I weighed the matter in my mind, comparing probabilities with
improbabilities, and drawed such conclusions from my deliberations as seemed
most consistent with my (...). In the first place I considered, although they was
(...) ^^^gaged, that engagement might be terminated in (...) minutes, and in a
few more I might be missed, (...) separating themselves, and being better at
quain^^^ with the tracts through the wood, I might be also (...) rounded in a
few minutes more, which would be exasperating an already exasperated crew, and
death of the cruelest kind would be the consequence* and another discouraging
reflection that entered my mind was this -- I did not know my way out of the
wood in the dark, and feared I should be attacked by some beast of prey: these
considerations disheartened me, for although I found great lenity and even
humanity and compassion from both men and women, as well as from the Chief; it
is matter of great doubt if that would have been the case if I had attempted to
make my escape from them. Now while I was deeply engaged in rumination what to
do, I found by the hoop that they always make when they kill a game, that the
beast was overcome: my deep speculations of liberty now vanished, and all my
golden hopes of escape was as a dream.

In the morning me arose earlier than usual to skin and dress tiger for
breakfast, and amongst so many hands it was soon done, and we had a comfortable
relish, and proceeded on the exercises of the day. -- About a month after this,
as we was on our daily excursion, we happened to meet with a party of the
Woolaways, the Indians I first made my escape from; they immediately recognized
me, and with ferocious countenances made toward me: our Chief seeing this,
immediately gave the word of alarm, and every man then on the spot prepared for
battle, and in a few minutes all our party was on the spot, which, though it was
(...) all the tribe, it was as many as the enemy* but all their aim seemed to
be to take me again; -- this our people presently discovered, and not knowing I
ever had escaped from them, it irritated them greatly, and stirred them up to
defending me: there was about fifty of each side, so that I had dreadful
apprehensions of falling into the hands of the Woolaways by the fate of war;
for a terrible battle ensued.

I was placed with the Chief, while the warriors on both sides began to let fly
their arrows with unremitting vengeance, and as our women did run and pick up
their arrows that did miss our people, so their women did the same with our
arrows, and in this manner they continued fighting about an hour, many being
wounded on both sides, but we had a greater number wounded than them, and the
arrows with our party being nearly all gone, as well as those of the enemy;
seeing there was no time to be lost, as our party was become much the weakest,
the Chief gave a sign, by which every man threw down his bow and arrows, if he
had any left, and rushed in upon the enemy with a club or stone, as was
handiest, and the enemy was obliged to do the same; and at the commencement of
this close engagement, the enemy had three effective men to our two; but so
fierce and resolute did they fight, that in the course of a quarter of an hour
they was equal, and in about half an hour more victory declared in favor of our
troop, by the others (...) away all weapons of defense, and making the token
(...) submission.

Each party began now to examine their dead and wounded, when we found we had
three killed and twenty-one wounded; nine wounded with arrows, and twelve in
the close battle: and the enemy had four killed and twenty-seven wounded --
five wounded with arrows, and twenty-two in close engagement: the women was
silent spectators on each side, any more than finding arrows, until the close
of the battle, when they was fully employed in sucking and applying herbs and
juices to the wounds; but not the least animosity or anger was to be seen
amongst any of the men or women during this time of attending the wounded, but
every man and woman (...) ^ither tribe, wounded or not, did all seem as if they
wa^e of one family; and even myself could now intermix in common with them with
equal safety; this work of attendance on the dead and wounded took us till the
evening; the dead being buried, and the wounded taken all the care of that time
and place would admit of, we parted toward our repective spots allotted for
the repose of the night.

It was a pity such an unfortunate affair should happen between these two
tribes, for it was very seldom any difference did distrub the amity and
friendship of the Woolaways and Buckeraws; for no two tribes did entertain a
more cordial and peaceful good will toward each other; for in their daily
preambulations, they frequently meet (perhaps several times in the (...) of a
year) as we had once before since my being with this tribe, but near enough for
me to be distinguished; for they never stop to converse or notice each other,
but pass on, and sometimes when close together without speaking, and especially
the Buckeraws who are most particularly reserved in conversation.

I hardly think that things would have arrived to such an unfortunate crisis as
took place if the Chief of the Woolaways had been present with his party, as
our's luckily was, for then it is more than probable that the two Chiefs would
have adjusted the difference, by preventing tumult and fighting until the real
cause was discovered, which would have been immediately the case, because the
Chief would have recognized me; but whether or not our Chief would have
surrendered me quietly -- I had great reason to rejoice it was not put to the
trial, for if one had insisted, and the other obstinately refused, it would
have created a powerful ferment on each side, and probably the Woolaways would
have called in another tribe to their assistance, and thereby exceeded us in
strength; for the Indians has sometimes such bloody wars amongst themselves, as
to be woefully destructive to the weakest tribes.

I never heard any thing of this bloody affray afterward, nor was there the
least notice taken of it to me by our Chief or any of the people, and it being
within a few weeks of the time I escaped from this tribe, we never saw a party
of the Woolaways after, When the tribes are large they always separate into
several parties for the better discovering of game, and but seldom meet at the
same place of rendezvous for the night, except when each party has been
successful without making a long excursion, so that they can conveniently reach
to the place agreed upon for the night; and when this happens they always enjoy
themselves with uncommon merriment, and partake of the plantane and trooly
leaves with great freedom; and excepting on such occasions, I seldom ever knew
this tribe drink to any excess; but for the Woolaways they drank at a beastly
rate.

After this terrible fray between the two tribes, I was always very careful to
be with the party that had the Chief with them, which I could easily do, as
there was no exactness or partial appointments, but nearly an equal number
promiscuously without any exceptions, set out together; and sometimes one, two,
or three or more parties return to the same umbrage at night, which depend upon
circumstances of the day; but they always endeavor to meet as many as possibly
can, at one place in the evening, to be the better enabled to encounter any
danger that may befall them from the attack of beasts of prey, or any other
tribe of Indians with (...) there might be an existing animosity; for there is
(...) tribe at peace at all times with every tribe.

Nothing remarkable took place for several weeks; when once being in pursuit of
an animal, that I could never learn its name, but to me it had the appearance
of a large mastiff dog, but covered with red spots, about the size of a large
wafer; a black streak about two inches wide along his back; his body an olive
^olour; his tail long and bushy, entirely brown; long lank brown ears like a
hound; his pace was not very swift, but so wily and intricate in his motions,
that it was impossible to take aim at him; and so thick and close the bushes,
that several times when we thought he was some distance ahead, he has started
from a bush not six yards distance; and at one time he was actually behind some
of the men that passed him as he lay concealed: having in vain attempted to
shoot him amongst the bushes, we tried to drive him off by hooping and
hallowing; but this also proving ineffectual, we gave over all hopes, and
despaired of making a prize of him, and turned round to take a fresh course;
but we had not advanced a quarter of a mile, before we heard a dismal cry and
groan, and following the sound we presently discovered the voracious animal had
seized a lad of about ten years of age, and mangled in a shocking manner and
devouring him rapaciously; the b^ast being fully occupied in feasting on the
poor victim, gave the Indians an opportunity to shoot at him, and fortunately
the first volley of arrows laid him sprawling by the side of the bloody corpse,
and soon he was dispatched; and by the Indians viewing him seemingly with more
than usual astonishment, I concluded the animal was also unknown to them; but
they began to (...) him, and in a few minutes it was done; for they are very
expert in this work, although their instruments are nothing more than sharp
flints: as I never knew them take off a skin in the course of the day before,
it surprised me a little, as they always do it in the evening where they take
up their night's lodging; but after the skin was off, seeing they slighted the
carcass, and the Chief snuffing his nose at it disdainfully, confirmed me in my
opinion that the beast was either unknown to them or deemed unwholesome food:
they now joined in kind of a concert of joy for their triumph over their enemy,
and some having during the interval gathered together a quantity of leaves from
the trees, they made a hole in the earth, not deep enough to conceal the
mangled corpse of the poor boy, but about on a level with the ground, when he
was laid in it, and covered over with leaves, and then we proceeded homewards.

Notwithstanding this melancholy incident, there was no particular tokens of
grief visible so as to discern who was the father or mother of the lad; such
little notice is taken of deaths amongst them. Next morning as usual we
prepared for the day's preambulation, and about the middle of the day our Chief
complained of a pain in his head, according to their method of con^^^ing with
each other, which I understood by the motions he made; this produced the
greatest consternation amongst them of any instance that ever I witnessed as
far as related to themselves; there was a general grief displayed, and with the
sorrowful hooping (...), it was a most hideous and dismal noise, ^^r more (...)
in its sound than the roaring of (...); every one was engaged in the melancholy
business of applying or procuring the most salutary, herbs they could find in
their own opinions; but when it was brought to the Chief for his approbation,
some he did spurn from him disdainfully, others he smelt unto and laid them by,
and out of all the different herbs that was gathered, there was but three that
he permitted to be put to his head; and one of these I was lucky enough to
gather; as I had seen the same herb applied to a woman in a fainting state
amongst the Woolaways; and in a few minutes the Chief had the other two herbs
taken from his head, and a whole bandage of mine wrapped round him, and with me
and a few women and two men, returned to our last night's resting place; and
before the return of the remaining party in the evening, he was quite
recovered; this produced a reverse of general joy, accompanied with such
gestures with laughing and mirth, that the woods echoed with the discorded
melody, but it was attended with such Indian affection and love for me, that I
believe the same degree of alacrity would have been manifested toward me for
good, if any thing had ailed me, but not the same measure of sorrow, because
neither my loss or that of twenty common Indians would have been proportionable
to the loss of the Chief, because of his superior wisdom and knowledge; for
it is that alone that constitutes his reverence and esteem; for the Chief of
every tribe has great skill in the virtue of herbs and plants; roots and bark
of trees, as well as fruit and flowers; but how they attain to this eminency in
b^tany and physical produce I do not know, for I never noticed any Chief
communicating the properties and essential qualities to another, either old or
young; and consequently it proceeds from self-taught experience, for I have
known instances os some that was more attentive, and engaged in speculative
improvements of the mind than others; for with them as well as us, there are
indolent and diligent; ignorant and wise; studious and slothful, in proportion
to their uncivilized lives; and I have reason to conclude, that the choice of a
Chief, or appointment to that office, depends upon the good opinion the tribe
has of any individual's skill in the virtues of such herbs and plants that the
woods and forests produce, which they mostly frequent, though the productions of
the whole country, of a vast extent, vary but very little in its kinds; but
they do not always apply the same herb or plant to the same malady: in this
respect the tribes differ, but the virtue might be equally efficacious.

They do not pay any regard to the age of the person that is singled out for
that important duty; ^^portant it is! for in all eases of bodily complaints or
wounds, his judgment is their sole and whole dependence -- I have known a Chief
not thirty years of age; but as they are never employed in any of the laborious
and fatiguing duties of hunting, they can find leisure opportunities in the
woods to gather plants, examine (...) different qualities, and occasionally
(...) ^^^^ments in slight cases; and by this means come to the knowledge of
such plants as other tribes make use of. There are very few plants or herbs but
what are beneficial for some ailments, but no one particularly useful to every
one: -- they take but very few inward medicines, for as their lives are very
regular in diet, and their bodies kept in due exercise, free from pampering
luxuries and laziness, they scarce ever complain of inward disorders; but when
they do, it alarms the whole tribe; as witness, the Chief before related; if he
had ^^ke his leg the grief would not have been so manifest nor general; because
wounds proceeding from falls, bites or scratches from wild beasts, after being
wounded with the arrows, and other incidental misfortunes are not uncommon, and
of course not so much noticed.

There is no herb that I found to be much in favor with every tribe, and
applied to the same purpose, and always administered with success: I never knew
it once fail in I suppose thousands of instances, that is, in curing them of
their morning sickness, after drinking to excess over night of the juice of the
plantane, after being become strong and sour from the powerful virtue of the
trooly leaves -- this intoxicating beverage is made after the following manner:

The women gather a quantity of plantanes, and spread them on the ground two or
three days in the sun, and twice a day sprinkle them with water; by which time
they begin to get rotten or decayed, for the sprinkling hinders their getting
dry; but it helps their moisture and the acid taste; they are next tied up in
trooly leaves, after the manner of cabbage in a net, with holes pricked in the
leaves to admit the sun's rays, but not powerful enough to dry them; in this
manner they hang two or three weeks; then being taken down, they very much
resemble rotten garden vegetables, and being bruised between two stones, a
nasty green juice runs from them into a vessel made of clay, and hardened by
the fire; in this vessel it stands for twelve hours, till it is clear on the
top, and the sediment all at the bottom; then it is poured out into some other
vessel and drank at leisure: this is very strong and disagreeable, and not
often made, for want of co^veniencies and opportunity; but the common method is
to bruise the plantanes directly, and soak some trooly leaves in the liquor,
for the space of an hour and drink it; about half a pint of this liquor mixed
with a quart of water, will intoxicate five or six men; but the worst effects
is in the morning, when they are very sick and stupid, much like a drunken man
with strong beer or spirits.

Now the herb that they all use as a healing alternative in the morning, grows
very common all over the country, but mostly in the woods and shady places --
it is very much like an English herb, that we call St. John'^ w^^t* this herb
is gathered in large quantities by ^^^^tribes, and dried and carefully
preserved; others (...) are (...) dilatory to make use of this (...) experience
the effects of their indolence and neglect; the method of preserving is as
follows: the plant is gathered a little before the seed is ripe, which is the
latter end of July, as near as I could guess the season of the year, and dried
in the sun, and afterward hung up in old decayed trees or any secure place
from too much cold and rain in the winter, and used as occasion require, by
being soaked in warm water; but in ^he summer season it is gathered and made
into a tea in its present state; and I have known them chew it in their mouths
as an antidote for a surfeit; but never knew it used as a physical plant on any
other occasion.

There are but few herbs they gather to preserve for winter use; one of which
is for the purpose of an application to bruises and stopping blood, proceeding
from briars and other noxious shrubs, by boiling it well and mixing the water
with some grease as an ointment, and rubbing it all over; and this stops any
blood that proceeds from wounds in a few minutes: this herb is what is called
by Europeans, ground joy, and by some creep weed, because it runs on the ground
near the roots of trees and among stones: they sometimes make a beverage of it
for suckling women, mixed with the juice of bramble berries or vines; it
increases the milk. -- Another herb they preserve, grows mostly by the sides of
rivers -- it is the leaves only of this they gather; they are nearly as large as
small cabbage leaves, and something like colts foot: from four of these leaves
may be extracted a half a pint of j^ice -- they are much more serviceable in
their season than in the winter; this juice being drank mixed with water, and
sweetened by the sap of a tree that is very common, is very good for all kinds
of inward pains, obstructions of the body, and surfeits from over eating; and
when these herbs from situation of place cannot be procured, the esteem and
respect shown to the Chief, depends upon his judgment, by providing some other
as a substitute, equal or nearly effectual, suitable to the calamity.

During the time I was with this tribe, I was once suddenly taken fainty with
the heat of the sun, and heavy loaded, and unable to proceed, when instead of
beating me with bows, they immediately eased me of the load, and exerted
themselves with great alacrity to procure the necessary herbs for my recovery;
which was soon done, and the Chief applying such as in his opinion was most
beneficial, to my nose and mouth, at the same time well rubbing me all over
with the herb, especially my head, breast and arms, which in a short time
recovered me, so as to be able to proceed forward; but their lenity toward me
would not permit them to load me with the game during the remainder of the day;
and on several other occasions while I was amongst them, they displayed
instances of feeling, that would have done honor to the sensations of
^^^ristian; and even before I had gained their good opinions and favor by
restoring the Chief with the herb I-fortunately procured.

The last day I was with them happened to be very stormy, which proved very
successful for us in birds, for we always killed more birds in wet weather than
dry, because they sat perched on the trees quieter: this day we killed
seventeen quams, and nine curassoes; although the Indians give them different
names, I am inclined to think it is the same bird, but differing in gender, as
I could not descry any other difference between them than the plumage; this
bird is as large as a goose and eat as good, although the forest and woods
abounds with a variety of fowl, this is the only one the Indians deem worthy
notice; we did this day also kill a large fish which they call the mannady; it
very much resembles a cow, but has no fins like other fish, but two large
protuberances like paps, and frequently creep on them to the shore, and sleep
and graze; it being a kind of an amphibious animal, and it is when they are on
shore or the water edge the Indians shoot them; they kill several other large
fish, from which they extract the oil, but seldom eat much of the flesh, unless
necessitated through scarcity of animal food.

There is also a kind of a snake they shoot which they call beveras, about
three yards long, which they eat as nourishing food; but all other kinds they
pass by unregarded.

At our return in the evening, there was two (...) parties met at the same
rendezvous, who had also been successful, so that our number this evening
consisted of about twenty men, besides women and children, and having plenty of
plantane liquor by us, it was a night of uncommon festivity, by drinking and
decorating themselves with the feathers of the birds, and carousing in jollity
and mirth till midnight; when nature being overcome, they all fell into a sound
sleep; and notwithstanding my situation was as comfortable as in such
circumstances could be expected, it was far from the desirable state that I
promised myself amongst christians if I could make my escape: I knew a
detection or apprehension by them if they pursued me, would be attended with as
woeful consequences as from the Woolaways; but nevertheless, I was determined
to make the attempt, although I did not know how to steen my course to escape
their pursuit, or the wonted haunts and tracts of the Woolaways, whom I feared
equally to my own deserted tribe; but all these terrific agitations did not
balance the scale of consideration against a life in continual jeopardy, and
associated with savage cannibals.

I waited the hour impatiently, and when all was sound asleep, I took my leave
of them with a kind of tenderness and regret, mixed with terror and sear, and
made all the haste possible, as near as I could conjecture, toward the borders
of the wood, and traveled without halting till midday; when being quite
overcome, (...) down by the side of a stream, and eat a bit of sowl that I took
with me, and quenched my thirst, and (...) to a thick covert of under wood,
laid me down to rest, and undesignedly falling to sleep, did not awake till
evening; when arising to pursue my course wheresoever providence pleased to
direct my wandering footsteps, when looking for the remainder of my fowl to ^at
before I set out; -- judge my surprise to find it was gone! a thousand confused
ideas crowded on my mind on one another! imagination upon imagination! but as
these unsettled speculations could avail nothing* with trembling, and a soul
loaded with terror and fear, I set forward, and happily made my escape from
them secure, after thirteen months captivity. -- I made no considerable halting
for three days, but pursued one direct course as near as I could guess by the
sun, and fortunately having a bow and arrows, I shot on the fourth day a
wherrie, and being very hungry, for I could procure but very little nourishment
from the wood (being the wrong season of the year) I sat down and eat part of
him raw; for although I knew how to make a fire, I dare not do it for fear of
discovery: I fed on this animal in its raw state two days, and not being
accustomed to raw flesh, it brought on me a flux (for the Indians never cat
their food quite raw, although sometimes it is not half roasted) I was now in a
deplorable situation -- groaning under the weight of a terrible calamity --
helpless to myself -- destitute of food -- surrounded with dangers from wild
beasts -- every minute liable to fall into the hands of the same or other
savages, or if these dangers should be all escap^^^ I had no other prospect
before me, but to be starved, and die a lingering, painful, mortifying death:
(...) the first time in my life, I lifted up my soul to the Lord in prayer,
with contrition, supplication, sincerity and confidence, in his almighty power
and goodness to pardon my sins, and restore me: blessed be his holy name; he
heard, he answered; and in about twenty-four or thirty hours I was able to
proceed, although very weak; through loss of blood and fasting, for I had not
tasted a bit of any thing, for near two days: the remaining part of the wherrie
that I had hitherto subsisted on, I could not eat if my appetite had been more
craving for it was become putrified; and nothing could be got now, but a few
decayed berries, fruit, and roots, on which I subsisted three days; and on the
morning of the fourth day, I perceived an opening amongst the bushes, which I
took for a good omen, that I was drawing near its boundaries, but coming
nearer, I to my surprise and terrible agitation, found it to be the resort of
some Indian tribe, and who had that morning left it, for the ashes was not
cold; and several bits and fragments of their breakfast laying on the ground;
as much as my poor afrighted soul was moved at the discovery, it leaped for joy
at the fight of this delicious repast; delicious it was to a poor, helpless,
afflicted, weak, starving mortal, and for the moment, the dangerous situation
was banished my mind; and I began without the least hesitation, to feast upon
what providence had thus unexpectedly provided for me; for the ^^^^ings of
nature was not diminished, and in fact, it (...) of the most nourishing and
refreshing (...) I (...) made.

Now to give the reader an opportunity for reflection, I will lay before him
the courses of this morning's table, to the best of my remembrance.

In the ashes was the head of a monkey, and on the ground laid part of his
entrails, with bones half picked, scattered here and there -- some fragments of
a tiger almost raw -- the ears of a wherrie, and many other scraps of animals
scarce warmed; and this nasty manner of dressing their food, made me believe it
was the resort of some tribe, as filthy as the Woolaways; I persuaded myself it
was none of them, because it was too far from the latitude they usually
traverse, and for my own last tribe, it was too nasty for them; so that I
concluded it was another tribe, into whose clutches it would soon be my mishap
to fall, for I did not know what course to steer to elude them: well, with an
aching heart and feeble limbs, after gathering together what scraps I myself
had left, and wrapping them up in a leaf, I quit this spot and pursued my
unknown journey, and met with no interruption, or inconvenience, excepting
weakness, fasting, and fatigue for two days; but on this evening, toward dark,
having lain down for the night, under the canopy of a large oak tree, I was
presently alarmed with the hideous voices of a crew of savages, and in a few
minutes discovered by them. How pitiable my situation, who had but just made a
painful and sore escape from a (...) fortune of thirteen months captivity!

CHAPTER IV.
BEING again fell into hands of the merciless, I sorrowfully bemoaned my hard
and unfortunate fate in deserting my last masters, for nothing less than
torture, I could now depicture to my own sensations. The party that now
discovered me, was the most frightful looking creatures that imagination can
conceive, consisting of about sour score, mostly aged men; their faces as well
as other parts of their bodies, was daubed with paint and grease in a nasty
manner, and the ferocity of wild beasts appeared in their countenances. Without
any consideration they directly seized me, and made me a miserable captive:
they began their authority and superiority, by beating, scratching, (...),
(...) ^^ting me, so that in a few minutes I was in a ^ore (...), black and
blue, with the pinching, and (...) with bruises by bites and scratches; I was
almost ready to faint under the loss of blood and anguish; especially
considering the debilitated condition I was in before: -- when they was tired
of thus displaying their cruelty, which I suppose was six minutes, which must
be granted was a long space to be tearing almost to pieces with teeth and
claws; they began to pluck long grass, and having fastened me to the ground
with it to some roots of trees, there was a consultation amongst them, which,
by their preparing their knives and flints, and twice coming to me and taking
hold of my hair with one hand and the instruments of death in the other, I was
convinced that they was going to scalp me, and so powerfully was this impressed
on my mind, that all animation was gone, and I was as a dead man; but there was
something of a discordancy amongst themselves, for in the end I was loosened
and led away by them bound to their nightly haunt, which took us up about three
quarters of an hour. Now the reason of their using me with such cruelty when
first discovering me, was owing to their Chief not being with them; for had he
been present, his authority would have restrained them, for the Chief of every
tribe is generally possessed of more consideration, as he would have conducted
himself with superice discretion and prudence.

Their flints they sharpen by rubbing one against another, and their knives are
made of very hard wood, sharpened by flints; they seldom go without flints
(...) knives with them, as they sometimes clean their (...) before they reach
home, when they have got a (...) early in the day, or the game of the large
kind, to make it lighter carriage for the women.

When we arrived at the place designed for that night, it had but little
resemblance of those I had been accustomed unto; the bushes was not cleaned
away, nor nothing that had the appearance of cleanliness to be perceived; at
the same time it was visible, that the spot was much frequented by them, by the
filth and remains of polluted carcases strewed about, and the bareness of the
ground.

As soon as we arrived, the first thing was to fasten me to a tree, while the
rest made preparations for supper -- a fire was soon kindled, and the game in a
very nasty manner laid on the coals (for they did not take the trouble to
barbacue it) and before it was one quarter done they began, savage like, to
devour it, and in a short time it was all consumed; for they had no
considerable stock of provisions by them, and during all the time, I was a
miserable, bound, unhappy, captivated spectator; for they never once offered
(...) one mouthful, or took any other notice of me than (...) and horrid grins;
but as soon as they had finished their beastly repast, a large fire was
immediately made, and they began to dance around it with hideous yelping (...)
howling; and the women continuing to gather (...) these alarming preparations
filled my mind with (...) ^ost susceptible ideas of something (...) dreadful
ensuing; for what more favorable constructions could I put upon such
proceedings, considering what I had already experienced during the few hours I
had been amongst them, but that I should in a short space be a sacrificed
victim in the flames, if not undergoing some terrible excruciating tortures
prior to my consummation -- so loaded was my mind with those weighty
impressions of approaching torture, that I could look upon death as the
greatest of blessings, and bringing with it inexpressible peace to my soul, if
it was not accompanied with lingering agonies, and prolonged by the torments of
this infernal crew -- If I could have been convinced or persuaded in my mind,
that I should have been thrown bound into this large fire, and left to consume,
how my soul would have leaped for joy! there was nothing terrible to me now in
death, because it was so evident, but the nature of it filled me with the most
piercing and heart-wounding impressions. With trembling and terror did I stand
bound to the tree, watching all their motions, and every minute expecting their
ceasing from dancing, and executing their hellish vengeance upon the
unfortunate prisoner -- with doleful impatience did I wait for what I dreaded
to witness, for the suspense was worse than a merciful death would have been.
After about two hours of their thus diverting themselves at the expense of my
throbbing heart, and the fire still increasing both in size and rapidity of
flames, which produced a melancholy (...) all around, and with the hideous
countenances (^^^^ceeding from the reflections of the flame in the dead of
night) of the bedaubed crew, gave it the appearance, or at least brought to my
agitated mind, the ideas of hell itself; especially when augmented with their
hideous howling.

They now terminated their hellish dance; and now reader try to form some ideas
of my mind, when they all turned toward me with the ferocity of tigers, and
malice of devils: words fall short, and language is inadequate to the task of
description, what I felt, what I feared, and how my soul was employed; although I
retained my reasoning faculties, they seemed to be moved by the irregular
impulse of irrationality: the moisture of my eyes was dried up, the beating of
the heart was become very slow, and every mortal montion seemed to be nearly
deprived of its wonted activity; for the pangs of death had taken hold of me
through the dreaded consequences of its nature, before it had felt the weight
of it.

They came and loosened me, but not by untying the bands, or gently breaking
them, but pulling to pieces, and me with it, and having done, threw me on the
ground, and after staring upon me some time, they again bound my hands and
feet, and presented to me a bit of flesh; this in a little measure composed my
disordered mind, and restored a little peace to my agi^^^^ ^oul; I did not
hesitate to take and eat, for ^^^^thstanding the filthiness of it, I found it
very ^^^^^shing, and longed for another offer; but here I was disappointed, for
it was the only taste I had all the night; and for rest, I could take none,
neither was many of them asleep together, but some one or other always moving
to keep the fire burning, looking at me, and jumping about; this stiring about
all night, indicated some disastrous event to take place in the morning, and
keeping so large a fire, contrary to the usual custom of the other two tribes,
rendered the night very uncomfortable, and portending cvil impending; as I
wished for, so I dreaded the approach of morning; and sufficient reason I had
for my anxiety, as in the sequel will appear.

Before it was scarce light, every one was in motion, and seemingly in great
confusion; but by the ridiculous postures, scornful looks, and wrathful
countenances of men and women toward me, I could easily conjecture myself to
be the cause of the consternation; but the fire being permitted to decrease,
and no fresh fuel provided, it very much abated my sears on that ^ead; at the
same time I could at that moment have freely presented myself as a free will
offering to the flames, as a sacrificed victim to martyrdom, to have been eased
of the dreadful apprehensions of what cruelties was in reserve for me. -- I
trembled at the thought of the book of ^ate being opened; at the same minute
was impatient for the book of fate to be opened; that the worst might be known.

About sun rise they began to collect the fragments of the last evening, and
had their breakfast; the Indians sometimes warm it in the morning, and
sometimes not, depending on the quantity and kind of provision: large beasts
they frequently heat again, but seldom small, or fowl, or fish. After they had
done, I was liberated and permitted to pick up what scraps I could find, which
was plenty such as it was; and now being bound again, was forced to follow
them; this was nothing new or difficult, if I had not been reduced to such a
state of weakness, by loss of blood with my disorder, as before related; this
rendered me incapable to walk as fast as they required; for instead of being in
search of game as usual, they walked on with hasty steps one direct course, as
if designed to some particular place; for about two hours I felt the weight of
their blows, and of their arrows so woefully severe, that I was blood and
swelling from head to foot. We now arrived at another of their reposing places,
where a party had that night been, and who had not long left it, as was evident
by the vestiges of provisions scattered about; but I apprehended those that I
was with expected to meet them there, and being disappointed, they seemed to
manifest a sorrow, and after a few minutes consultation, they bound me fast to
a tree, and leaving the women and two men to keep watch, the rest all separated
in different routs, and presently I (...) their dismal whoops from every
quarter, which (...) give notice to the party they was in search after, that
something was the matter; for at other times when all is peace, the parties
keep at a good distance from each other, to prevent being prejudicial in the
work of the day.

In about an hour they returned, and with them about fifty more, equally
frightful and hideous, and amongst them their Chief, an aged man; the oldest
person I had hitherto seen amongst the Indians; I guess by his wrinkled limbs
and white hair, he could not be less than four score, but still in a measure as
active, though not as able, as the youngest man in the company; and on the
other hand, the most ill-looking fellow that ever eyes beheld: -- as soon as I
saw him, to distinguish him from the rest, I knew my fate depended entirely
upon his decision; and his ugly sour looking visage dispelled all faint hopes
that remained after my several respites, and I now gave up myself to death, and
expected nothing less.

The first thing they done, was to examine me, and the paint that was put on me
by the others, being in several places washed off with rain and dew, my skin
was quite spotted, and made a strange appearance; this very much excited their
curiosity, and convinced them I was no Indian of a neighboring tribe: they put
many questions unto me, which I did not understand; for though I had attained
to some little knowledge of the language of the Buckeraws, from (...) I last
escaped, it was of no service to me now; (...) was that of the Woolaways, when
I fled from them, and was taken by the Buckeraws: although the Indians can
understand each other, I could not.

After they had done examining and questioning me with little or no
satisfaction; and the Chief as well as the rest entertaining an unfavorable
opinion of me, they one and all seemed to be intent upon some torments or
death; and the women seeing the men thus enraged, began immediately to display
their talents of cruelty, by assaulting me with the nails, and would presently
have torn me limb from limb, if the Chief had not interfered; and although I
was now at liberty; I dare not take the advantage of it, by defending myself
against their furious attack, and must have fell a victim to their serocity,
had not the old Chief excited his authority, and displayed some degree of
humanity; but he was a neutral spectator long enough for them to mangle me in a
shocking manner; sor with the blows and bruises, added to the swellings of the
morning, and my other calamities, I was in reality an object of commiseration,
where no commiseration or pity could be expected: -- the blood did actually run
in streams, and with it came off the paint from my skin, so that I was as
spotted as a leopard, or more properly, streaked like a zebra: but still to
preserve me for more trials and sufferings, the Chief gave orders for the
gathering of some herbs; and presently a large quantity was pro^^^^^, but there
was but little that met his approbation, ^ut enough for the purpose; these
herbs he pounded between two stones, but in such a manner as to preserve the
juice as much as possible, and applying them to the wounded parts. It was
fastened on with bands of long grass, and I was permitted to lay down, and
finding I was too weak to follow them that day, they left me under the care of
four men, and went in search of game; -- and during this day, I never tasted
one morsel of food, and the groan^ that forced themselves from me, in
consequence of my pains, was matter of mirth and ridicule for the hard-hearted
wretches that attended me: long before the evening, my blood was staunched, and
the wounds in a healing state; but the anguish issuing from the application,
intensely severe.

Whatever the consequence would be, I longed for the return of the hellish
looking Chief, my physician, with as much anxiety as Dives for a drop of water.
-- I longed for a termination of my existence, and with horror I now relate it,
that I was several times come to a resolution to accomplish it, but the means
was not at hand. -- See here the mereciful goodness of God* when temptation did
overcome me, the opportunity was withhold; and when both opportunity and means
was present, there was no temptations; but then I was grovelling in darkness;
it is now my eyes are open to God's marvelous light, and to see him as he is;
excellently wife in all his dispensations.

It was late in the evening before the party retu^^^^ and the first thing was
the Chief's examining my (...) and finding it had a promising appearance, he
gave me a pleasant look, and immediately applied fresh leaves and juice of a
different kind, and then left me at liberty to walk about, which opportunity I
gladly embraced, but could find nothing to eat, as the men left all day with me
had devoured all; but I was in hopes of a hearty supper, for the party brought
home plenty with them: nothing was nauseous with me now, it was the quantity
and not the quality I principally looked at: they even permitted me to assist
in making the fire, and amongst us all, I don't believe it was more than half
an hour before the game was cleaned and broiled: this tribe is too nasty, to
take the trouble to construct a barbicue, except the animal is large: during
supper I was indulged beyond my expectation, at the same time it was intended
as an Indian slight and scornful favor.

Presently after they began eating, the Chief disdainfully threw the limb of a
wherrie to me, that had not been near the fire, more than to be just warm: as
they seemed to be fully employed in gorging themselves, and little or no notice
taken of me, I ventured to put this meat down on a few hot coals, and thereby
dressed it very nicely, and indeed palatable, and made a very comfortable meal:
after they had done, I was at liberty to eat what I pleased of their refuse,
but I was filled; for liquor, they nor no other tribe gave me much, for (...)
too valuable a beverage to themselves; neither did I want any, while good
spring water could be procured, which I suppose these forests do produce equal
to any springs in the world, in general: after supper I was again the subject
matter of discourse, and so warm was they in their altercations, that it came
to angry words, stamping, roaring, yelping, jumping and even several hard blows
gave to me: by which I was convinced that they was not united in sentiment, how
to dispose of me; but still I could draw no favorable conclusions, from my own
conceptions, or put any favorable constructions upon any of their proceedings,
for every one looked on me with a horrid and ghastly aspect, and I had reason
to think, that the contention was not between my friends and foes, but what
death to put me unto, or how to dispose of me to the most advantage: -- several
times there was bows and arrows taken up, and once levelled at me, but the
wretch was prevented from shooting by another; but the Chief was a silent
spectator at the time, and seemed satisfied with the fellow's conduct; this was
the greatest trouble to my mind, that at this time could befall me, for I was
sensible, if the Chief meditated, or ever consented to my death, it would soon
take place, and not having a pleasant look from one of them, I had no reason to
conclude, but that it would be the case very shortly, in some shape or other;
for when they was a little reconciled and quiet amongst themselves, the full
force of the venom seemed to be levelling against me; for I did receive blows,
kicks and (...) from men, women and children, without intermiss^^^ (...) but
not in such a ma^^e^ as to draw blood, excepting from the former wounds; and
what increased my grief most, was the unconcernedness of the Chief, who was
more pleased than displeased, with their savage barbarity.

I bore the cruel treatment with all the patience I was able, for I knew
remonstrance of defense would avail nothing: when they was weary of executing
their devilish sport upon me, every one began to retire to rest; and for my
part, I was placed in a circle, surrounded with the greatest part of the crew,
and in this manner we remained all night; when morning came, I was set about
procuring fire wood, but was too weak to apply myself to it with that alertness
as to give satisfaction; for they are always in a hurry in the mornings; and
for this, I felt the weight of some stick cruelly, besides their dismal
yelping, with eyes glaring as (...) I as fire; I had but a small portion of
breakfast, and obliged to set out with them, for it would not do for them to
leave a guard with me, or entrust me with the women; besides the women
themselves was wanted to carry the game: -- as they saw how weak I was, they
pinioned my hands, and permitted me to accompany the slowest of the women; but
even these ^ould (...) too fast for me, and was frequently obliged to (...) me
to come up with them; this exasperated them and I was obliged to submit to
their blows as often as they (...) without mercy.

As it happened, I escaped the blows of the men all the day, and when evening
came, I was in hopes that fate would have favored me, but I was disappointed in
my expectations, for having bad success, they raked their vengeance upon me, by
tying me to a tree, and keeping me in that condition all the night, without the
least nourishment either in food or water, and when the morning summoned them
from their tufty beds, they came and whooped at me with every mark of venomo^s
spite, and left me in that state until they had eat their breakfast, and then
loosening me, left me to pick up what scattered refuse I could find, which was
but little after such fasting; at the same time ready to sink under to pangs of
the night's endurance, for I could not change my posture, being so close bound.

The Chief having examined the state of my body, and seeing there was no danger
of mortifying, in a rough and surly manner, commanded me to follow the party
that go with him, as they was again going to be separated. I was obliged to pay
submissive obedience to the direful mandate, and as well as my strength would
permit, s^t out for the toils of the day; they (...) hands, seeing there was no
occasion for (...) permitted me to walk at my own leisure, so that I did not
let them be out of sight; but this (...) very difficult for me to do sometimes,
when they (...) scattered about; but there was always women and (...) with me.

The ill treatment I saw that I should certainly experience with this tribe,
made me resolve in my mind, to embrace the first opportunity that had the least
appearance of success, after my wounds was healed, and health and strength
restored, to desert from them; for I still had the consolation that the Lord
would in his own due time work out a way for my deliverance; and it was these
reflections that prevented me from laying violent hands on myself; this enabled
me to overcome temptations, and brought calm tranqu^llity to my soul, by
waiting the Lord's season, and trusting to his gracious promises.

In a few days I found my strength and health reuniting very fast, and in a
fortnight was able to encounter all the labor of the day in hunting and
carrying what game they thought proper to load me with. -- This day I
experienced more civility and tender treatment than I expected from them, and
cherished some hopes that their tyrannical behavior was decreasing; but still
this transient lenity was insufficient to counter-ballance their inhumanity by
nature, and what it (...) more than probable I still should receive from them;
-- it was not enough to sooth my troubled spirits, or deter me from the attempt
of imploring some happier climate when I had room to hope I could effect a
peaceable and safe escape* As to their future treatment, I (...) experienced
more or less ill-usage, although there (...) occasional intermissions, they was
of short duration; but though I had the good fortune to escape much relentless
cruelty, my life was still in jeopardy, for it required the most cautious
conduct in all my actions to secure their gentleness after a bad day's labor:
their countenances, actions, language, and behavior toward me, manifested the
turbulency of their spirits, and it required a diligent and watchful guard over
every motion or word that proceeded from me, to restrain their malice, or
prevent the effects of the ill success of the day from being vented on me; for
with them there was no reasoning, and arguments was as words to the wind; their
incorrect ideas of causes and effects, will not admit of comment or
animadversion; patient and silent submission to their barbarous ignorance and
darkness, is the only alternative that promises and good effects to one that
should be so unfortunate as to fall within their clutches.

Having learnt by dear taught experience, how to humor their capricious,
dispositions, I was fortunate enough to remain amongst them without much
barbarous treatment, some weeks: but on a certain time, ^hen they had been more
than common successful, I was set abo^^ cleaning some game, by the side of a
large and rapid stream, that we might not have so heavy loads to take to our
resting place; when not being sufficiently watchful, I unguardedly left a
considerable quantity near the water edge, while I with (...) to a little
distance for a few minutes, and in the (...), either an otter, beaver, or some
other (...) our animal, dragged it into the water; and as it was the principal
part of the day's success, and the day drawing to a close, and the Indians
exulting in their good fortune, and anticipating a jovial and merry evening; I
was almost distracted at what would be^^l me; for there was not near enough
remaining for supper, and they was very regardless about seeking more; as they
act very prudently in these cases; for they never love to kill so as to have a
superfluity to waste; I was in such a straight, I knew not which to prefer;
either to terminate my existence myself, or leave it to be excented by their
merciless vengeance; as there was not a shadow of hope that I should live till
next morning; so powerfully was the propriety of suicide impressed upon my
mind, that I was once on the point of committing the horrid crime, and had the
instrument of death at my throat (which was a piece of hard wood sharpened like
a knife, and as pointed at the end as a fork) when suddenly hearing a voice,
and looking round, it was one of the men bawling to me to make more haste, but
did not come near enough to discern my disorder and disaster: in this
deplorable state, my mind would admit of no stable conclusion, and at last I
had recourse to prayer, and begged of the Lord to direct me what to do; but
alas! I was too much like such as "live without God in the world:" I was
totally unacquainted with heavenly language, or the motions of (...) spirit, to
understand, or receive any benefit, or (...) know whether the Lord had answered
(...) or not (...) began seriously to meditate upon some scheme to elude the
approaching trial; but how to do it in that situation, required the wisdom of
Solomon, or the power of a deity; or at least the aid and assistance of a
d^ity; for no wisdom, exclusive of infinite wisdom, could point out the means,
and then put in practice.

I had nothing left of all the game delivered unto me, but two rabbits, one
small guanna, and one small cura^^ce, and but a very little they had amongst
them that was not gave to me to wash; and the number that was to sup and
breakfast of this, was about thirty men, about twelve women, and as many
children of different ages. It was drawing toward evening before I had
determined in my mind, and knowing there was no time to be longer lost, I
rashly jumped into the water to drown myself, but the stream being so shallow,
my plunging and tumbling brought two of the women, who seeing me in this
situation, screamed out hideously, and this brought one of the men to the
water, who directly jumped in and took me out, and leaving me with several of
the women that were now assembled on the spot, ran to setch the rest of the
crew; at whose return I knew extremities of an excruciating kind, would be
inflicted on me, and probably no more than the forerunner of a cruel death at
last.

As soon as I had discharged the water, and (...) stand, I walked a few steps
-- the women wa^ (...) time staring about to see what was become of (...)
visions, for they undoubtedly judged I had thrown it into the water; and the
men would naturally put the same constructions upon it, after being ^^^ness to
my being is the water myself: I now had no time left for hesitation, or
consideration -- there was no alternative between life and death but running;
but where could I run? or how could I run? but I did take to my heels and run;
and in about (...) minutes I heard their yelping cry behind me, but it was too
far gone to retract, for they presently saw me on the ^^ight, and the first
that came near enough, let fly an arrow, which I saw pass by my side without
touching me: I had no time to look back to see how many was behind me, or how
near to me; but every moment I expected their claws upon me, for they was much
superior to me in swiftness, and I knew while running they did still gain
ground upon me. In about three or four min^^^s after the arrow passed by me,
another was discharged and entered my arm scantingly and fell out, and as
painful as it was, run I must, and did, but within two minutes, a third arrow
took me in the most fleshy part of my body, and brought me to the ground its
pains; I was now seized, bound, and led away a captive prisoner to the Chief,
in the midst of every savage insult, and receiving (...) all the way: when we
came into his p^^^ence, his (...) countenance portended inflictions (...)* the
first thing was to take me to the (...) to know what was become of the
provisions; (...) could say, or motions I could make, was not (...) convince or
at least to mollify their (...) hearts and cannibal natures; although I have
great reason to believe they understood from me what had happened, but their
incredulity would not allow them to display the tokens of their understanding;
and my unlucky running away corroborated the unjust suspicions they entertained
of my disintegrity and faithlessness; and consequently all my submissiveness,
confessions, declarations, or pitiful motions, could not move them to pity or
tenderness: not a countenance amongst them bore the least resemblance to
sympathy, but just the reverse; anger, wrath, passion and vengeance seemed to
be stored up in reserve, to be vented on me as soon as the dreadful mandate
describing its nature, was issued forth by my imperious judge, the enraged
Chief. We now drew toward our place of rest for the night with what little
game was left, and arriving there with so small a portion of provision, and
myself and crew in such a disordered state it raised the curiosity of the
woman, who had made the necessary preparations for the feast; but being
informed of the circumstances that had taken place, they immediately flew at me
like ^^ends let out of hell, and would have tore me in pieces presently if they
had been permitted to display their vengeance: but after scratching me, so as
to make the blood stream all down my body, they was restrained from further
violence for the persent. It must be observed, I was naked continually since
the ti^^ the Woolaways first stripped me, and consequently (...) wounded. How
welcome would death have (...) this moment! but alas! I was reserved for (...)

After binding me to a tree, they prepared for supper, and a very scanty
portion fell to each one's share: reader may easily guess what portion of it
fell to mine.

As soon as the provision was devoured, there was a general consulation how to
dispose of me; and by their motions I could see that some was for burning, some
for scalping, some for hacking by cutting me in pieces, and others by killing
me with arrows: and this last method I observed me the approbation of the
Chief. Now during all this debating amongst themselves, I particularly noticed
an old man, but a few years younger than the Chief, that seemed to be entirely
unconcerned in the whole affair; and his melancholy aspect convinced me his
soul was burdened with weighty impressions; but before supper, and during the
course of the afternoon, he displayed the same degree of ferocity toward me as
the rest: I endeavored as well as my dismal situation would permit, to deduce
some consolation from this singular conduct of the venerable old man: but then
again, (...) ^^^sidered what I had on my mind to counterba^^^, (...) faint
hopes, my feeble comfort would vanis^ (...) smoke. All this time I was faste^ed
with my naked mangled body to the tree; sinking under the weight of pain,
^^^sting, and fear, longing for, and dreading the shape of death.

(...) found it was concluded upon, that death (...) me with the weapons of
arrows; and I was confirmed in my opinion, by seeing them prepare their bows
for the purpose -- the Chief himself being also supplied on the occasion. When
each was furnished with the cruel instruments, they came and loosened me, and
led me about half a quarter of a mile to an opening, and there again fastening
me to a tree (and to make the scene the more shocking) with my face toward
them, that I might be an eyewitness to my own martyrdom: -- they had their
bows and arrows all in order, and ready to begin their infernal deed; big with
impatience for its execution. It Is impossible here for me to describe, the
state of my mental powers, or for the reader to picture to himself, my
distressing agitations; he may sympathise now, but no relief could be expected
then: -- the Chief seemed to be the most revengeful and blood-thirsty amongst
them, at this time, and impatient for his savage satisfaction. The crew,
consisting of about thirty that was prepared with bows and arrows, was now all
drawn up as in bottle array, ready to vent their spleen upon the poor
unfortunate victim; and now seeing my last moment at hand, my whole frame
became as a statue of marble, and sensation and animation seemed almost to have
left me, but still retained sufficient reason of faculties to ponder upon
eternity; but the terrors of death and its agonies had quite left me: the soul
and body seemed to be separated, for I felt no more of the anguish of my
wounds, or want of food, than one wallowing in every enjoyment of life; or as a
dead corpse.

Just at this critical and last moment of r^spite, a circumstance took place
that caused a delay, and the confused noise it produced, brought my scattered
ideas and faculties together, and I presently began to reason rationally, and
looking earnestly, I perceived the old man before alluded unto, harranguing
them vehemently: I thought it seemed to be productive of pacification amongst
them, and my soul began to revive, and my almost lifeless body to war warm: for
I soon saw several of them lay down their bows, and amongst them was the Chief;
but there was some that still continued obdurate and resolved, but they were
soon overpowered and persuaded by numbers; and in the space of a quarter of an
hour, every one was as quiet as lambs, and the old man himself came and
released me: O what a heavenly exhortation this proved to me, how soon I
experienced its efficacious virtue; the ferocity of the surrounding crew was
dispelled, and a composure bordering on peace and serenity assumed its place;
how was my soul enraptured in flames of inexpressible joy, to be thus so
unexpectedly delivered from the voracious jaws of a lingering death: this
miraculous deliverance struck my mind with an impressive reverence and sacred
gratitude to my Creator, who I now plainly perceived, had been my deliverer,
and henceforward I determined to submit with patient resignation, to every
(...) that it was his will should befall me, without ^^jection; and be humbly
obedient to his dispensations. (...) taken from the tree, I returned with the
rest from whence we came, and all animosity seemed to be forgotten; and if
there had been any food left, I should have been welcome, and partook of it
with the rest; but as I before related, they had but a scanty portion amongst
themselves, and consequently it was my ill fate to go all night and till next
evening fasting, which made two days; excepting a few berries I found this last
day: this day we again had uncommon success and retired to our umbrage very
early, for every one was hungry enough, and I was permitted to eat with them,
with equal freedom, which indulgence I embraced joyfully, and improved the
opportunity plentifully.

They had not as yet presented me a bow to try my expertness as a marksman, but
the next morning they did; but fearing within myself that I should not answer
their expectations, and thereby incur their future displeasure, I pretended to
more ignorance and unacquaintance with them than was really the case, and this
induced them to excuse me for this time; but I thought I observed a little
murmuring amongst them, and in fact I should have been very glad to have been
useful to them, as it would have contributed very materially to my peace and
comfort amongst them.

This tribe is called Ass^noes, and differ from the other two tribes in their
persons and decorations: -- their lips are very large, and their notes long,
proceeding (...) their being frequently pulled while they are (...) which
compression of the finger and thum^^ against their nostrils, cause them to be
almost closed; but from what cause their large lips proceed, I never learnt,
nor had no opportunity to make particular observations, for there was but few
infants amongst them; and my mind always bent upon escaping -- they are also
ramarkable in their decorations. Whenever they kill a large beast, one of the
men have the tail and wear it fastened round his head, and sometimes one or
both ears; and by these ornaments of head dress, I could judge of their success
in hunting; and suppose in the whole I saw near a hundred men thus adorned with
the tails of different large animals; and the boys dress themselves with the
tails, ears, and feet of smaller game; while the women are equally singular to
decorate themselves with feathers: they commonly tie a little bunch of
vangated, small, pretty plumage, and hang them to their ears, fastening the
long ones round their necks, plaiting them into their hair, and permit them to
hang down their backs; and sometimes in such plenty as almost to cover their
body: but they are soon destroyed in the woods, and it frequently happens, that
a woman have not one feather about her but those in her ears, for they kill
less fowl than the other tribes: this part of the forest and woods abounding
more in animals, and especially wherries and conies, and to decoy the latter of
these, the Indians have wooden whistles, by which they imitate their noise, and
by this means frequently (...) a number of these little animals into an ambush
(...) then letting fly amongst them, but very few of the (...) ^^^uded
creatures escape.

There is another animal that is very common in some part of the forest where
rivers run through, that they catch when their excursions call them that way,
called a gu^na, in shape much like a lizard, but considerable larger; this
creature lays its eggs by the side of a river, so that on the approach of an
enemy, leap into the water; but this instinctive policy seldom answers the
purpose of preservation; for the Indians are as good diverse as themselves, and
pursue them on the sand at the bottom and bring them up alive: there was one
day our whole success was by catching this animal, and plentifully we was
supplied for supper and breakfast; but the Indians are not fond of feeding upon
one kind entirely for two meals, or even if it can be avoided; but of all the
game they kill, there is none more mild, and free from noxious qualities: I
never tasted any but twice before, which was while I was with the Buckeraws.
There is but few streams run through that part of the forest frequented by the
Woolaways; but they have the creature called the tenaha, about the size of a
cat, but surrow into the ground almost perpendicular for near two yards; there
is but one way to conquer them: when the Indians discover one of their holes,
and by examining it, convinced that it is occupied, a few of them begin to
break (...) the earth, to force the creature from his habitation, while the
rest stand ready to let fly a^^ him, and the most acute diligence is requisite
to shoot him before he escape, for he is one of the swiftest animal^ (...) the
forest, and when killed, but very indifferent men^.

There are plenty of tortoises and armadilloes in our present daily
preambulations when we are near the rivers, but their shells and scales bid
defiance to the force of the arrows, and we commonly take them alive; the
former require no industry or art, to be taken when once discovered, but the
latter lay so deep in the earth, the trouble of tearing up the earth would
exceed the reward; but we often perceive them on the ground, and by instantly
giving chase, seize them before they can reach home.

Crocodiles also are very numerous in this part of the forest, but they never
attempt to shoot at or entrap them, and their nature is too destructive to be
dealt with gently.

Here is also beavers and polecats, but their noxious smell screen them from
notice, as they cannot be eaten.

When they pursue a deer, he frequently makes to the water, and attempts to
escape by swimming; but this generally proves fatal, for if the Indians can
reach the water before he is got to the other side, they rouse in after him,
and trimming themselves upright in the water, level their arrows as effectually
as on dry land; and the value of the victim well rewards the pains: it is the
best meat they kill.

They do sometimes shoot at a large (...) when playing on the surface of the
water, and if they happen to pierce him so as to wound him mortally, he dives
to the bottom, and if the water is not very deep, they follow him and force him
up, and so worry him to death: they eat some part of it, but the chief purpose
they apply him unto, is extracting the oil, which they do in this manner: They
clean and cut him down the middle and hang it up in the sun, and catch the oil
in an earthen, or sometimes a wooden vessel, which is a piece of wood scooped
out hollow; and this oil they heat by the fire and pour it over the fish, which
is the means of bringing out more, and this operation is performed three of
four times before all the off is extracted; then the carcass is thrown away,
and the oil preserved.

This tribe consumes more food than either of the other two, because of their
lavishing wastefulness, and drink considerable more plantane juice: the women
are in a great measure as bad as the men; for filthiness they quite equal them,
and being accustomed unto it from their infancy, they never leave it off: it is
not uncommon to see young men and women wallowing on the mossy turf together
quite intoxicated, for being so fond of this bewitching liquor, they employ
more time in procuring it than other tribes; they are seldom idle, for when
they are by any means exempted from the duties of the forest, the time is
employed in providing or drinking this liquor. I have sometimes though^ whether
there was filthier, and more beastly set of human beings under the sun than
this tribe; and in disposition they resembled wild beasts, for there was scarce
a day passed but quarrelling more or less did take place amongst them -- the
women as well as the men; and sometimes arise to such ruptures, that the Chief
was obliged to interfere to put a stop to the soment, for when once they are
exasperated, it is difficult to stop the progress of the contention; but I
never knew an instance where the presence and austere commands of the Chief
failed to be effectual; but when it is arrived to such a height of passion as
to make that necessary, there are from six to ten or more, concerned in the
fray; for the peaceable part of the party never call in the aid of the Chief if
their own attempts will effect a mediation; which is generally the cast when
the combatants are consined within six or seven; and it seldom exceed that,
except when the women join the contending parties on different sides, then from
the nature of their dispositions, it is impossible to reason or convince them
by any pacific measures, (...) they act just like mad-c^ts, and as void of
rational consideration; and would tear each other in pieces if left to exhaust
their spleen; but the men do now cease from strife, and all unite to separate
the female combatants, or whose rancour would soon become outrageously
boundless; in this case, the men are obliged (...) recourse to that privilege
that nature has (...) and exert their superior strength, and (...) advantage
only that enables them to accomplish (...) end. From this bloody contest
amongst the women, we may conclude that there is a kind of conjugal alliance
existing between a man and woman, in the characters of husband and wife; close
friends, bosom partners, or whatever appellation you choose to give this
peculiar attachment; but this manly interference of the men never fail to
answer the purpose, even in the absence of the Chief; but fortunately for them,
it is but very seldom that things arrive to such extremeties. I was not witness
to more than one bloody contest amongst the women while I continued with this
tribe, and not once with either of the others; but the men frequently have
little skirmishes; but one thing attracted my notice: when the boys have a
falling out, they are permitted to fight as long as they please; and this is to
harden their natures, and temper them to practice, that being early accustomed
to blows and bruises, they may the more boldly enter the field of battle
hereafter; for there is no tribe that enjoy peace long together, but what they
are engaged with the Spaniards, Mu^^^^men, or other Indians, according to their
situation: but the most cruel havoc is made when two contending tribes meet,
and the Chiefs, like two Generals of armies, animating their comrades, and
encouraging them by their dismal war whoop: in these battles there is no
quarters, but cutting, hacking, and scalping, and there is no other way to
terminate this affair, but total conquest, and the victorious party murders
with triumphing exultation all that falls (...); but although they fight like
devils, while (...) is uncertain, they are not like game-cocks, to fight till
they are dead. When the issue of the day is evidently against them by the
reduction of their effective men, they then turn round and make their escape,
which is easily done, because there is no pursuit by the conquerors, for they
immediately begin to bury their dead, and take care of the wounded of both
sides; and here is no distinction or partiality, for friend and (...) share
alike in mercy; and such of the vanquished as recover of their wounds, do now
unite with this tribe, until an opportunity presents for them to join their own
people, which they are permitted to do without the least opposition if they
choose; but sometimes they remain with the new tribe, and never reunite with
their former comrades. We had several in this tribe that was taken in battle
with the Charcores, but was desirous to join their companions if ever they
could, for their present situation was very disagreeable, for I believe our
tribe was too nasty and too noisy for them; but the distance was too great, for
since their captivity, the Charcores was removed several hundred miles further
up the country, as this tribe had on the contrary way.

I never was present at one of those general engagements, but have at two or
three party-frays, the principal of which was while I was with this tribe.

(...) was a tribe that I never understood the name (...) and their foraging
parties did often meet ou^ (...) never stop to pass any discourse, or scarce
notice each other. It was our mishap on a certain time to meet at a river's
side, where there was but one convenient place to wash and clean game -- they
were there, and had taken possession of the spot when we came; we as well as
them wanting to clean and dress what we had killed, drew toward them, and our
Chief putting on an austere brow and grimace countenance (who at no time had a
pleasant one) this rouzed the indignation of their's, and seeing us make
preparations for the offensive, they immediately began to do the same for the
defensive; the number on each side being nearly equal, about forty, excepting
they had no women, and our's was neutral spectators.

Both parties having arranged themselves in order of battle, a dismal shout
preceded the bloody affair, and the arrows began to fly like hailstones; and
in a quarter of an hour there was too many wounded on each side to prolong the
contest, and a parley took place, and each side began to dress their wounded as
fast as the healthy ones could procure the necessary plants; and so far had
animosity subsided, that even the Chiefs assisted each other to dress their
wounded without the (...) show of resentment: I had myself a slight wound in
the lower part of my right side by a stone (for when their arrows are gone,
they take stones, c^^bs, or any thing at hand) and their Chief chewed a herb
and squirted the juice into it; so that if they (...), they forget like friends.

There was but one person killed, and that was on our side; that aged man that
was my interposing and liberating friend, when I was fastened to the tree for
martyrdom, as before related: I regretted the death of my benefactor, in
remembrance of his former kindness; but from that time to the present, had
never experienced one singular act of peculiar lenity from him.

After these things were properly adjusted, by the wounded being taken care of,
we buried our corpse in which they assisted: the number of wounded on our side
was seven, and on their's I think about twelve; two or three so badly as to be
carried away it a kind of litter they make of grass, leaves, and small sticks.
They did not stop to finish cleaning their game, and I was immediately loaded
with our's, and we all marched toward our nearest place of rendezvous. It must
be observed that we was at the extremity of our boundaries, I suppose near a
hundred miles from the most distant one on the opposite side: as on the
contrary it was the case with them; so that such a meeting may (...) happen
once in a century. Our nearest rendezvous was about five miles, but the
distance of their's I cannot tell.

There was a tribe in our neighborhood that was on terms of strict amity and
friendship, which parties did of^^^ (...), but seldom stop to congratulate, as
the Indians are in general very reserved.

About two months after the battle before related, there was an Indian banquet
took place between our tribe and the friendly one, which for its originality
and singularity, I thought proper to relate.

I perceived one day that our Chief was more than common earnest in his
commands, and the people seemed to be particularly attentive and pleased, and
during the whole day, every one seemed to be extraordinarily alert and
diligent; and the success was proportionable, for we had considerable more than
could be possibly consumed by us while it was good; but when evening came, I
was not a little surprised to see them preparing a portion of it for
preservation, by warming it before the fire, and hanging it up in the smoke to
the limb of a tree, under which a fire was made on purpose: the next day the
same diligence was observed, and produced similar success, and in the evening
cured after the same manner, with this difference; we had now two large birds,
which was roasted and wrapped up in trooly leaves: the two following days was
much the same, so that we now had a store of provision in reserve; I put many
different constructions upon this proceeding, but the most probable in my mind
was, that we were going to remove for a long journey further up into the
country; but neither of my speculations bore any affinity to the true cause; as
it was what I could not surmise, ever did take place amongst such a herd of
savages: it was the pre^^^^^ion (...) banquet.

The women had been excused for the last four days from accompanying us; this
also excited in me a little astonishment: the fifth or sixth day we very much
exceeded our customary circuitous bounds, and kept one invariable direct
course, and in the evening was near ten miles from home; and after eating very
sparingly both supper and breakfast, we proceeded that day in the same direct
course, and toward evening we came to a large open shade, about half a mile in
length, and in some places forty yards in breadth, constructed by trees
naturally, and boughs, leaves and grass artfully worked together in many
places, so as to produce very agreeable and pleasant retreats.

We was now arrived at the end of our journey, eat our supper and went to rest;
when in the morning there joined us at different times the remainder of our
tribe, many of which I had never seen before; I suppose the whole number
amounted to near three hundred of (...) sexes. This day was taken up entirely
in painting ^^^selves, and with greater nicety than usual, and (...) of the men
had provided themselves with a (...) polpro; a thing intended for the purpose
of an umbrella, made of grass and boughs of vines: every man now made him a
trumpet from some wax, that had been previously provided from the cells of bees
and other infects: they also procured each one a stick about four feet long,
from a curious pretty tree called a (...) these sticks, about four in^^^es in
circ^^^ (...) was so very s^ple that they resembled ropes more than sticks, and
yet as tough as cane.

This spot appeared to be very little frequented, for the grass was several
inches long, and no remains of any feasting or resorting visible. After
speading the day here, next morning a party of the men returned from whence we
had left our women and a few men as guardians, and in two days returned with
the whole company and all the provisions; and those men and women that was
left, had in the mean time curiously painted themselves, so that between paint
and decorations, we composed a strange motley of creatures; when it is
considered that we had no other covering, except the women who had aprons made
of grass, feathers and leaves.

We ^emained here two days, when we were joined by some hundreds of men, women
and children, with their Chief and they were also curiously painted and
decorated, much more so than us; and besides had with them provisions in
abundance, and with each of them such a stick as we had -- I now began to think
that a feast was going to be celebrated, and mirth to abound; and here I was
right in my conceptions.

This last tribe brought their provisions whole and (...), being all killed
that and the preceding day, and (...) it directly on their arrival, and we
(...) them.

There was a very strange ceremony took place between the two Chiefs at their
first meeting: each of them put his hand upon his head, and pointed toward the
sky with the other; and muttering some i^articulate sentences, both gave a
shout, and the whole company followed, that made the woods ring with the noise,
and then every one began his appointed duty of preparation for the morrow.

Nothing more took place this evening; but as soon as the morning light
appeared, all was in motion, by removing the whole stock of provisions about
twenty yards, to a little spot of ground about six yards square, free from all
encumbrances, quite level and clean, and surrounded with bushes so close, and
tall lofty trees that it was like night in midday: the spot where we remained,
was beautifully surrounded with tall towering trees, that cast both a cool and
fragrant shade over us; and for their regularity, had more the appearance of
art than nature; and the intorstices between were so closely filled up with
small bushes and other underwood, such as running vines, barberries, and such
like, that the place was completely lodged around, not having more than three
or four places that would admit an entrance pleasantly.

We was now summoned to our breakfasts, provided by the women; but each tribe
eat their own, a little distance from each other; and this being (...) Chief
after examining every individual (...) paint and decorations, placed us all in
rows three deep, like a file of soldiers, and marched us to the spot where the
provisions were deposited and back again; playing on our trumpets all the time:
then the other Chief arrayed his company in the same order, and performed the
same evolution: after this part of the morning exercise was over, (...) women
all stood up, and taking each other by the hand, danced round a post that was
placed in the ground on purpose, singing in their manner very harmonious^y and
cheerful, while the men of both parties was playing upon their trumpets.

This ceremony, which lasted near an hour, being over, the women separated, and
each taking a callabash, filled it with either plantane or maize liquor, and
presented it to their husbands, if we may so call them, who drank very
plentifully, and then the women drank, and after them the children; after this
there was a general dance took place between all the men and women, in pairs,
the same as the women presented the liquor unto; by this it may be relied on,
that they do not live like beings, irrational creatures, by cohabiting all in
common, although a person who has no more than a transient acquaintance with
them, may be inclined to believe; I was long enough amongst them to know if it
was the case, but I never was witness to one immodest action, during all my
different captivities: I see more immoralities and lewd actions, now I am
amongst (...), virtuous, modest and enlightened christians* in one month (I
might say one week) than I did amongst uncivilized Indians in seven years.

The women now withdrew, after dancing about half an hour, toward the place
where the provisions had been deposited, and prepared a place for a fire, while
the men were busily engaged in procuring w^^^d, and making such other
preparations as was needful for cooking dinner, and where there was so many
hands this was soon done.

Sometime in the course of the forenoon, we were joined by two or three hundred
more people, of three or four different tribes, if I may judge by their
features, decorations and manners, but there was no Chief amongst them, and had
provision with them ^^abundan^^ dried and smoaked like our's: I could not
conceive what the meaning of all this could be; notwithstanding the multitude
of us, there was provision provided sufficient to serve us with three meals a
day, for a week.

After this last company that joined us had rested themselves, and carried
their provisions where our's was, we all joined together and had another dance
for a quarter of an hour: these had sticks with them, but no trumpets; at the
conclusion of this dance, the two Chiefs stood up and harrangued the whole body
a few minutes; then every man betook himself to some employ such as cutting
wood for firing, cleaning away all encumbrances from the spot, washing and
gutting animals, and assisting the women at the fire, until dinner time: when
dinner was ready, we all was placed on the ground by the Chiefs in a very
singular manner, some in a square, some in a circle, and some in direct lines,
and the provisions brought by the women in earthen platters, calabashes and on
bark of trees, and every company eat the food they themselves brought: there
was in the whole six companies, and the women of each company did want upon
them respectively, and there being something singular in the manner of each
tribe, induced me to imagine that there was six separate tribes or parts of
tribes amongst us; for there was not an entire whole tribe of none of us.

This was the first dinner I had eve^ seen amongst them, as I believe these
general feastings happen but very seldom; and what method they have to acquaint
each other with the approaching time and place, I know not. After the men had
done, the women fa^ down promiscuously in no regular order, and partook of the
remains of the table all in common; the men all the while dancing and drinking,
and the children skipping about with bones and meat in their hands: but what
was most extraordinary, the Chiefs all this time did not taste a morsel: when
the women had done, the whole body of men was formed into a large circle th^^^
deep: but our's with their music in the front: and the two Chiefs within,
seated on a large quantity of gr^^^^ moss and leaves, previously prepared; and
the women brought the most dainty part of the provisions, such as legs, wings,
and ^^ces of birds and animals, nicely done, and in quantity sufficient for ten
men, with liquor in proportion. Thus dined the two great emperors of the
Indians in state and splendor -- not Solomon in all his glory sat at a table
in more magnificence, and attended by more cheerful and obedient domestics. It
was near evening before they arose from their seats, although the encircled
musicians were dismissed as soon as they had done eating; and the whole
afternoon was spent in jollity, mirth, singing, and diversions of all kinds;
and in the midst of such a variety of amusements, it was almost impossible for
me to avoid sharing of it in some degree, so as to produce resibility, and I
did enjoy myself this afternoon with plea^^^ry; the first time I f^^wed a
disposition for jocundity and laughing since my first captivity: -- as to any
approaching danger impending toward me by this feasting, I was entirely free
from all fears or apprehensions, for no notice of any kind was taken of me
where I go, or what I do; but still it was not a proper time to run away; --
toward the close of the day the men began to amuse themselves by jumping over
the fire, and throwing coals at each other, but this dangerous gambling was
soon over by the interposition of the Chiefs, for it was improper play-things
in the hands of ^^unken men. Night now advanced, and the musicians was again
placed in two rows, and after playing a little while, was dismissed, when every
one as (...) fancy directed him laid down to rest, or dance about; so that
amongst us all, there was some diversion all the night* when morning appeared,
the whole company was busy in providing breakfast, excepting the trumpeters,
who was playing on their instruments around the Chiefs; when breakfast was
ready, and the same ceremonies observed as the preceding day, every one partook
of what was left last evening, the Chiefs excepted; for whom there was hot
victuals provided, after all had done, and the refuse of bones and other
fragments being removed out of the way, they began to prepare for the principal
part of the meeting in celebration of the banquet.

The whole company being ordered into ranks, they were then separated into
eight divisions, which was also placed in two squares, each division being
about six yards asunder; in this manner they stood while the two Chiefs went to
each corner and harangued them by way of instruction as well as command; this
being done, they now made a conjunction, and formed but one square; and now
commences a very strange kind of diversion, which terrified me very much, as I
expected to partake of the amusement.

One of the Chiefs now gave a whistle, and a man from one corner came to the
center of the square, and he giving a whistle, another came from the opposite
corner; one of them then stooped down, laying his hands upon his knees and
exposing his bare back, the other gave him three blows with his knuckles with
all his might: them he in return stooped down in like manner and received the
same discipline; then returning to their respective corners, two more came away
and performed the same exploits, and thus they continued two at a time till the
whole company had tasted of this banqueting dish; for my part I was still in
hopes it would cease without a general display, and for that reason did
continue changing my position to escape notice; but seeing there was no
likelihood of it, I did toward the last venture out, and went through the
unpleasant ceremony better than I expected: this took us up till dinner time,
and having made free with their favorite liquor, the plantane juice, to recruit
their spirits, we was all summoned again to the morning recreation, but happily
it was conducted in a different manner, which I took the advantage of: instead
of drawing out two and two, there was now no order observed, but running
amongst each other in confusion; any one did stoop as he please, and any one
strike the blow; and I question if there was one poor simple creature amongst
them, but what exposed his naked back, and some two or three times: -- at this
time my sagacity was of important service to me, for I pretended to as much
alertness and activity as the rest, and being continually in motion, and
running from one end to the other, no notice could be taken of my subtility;
but to prevent them from discovery or detecting of me, I sometimes gave a rap,
and that as hard as I w^able, or notice would have been taken of the ^enity but
the harder the blow, the greater the pleasure to the sufferer; but I never paid
any regard who it was I did strike; for being all devils alike, it was no
matter which: but by my ingenuity I escaped myself. This continued without any
considerable intermission, till supper time, when they eat a hearty supper, and
drank plentifully: -- between this and bedtime, the women was dancing and
frisking about merrily; when they had done, the men began, and continued
jumping, singing, whistling, shouting, hallowing, and laughing, all the night;
and great part of the women following their example; even the two Chiefs was on
their legs at intervals, the principal part of the night; and in reality it was
the most agreeable night I had ever spent amongst them, because my mind wa s at
ease: toward morning every one began to grow drowsy, and one after another
dropped asleep; so that at one time I thought every man, woman and child, was
napping together.

I now had some little impulse on my mind to give them the slip; but at the
same time there was many weighty objections started up to discouragement: they
would not sleep long; it was day instead of night; too many would be in pursuit
of me, and when taken, this second crime would be an aggravation that would
certainly exasperate them, and admit of no mercy. After seriously considering
the matter, I judged it best to rest contented till a more favorable and less
dangerous opportunity presented itself.

In the morning they breakfasted, and then began to renew the former diversion
of the knuckles, and in the same disordered and irregular manner: -- I began to
grow doubtful of the further good effects of my deceiving stratagem to evade
their knuckles, for though I could escape their notice by skipping about, my
back could not escape their eyes; for as there was visible mark^ of the blows
upon them, I should soon be discovered, and very probable out of show of Indian
civility, I might have been complimented with a blow from an hundred of them;
for it was evident to me, that the more blows a man did receive, the greater
was the friendship and esteem, and this kind of esteem I wished to be excused
from partaking of, and though it the best way to take a moderate share of their
false diversion with them: but even that was now hazardous, for although they
had not hitherto noticed my back, it was likely they would when I come to
stoop; and seeing I had been hitherto neglected, perhaps give me three or four
blows instead of one; and if two or three of them should be disposed thus to
evince their seeming good will at the same time, I doubt the pains of my poor
back would make me cry out pe^avi; which would sound in their ears like music,
and bring upon me still more of their banqueting love.

I was in a straight betwixt the two extremes, but at last ventured to stoop
when there was but one man within a few yards of me, who no sooner looked at my
^ack and gave a shout, them several more came up, an^ as I predicted, so it
happened; they showed a kind of sympatising sorrow that I had been hitherto
slighted, and altogether began to knuckle me so forcibly that the blows almost
brought me to the ground. I imagine I had at this one time twenty blows, and in
all probability should have been favored with twenty more if I had not marched
off; but so far was I from being inclined to oblige, or be obliged; to confer,
or receive any future favors of this nature, that I remained a neutral
spectator the rest of the day. At the return of evening, after supper, they
renewed their last evening's ceremony, by shouting, screaming, whooping and
imitating so naturally several beasts of the forest, it was as great an uproar
as if the whole tribe of savage beasts of prey had met together and were
fighting a battle of royal.

I did not partake with them much in the jollity of this night: the
distinguished marks of their friendship was too fresh in my memory; too
effectual on my sensations, and too visible on my back, for me to have much
appetite for running and skipping about all night. When the anguish would
permit it, I was glad to dose and slumber a little; for sleeping I did not
expect that, for putting the pains of my back out of the question, the noise
and trumbling about, some drunk, others stupid, and others dancing and
hallowing, would hinder any person from sound sleep, and especially so in my
circumstances, that even at this (...) season could not always keep my mind in
a state of calm composure, but at melancholy intervals did forebode some
impending evil, and was oftentimes very sorrowful in soul by reflective
impressions what was still reserved in the womb of fate, and how this uncommon
assemblage of savages would separate; whether it might not be an invitation
from our tribe to the others to compliment them at the termination of the
festival, with a victim sacrifice, a captive prisoner's death.

I endeavored to cheer my spirits as well as these gloomy apprehensions, and
desponding surmises would suffer, and passed away the night in a manner as easy
for the reader to guess, as for me to describe; if he only makes an exchange in
his mind, and place himself in my situation.

When morning made its appearance, I observed the two Chiefs was the first that
was stiring, and was walking to and fro, seemingly big with some new
enterprise; their frequently stopping and making observations, confirmed me in
the opinion that something new was on the carpet; but still I endeavored to
stifle all fears and anticipations relating to my own safety, although it was at
intervals much like the troubled sea; a difficult matter to keep the agitations
of the soul within the limits of silent sadness.

As soon as the men arose, they was summoned before the Chiefs, and after a
little music, our Chief gave a most horrid and hellish cry, accompanied with
motions toward the sky and ground, and then began to harrangue them very
earnestly for a quarter of an hour* after him the other Chief did the same,
with this addition; he took one of the sticks that I mentioned before, every
man was provided with, and struck our Chief across the back with all his might;
then our's returned the civility with the same stick; then every man gave a
shout, and danced and jumped about for joy as though they were frantic: and now
commences the most barbarous diversion that could possibly be devised, to come
under the appellation of mirth and festivity.

The whole company now divided themselves into four parties, and each procured
a large bundle of grass, and laid it in four different places; then the four
companies formed themselves into regular lines; each company having their
bundle of grass, and each man having his stick before spoken of in his hand:
the foremost man now laid down with his breast on the bundle of grass, and all
the rest passed him one after the other, each striking him across the back with
all his strength, where the knuckles had so bruised before, and as they passed
they fell into a rank, and when the last man passed him, then he arose and went
to the rear of the rank, and the next foremast man laid down on the grass, and
experienced the same treatment, and so on until every man in the four companies
had felt the festive blow: -- in this case there was no alternative, and I
underwent the painful ceremony of Indian friendship.

At the conclusion of this savage diversion, the ground was clotted with blood,
and some of the poor filly creature's backs was battered in such a manner, that
they was disabled for some weeks after; and three actually died belonging to
our tribe within a fortnight, and four of the others died on the spot; and for
my part, I was obliged to use all my cunning again for many weeks after,
pretending to a disorder in my body and weakness, because I would not so soon
resume my former occupation of foraging in the woods.

If they had not divided themselves into four parties, the blows every man
would have received, must have proved mortal to most of them: -- in this affair
I believe I came off as favorable as any one, for I cautiously contrived to be
the last man, and by this time every one had been beat, and was weary and ^ore,
and of course did not strike with such vengeance; but as tender as the
treatment was with the blows received the day before, I found the first stroke
fetched the blood, and the next a stream, and it cannot be supposed the future
blows healed them; and from the number of men present, the blows that every man
received, notwithstanding the division in parties, must be very numerous: and
yet all this cruelty so unmercifully inflicted on each other, produced nothing
but mirth and seeming good will: the more yelping, groaning, and lamentations,
the more pleasure and gladness it produced to those that was not so terribly
battered, o^ that could better bear it. It was enough to (...) the nature of a
tiger, if he could reason between pleasure and pain, to hear the dismal groans,
sobs, sighs, and woeful cries all the night; as one night kept us from sleep
with pleasure, so on the other hand, the next did with pain: but what is still
more extraordinary, during the whole time of thus mangling each other, there
was not the least sign of trouble or complaint; but every one was full of glee,
laughing ready to split themselves, and the more blood ran, the more pastime it
afforded, and thus their pleasure increased by their barbarity: as soon as it
was over, preparation was made for the wounded; but those that died was buried
on the spot, with every token of mirth, exultation, dancing, and blowing
trumpets; and their sticks buried with them: at the conclusion of this
ceremony, the whole company proceeded to an adjacent river, about half a mile
distance, and according to their strength, washed their bloody carcases; some
by plunging in, others by setting down on the brink, and others by having it
done for them: this took up the space of two hours, after which they returned
to the shady bower, and after devouring an amazing quantity of provisions, and
drank ^^ll some was intoxicated, and others quite stupid, they laid themselves
down, and the greatest part went to sleep, and nothing extraordinary took place
before morning, when every one was examined as to the state of his wounds, and
medicines applied accordingly, both inward and outward, for the pains and
effects of the blows had produced great need of restorative applications to
many of them, for it had brought on very ^ore sickness, fainting and weakness,
and to a christian sptator, it would not have appeared as if one half of the^^
would ever survive it.

This attendance upon the sick and wounded being finished, and the women during
the time having provided breakfast, every one partook according to his strength
and appetite, and although they did consume a large quantity for men in their
situation, it bore no comparison to their devouring stomachs before. Breakfast
being finished, the men was left to their own exercise and option of employ;
which was very reverse to what had hitherto taken place; there being but a very
few that was disposed for jumping or dancing; but there was some exceptions,
for several of them played on their trumpets, others leaped and frolicked
about. We may properly divide them this morning into three classes: one-third
dancing and making me^^y; one-third soberly walking about to restore health and
strength; and one-third sitting and laying on the grass; and (...) ^his last
class, I was glad to be at liberty to add (...) number.

The two Chiefs in the mean time was gone with the women to inspect the state
and portion of victuals left; for the festival could not continue longer than
the means of feasting, and many of the men was come a great distance, and in an
unfit state to forage the woods on their (...), it was necessary they should
take provisions with them to subsist on; which was a precaution absolutely
needful for us all: -- at the return of the Chiefs, after examining the
provisions, there was a council called, and all that was able attended; the
Chiefs having delivered their opinions on the state and quantity of food
remaining, it was concluded upon to break up the banquet, there not being a
sufficiency to admit of its longer duration; and without any further
deliberation on the matter, every tribe, or part of tribes, as they came
separated themselves into distinct companies: there was our tribe, and the
other tribe with their Chief; and the large number that joined us the second
day, separated themselves into three companies; by which I concluded they
belonged to three different tribes; there was now five separate parties; the
two Chiefs now picked out two of the stoutest and ablest men from each
division, and had all the provision that was left brought out on the open
green, and according to the number of men in each company, it was very
impartially divided, and there being found to be something more than was deemed
necessary to support us on our return, it was agreed upon to remain (...) or
day; and this day was spent agreeably, profitably, and wisely; for every able
man was employed in procuring herbs and plants needful for the ailments of the
sick and wounded, and the two Chiefs engaged in their preparations, so that
each party might have some with them on their journey, and applying them as
occasion require: -- the women was busy in dressing the (...), that there might
be no delay in their travels on that head; for some came a great way; while the
s^^k and disabled enjoyed the comforts of rest, and good warm provisions and
liquor as was needful, to prepare them for the next day's journey.

This day proved a salutary one to me, as well as many others, for the faithful
attendance of the Chiefs produced astonishing good effects upon our maimed and
bruised bodies; for the surprising skill they have in simples, frequently heals
such wounds in a week or ten days, that would require as many months by the
tedious operation of lancets, phlems, and compounds of noxious and baneful
properties: and without the aid of one drug, one particle of chemical
preparation, or a single draught of nauseous physic, they will, by the virtues
of nature's production alone, within the narrow sphere of their daily
excursions, find remedies for every casualty and inward disorder that befall
them; but the whole of the matter rests on this one point, they (...) not
subject unto the thousandth part of our (...), and the reason of which is
obvious: they wisely avoid the causes, and that prevents the effects from
taking place.

Whatever may be the imperfections of the Indians, owing to their want of
education and correspondence wi^h the world, they are in their study of nature,
and its va^iagated operations on the bodies of men, lessons of useful
instruction to civilized mankind: in their manners they are not depraved, in
their actions they are not immoral; if they murder, it does not proceed from a
principle of abandoned good, or wicked dispositions; natural instinct, and
self-preservation, prompts them to acts of barbarity, which they do not see a
sin in committing; nor is the rectitude of their conscience, seared as with a
"red hot iron:" they don't way-lay the innocent traveller, and assassinate him
in cold blood; or break in unawares upon each other's property and (...) their
throats, and leave them weltering in a gore of blood, where neither enmity or
prejudice existed, merely for the sake of a little perishing pelf: no, the
Indians are not guilty of any such inhuman and unnatural cruelties: it is
amongst christians, the pretended followers of a humble, meek, peaceable and
benevolent Jesus, that we must look for such scenes of corruption and hellish
iniquities.

The morning being come, every one received a portion of meat for breakfast, as
allotted them by the two Chiefs, and delivered by the women; who also assisted
in administering the prescriptions to the sick and wounded: this precaution of
distributing the provision in portions was to prevent a waste, because every
one had not equally alike a prudent government over his own conduct: this
arrangement being adjusted, the next thing was to prepare for separation; and
this part of the festival was as whimsical, as the former part had been cruel;
but founded entirely upon good will and friendship; and in fact there was not a
single instance of strife or anger happened during the whole festivals an
example worthy of christian imitation.

Being now all assembled together, the first thing was for every man to break
his stick in two, and put one piece under one of his feet, and the other under
the foot of a companion, and he doing the same, the whole company was now
standing upon two pieces of stick. The two Chiefs then went round, and taking
the two sticks from each man's feet, delivered them into his hands, who
immediately struck his opposite with both of his hands across his two arms, and
then threw the sticks down on the ground; and after this manner the whole
assembly proceeded. The sticks being now all in one heap, a fire was kindled,
and while they was burning, there was the most general shouting and antic
gestures throughout the whole body, that I had ever witnessed: not even the
Chiefs, women, children, nor sick was exempted, but every one seemed equally
alike concerned and engaged with such a portion of joy, mirth and pleasantry,
that convinced me that the separation was going to take place on the most (...)
terms of social friendship and good will; and this continued till the sticks
was burnt to ashes; when every one took a bit of the ashes, and putting in into
his and her mouth, squirted it into each other's faces, so that every one
partook of this part of the ceremony, and even those that were sick, some of
the ashes was carried to them for the purpose. This being over, the mus^cians,
after playing a little on their trumpets, threw them on the ground and trampled
them in pieces: then all joining in a loud whoop, with jumping and dancing for
a few minutes, every one made motions with his hands toward the sky and
ground: then silence ensued for a few minutes: now one of the Chiefs harangued
them for a quarter of an hour, making the usual motions: when he had finished,
the other done the same, then the whole company gave a shout, and smacking
their hands together a few times, closed this terrible banquet; and to me it
was a rejoicing season.

The next thing was to provide litters to convey away the sick, which was
performed after this manner:

Two long poles, about four yards each, and strong enough to support the weight
of a man, was provided; now these two poles was brought within three quarters
of a yard together, with strong twisted and plaited grass, like the bottom of a
chair, so strong and firm as to bear the sick man, and as many of these
conveniences was prepared as needful.

The next thing was to tie up the provisions allotted to each company's share,
and this was soon done -- for liquor there was none left.

All things being now adjusted, we divided without any further ceremony, and
left the banqueting spot all at the same time, and taking different routes, we
did not accompany each other no way: our tribe had not proceeded two hours,
before we halted under the canopy of some large spreading trees, and reposed
ourselves with a comfortable and refreshing sleep. We had but two sick men to
carry on litters, but from the number of the weak and fainty, we traveled very
slow, as it took us up six days before we reached to our nearest place of
rendezvous; and the last two days provision was very sparing; but as our
stomachs was not so craving as when we went forward, we did not much mind it:
besides, those whose appetites could relish it, had the advantage of fruit, and
thus lengthened out the animal food for the more delicate and weak stomachs.
All trials seemed to be borne with heroic patience; no murmuring or complaints
was heard, and at last we got home.

I understood that after this savage manner (...) ^nowledging friendship was
observed by all the tribes in the forest at certain times, amongst those that
were in amity with each other, and that another similar one would be observed
by us after a number of moons; I thought within myself if the opportunity
should ever again present itself, I would embrace it and venture upon an
escape; but how the distant tribes distinguish the exact time and place, I
never could understand, so as to be all there together within a day or two: it
is without doubt by the moon's revolutions, but how they keep an account of the
moon's variations is a mystery, as I never saw any account like a record
amongst the^* excepting cutting notches in trees answer the purpose: this I saw
sometimes, but not any particular period that I could deduce plausible
conclusions from: but there was some meaning to it, because I did sometimes
mark their resorting to them, and making observations.

Of all the tribes, or parts of tribes, that was at this scene of barbarous
jocundity, no two did speak the same language; from this I imagined there must
be five different tribes; but not one captive besides myself: they had some
dogs with them, but little notice was taken of them.

The greatest part of us remained at home for several days, and some for as
many weeks, without being summoned to the duties of the day; but as fast as we
was found able to encounter its fatigue, it was at our peril to besitate, for
the indulgence was deemed a great favor: but excepting myself, there was not
one but what was anxious for the opportunity to display his skill in the woods.

I dallied with them as long as possible with safety; and the first day of
going out on the foraging scout, I was presented with a bow and arrows, for it
was full time I should render them some service. As I was sensible of my
incapacity, it troubled me much, and the more so as the weapons were delivered
into my hands with an imperious austerity, bordering upon a command, and
expected success. I rallied forth upon my Quixote expedition, and done the best
I could, which was to kill one small animal, and losing all the residue of the
arrows; at night when the success of my day's enterprise made its appearance,
the Chief showed such passion, and evinced such choler, that I foreboded some
terrible event would befall me; and too true was my prophecy, and correct my
prediction, for I was ordered to sit down, and without the least notice taken
of me, had the mortification to see them gormandize in nearly all (...)
provisions, excepting what was reserved for the morning; and when they had
done, I was permitted to "pick the crumbs that fell from my master's table,"
but a very scanty allowance it proved to me, and in the morning still less.

More arrows were now delivered to me, with an injunction to be more
successful: I trembled for fear, but follow them I must, and fortunately was
more successful, and of course experienced better evening treatment. Next
morning being again recruited with arrows, I set out, but was uncommonly
unfortunate, for I lost every arrow and killed no game. When we returned, the
Chief ordered me to be tied to a stake that was purposely drove into the
ground, and procuring some small twiggs, I was beat till (...) blood streamed
down my back; and in that condition left all night; and in the morning after my
wounds were dressed (...) obliged to follow them, without receiving the (...)
^^^^shment; but was not entrusted with ar^ows* In the evening I partook as
usual of the sare of the day, and all animosity seemed to be forgot. In the
morning, I was again presented with the weapons of death, and good luck
accompanied me; a twenty thousand pound prise in the lottery, would not more
overjoy a raking mis^^ -- my heart leaped for joy, to produce to them as many
dead carcasses as I had arrows delivered unto me; which was six; but as this is
nothing new to them, they took no notice at all of it, and thus my exultation
was turned into sadness; for it was a grief to be punished with stripes for
being unfortunate, and not rewarded with even a nod of approbation when I was
successful: but as the same success was expected from my daily excursions as
from the rest, I could not expect surther notice, or greater favor, and as they
was seldom unsuccessful, I must not be so neither: here was no consideration
of, nor allowance for want of practice and experience.

I found that at any rate I must now learn to be a marksman, and I exerted
myself to the utmost for improvement, and in the course of a few weeks I had
made a considerable progress, and seldom returned on an evening without my
share of game; but notwithstanding did at times receive many blows and
scratches from the women for errors I was guilty of, when employed by them in
dressing or cleaning game, preparing fire, and many other things they did set
me about, which I dare not refuse to do, for there was not (...) in the whole
tribe but what eyed me with (...) and envy; and excepting the banqueting time,
I was continually in jeopardy, and never safe from (...), (...), or f^olding;
for I was looked upon as an usurper, intruder and enemy.

After this manner I led a miserable life, till the time approached for another
banquet, which was about three months from the former one; -- I had learnt
enough of their language to understand we should soon march a great way to a
feast, and consequently had a store of provisions to get ready to take with us,
for which reason we lived very sparingly, and hunted very closely for two
weeks, and then marched off, with the women and the little ones; but there was
no sticks provided for this feast, which gave me some hopes that this would be
a merciful, instead of a merciless banquet: all things being adjusted, every
one took his load of smoaked meat, consisting of monkeys, wherries, guanas,
rabbits, baboons, and one tiger; and thus we marched for seven days, when we
arrived at the general rendezvous, where was I suppose six hundred people, and
amongst them nine Chiefs; the place was beautiful, surrounded by large towering
(...), near a mile in circumference^ and a river running through it; and grass
six inches high.

The first observation I made, was to (...) any sticks amongst them, but they
^ad (...) in abundance; after throwing down (...) with their's, we partook of
some refreshing (...), (...) different from the plantane juice, (...) much
plea^^nter and mild; and such quantities of provision, that it seemed as if we
was going to stay there some weeks: -- there was in the pile one lion, three
tigers, seven deer, and such a multitude of smaller animals, almost without
number; and the greatest part of this stock was dried and smoaked in sides:
every one of the Chiefs had a horse which carried a part of the provisions; --
the liquor was made mostly on the spot.

The amusements of this festival consisted chiefly in singing and dancing, the
two first days; but from the first day of our setting out, I had resolved in my
mind, if possible, to escape; and though there was no prospect of approaching
cruelty, I did not know what might be in reserve; for they had many ways to
torture; even the blows with the fist was sufficient if cruelly laid on: I
could not be easy under such gloomy doubts, and employed all my thoughts upon
flight; and what rather encouraged me was this:

There (...) ^^^^mbled, I should not be so soon (...) better (...) to pass the
(...) as there would not (...); and as most of our tribe (...) that was at the
last banquet (...) thoughts was fully bent upon (...). Three days had passed
and nothing (...) particular notice; but (...) merriment, with eating and
drinking, had engrossed the principal part of the time, and what encouraged me
in my design was; they did not take any notice of me peculiar from the rest, so
that I might very well have been absent from meal to meal without being missed,
as many others was; but there was too many strolling parties about in the day
time; I judged it most prudent to embrace an evening when they had been pretty
free with their beloved liquor; for there was a considerable quantity of the
plantane juice drank, though not all, and especially amongst our's, which was
all I had to fear, for none of the rest would miss me.

The fourth day morning, after breakfast, every man was summoned to attend the
orders of his Chief; and that was to procure each a bundle of long grass; this
being done, and the remainder of the day spent in separating the strongest
blades, the next morning every man was set about twisting some of these blades
of grass like cord, and when each man had thus provided himself with one, the
remainder of his grass was laid on the ground as a cushion, and the cord he
made. I was soon convinced by the playful actions of the men was intended for
some diverting (...) dreading the consequences, I waited the (...) impatiently,
determining at all events to (...) As the next morning was to commence the
(...) of the festival, it very luckily happened, that (...) drank to an excess
in the evening, and became in general quite inebriated, and our people
especially, which was what I hoped for; for while they was easy, none of the
others would concern themselves or even miss me, and the hurry and bustle in
the morning, might take up the attention of our people too much for them to
notice my absence, probably till breakfast time; neither would it be necessary
to wait till all was asleep before I set out, for that would not be all night;
as some kind of merriment or other was observed all night by some or others,
and all promiscuously intermixed, and widely scattered.

Having made my mind up on the matter, when night came, and long before one
half was asleep, I walked off, but recollecting the Chiefs had horses feeding
near us, I formed the plan of taking one of them, which would accelerate my
flight, and expose me to very little more danger in case of apprehension.
Accordingly I returned, and took possession of one of the horses and bridle,
which was made of grass, and mounting, made all the speed possible, and rode
all night. Supposing myself out of danger, I dismounted and baited the horse,
and refreshed myself with some meat I took with m^ for two hours: -- I conclude
that I was near fifty miles from them before I halted, and rode about ten
afterward; then tying the horse to a tree and (...) plenty of grass before
him, I rested for the might: and in the morning proceeded as well (...) could a
strait direct course till the middle of the (...) when halting to rest myself
and beast, I perceived at a distance a party of Indians with their backs
toward me, marching forward in pursuit of game: as they had their weapons with
them, and some dead game; by this I knew it was none in search after me; for if
they had, or if they did, they had the same means of accelerating their
pursuit, as I had in my escape.

After this party of (...) was got out of sight, I soon pursued my course and
rode till evening, and imagine I was about eighty miles from whence I set out.
Having again fastened the beast, I laid me down to rest; -- but some large
beast of prey, unknown to me by name, attacked the horse just after dark:
immediately springing up, I went to the assistance of the horse, but the
ferocity of the animal had made him so furious, that he had broke the grass
cord, and turning round, set out on full gallop the way we came. I knew it
would be in vain as well as dangerous, to follow him; at the same instant the
wild animal took to his heels the contrary way. After a few minutes pondering
upon my situation, I thought that probably the horse might not run far, and
went in search after him several miles, until I again came in sight of the
Indians before alluded unto, by the light of the (...) deeming it now time to
quit my pursuit, (...) and rested that night where the horse left me, and
proceeded daily without any particular occurrence worth (...) two days more,
when I saw another party of these haggard wanderers, but at too great a
distance to discover me, and also with their backs toward me.

I had nothing now to subsist on but the produce of the trees and bushes; but I
effected my escape from the banquetters, and was once more at large, after a
captivity of two years and an half with this merciless and inhuman cre^.

CHAPTER
ON the ninth day of my wandering, being as near as I could conjecture, two
hundred miles from whence I escaped, or at least had traveled as many miles,
though in the woods might not go a direct course; in the evening of this day,
laying myself down for the night, I was surprised by seeing a sudden smoke
issue up amongst the trees, about a quarter of a mile from me; I was at no loss
to conclude this to be an Indian rendezvous for the night: it seemed prudent to
proceed forward without delay, to get out of their reach before morning;
directly setting forward I trave^^^^, though very slowly and irregular, the
greatest part of the night, and believe in the morning I was not more than
seven or eight miles from whence I set out; and this (...) be much wondered at,
when all the difficul^^^^ I (...) ^^counter are considered: such as hunger,
pains, weariness, darkness, woods, and an unknown tract; all these obstacles to
progress was combined to prevent; and in the morning while sound asleep, under
some thick bushes, I was roused by the hideous yelping of another infernal
crew, not less than three hundred of both sexes: here was no parleying with the
enemy; without the least resistance I tamely submitted, as they on the other
hand showed no mercy, but immediately seized me as a lawful prey, had fastened
me to a tree; many arrows were levelled at me, some let fly, two wounded me in
the shoulder and back, but not dangerous; several of the women now rushed in
between me and my enemies, and with their own hands released me, the Chief at
the same time putting on a pleasant countenance; but the men were like so many
distracted creatures, raving with madness at the restraint; when I was at
liberty, the women took me amongst themselves for protection; but they
prudently pinioned my hands behind me, and thus was I forced to travel all the
day, and as fast as any game was killed, they did load me with it, tying it on
with grass, until they found I could support no more: thus this first day
passed, and at night I had plenty of food, which I stood in great need of, but
the women kept me close amongst them, for the men would kill me if permitted:
the Chief seemed to be quite neuter in the case, and if I could escape from the
women, the men would not have concerned themselves about me, for they did not
want me as a slave, or a captive, but (...) kill me as an enemy and intruder.

I now ^^^nd that the women's lenity was the effects of crasty policy, to make
me bare the burden and heat of the day for them, and in this respect they
exceeded the men, for they loaded me unmercifully, and if ever I complained or
attempted resistance, a man was called to their aid, and my poor back paid
dearly for the crime; but this was scarce ever the case, for I had the good
fortune to keep in with them in general; and all the enmity the men had to me,
was consuming the provisions without being serviceable, for their women and
children being more in proportion than the men, they very seldom had a
superfluity, and plenty of women to carry the dead game, so that it was evident
my life was spared from respect and esteem to the women: for I did not observe
any show of dissatisfaction from the men to the women on this head: I found now
that not only my ease but even my life, depended on the friendship of the
women, and that I was to be their slave and the men's captive. Some weeks had
past, and I experienced nothing short of tenderness and care from the women,
any more than their over-loading me; they behaved toward me as a person would
to a good horse; give him plenty of good food to (...) him to undergo the
labor allotted him; but use him unmercifully if he faulters.

Having been one day uncommonly unsuccessful, so that the people had but a
scanty portion, it was a (...) great vexation to the men to see the women (...)
part to me: one of them rushed forwa^d and laid holy of my hair and dragged me
several yards, and some others at the same time kicking and beating me: the
women did not, or dare not interfere, by which I was most terribly battered and
bruised; and should certainly have been sacrificed to their brutality, if the
Chief had not interposed in my behalf: -- the women now took me again under
their protection, and nursed me with all the tenderness of Indian compassion;
but at last the men grew quite weary of toiling for an unnecessary mouth, and
seemed determined that I should assist in providing as well as eating, and
consequently presented me with a bow and arrows; and be fortunate I must, or
the ill success be attributed to design, to be again reinstated into the
women's service, which was in fact much worse than this, if I could escape
stripes; and this depended entirely upon fate.

I mustered up all the courage I could and followed them (this tribe very
seldom separate into parties like the rest, if they did they would thrive
better) not having used the bow lately, I was not so expert as I could wish,
and of course killed but one animal, and lost the rest of the arrows, and
dreaded the consequences; but to my surprise, at our return, my day's exploit
pleased very well; I had the whole animal delivered to me for my pains, which I
immediately presented to a woman that had manifested instances of good will
toward me: it was cleaned and dressed, and as many of the women partook of it
as would; but next morning there (...) altercation amongst the men about
allowing (...) breakfast, but I had some from the women. More arrows being
delivered to me* I was successful this day, and pleased them much: -- in the
evening, for the first time, I was permitted to set with them and eat; they was
a little decenter than the Woolaways, but not equal to the Buckeraws; but for
dressing their food, it was better done than either: it was commonly hanged up
before a fire with small twisted grass like a string, and turned with the hand,
and roasted very nice -- it is seldom they dress a monkey or rabbit any other
way: they first gut them, and then cut them down the middle, and roast the two
sides. When they kill a large animal, as a tiger, lion, or such like, they cut
stakes from the rump, and roast the rest; excepting the heads, which this tribe
seldom eat of any beast.

Lions are not numerous, but tigers abound: when they espy a lion, they have a
decoy note, which (...) make with their mouths, something like an (...) weak
crying; this they begin to do as soon as (...) him, and draw nearer and nearer
-- when the beast hears it, he moves his tail, and stands in a bold posture,
looking earnestly about him: when they art, nea^ enough for him to hear them
distinctly, they conceal themselves behind some thick covert, if they can, and
continuing the infantite imitation, the deluded beast approaches toward the
place from whence the alluring sound issues, and when near enough for the
arrows, (...) volley is let fly at him at once -- if they all miss him, he runs
about a quarter of a mile, and stands facing his enemies, and even suffers them
to advance near enough to strike him with their arrows. When he finds himself
wounded, he stops so long shaking and licking himself, while the archers
discharge another volley, which seldom fail to disable him. I never was present
at the death of one, nor tasted of more than one: -- the flesh is more
pallatable than the tiger, but not so tender.

The tiger is more wary, and subtle than the lion: -- when he perceives the
company, he hastens to some large tree, and ascends it with incredible
swiftness, and mounts the highest bough that will support its weight; but his
elevated situation is no refuge; it will not protect him, because they can now
attack him with advantage; for a few arrows from three to four feet long, soon
bring him to the ground.

Baboons are the most difficult creatures to kill the (...) produce; for they
mount the top branches of the (...) trees, and then by their agility escape the
arrows.

There was a considerable number of deer in this part of the forest; but the
men could not shoot them, as there was so many turnings of rivers, that the
water frequently protected them, and the woods was too thick to discover them;
but they had a trap to (...) them, and by that means did sometimes (...) made
after the following manner -- but in the winter, when the snow was on the
ground, to trace their footsteps.

In the summer they plucked a quantity of grass and made hay, and preserved it
till winter.

They provided a stick, about six yards in length, the size of a common walking
stick; about one yard from the largest end, a hole was made through it; the
other end of the stick was bended down toward the hole, so as to represent a
bow, with the point in a direct line with the hole; then with some strong
twisted grass, one end tied to the small end of the stick, and the other end
brought about a yard through the hole, a bow was formed; now a piece of wood,
three quarters of a yard in length, and half a yard wide (commonly bark of a
tree) was cut so sharp at one end as to enter into the hole of the bow, and to
hold the yard of bow string out side; now upon this bark there was tied a lock
of ^ay, and the yard of bow string being double, it was spread over the hay as
wide as possible; the big end of the bow stick is stuck into the ground a
considerable depth, and fastened besides to some tree; now when the deer comes
it begins to eat the hay, but finding it fast, thrusts his head down hard; that
pushes out the bark, and the bow with a force draws the string and the animal
is caught fast by the neck or horns; and in this ^^^ner they ens^are more deer
than all the other tribes put together kill with the arrows, during the winter;
but in the summer they cannot come at them.

The Chief of this tribe seemed to be endued with wonderful sagacity, peculiar
to the others: he was the youngest I had been captive unto; he did not appear
to be forty years of age: he goes to a little distance from his companions,
snuffs the air all round, and then tells them where the game may be found, and
in these predictions he is but seldom deceived; this is an art never practiced
by any other part of the crew, but they all seem to have the eyes of vultures
in espying out the game, and marking their footsteps, which is a common rule
for them to go by; and when they discover the track of any large animal, they
all keep close on the pursuit, through briers, thorns, or any other obstruction
that impedes their progress ^ver so much; and the Chief always takes the lead
in these cases, by darting his head undauntedly forward, and boldly forces a
passage, the rest closely following, so that before the rear of the company
approaches, the passage is pretty open, or they could not pass loaded with
children and dead game.

My situation with this tribe was very fluctuating, sometimes easy, and at
others sorrowful and dreadful; I did kill for them my share of game, but very
frequently felt the weight of their blows severely, but I endeavored to
reconcile myself to my deplorabl^ (...), with as much fortitude as possible,
and they not noticing any signs of discontent, imagined I was concentedly
pleased with my state, and in consequence of this, they gave me my liberty and
great indulgence; so that I did sometimes wander away from them, for an hour or
two; and privately concealing some arrows, did improve such opportunities by
practicing, and if the arrows was lost, they was not missed; sometimes I did
bring to them an animal unexpected, which although it did procure me no reward,
it might save me some hard blows, and hellish looks.

This tribe was very particular in their manner of painting themselves; it was
done so effectually that it would not come off with the sun or water for
several months; but it was a dirty color, very much of an olive.

They made their paint after this manner: they procure the green bark of a tree
they call porpai, about the size of a beach tree; this bark they dry in the
smoke as they do meat, then pound it fine between two stones, afterward mix it
with oil, and grind it between the stones; then mix a quantity of grease with
it, and keep grinding it until it is fine enough for the purpose; then they put
it into calabashes and keep it for use: their brushes they make by procuring a
bundle of very coarse grass, and beat it well, and then pick out some fit for
their use, such as is stringy, resembling hemp, and by (...) themselves, it
remains on them several months.

This tribe had some knives and other European articles of manufacture amongst
them, for the Indian* that inhabits near the sea shore, carry on a traffic with
the Spaniards, and when the season of banqueting arrives, they sometimes make
presents, or exchange with each other; and by this means, there are few of the
Indians but have more or less or European commodities.

This tribe is called Barlawys, and seem to me to be a more reserved company
than any of them. I heard nothing of any preparation for a banquet while
amongst them, but they had a custom of preserving provisions, and staying at
home sometimes two or three days together, which was on some occasions
extraordinary: while being with them there was an aged man died, and the whole
crew refrained from hunting for twenty-four hours, feeding entirely on berries
and other fruit, which at this time was plenty, such as bramble berries, vines,
grabs, kind of plumbs, sloes, and black currants; the sloes they gather and
preserve for dyeing their feathers; for they decorate themselves a little, but
not as much as some others.

They have greater opportunities for killing game than many tribes, being
further inland, and distant from the sea: the forest and woods abounding more
with large animals that shuns mankind, besides plenty of materials for making
arrows; and having so (...) boys amongst them, whose principal employment it
was, they thought but little of two or three dozen of arrows: -- this was the
best opportunity I had to improve in that branch, and by practice soon became a
tolerable archer, and was very useful to them; they becoming sensible of this,
instead of its being a means of more lenity, compassion, and favor amongst
them, it was just the reverse; for once being convinced of my service, they no
longer neglected me, and treated me with indifference, but used me with severe
confinement; for taking me away from the women, they kept me to close daily
hunting; and notwithstanding my success was in general four times as much as I
did eat, it could not bring their savage, inhuman natures to a sense of feeling
or commiseration; but fastening me every night to a tree for security, I had no
comfort of my life: and what I did eat, was such as they pleased to give me,
which was in common as good as themselves eat; but at any time when the fortune
of the day was not favorable to me, as was commonly the case with themselves,
they behaved with a degree of cruelty, by refusing me a bit of victuals, and
frequently beating me; and if the women did not convey some unto me privately,
I should have went without supper and breakfast; and this cruelty was sometimes
extended toward me, even when I had killed more game than I should myself
consume; but it was not often the case -- my success was so far pleasing as to
procure me plenty of provisions, but the confinement (...) was to a degree
distressing, after the hard fatigue of the day; but this did not proceed from a
disposition of inhumanity, but from fear of losing so valuable a servant; for
as they was not the best marksmen, neither was they the most active, for it was
not uncommon for them to lay down in the middle of the day for an hour or two,
and sometimes longer; and the boys and me would be at the same time hunting;
and when the boys was successful, they gave them the fruits of their labor as
a reward for their ingenuity: but for my part, I done it with a view to keep as
much in their good graces as possible, or I should have been as proud of the
midday rest as themselves; and at such times it has happened, that I have been
the most successful in the company that day: -- but all this could not procure
my liberty for the night, for the more useful they sound me, with the more
hardships they conducted themselves toward me, by close watching and restraint.

The women several times interfered in my behalf to procure my releasement; but
it only brought on themselves displeasure, and on me additional watchfulness;
so that it was totally out of their power to alleviate my calamity; excepting
providing me food at such times of scarcity, as the callous hearted wretches
was sparing.

Notwithstanding their barbarous nature, I did not receive many blows from
them, as my usefulness precluded all necessity for that; but the confinement at
night never ceased till within one week of my (...) form them.

When they set out in the morning, they usually have about forty arrows each,
slung to their side in a piece of deer's skin: -- they are made of unjointed
cane; into the smaller end they drive a piece of hard wood, and splitting the
end of this bit of wood, they drive in a small piece of flint, two inches in
length, which they secure in by wrapping the wood with silk grass; the
extremity of the flint being made very sharp, for the better penetrating into
the game.

As we was once in pursuit of some large animal by the tracks of his feet
through the thickets, the Chief and front of the company, were suddenly
surprised with an uncommon rustling of the leaves, and looking round, beheld
two furious tigers, one of which made a leap at one of the people, and catching
hold of his leg, tore him terribly, but was soon forced to relinquish his hold,
and turning tail followed his companion; but the party would not quit their
pursuit, until they had again come in sight of them and killed one; but it was
too late in the day to prosecute the chase after the other; and even now we
could not arrive to any frequented place of rendezvous that evening, but
obliged to content ourselves with lodging under some trees in the woods, and
next morning conducted the wounded man to our nearest accustomed place of
repose and rest, and left him under the care of some women. This morning (...)
fared but poorly for breakfast, for the one animal (...), was all we had
amongst us for supper and breakfast: from this time for some days, we was none
of us very successful, which induced the Chief to call a council; which being
done, the result was, for us to remove further up into the country, which is
very common amongst them. Now the next thing to be concluded upon, was what
course to steer, and in this case the Chief had no more authority than another,
and every one gave his own opinion; and when all had done, it was decided by
the majority of voices, and this majority was taken in a very odd manner: every
one got a bit of stick, and put down on the ground with the largest end
pointing that course he would wish to take, and when every one had done, the
sticks was numbered, and that point that had the greatest, had what might be
called one vote: the sticks was again delivered to the company, and laid down
again, and the largest number being again toward the same point, this was the
track concluded upon for the journey. A fire being kindled, these sticks was
all burnt on that spot where the largest number laid, and the ashes taken up,
and carried about a mile on that route, and then seattered in the air.

We now proceeded in a direct line for five days, killing such game as did fall
in our way, and resting at night on the most convenient spot that presented to
us. The fifth day we came to a spot that had been some time past the resort of
some tribe, but now overgrown with coarse grass, moss and shrubs; and as game
did now begin to flow in upon us plentifully, (...) concluded to make this one
of our new resorting places, and directly began to clean and make preparations
for supper; but while we was busy in this affair, a party of another tribe, to
whom it did originally belong (and who like ourselves was benighted) made their
appearance, and this caused a consternation, and confusion took place, which of
course soon amounted to a quarrel; but our number being so far superior, the
conflict was soon terminated without any further ill effects than a few bruises
and bloody noses; but as the original possessors was not willing to forsake
their own territory, nor us disposed to quit our new fortunate discovery; there
was a parley held between the oldest man of them and our Chief, which continued
about half an hour, and terminated amicably; so that we all sat down together,
and divided our provision in common, and next, morning very peaceably
separated; we began to forage the wood without any intention of advancing
forward, and return again in the evening; we had good success, and returned and
found the same party there before us: I expected another fracas would take
place; but on the contrary, all was amity and friendship. Next morning we
separated, taking different routes, and our own company also divided -- the
party I was with had good success, and in the evening we all met together, but
the others had not sufficient for supper, exclusive of breakfast, which made
our's very acceptable. This evening the strange party was not there, and the
first evening that I was at liberty all the night, without being closely
guarded: but thinking I was now reconciled to my destiny, they neglected the
precaution, and I gave them every reason to believe that my situation amongst
them was agreeable, but it was only an opportunity for an escape that I
meditated, which soon after happened; for having wandered further than usual,
we came to one of the most delightful spots of herbage, purling brook, and
shady grove of trees around as could be seen; with so much plantane and trooly
growing, that in a few minutes the women had enough gathered and hung up, to
supply the company for several nights, when it was pressed: we directly fixed
upon this spot as another rendezvous; so now we had two on our new acquired
dominions. The next evening we all assembled there, having in the course of the
day found our other party, and communicated the discovery.

The chief employ of the women was to prepare plantane liquor, for we had been
some time without, and what was eagerly wished for. We went now altogether for
several days, and generally successful, so that there was a reserve of meat and
plenty of liquor.

One morning before we set out, the Chief harrangued the company, which I
understood enough to know that if we was successful this day, the evening
should be spent in jovial festivity; and for this reason we was divided into
five parties, the better to accomplish our wishes. I must acknowledge that
these last few days I had experienced as much civility from them as I could
desire or expect; nor had any thoughts of escaping ^^tered my mind for a day or
two, and this morning I was remarkably tranquil and composed; and luckily every
party was successful, and the evening spent in a manner bordering upon mad
festivity: all was harmony, love, mirth, and jocundity, and to crown all, every
one (myself excepted) was stupid, and totally int^^icated; and when they laid
down to rest completely drunk, and senseless. In the course of the evening, it
entered my mind to embrace the opportunity of the night, and leave them. I
weighed the matter seriously in my mind, and gave it every consideration I
could suggest; deliberately comparing circumstances, to circumstances, and
drawing conclusions from present experiences, to future expectations, if I
should make my escape good, not only from them, but out of the forest.

I now could see so far into the goodness of God, as to lift up my heart unto
him in a lukewarm, formal manner for direction; but what the spirit of prayer
was, I was still a stranger unto; although it might naturally be supposed, that I
had trials sufficient to have taught me before this time, to have known how to
have prayed in the spirit, and communed with the spirit; but I was a stranger
to myself, and a stranger unto God. I persisted in my resolution, and toward
the middle of the night, took my leave of them, after being with them fourteen
months: about nine under the protection of the women, and five under guard of
the men; and not ten nights of this time without being bound by night, with my
hands pinioned; and notwithstanding their cruelty unto me, I left this tribe
with more regret than either of the others, and even shed tears when I stole
away from them.

CHAPTER VI.
I COULD not tell what course to steer; to return from whence we came, I deemed
fruitless, and to go forward would be dangerous of falling into (...) hands of
those with whom we met two evenings at our resting place; but as there was no
alternative, I thought it best to venture forward, and explode an unknown
course; if peradventure I might arrive to some hospitable spot, or the sea
shore, as I had hitherto done, so I continued a direct course as near as I
could, and found the country more and more promising; and with a few arrows I
took with me, I had the good fortune on the second day to kill a rabbit, which
I roasted by a fire I made: I never before ventured to make a fire while
wandering by myself, for fear the smoke ^^uld betray me; but my appreh^^^^^ns
on that head was quite dispelled now; my soul was in no agitation, I was under
no dread of being re-taken, for the tribe took too little notice of me to think
me worth pursuing.

On the fourth day in the morning, I came within sight of a spot of land, about
two acres within an enclosure, and horse's dung on it. Judge, gentle reader, my
exultation to see the effects of the hand of industry. I promised myself the
felicity before evening to enter some civilized village, and like the sumptuous
"rich man," seed luxuriously: my joy took away my appetite, and the
anticipation of approaching delicacies, would not permit my seeking for any
game; and thus the day passed me with vain delusions, and empty expectations,
for nothing more could I discern that day, that had any appearance of the
neighborhood being inhabited; and in the evening laid down with an empty
stomach and low spirits; but before I had lain ten minutes, I saw at a distance
another party of Indians, about a hundred, but they had with them loaded
horses, and more covering than the rest, and by their motions had the
appearance of civilized people: although I could very easily have evaded them, I
reasoned with myself that they must be a tribe that do business with the
Spaniards, and (...) course a little more learned and humane than the others;
besides the opportunity that might now present of entering on board a Spanish
vessel, if I was amongst these people. I came to a resolution, and situated
myself so as for them to se^ (...) they no sooner came to me, but I perceived
they was trading people; and hoping they might be endued with some
understanding, and compassion, I appeared before them in a supplicating posture
on my knees, like too many professors; they will pray to a man that can kill
only the body, in sincerity; and pray unto the Lord, that can cast the soul
into hell, with hypocrisy.

This humiliating posture did not much attract their notice, in the sense I
could wish it; but like the former crews they seized me, and led me away, and
in an hour we came to their place of residence; where to my agreeable surprise,
I saw near twenty wigwhams, and women and children around them. When we was
come near enough for the women to distinguish me, they set up a loud cry, but
the men soon pacified them: they tied me to a stake with a strong hempen (...)
(the first I had seen) but if they had left me loose, (...) not have attempted
to went one step from them.

They now began to unload their horses, which consisted of many European toys,
some spirits, and a large quantity of Indian corn -- they had been upwards of
two hundred miles for it; and purchased it of some Indians that live near the
sea, and trade with the Spaniards by exchanging furs, skins and wood, for
knives, daggers, tools and sundry things; but this tribe was the most remote
that carry furs so far in exchange; and being but seldom they went, the residue
of their (...) was spent in the woods; but they had every advantage of
cultivating land, and raising Indian corn, for there was a great deal of open
land, and they knew the value and service of Indian corn, because they did eat
it, and any kind of tools needful for digging and hoeing the land, they could
get on their journey; but they appeared to me a very lazy people.

The enclosed spot of ground that I saw in the morning, belonged to them; --
they had six horses, and did let them run in the woods till within a few days
of their setting out on a journey, when they was put there for readiness: they
did commonly go twice a year.

The next morning after they had me, I was liberated, and after breakfast sent
out with a scouting party in (...), but they was so lazy and indolent, that
they (...) scarce any thing; and if I had not been more mindful and successful,
we should had nothing to carry home worth dressing. This first day's exploit of
mine, gained their good favor, and in the evening I was feasted as well as any
of them, and had the same liberty; sleeping in one of the wigwhams; which were
made by bending a parcel of sticks, so that both ends might enter the ground,
and covering them with boughs, leaves, and turfs of grass, so close, that
neither rain nor wind can penetrate it.

The animals that we brought home was dressed as if it had been mutton, but it
was on the coa^s; (...) with it we had a little brandy and water, a great (...)
to me. In the morning we set out again, but so dilatory was these fellows, they
did permit game to pass them without getting ready, or step one step after
them; and it was my diligence that again crowned the day; but every day
manifesting more and more their indolent dispositions, and depending almost
upon me, was disheartening, and in process of time, when winter approached, I
was sent out by myself, and, though it was opportunities for escaping, and even
with one of the horses, if I thought proper; it did not appear to me prudent,
for I was in hopes some more favorable season would offer, when I might do it
with little or no hazard; and besides, I was used as civil as one of
themselves, but suffered very much by hunger; for when there was a scarcity,
which was frequently the case, I had but the measure of their charity.

After I had been with them four months, they had a general painting amongst
them: but they give themselves a slight covering every two or three weeks.

They now had a large quantity of red and black paint ready prepared, with
which they daubed themselves very thick in separate places, so that they look
spotted; and with it they mix the seed of an herb well ground, and cement all
together with greese: I did not s^e what they made this paint of, but I suppose
the (...) as the others, which I have before spoken of; but the manner of
laying (...) on is very different from the rest; the face is striped, and their
bodies in diamonds, and the arms round spots, but laid on very thick.

There is something very singular in this tribe in their behavior, which I
apprehend they must have learnt from their little acquaintance with the
Spaniards, and from those distant tribes that they occasionally trade with, who
it is probable has very much of the habits and customs of the Spaniards amongst
them. During the time I was with this tribe, I never saw an instance of levity
and ridiculous gestures, or an excess of eating, drinking, or ludicrous
wantonness: -- there is but little discourse amongst them, but a kind of lazy
reservedness, and very frequently have not a mouthfull to eat in the morning,
and must stop until the evening, till some of the archers has been a hunting;
but notwithstanding this fasting, there is not the least sign of murmur, or
dissatisfaction, amongst the women toward the men, but all is borne with
silent, unconcerned patience; for in their turn, the women are as bad as the
men. It is not uncommon to see them take the horses and ride about the woods
for pleasure, although they do not seem to take any; and at the same time nothing
in their wigwhams to eat.

They were in general a clean people -- every thing had the appearance of
decency (making allowance for their race) and resembled much the civilized
(...) by washing, and brushing all around them.

If they had not been accustomed to such a degree of laziness, my being with
them would have been beneficial; for if every man amongst them did kill half
the quantity of game that I did three days in the week, I should myself have
made up the rest; for they had plenty of game, many men, and but few woman and
children in comparison.

I was as easy in my mind as I could wish to be, being under no terror or dread
o^ severe treatment, by confinement or blows; neither did I ever receive any
from the first two days, but experienced every usage in common with themselves.
Every method I could devise, or suggest, I made use of to rouse them from their
indolence; by laying before them the advantage resulting from diligence; -- I
attempted to persuade them of the utility of cultivating a spot of ground, and
planting some corn, which there was no obstacle to prevent, but natural
flothfulness. For tools, they could procure them of those they traded with, or
even without going half the distance, as there was several tribes they did pass
on their journey, that ^ad lands under cultivation, and lived under a state of
regular government; but all I could do could not prevail upon them to set about
this necessary reform in their lives; although I would have willingly performed
the manual labor (...) own hands, for I was frequently at home^ (...) day
idle, and should have been oftener, but my (...) in the woods seeking game
required me there (...) me a disgust to (...) people but (...); I could have
spent my time, I could almost have said my days, amongst them contentedly, had
it not been for this one predominant evil; for health, ease, and civility, was
now so transcendently exulting and comfortable to me, that I had almost forgot
the superior advantages of civilization, and cannot tell if ever I should have
left them; even in the present case, the desires for further human enjoyments
did seldom engross my notice, and for liberty, I had no occasion to wish for
it, because I was not in captivity; but if I had left them, it was probable I
should soon be.

In this manner about eight months passed, when the season arrived for them to
take another trip; when for two or three weeks we was all closely engaged (...)
hunting for beavers, rabbits, foxes, and other animals, (...) skins were
useful, and having procured upwards of fifty beavers, two hundred rabbits, as
many foxes, and three times the number of squirrels, and a multitude of other
small animals, every thing was prepared for the journey; I was in great hopes
they would have let me went with them, and made all the solicitations I could,
but in vain: my usefulness was too manifest, and when the women found I was
petitioning to go, they done all in their power to prevent it; and even with
the importunities of friendship, earnestly desired me to stay with them, for
those of the (...) was left behind, would not provide half provis^^^^; although
this was not expressed in direct language (...) ^^prehensive to me, I
understood the (...) from them so feelingly, and impressed so forcibly upon my
own feelings, that I relinquished my solicitations, and gave way to the
sensations of tenderness and compassion.

How the case is altered -- for seven years being myself in a state of
commiseration, destitute of every compassionate heart, and deprived of the
opportunity of enjoying the consolation of one sympathising friend; should the
first time an opportunity presented, display that degree of human feeling, and
soft sensations to those that was themselves estranged into it, which I myself
could not experience for so many years.

The morning being arrived, and the horses loaded, the traveling party set out
on their journey, being just three men to one horse; what was the cause of
there being so many men, when they took me returning from their last journey, I
do not know.

The setting out on the journey, was something more affecting than might be
expected to take place amongst such people.

The men took every woman by the hand, and put their ch^eks together, by way of
embracing; this I observed took place at the return from the other journey;
then each man pointed toward the sky, and ^he (...) at the time clapping their
hands and shouting; (...) that was husbands and wives, was more particularly
engaged, and seemed to separate very meltingly. This being ^ver, they set out,
taking with them bows and arrows; the women looking at them, clapping their
hands till they was out of sight, when they all retired to a little cleared
smooth spot, and began dancing, and continued full two hours; but these were
only the women that had their husbands in the company. After this, every one
returned to the necessary occupations of the day; and leaving them all to their
own engagements, I went to the wood, and in the evening early brought home a
fine fat buck; on which we feasted deliciously; the children playing around me
with the greatest pleasure and infantite innocence; but the rest of the men had
been lurking about all the day. I got more and more in favor every day, and was
as happy as an Indian in all his splendor could be; and during the whole time
the company was gone, which was six weeks, I never let them want for
provisions; and when some of the rest would accompany me, we was often provided
for two or three days plentifully, during which I did walk about, or repair the
wigwhams, or procure firewood; and thus the time passed till the company's
return, which was a day of mirth and festivity; and by my means plenty of food
was ready for them, for they generally come home hungry and poor in flesh, as
time will not admit of hunting much, and the dried meat they take with them, is
gone before they set out on their return.

I was very glad to see them, and was embraced in their manner of patting the
right cheek with their right hand very cordially; and the good supper that was
in readiness for them exulted them highly: the women and even the men making
known that it was my entertainment, and how useful I had been all the time they
was absent; this made them give a shout, and sque^zing me to their breasts such
as were near me: I took it upon me also to attend the horses, and had provided
some good grass to feed them before they was turned loose.

The produce of the journey was left untouched till the morning: it was wrapped
up in very coarse Spanish bags, like wool bags, such as the Spaniards pack
their wool in. Next morning when we came to open the parcels they consisted of
the following articles:

Hatchets, knives, wine, corn, spirits, wooden and glass bottles, leather,
hats, toys, some carpenter's tools, and many other articles: the generality of
which were useful things if they had been in the possession of such as knew how
to use them; but as the articles they did exchange cost nothing, neither was
what they did bring back in return of much service, excepting the liquor and
corn; leather and hats; the leather they did cut out into things something like
shoes, and the hats they wore.

During all the time I was with them, we never slept from home ten nights, not
going far enough in the day; for if they did not meet with success enough in
time to return, they went back without, and this was the cause of our being so
often short of provision; and even when we did fall in with a herd of deer,
that by pursuing them we might have killed probably twenty in the course of
day, which might be preserved by drying, their dilatory natures would not
permit them to embrace the opportunity.

This tribe was worthy of pity, for they had every advantage, and improved
none: their situation was such that they was never molested by other
troublesome tribes: -- they had a large tract of land, with a considerable part
of it almost free from every encumbrance; fine streams of water; plenty of
game; six or seven good horses, and opportunity to procure of the other tribes
that trade with the Spaniards every necessary article they wanted; and yet
surrounded with all these advantages, they fared harder and lived more
uncomfortable than any tribe I was with; it is true they had better covering,
and warmer lodging, but too lazy to provide for their bellies, and as craving
for food when 'twas on the spot as the rest.

I believe this was the most distant tribe, inland, that did ever have any
European commodities in a regular course of dealing, for I never saw one man
that belonged to another tribe whilst I was with them.

I was really desirous to render them all the service I could, and if it could
not be done one way, to do it in another; for which purpose, I proposed to them
to increase the number of wigwhams, and repair those already erected: I
explained to them the purpose of the tools, and how to use them; we had a saw
and other serviceable tools, as hammer and nails: I very soon brought them to
approve of my plan for increasing our dwellings; which we set about upon an
improved plan, considering the abilities of the architect; and soon had a frame
of wood constructed, so that when it was divided into partitions, would
constitute six comfortable cabins; or a house with six rooms. The carpenter's
work was left to me, and though a workman would see nothing to merit his
notice, it was an ingenious, masterly piece of building here: we had no boards,
nor wanted none: the frame was the principal; and for rafters, joices, and
upright pieces, they was so thick, it was easy for us to make all close with
pla^^ing in boughs, and coarse grass* and during our erecting this frame, and
closing it all over, the men and women labored with extraordinary diligence,
and in the course of two months, we had it tenable for six men and women
separately.

After we had finished our building, we repaired the wigwhams, and by the time
this was also completed, another trading journey was contemplated. As soon as
I (...) it in agitation, I strongly renewed my request to (...) company them,
but with the same (...) as before. I began now to suggest some method of
following them undiscovered; but could not hit upon any one that promised
success, and at the same time must be undertaken with imminent hazard. I need
not re^^at the preparations and setting out on the journey, as it was the same
as before; but instead of three men to each horse, they now took five; and a
few days before their departure the whole company was so effectually painted
that the red color is visible with me to this day on my left arm.

I became very anxious to leave them, and the second week after the company's
departure, I done it; the principal cause for it at that exact time was as
follows:

The men remaining behind, was so indolent that 'twas almost impossible for me
with the little assistance I received from them, to kill game sufficient to
render the women comfortable; for their own wolfish appetites would gorge in
such an amazing quantity, when put before them, though too lazy to hunt for it,
that with all my industry the women suffered much; but I had a sincere good
will for them, and hunted with pleasure for their comfortable sustenance. Being
exasperated at their uncommon idleness, I came to a determination to quit them,
and try to trace the tracks of the travelers; but it being through woods, and
across rivers, I knew it would be attended with great difficulties, and many
hazards; but I concluded if I was taken (...) another tribe, it might be one
still more enlighten (...) accordingly taking my bow and arrows as usual, I
rose early in the morning and set out, but had not gone more than four miles,
before a large deer started up before me; not willing to let such an
opportunity escape, I levelled and brought him to the ground; ^^ing in
possession of him, I could not tell what to do with him on the journey, and of
course turned round with him toward my companions that I had left, which as
soon as they saw so early in the day, they all began to show tokens of
gratitude, and joyfulness; their extacies and fondness attached me to them
again too powerfully to leave them again that day, and next morning an incident
happened that prevented it: the men all arose cheerful and in high spirits, to
go a hunting, and after breakfast, taking bow and arrows, went forth;
appointing me their leader; and from my frequent traversing the woods, no one
at that time was better qualified to know where the game mostly resorted. We
kept so close together as to be within sound of a whistle; this was by my
desire, because I had a few days before seen two pair of deer feeding
thereabout, and was in hopes amongst us all we should fall in with them, which
accordingly happened, and we killed three, besides a good stock of game we had
before, so that we returned home loaded with spoil. I earnestly pressed them to
cure it, and for us to renew our chase next morning, but all in vain; they eat
every bit before one of them attempted to stir, and the women are as bad as the
men in this case: they eat very luxuriously till all is gone, and never urge
the men in the least to activity.

This wasteful extravagance gave me a disgust even to the women, and made me
renew my resolutions of leaving them; accordingly, next morning I took my leave
as before, and marched forward all the day; I was not under any fear of being
pursued; for I fancy the terror was now on their side for my safety. As I had
nothing to impede my progress, I imagine my journey that day was about fifty
miles; and although I had traced their horses by the dung upwards of thirty
miles, having now a river to cross, I was at a stand, nor could see any signs
where they passed it, and following the stream near a mile one way in vain, and
going the same road back for near a mile on the other to no purpose, I gave
over the search for the night, and dearly repented the attempt. In the morning
very early I arose and went forward by the side of the stream, and thus
traveled till near midday, when being quite dismayed and dejected, I sat down
and eat the last bit of meat I brought away: thus despairing of crossing the
water, I was almost upon turning back, but being thus f^r advanced, I assumed
new courage, and leaving the river, I struck across the forest into a wood,
and seeing something like a path, I followed it, and in about an hour saw a
mule grazing, and attempted to come up with him, but in vain: still I followed
the track, and presently saw another mule, and in a few minutes several more;
it was an encouraging sight, but they was too wild to permit me to come near
them, but they was thus far serviceable, by following them it brought me in
about an hour to the ^xtremity of the wood, out on an open plain, with here and
there a tree and a few bushes, with many horses and mules feeding: I was now
confirmed in my opinion, that there must ^e inhabitants not far distant; I
looked around on every side, but could see no sign of a house of cultivation;
but the footsteps of the cattle was just visible, and this track I followed for
nine or ten miles as well as I could: toward evening I saw at a distance
before me an enclosure, toward which I hastened, and soon after, a mile or two
beyond it a large house, at the sight of which I was ready to drop to the earth
with the transports of joy that possessed me, at seeing a house promising at
this distance to be the mansion of hospitality, after eight years and a half
wild wanderings in woods and forests, the resorts of wild beasts, and savages,
more terrible than the beasts themselves.

With all the speed possible I made toward it, and soon came near enough to
discern a well cultivated farm, with horses, cows, corn, and hay in plenty: I
now thanked my fortunate stars that had led my wandering footsteps to the
desirable spot, after one year and nine months residence amongst the last
Indians: I cannot call it a captivity, because I was always at large and at
liberty.

CHAPTER VII.
WITH a timorous assurance, between hope and fear, I approached the house; and
knocking at the door, there came out a well dressed Indian, who looked at me
for some time with a mild and symathising countenance; but by the form of his
head I was convinced that he was one of the Woolaways, from whom I first made
my escape, and this filled me with some terror, but considering the distance I
was from them, it soon subsided.

The venerable stranger now addressed me in the Spanish language; but I did not
understand him, and addressed him in turn in my own native tongue, the English,
and to my great surprise and joy, he answered me in the same language: -- how
did my heart leap within me ^or joy! to hear and speak, and to answer and be
understood.

I was now invited into the house, and the first thing was to order a servant
to place provisions before me: the w^^thy old gentleman knew I could not have
come there without having escaped from some Indians, and knew that I must stand
in need of refreshment: a table was spread, and covered with delicacies; and
good roast mutton, with its sauce and vegetables, was a feast I never shall, or
can forget, and plenty of good Spanish wine also graced the board: pie and
fruit, butter and cheese, was also at my service, but nature could not digest
such a variety for the first time. After I had done supper, my aged host took
me into his parlour, and began in a very polite and respectful manner to
interrogate me; as who I was? how I came there? and many other similar
questions: all which I answered in the most respectful manner; and should have
accompanied it with humiliating manners, but he had not enough of the European
in him, to display his own dignity, by humbling in body, the already distressed
in spirit: he wished to alleviate the sufferings, and not increase the painful
sensations of an unfortunate fellow creature, by manifesting his own feelings;
judging I must be fatigued in body, he advised me to go to rest, assuring me I
might sleep composed and calm in mind.

Thus closed the first night's interrogation, and I had no reason to be under
any dread for the consequences. My bed being ready, I made him a thankful
obeisance, and went to rest. I now heartily assure my readers, that it was the
middle of the might before I could go to sleep; owing to the pleasing
reflections on my mind, when contrasted with what was past: -- the softness of
a f^^ther bed -- the still cal^ness of the night, all added to the pleasing
anticipations of what was behind; it was nothing astonishing that I could not
sleep: but when nature was overcome with weighty thought, and impressed with
the powers of silent darkness, I never awoke 'till called next morning to
accompany my worthy benefactor at his table to breakfast, on chocolate and
butter-toast: but prior to being introduced to his wife and children, he had me
into his wardrobe, and clothed me from head to foot -- with a shirt, (...),
stockings, shoes, and straw hat; and being thus equipped, I sat down to
breakfast with himself and family, having a black servant to wait upon me.

After breakfast, we renewed our evening subject; and I gave him a
circumstantial detail of the adventures of my life, from first going to sea,
till this hour. He seemed to give credit to all my relation, and especially
that which concerned the different tribes of Indians I had been with; for my
describing their particular marks and customs, he told me their names, which I
did not know before, and expressed a happy surprise that I escaped them; for
there was very few did ever escape alive from the Woolaways. He said it was not
often that they did retain any captive as a slave, but kill him immediately;
but the other tribes did keep a captive a great while, but it was not often
they had one, being too far from the sea. And for the Buckeraws, he was
astonished how I got amongst them, as they are at a farther distance from the
Woolaways, than the third tribe I fell in with. The Woolaways are the most
savage race in all that part of the country -- The distance I was now from
whence they first took me, he said was about four hundred miles; and their
nearest place of rendezvous to this spot, about three hundred; between them and
us was the two last tribes, but the second and third tribe laid off at a
considerable distance; so that if I had taken the right course when I first
escaped from the Woolaways, it is probable I might have been at his house five
or six years ago; for if I had escaped the Assenwasses, the third tribe, I
sold have been at once with this last tribe, and could have left them when I
pleased: -- he called them Pompoos, and said they was the most inoffensive
Indians in all South America; that they did generally go twice a year up the
country to trade with some other Indians, who carried on a correspondence with
the Spaniards: -- their journey was sometimes longer and further than at
others: -- when they did set out for a distant trade, near two hundred miles
from their own home, they did go in a large company, because they had a tedious
wood to pass that was much pestered with a band of Indian miscreants, that made
a practice of plundering all that they fell in with that was not too powerful
for them.

The road my last tribe did travel, was about forty miles one side this house:
-- he told me where I lost their track, and how far I had got on my unknown
journey at that time: -- if I had continued in their route, I should, in six or
seven hours more, arrived at another Indian village, larger than that I left,
who did also go the same journey yearly to trade; but they had grass, corn, and
tame cattle around them, and very industrious, and proportionally luxurious and
wasteful; besides being excessive drinkers. The chief commodity they did bring
home was spirits, and this did frequently create broils and strife between
them, which made both them and their neighborhood very disagreeable; they was
about forty miles from this place: the next inhabited spot was about a hundred
miles forward, consisting of above two hundred souls, divided into about eighty
families, each having their own wigwham, or hut; the next was about twenty
miles forward, and these was near enough to the sea to sail up the river in
their canoes, and (...) skins, furs, and other articles for European (...) the
first hand; but they did not carry on traffic (...) to supply their n^ighbours;
but twenty miles farther was an Indian sea port, where the Spaniards did come
and unload, and make their exchanges; and here most of the Indians for many
miles did resort.

He said it was in one respect fortunate for me that I had (...) the Indians
track; for if I had fell into either of their hands, they would have sold me to
the spaniards, who would have sentenced me to the gallows, or committed me to
the mines for my life. The Spaniards gave them a good price for an Englishman,
and he supposed there might be now many hundreds of my countrymen condemned to
the mines, that have been reported as dead by the hands of Indians, or wild
beasts; but it is seldom any tribe kill a captive that is near enough to
dispose of him, as they frequently do from one tribe to another; perhaps the
first will exchange him for a few dead animals, if their distance is too far
from the sea; and the next for a little more, and so on till he falls into the
hands of christian barbarians, more inhuman than Indian savages.

He told me of four Englishmen that had about four years ago been taken by the
Woolaways, who had made their escape after nearly two years bondage; their
calamities and sufferings not enabling them to do it (...); and after wandering
in the woods two months, was at last taken by one of the human trading tribes,
and exchanged from them to another, who was putting them on board their canoes
to go up the river to dispose of them; when one of them embracing the
opportunity, knocked down an Indian and run into the woods: ^^ey could not with
propriety pursue him, because having the other three to guard: thereby he made
his escape, and after six days arrived at (...) house: he entertained him with
the same (...) hospitality as he did me, and sent him forward in the same
manner as he must me.

During my stay at his house, he condescended to give me a detail of his own
life: the principal events of which are as follows:

He said he was born one of the Woolaways, and continued with the tribe till he
was eighteen years of age, according to his own computation, since he has
embraced christianity; and as he with several others of the tribe was fishing
along the coast, a party of Mosketomen came upon them unawares, that had failed
down the river in a canoe, and although they made all the resistance in their
power, the enemy was too strong, being superior in numbers, and armed for
battle; and they carried them a good distance up the river, as much as three
days failing, and exchanged them away with the Spaniards: in a few days it was
his good fortune to be sold by the Spaniards to an English mer^hant, that had a
factory on the Musketo shore, a few leagues off -- whatever became of his
unfortunate companions, ^e never heard, but supposes they were disposed off
after the same manner.

He continued in this merchant's service many years, and enjoyed himself as
well as it was possible for a captive to do, experiencing such a measure of
humane (...) generous usuage, that his heart has always leaned toward an
Englishman ever since; and his bowels now yearned for me, that he could not
secure my future peace and liberty. While he was in this service, he was
employed both by land and sea in several confidential trusts, and made three
voyages to Jamaica as commander of his master's stoop; and which trust and
confidence he never betrayed, nor forseited, but gained his employer's good
will daily, and was instructed at his expense in the English language, which he
could now converse in very ^^uently, though not altogether so correct; as many
years had elapsed since he had much occasion for it. His master he said was of
a peaceable, mild disposition; tender, humane and benevolent; and he had no
reason at all to complain of his servitude; but an anxious desire to be again
amongst his own people, prevailed over that improved understanding that he had
acquired amongst enlightened people, and this liberty he at last obtained.

He had been twelve years in his master's service, and of course had acquired
not only confidence, but experience in the customs, manners, and conduct of the
Europeans, as well as the Islanders in America: -- his master entrusted him in
the negotiation of the sloop's freight, and other business the Islands, as well
as the management of a considerable part of his domestic concerns, when at
home: so that nothing was wanted to render his life pleasant and agreeable, but
to overcome his desires for a renewal of his for^^^ ^^vage life, which might
appear strange, after so (...) years experiencing such a reverse of
circumstances* but (...) verifies very forcibly the old adage, "Home is home if
it be ever so homely."

In the twelfth year of his servitude, being at sea a fishing in a large canoe,
with four Musketomen, that his master kept in his service; a strong wind arose,
and drove them quite off from their own shore; and continuing in the same point
several days, they were driven a very considerable way to the southward; and as
soon as they could they went on shore to procure water and provisions: they had
not been long ashore, before he discovered that he was near a spot which he
formerly frequented, before he was taken from his native companions, the
Woolaways; -- his mind now became strongly impressed with an inclination to
rejoin his former comrades, and bid adieu to civilized happiness, peace, and
content: accordingly he deserted his companions, the Musketomen, and went in
search of his former associates, the Woolaways, and what became of the poor
forsaken Musketomen, he never heard, until two years past, he was informed by a
Spaniard, from the Musketo shore.

After searching about (...) near dark, and hearing nothing of him, they went
to the water side, and fa^tening the canoe, they laid themselves down to sleep,
intending to renew their search in the morning; but in the course of the night,
the canoe fell adr^^ and (...) them out to sea, while they was all asleep, and
awakening in the morning thus situated, they was totally at a loss how, or
where to steer, and gave themselves up entirely to the mercy of the waves. In
this deplorable state they remained, tossed to and fro five days, when they
were fortunately picked up by another fishing canoe, and landed about forty
leagues from their master's, the Englishman; their own conoe being turned
adrist, as leaky and dangerous. -- They marched by land, and arrived at home,
after near three weeks absence.

Now to return to the narration of my host: -- After he had deserted his
companions, he traversed the woods till d^rk -- next morning he pursued his
route and search, and early in the day fell in with a party, a few of which he
recognized; but his dress, and change of countenance, had rendered him totally
estranged to them; but after a short time he made himself known, and, stripping
off his clothes, immediately became as one of them. He presently found the
inconveniences and disadvantages between his present and past life: -- he had
almost forgot the use of the bow: -- his naked body could not sustain the
^ricking of the thorns and ^^^^bles: -- his bare (...) ^^and the ill effects of
the ragged ground, and his delicate stomach could not relish the half raw
animal, nor his constitution digest the ^^^seous food: -- the inclemency of the
weather affected his body, and the fatigue of the day was too (...) and
^^^^^ious, for his health and strength (...)

Not two weeks had elapsed, before he was as anxious to be again under the
Englishman's roof, as before he was to be sheltered under the Indian trooly
leaf: -- he tried, and tried in vain to reconcile his mind to his present
vagrancy; but every day added increasing strength to his determination, to quit
them: and having duly considered all circumstances, and reasoned upon the
matter in his mind (for he was capable of reasoning rationally now, and judging
wisely, and determining prudently) he gave them notice of what he was purposed
to do, and finally took an affectionate adieu of them; here was no need of
subtility or cunning for escaping, but a cordial and friendly separation took
place. During his stay with them he had communicated the transactions and
experiences of his life in his long absence, and endeavored to prevail upon
two of them to accompany him on his return, as it might be the means of
establishing an amicable understanding, and future friendship between them and
the Musketomen; but their ideas was too wild and dark to reason with that
accuracy as to deduce profitable conclusions from my worthy friend's arguments*
and thus he was obliged to leave them; and having no hopes of ever reaching the
Musketo shore, where his former master resided, he turned his thoughts toward
the Spanish coast, and disposed to venture his life upon their humanity; and
being well acquainted with the country, he traveled the ^orr^st and (...)
three weeks, when he fell in with a tribe (...) a stranger unto^ and ^^uld not
converse (...) them; they took him as a prisoner, and kept him two days, when
he found means to escape, and pursued his route, and traveled on three weeks
without any interruption, or inconvenience, excepting hunger and fatigue, as he
had not always an opportunity to procure game or fruit. After six weeks travel,
he came to the very spot where his house now stood, and drank of the brook that
now ran through his own yard; he then proceeded till he came amongst the
Spaniards, who seized him, and conducting him to Ma^aolpa, confined him in the
same prison where 'twas my lot presently to be cast; examined by two of the
same magistrates, guarded by the same jailer, and for some time confined in the
same ward; as I found afterward from the descriptions he gave me of the men
and prison.

After he had been in this prison about a month, he was conducted some hundred
miles through the country, to a place called Guatamala, where the Spanish
Governor at that time resided (the last prison that I was in) here he was
strictly examined, and the Governor happily believing his tale, showed him
great lenity, and ordered him into the custody, or more properly, under the
care of one of his own confidential servants, in his own house, until he had
the opinion and counsel of some of the leading men of the town, how to dispose
of him. After four days, he was again ordered into the presence of the
Governor, and the in^^rior magistrates of the town, who interro^^^^ him
^^^^^owly, and finding the (...) did bear corroborating evidence of
corresponding fact, they entertained a favorable opinion of him, and began to
think of displaying some tokens of friendship toward him, not doubting but
from his experiencing so many years of christian civilization, he had
voluntarily made the exchange from insidelity to Christianity: -- the next day
he was summoned before the Governor; who after a few questions, proposed to him
a service in his own family, with this proviso, that on the first instance of
dishonesty, or disobedience, he should be severely p^^ished.

Accordingly he was admitted as a menial drudge, doing all the refuse and
flavish work of the house (...) not the most abject servant on the premises,
but was his lord in authority; to say unto him "come and he ^^^^th; go and he
go^th;" he knew there was no alternative, but submissive patience, and passive
obedience, and he bore the degrading treatment with calm fortitude; for to give
them their due character, he experienced no abuse, or ill usage, no^ ^anted for
sufficiency of every refreshing good.

His obliging behavior and diligence, (...) obtained (...) the ^^^ther notice
of his master; who from (...) degree to another, promoted him to almost the
highest office in his house; and those that (...) played their national pride
toward him as (...) serv^^^ and beneath notice, was now glad to (...); and
seeing the bunch of keys in (...) to apply the language of supplicants, and use
the term "if you please;" but so far was he from retorting in his turn, that
his ambition consisted in manifesting his wishes, that a friendly equality
should exist amongst fellow servants of every denomination; so that each did
retain their own integrity, and fulfill with faithfulness his appointed trust.

He was now as happy as he could wish to be; and having by this time attained a
competency of the Spanish language (for his former examinations was by means of
an English interpreter) the magistrates, of the town made a proposal to the
Governor, his master, to employ him in the service of the nation; to which his
master readily acquiesced, on condition any means could be adopted that would
be beneficial to both parties: the magistrates then proposed the following plan
for his consideration:

There had been of late great depredations committed by plunderers going up and
down that river, which he called O^za, and doing great injuries to the
inhabitants that lived near it, by Indians, and runagate ^paniards, and
Musk^tomen; it was therefore concluded upon, that a commodious house, and a
proportionable quantity of land should be provided, and he should be sta^ioned
there to prevent passing any canoes up and down that river, without his ticket
of authority; and for this employ no properer person could ^e fixed upon, as he
could question either Indi^^ Spaniards, Musketomen, or English: -- the matter
being concluded upon, a day was fixed for him to be consulted on his
approbation, and opinion: he finding by the tenor of the conversation it was
the wish and expectation that he would accept of the trust, out of respect to
the country, as well as his master and gentlemen of the town, and those of the
neighborhood, where it would be thought most proper for his situation; he did
not hesitate to convince them, that he was ready to comply with their request
(although he would much rather have been excused.) The next thing was to
determine upon the spot suitably adapted for the business, and surveyors was
employed to examine the situation of the river, and land fit for cultivation;
and at last it was concluded upon to build a house on this spot, there being a
large tract of land, and the river not more than a quarter of a mile in
breadth, in some places it was three miles, in others much less: -- the house
being finished, he was provided with a number of ^laves, sufficient to
cultivate his ground, and gu^^^ the river: -- a particular number ^as always on
the water in canoes, fishing and watching; so that his domestics answered a
threefold purpose: to procure fish, cultivate his land, and guard the river;
(...) from his first settl^^^ there to the present time (which (...) years)
there had been no depredations, (...) invaders infested the neighborhood;
(...) as no^ (...) could pass without his knowledge and (...) would have been
in vain for robbers or (...) applied for pa^^^ge; so that for (...) material
service rendered to the inhabitants that live up the river, he was in universal
esteem, and held in great veneration.

He was at first accommodated with a few head of cattle, which he had increased
to a very considerable number, so that he could supply the canoes that went up
the river for the neighboring Spanish settlements; and thus by his industry he
had acquired great opulence: he had no allowance of a pecuniary grant from the
government, but liberty to make what advantages he could by the improvement of
his land, and produce of his stock; and having no competitor, he made great
emoluments by trading with the canoes passing and repassing.

And further to increase his domestic felicity, he had two comely Indian wives,
both of the tribe of the Woolaways, that he originally belonged unto, and one
of which he had been acquainted with before his first ^^aving them, and the
other during his short residence amongst them the last time; and to complete
his domestic happiness, he had four children; three by one of his wives, and
one by the other; three boys and one girl. Many Indians, and particularly his
own native tribe, did occasionally call upon him, in the course of their
wanderings, and having it in his power to accommodate them in such a plentiful
and comfortable manner, it cemented a lasting and solid, friendship, so that
his cattle might ^ange over (...) whole do^^^^^ of the forest, and a "thousand
hills" without being molested; but the nearest place of rendezvous of the
nearest tribe unto him, was upwards of eighty miles; so that it was not
frequent he had any domeciliary visitants; and whenever the Woolaways did come,
it was a friendly journey, on purpose to see their country women, which was
always observed with a degree of jovial festivity; but not accompanied with the
substantial part of the Indian banquet, which the reader is already apprised
of. He had been married to one of his wives six years, and to the other three;
the former of which had for a considerable time a longing to return again to
her wandering companions, but was since his second marriage become quite
reconciled, and enjoyed the tranquillity of civil life, with an improved sense
of its many peculiar advantages.

After being under the hospitable roof of the christianized Indian four days,
he affectionately told me, that he must not keep me any longer, for fear it
should come to the knowledge of the ^^anish Governor, o^ any of the officers
under the crown, which would prove his ruin, and my death; neither must it be
ever known that I suffered him to pass my house without being (...) forward in
irons; which if he did, there would be no prospect of mercy, but to go amongst
them myself it may probably terminate favorable, but this issue he could only
hope for me, not se^ure unto me; and to ^^tain me in his service, he dare not,
although for many reasons as a conversable companion, he should have been glad
to have done.

After renewing his entreaty, that I would not divulge to any person the civil
entertainment and indulgence I experienced from him; he generously supplied me
with such clothes as was necessary, and then ordered three black servants to
attend me on horseback as far toward the next Indian town as they could with
safety, without being in danger of a discovery by any of the Spaniards that
come down the country to deal with the Indians. My trusty guides brought me to
the Indian town, but durst not be seen with me, for fear some Spaniards should
be in the place. This town contained about a hundred dwellings, many of them
built of wood, and very handsome, considering its inhabitants: some infidels,
and a few converted to christianity.

My guides now left me, giving me directions to proceed toward the Spanish
town of Mataolpa, about fifty miles further; and then to throw myself on the
clemency of the officers, as there was no other way for me ever to reach my own
country but through the Spanish settlements; and wishing me a good and
prosperous journey, left me, to return to their master.

Being left by my guides, I proceeded forward according to their directions,
and continued till late in the evening: -- being now greatly fatigued, and
(...) no appearance of the town I was going toward, I laid down and fell
asleep. Next morning I pursued my journey until about midday, when being
hungry and weary, I halted under a large tree, and unwarily dropped asleep; in
the mean time a drunken Indian approached and awoke me, and addressing me in a
language that I did not understand, I continued silent* he then gave me a few
pats upon my head in a jocuse, funny manner. Seeing him with a pleasant
countenance, it revived my spirits, and imagining he was desirous to know who I
was, I spoke, and said, an Englishman: an "Englishman!" said he, and
immediately gave me a blow with a stick that stunned me, and directly fled from
me with the greatest precipitation. As soon as I was a little recovered, I
walked to a fallen trunk of a decayed tree, to take some repose if I could; but
I had not been there more than an hour, before I found myself surrounded with
about fifty armed Spaniards on horseback; who instantly seized me, and placing
me on a swift footed beast, rode furiously away to the town, which was not more
than three miles distance: and now commences the era of my cruel sufferings
under the pangs of Spanish imprisonment almost five years.

CHAPTER VIII.
THE sanguine hopes I had formed of meeting an agreeable reception from the
civilized Christian Spaniards was now vanished, and all hopes of humane
compassion and feeling entirely dispelled; I almost wished myself back again
amongst the savages of the woods.

I no sooner entered the town, but by c^^^^and of some inferior officer, my
trembling hands were bound together by strong manacles, and hurried away to
prison, and there my feet was fixed to the ground by the weight of a ponderous
load of iron, and a military ^^ard placed to watch my motions, and from their
furious behavior, as well as other crowds, of curious spectators that
approached toward me, I could not for a long while picture to myself any thing
less than speedy death.

I was presently made to understand that a suspicion was entertained of my
being a spy, and they was under apprehensions that more of my countrymen was
lurking about in the adjacent woods, waiting my returning intelligence, to
execute some daring enterprise to the injury of the town; but it must be
observed, that at this time there was no English forces in hostilities with
Spain in this part of the globe; consequently a spy could neither be
serviceable to his own country, nor prejudicial to another, without a powerful
assistance: however, in consequence of these groundless apprehensions, I was
closely watched, and guarded by the military, unnecessarily strong, for a poor
weak individual captive; and so impressive was these vain imaginations
impressed on the minds of the people, that the principal part of the woman and
children, with their portable effects, had left the town, and made a
precipitate slight a considerable way up into the country, before I had been
one week in the town. Such effects has false rumors and reports upon the
timorous and credulous part of the human race.

I had been in the town four days before the chief magistrate attended, when I
was had into the (...) house for examination; but as he could not spea^ (...)
English, nor me the Spanish language, an (...) was necessary; and as no one
could be (...) the town qualified for the importancy of the affair, he
dispatched a Negro to the town of Granada, and desired the Governor of that
place, to send a person that was fluent in the English language.

My situation was tr^^ly pitiable during the absence of the massenger. I should
not have been alive for examination at his return, if the military had not well
guarded the prison from the rancour and inveteracy of the furious mob; and
Mataolpa being but a few mile^ west of Costa Rico river, it was a long distance
from Granada; but the message being of such magnitude* the person returned
within a fortnight, and the Governor with him, by which it may be concluded,
that in the opinion of the town where I was a prisoner, I was a person of
consequence, and on suspicious business, and dangerous to the state. The
Governor brought (...) him several of the principal gentlemen of Granada, (...)
be present on the occasion. How I had now to lament the presence and benevolent
assistance of my worthy friend the Indian, to clear up all matters, and remove
suspicions.

The next day after their arrival, my examination commenced in the presence of
the governor, the magi^^^^^^, and many other gentlemen. A negro that came (...)
put the questions to me in English, (...) their proposing to him in Spanish.

As who I was (...) ^ow I came upon their coast? My occupation? What company I
had, and where they was? How long I had been there? and many other similar
questions; to all which I gave reasonable and explicit answers, with an exact
account of all my misfortunes and trials; but these arguments availed nothing.
He told me that some time past there was a person apprehended on the coast,
whom the governor had great suspicion of, as being an English spy, and that he
was conducted to Old Spain, to be disposed of according to the sentence of
their tribunal; and they had great reason to suspect that I was in confederacy
with him, or employed in the same affair: and after interrogating me with all
the subtility their malice could devise, to draw something from me as would
lead to a conviction of my being known unto, or acquainted with this man (whom
they called George Foo^es) and finding I knew nothing at all about him, they
ordered me again to prison, for further examination.

I found by their interrogatories, that this George Foo^es was the person that
my friend the Woolaway Indian alluded unto; but I observed a sacred silence as
to ever having heard any thing of him before, for I was very cautious to let
nothing escape my lips that should lead to a detection of my being at the house
of the hospitable Indian, as I should thereby have implicated him without
benefit to myself: but had my own personal safety and liberty been depending
(...) it, I scarcely think I should have done it -- in that case, I could
almost "lay down my life for my friend."

The interpreting Negro was very faithful in repeating my defense, and answers,
and by his actions and features, I thought he seemed affected at my unfortunate
situation; but all did not suffice, to convince the relentless company of my
innocence; for at the close, they either had, or pretended to have, a well
grounded suspicion of my ^vil intentions in some respect or other on their
coast.

I was accordingly remanded to prison for one year; in which time it was
probable that something would transpire to confirm their present opinion of me.
I had not been long in the prison, before I heard that this George Foo^es had
been confined there, and in every prison that I was conducted to afterward, I
^ound he had been before me: this certainly made me fare the worse than if this
other unfortunate man had not been before me: and the town's people was so
exasperated against me, that it would have been impossible for me to have
escaped their fury, if the Governor had liberated me, without a strong guard
for my protection.

My fate for one whole year was now determined, (...) made my situation the
more deplorable, the pris^^ (...) in this gaol have no allowance of ^^^isions
from the government, but subsisted entirely on the charity of benefactions, and
the scanty morsels that was daily sent from the convents, as the fragments of
their tables; and this means of support was frequently so very bare, that for
my part, I have commonly went twenty-four hours without more than four ounces
of food; and what rendered my case more severe than the other prisoners, such
as thieves, robbers, murderers, and all kinds o^ villains, I was bound fast in
(...), and had not the liberty of the yard to breath the fresh air; excepting
twice or thrice in a month, for about an hour; nor could never have the
consolation to receive a pleasant look, or hear a sympathising word from the
tyrant ga^ler, who displayed every merciless act that his office would admit
of, by insulting reflections and close confinement.

At the expiration of the year, an order came for my removal to a small strong
garrisoned town, called Massiah: accordingly I was mounted on a horse str^^gly
ironed, and my fe^t tied under his belly, and half a dozen Spanish dragoons to
conduct me. We was four days on our journey -- probably it might be about four
score miles; and during this journey, these soldiers behaved toward me with
great civility, and provided me plenty of good food. Being arrived to this
town, the chief ^ff^cer, after putting a few insulting questions to me, ordered
me to prison, without even letting my heavy irons be taken from (...) but added
others unto them. This jailer (...) little more humanity than the last, did
somet^^es (...) them off, and indulge me with the liberty of the p^^son court;
but the allowance of provisions here was by government, which was very scanty,
just sufficient to support nature, and the prison crowded with malefactors of
all kinds: -- crimes the most heinous, and wretches the most profane and
blasphemous, that eyes ever saw, or ears ever heard. In this prison I remained
six months, and every day waiting with anxious impatience for a trial, to know
my doom: -- twice a year there was held a court of justiciary for the trial of
criminals; -- it happened a few weeks before my arrival, and at the next time
of gaol delivery, the judges had no order from the government, nor the governor
to examine into my case, and of course, did not care to take recognisance of
the matter; but said they would represent the affair to the governor in their
circuit, and to do them justice, they was punctual to their word, for within
three weeks after their departure from this town, an order came for my removal
to the city of Nicaragua, which took us three days.

During this journey, the soldiers did not behave with as much lenity as the
last guard I had. The last week that I remained in this prison, was a little
more comfortable than before the a^^^es took place; for out of upwards of
thirty prisoners, there was but four ^^^ght back to remain in custody -- the
r^st was dis^^^^ of according to their sentences; -- three suffered (...);
(...) sent to the galleys; some to the mines; (...) receiving corporeal
punishment. This last (...) of my imprisonment, there was crowds of people ^id
resort to the gaol to see the English spy; some wishing he had been hung there;
others enquiring where he would be hanged; and a few compassionating the poor
man. -- I had now got a little spattering of the Sanish tongue.

As soon as we arrived at Nicaragua, and the news spread over the town (which
was not long about) there was such crowds of spectators, that the magistrate
was obliged to increase the guard over me; for tidings had been brought before,
by some of the inhabitants that was at the county assizes at Massiah, and
hearing the state of my case, and former hardships from the mouths of a few
considering, humane people, they had represented my situation in a feeling and
sympathising manner, and thereby a considerable part of the people was
compas^ionately disposed toward me; and many of these being very respectable
citizens and of opulence and note, it of course turned the lower order of
people much in my favor; and the chief officer of the place, finding that the
general voice of the people leaned on the side of mercy, began to be doubtful
of the consequence, and dreaded an attempt by the populace to rescue me out of
the hands of (what they called) justice; which induced him to augment my guard,
so that there was now upwards of twenty (...) soldiers stationed round the
prison, and myself (...) ironed with a bar from leg to leg, beside (...)
cuffed; and during my imprisonment (...) which was eleven months, I never
breath^^ (...) air half an hour together, nor ever had the use of my legs and
hands at the same time one minute; for when I was led out into the court for a
few minutes, it was sometimes with my hands loose, and at others my legs, which
was three times a week, and the remainder of the time I was under ground. -- No
floor but the earth, a lock of straw to rest on; no other light but what could
penetrate through the ponderous irons that constituted the window, about a yard
square, and the cross bars not more than an inch apart, and the window a yard
beneath the surface of the prison yard, and myself two yards below the window;
so that it might with propriety be said, I ^as buried alive, three yards under
ground.

I should have experienced great friendship in this prison from the town's
people, but they was not permitted to have ^^ess to me, and all they could do
was to send me daily from their tables a portion of good victuals; and this
being delivered to the outward sentinel, it did pass from him to the next, and
thus through three hands and then to the jailer, and (...) of all to me; and
visible enough it was that it had ^ained nothing on the journey, for I had
oftentimes a large plate with scarce four mouths-full on it; (...) should have
been totally useless, and (...) and (...) friends were, 'twas imp^^^ (...),
neither could they be made (...) imposition and abuse of their generosity What
liquor was sent to me, I do not know, for there was never none delivered to me
by the jailer, more than ten or twelve times.

Four times I was examined by the magistrates, but they have an apartment in
the prison for that purpose, so that I had no opportunity, even at this time,
to enjoy a few minutes of open air. Their different examinations amounted to no
more than charging me on mere supposition (for I do not believe they
entertained a suspicion) of my being on the Spanish coast for some clandestine
purpose; but as they was not authorized to pass a definitive sentence upon me,
agreeable to their surmises, I was each time ordered again to prison, to await
their further orders from the Governor what to do with me; but not the least
lenity displayed toward alleviating my sufferings. Often I did entreat the
keeper of the prison, to permit me to, walk the court for the benefit of the
air; but always me with a refusal, upon some simple pretext or other.

Several times I was taken sick; then some trifling indulgence was shown me;
and twice or thrice a humane person, a friend to the miserable, was permitted
to enter my dungeon, but attended by the jailer and a sentinel, so that the
opportunity of opening my mind, and relating my sufferings, was lost, and the
hum^^^ visit was of no benefit; and they having the (...) of representing me to
all enquirers in the (...) favorable light, it fared much worse with me than it
otherwise would in the opinion of the people.

In this deplorable situation I continued nine months, when being brought
before the magistrates in the town court house, there was a multitude of
spectators, and fortunately for me it was so for amongst the rest was two
Spanish gentlemen, that had formerly resided in England, and was pretty fluent
in the language; this was a great advantage to me for them to notice the
questions and answers between me and the linguist, for the next morning they
both came to the prison and demanded (not petitioned) admittance to me, and
being gentlemen of some consequence, the callous hearted jailer was obliged to
submit and pay obedience. As soon as they entered my dreary abode, they lifted
up their hands with astonishment and indignation, and asked the jailer if such
usage was by command of the magistrates; he answered it was; they replied, it
shall continue no longer.

The two gentlemen, after remaining with me about half an hour, and fully
satisfied as to my innocent^e, assured me that they would immediately set about
using their best influence to procure my liberty, or some al^^^^^ (...)
sufferings. -- From that time I had plen^^^ provisions three times a day, (...)
different ta^^^ (...) I imagine proceeded from the interference (...) gentlemen
who I had informed of my suspi^^^ and from this time the keeper ^as afraid to
embezzle it from me, under an apprehension of their paying me another visit,
and his guilt be brought to light; but I believe their endeavors toward
softening my miseries, was unsuccessful, for I found no alteration, nor ever
saw them afterward; but in about seven weeks there was an order issued for my
removal from this prison to Granada, the town from whence the governor came to
my first examination at Mataolpa; and although it did not require more than one
week for the governor and messenger to return from Granada to Mataolpa on my
examination, the reader will find it took two years and seven months to conduct
me there.

Being as formerly, bound fast on the horse, and guarded by four Spanish
horsemen, we set out on our journey; and I thought the spectators in general
seemed to sympathise and feel for my distresses.

On this journey, which took us four days (owing to the ^^ity of the soldiers,
because they would not fatigue me) the guard behaved in a manner truly tender,
^^passionate, and humane. The cords with which I was tied, was loosened in such
a manner as to be of no inconvenience at all; my hands and legs was quite at
liberty, and if they could have permitted me to escape without inevitable
danger to (...) am convinced they would have done it; but (...) not in the
least inclined to embrace the (...) it had offered; for where could I escape^
(...) back again amongst the Indians: so that (...) toward deliverance, had a
more dark appearance, than the evil in futurity.

When we arrived within a few miles of the town, one of the guard rode forward
to give notice of our approach, and he so wisely conducted himself amongst the
people, that we entered the town amidst numerous spectators, without hearing
the least clamor. I was now in hopes that a change was going to take place for
the best; as I cherished sanguinary expectations that the Governor who examined
me two years and a half ago at Mataolpa (and from that time to this nothing of
a conspiring nature taking place, nor no charge alleged against me, being
confirmed by any recent instances of guilt) would now liberate me; but to my
great sorrow and disappointment, he (...) recalled, and another succeeded him
in the administration of government, that never had heard any thing about me,
and of course could do no more than be guided in his conduct toward me,
according to the tenor of the warrant from whence I came, which ^^^ented me as
a dangerous person, and under strong suspicions of an evil tendency toward the
country.

After being interrogated about a quarter of an hour, (...) was ordered to
prison till some other opportunity, (...) as much indifference as if I was
going to be encertain^^^^ a palace. The Governor, my compa^^^^^^^ (...), could
not take the liberty to speak a word in my behalf, but their kind influence
over the keeper of the prison, proved very beneficial to me; for I experienced
every indulging favor that in the duties of his office he could grant me; and
such a supply of provisions from the town's people, and frequently from his own
table, that I lived luxuriously, and plenty to spare to fellow prisoners. Every
person that did approach the door to see the Englishman, had free admittance,
and in general, behaved themselves with every degree of civility. Here I had
the full liberty of the court, and very lightly ironed, never confined in the
day time, and at (...) a good room and bed, considering the situation I was in;
and for the first time since my captivity I was permitted to attend (...) of
the prisoners on the Lord's day, to hear (...) ^inister; but they being all of
the Roman Catholic persuasion, and the worship performed in the Spani^^ ^ongue,
the opportunity was of little benefit to me, otherwise than my own private
contemplations; which for want of practice, and experience, was too irregular
(...) ^^^fused, to produce that consolation to my soul as my situation
required; but even the reflections o^ change of circumstances (putting religion
out of the question) was a great happiness, and instead of animating me to a
servent return of praise and sacred gratitude to the Lord, for such a gracious
dispensation of his interfering providence, for working round (...) hear^
reviving change, my spirits were to (...) of (...) enjoyment of this temporary
pleasure, to (...) what source it sprung, and to whom my obligation was due.

Notwithstanding my ignorance and stupidity in religious matters, and the
ceremonies of the Roman church, I nevertheless received great benefit from the
conversation of the clergy, as they did endeavor to suit their discourse to my
slight knowledge of their language; but it was always backed with such forcible
arguments in favor of the Romish liturgy, that I was many times on the point of
surrendering up that faith which I professed, but did not understand, for
another that I neither understood nor professed; but I had been taught from my
childhood (as other children are) to imbibe such a persecuting, and
unch^istian-like opinion of the papists, that it appeared to me to be a member
of that church, was in society with the devil; although for my part (as well as
many other^) I could give no other reason for my prejudice, but an implicit
belief in the idle rumors of others that pretended unto, but in general
possessed no more real knowledge of ^^^^^ets of the Roman church than myself:
however (...) and not conviction prevailed over inclination, and I with (...)
all their entreaties, and persuasions; and to their ^^^dit I affirm it, there
was never the least attempt (...) upon my faith and conscience by means of
threaten^^ violence, or compulsion; but (...) and solid reasoning was all the
means they had recourse unto, which was ^^guments beyond my then, or present
abilities to con^^te.

During my stay of six months in this prison, I never experienced one painful
day of bodily calamities, nor knew the want of a sufficiency of good and
wholesome diet; but the reflections on my future destiny, was in no measure
diminished; for the magistrates was no friends to me, even as far as their
commission tolerated them; although they could not grant me liberty to depart
under their seals of office, they could permit me to have went of my own
accord, or remain in the to (...) like another peaceable inhabitant, as the
warrants from one to another did leave my case to their own consideration. Thus
I was harrassed and dragged about from prison to prison, just to satisfy the
caprice, and display the dignity of the haughty and high-minded. -- During my
being here, (...) was two courts of justice held, and at the close of the last
only one prisoner besides myself remaining, so that this imprisonment with me
might properly be called a limited liberty; and the jailer was so indifferent
about the matter, that he did frequently leave the ou^^er door of the court
open, when no person (...) as watch over me, and I was at the same (...) from
irons. But the jailer knew that it would be weak policy in me to attempt an
escape, for (...) soon as I was in the street, every eye should be upon me, and
without doubt some hands to secure me. -- There was never such a thought
enter^d my mind in either of the prisons as to flatter myself with on escape
out of the country, although I should have been glad to (...) done it out of
some of the prisons, and (...) to ^^rtune for future trials; but from my
present (...) finement, I never had a wish for to be enlarged, except that
enlargement came from proper authority, and would be the means of my protection
through the dominions with security.

At the expiration of six months and a few days, when I was at supper in the
keeper's apartment, there was an order came unexpectedly for my departure next
morning; but whether it was an order came from Leon to the chief officer for my
conveyance thither, or whether it was a warrant of their own pleasure, to
remove me out of the town, we could not learn; but the keeper suspected it was
a scheme of the principal people of the town, in conjunction with the chief
magistrate, out of hatred and enmity to the English nation, because they knew
that I should, whi^^ in that prison, experience great severities and hardships
-- finding the people here too favorable and tender toward me, and
consequently I did not feel sufficiently the weight of their malice and envy.

About two days before, the other prisoner (...) charged -- and my removal,
would leave the (...) ^^tute of inhabitants -- an instance that had never
^^^pened before since the present keeper had been in the office -- up (...) of
thirteen years.

It might be (...) supposed, that the separat^^^ between me and my humane
keeper, was very a (...) as was really the case; and what added to (...) wa^,
he knew what troubles was hatching in the womb of ^ate for me; but his
^^mpassion would not permit him to reveal it to me, because my spirits should
not sink under the weight of anticipation.

In the morning a guard of six men arrived at the gate, and demanded me of the
jailer; but before he delivered me into their hands, he harrangued them in a
very pathetic manner in my behalf, which had the desire effect, for they
treated me very tenderly on the journey to Leon, which took us six days; this
is the capital of the province of Nicaragua.

As soon as we arrived at Leon, I was delivered into the custody of a petty
officer, or constable, until the magistrate should be acquainted with my
arrival; -- for three days I was kept in the common house of correction, locked
into a private room; but on the fourth had before the magistrate, or mayor, who
took the warrant, and after reading it, put himself into a great passion,
repeating the words "a Spy! a Spy!" he (...) have been executed on the spot of
his appre^^^sion; but as he has been permitted to live till this time, it is
only mani^^cting the indulgence and humanity of the Spanish government; and it
is now out of my power to execute the sentence of the laws of nations upon him,
without the authority of (...) province governor, unto whom I must write to
(...) his pleasure; (...) the mean time I shall give orders for his close (...).

This man was too much in a passion, to hear or ^e heard, and without
interr^gating me, formed his own constructions, and drawed conclusions from
them, on the strength of the accusations of the warrant; by this I was
confirmed, in the opinion of my last worthy jailer, that the last magistrates
was too much my enemies to represent my case in a favorable light; and also a
confirmation of our conjectures, that this removal was the result of their own
deliberations.

I was ordered into confinement, with a particular injunction to the keeper, on
pain of displeasure, to allow me no further indulgence than was really
necessary for existence. Being thus conducted to the county gaol, and the
warrant of commitment perused by the keeper, I presently judged, by the
austerity of his countenance, and roughness of his speech, that no lenity could
be expected, to soften the rigor of the magistrate's command. I was now
conducted through six dismal apartments, and as many heavy iron doors; and in
each of these dreary cells, was one (...) more unhappy wretches; some chained
to the floor, and (...) handcuffed, and so dark, it was impossi^^^ (...) their
features. After passing (...) last of these (...) abodes, we descended three or
(...) steps by the (...) of a candle, that was then kindled by a match; (...)
now another heavy grating door with three stupend^^^ locks was opened, and I
was ordered to (...) which was nine in number, (...) top step; but by the
feeble light of the (...) took a transient survey of my melancholy mansion, and
found it to be about four yards square: they immediately turned the key, and
left me to my own contemplations, and solitary thoughts, upon what would follow.

I began to groupe about, and walked round my dwelling, and found it to be
firmly secure with large stones, and the bottom paved with the same; and all
the light or air admitted, was through one hole, about four inches square on
one side, and another about a foot square the other side; but this last had
cross bars, that the squares was not more than three inches; and these windows,
if they might be so called, was six yards abo^^ my head; for by the steps we
descended, I concluded I must have been full that distance under ground. There
was now no beam or ray of hope that I could rest upon, ever to expect to see
daylight again; because I apprehended it was in agitation for me to be starved
to death, for not one word passed to encourage me with the expectation of
deliverance, or support: -- (...) was not even a lock of straw, or bit of board
to (...) upon, all I had for this purpose, was the steps.

(...) this deplorable situation I remained till next (...), when hearing a
little noise at the door, I an^^^pated a change for the best, or worst, if that
could (...) ^e, and presently heard a voice call out, "(...)" I goes to the
door, and through a hole, just (...) for the purpose, was handed to me a pint
of water, and about one pound of coarse hard bread, but not one word spoke to
me; notwithstanding it was a dainty feast. I was now left again to my own
private and undisturbed meditations, until the next day about the same hour,
and then had my scanty pittance delivered to me in the same silent manner, and
same in quality, and thus did I spend six or seven weeks, without seeing a
single face, or hearing a single word, besides the surly "hallow!" once in 24
hours; and not light sufficient to discern the color of the bread I did eat.
It is impossible for me to describe the different emotions and agitations of my
soul, during this time, for there being neither hopes or expectation of
deliverance; I could only employ my mind with reflections upon reflections on
what was past; for no regular ideas could be formed of the events of futurity,
for I had no worldly scenes in future view; for futurity in this world appeared
to my senses beyond the reach of time, and of course never to be experienced.

At the expiration of seven weeks, I was surprised early in the morning by the
opening of the door, and a lighted candle, and led forth the same (...) I came,
into a large room, and there being ^^^deu^^ed, was again left to myself till
day light; and there being a bed in the room, I laid down and fell into a (...)
sleep, which the courteous reader will not be surprised (...), considering how
many weeks (I might say months) since I laid on a bed; -- the last time was at
the ^^^^^table Indian's, and before that, eight years and six months, and since
that three years in different prisons, so that on the whole, I had been eleven
years and six months (excepting the few nights at my worthy Indian friend's)
without sleeping on a bed. I slept till the jailer came and awoke me -- when
opening my eyes in full day light, I was almost struck blind with its
brightness; nor for a short space could recollect myself, the transition was so
powerful upon my senses; and there being an old looking glass in the room, I
looked into it, but so surprised was I at my own figure, and ghastly
appearance, that I was almost ready to exclaim with the drunken man that had
his head shaved while he was asleep; being ^^^aked, and putting his hand up to
his head, cried out; "this is not Tom Brown; I Am sure Tom Brown had his hair;
it is not I, it is another man."

I had but little time for reflection or observation, for I was informed that
the magistrate was going to hold a court, and I must wash and clean myself to
appear for examination; this sound was in no measure gra^^ing or unwelcome to
my ears, although it might be as a ^^ath warrant to many other poor unfortunate
wret^^es, for I had been too long cloistered in the (...) of dismal darkness,
to be dismayed or ^^jected at any occurrence that could take place, or fortune
besal me in the cheerful prospects of open day, and the enjoyment of free and
refreshing air:- if a change in my situation did take place, it must be (...)
the best, it could not be for the worst. I need not inform the reader that I
did not hesitate to obey the summons, to wash and be clean, for I stood in
great need of it; for in my dark and nasty dungeon there was ^o convenience of
any kind allowed me for decency, or preservation of health; and being almost
destitute of clothes, it must be naturally supposed, that I stood in great need
of washing, for no apparel had been allowed me, and what the hospitable Indian
gave me was worn to rags.

After I was a little cleansed, and received my usual scanty pittance of bread
and water, I was chained with the offending criminals, and conducted into the
court. It was the pleasure of the magistrates to examine me first, but their
interrogatories, and my answers being in substance the same as before, it is
needless to be again repeated. I was remanded to prison, until the pleasure of
the Spanish president, which resided at Guatamala, should be known; but who at
this time was in Old Spain, and of course would not return to resume the reigns
of government for many months there was no alternative but patience, and I was
ordered back to my dungeon, but with orders from the magistrates that my future
allowance of (...) should be the same in quantity and quality another
prisoners, but my confinement equally close; with this proviso, that once a
week I should have the liberty of the court yard for one hour, and any (...)
inclined to assist or relieve me, should without moles^^tion have free access
to the court; but no person that could not make it appear satisfactory to the
doorkeeper, that their business was other than mere curiosity was admitted.

This weekly indulgence was very beneficial to me in many respects, for I had
plenty of good provisions, and liquor brought me weekly from the tables of the
generous and feeling citizens; and as a proof of their zeal for my alleviation,
they did send me such preserved meats, liquors and fruit, as would keep good in
my unwholesome cell all the week; so that I wanted none of the prison
allowance, and at the week's end did distribute my remains amongst my
unfortunate sufferers. I had also a good comfortable bed and bedding provided
me, with other necessary utensils and conveniences for decency and cleanliness,
as also clothing suitable to my dwelling; and candles would have been
provided, but I was not permitted the use of them, under pretense of danger.

My principal benefactors in this prison was from merchants that either had
been in England, or had dealings with the British merchants, and the Nuns,
whose liberality came through the hands of the Friars, whose friendship was in
general confined to linen, and keeping it whole and washed, as I did receive
it clean or new from the convent every week. I had too many table benefactors
to need the generosity of their table, and of course, this did go amongst the
other prisoners.

In this manner did I spend a whole year, before any tidings came of the return
of the President to Guatamala from Old Spain; when a special messenger was sent
upon the business to know his pleasure, and in about eight weeks, an order came
for me to be conducted to Guatamala to be examined by him: I was accordingly
loaded with heavier irons on my legs than ever before, and eight privates,
besides two non-commissioned officers appointed to conduct me: this distance
was upwards of two hundred miles. My first guard was to convey me to a little
seaport town, called Comajagua^ in our way we had a spacious river to wade
over, which from the excessive rains that lately had fallen, was become so deep
and rapid, as to render it totally passable without great hazard; but in
crossing it, our lives was in imminent danger; for the horses on which we rode,
were forcibly driven a considerable way down the current, and it was with the
utmost difficulty we reached the shore on the other side. Owing to bad
traveling, this first journey took us up near three weeks: on our arrival, I
was conducted to the Spanish magi^trate, to be by him forwarded on my journey.

Fortunately for me the gentleman could discourse with me in English, and after
a short examination, and hearing from me a detail of my many hardships and
cruelties, he dismissed the guard that brought me, with his letter of
acknowledgment of my being safely delivered into his custody; and as soon as
they was gone, he sent one of his domestic servants after a smith to knock off
my iron^, and remained with me in the room while the operation was performing,
talking all the while with the smith in Spanish, which (...) understood well
enough to know was for him to be tender of me.

After my irons was off, he took me into another apartment, and ordered a
servant to place before me provisions: when I was comfortably refreshed, I was
ordered into another room, where was water to wash, and apparel to put on: --
when I was both clean and clothed, he took me into the parlour, and renewed
the conversation: I gave him the particulars of my life, in a very
comprehensive manner, which he ordered his clerk to take down in writing, to ^e
preserved as a memorial of the wonderful operations of God for good toward me.
He now redoubled his kindness toward me, by presenting me with a purse
containing fifty dollars, and at the same time dispatched a servant after a
tailor to take my measure for a complete suit of clothes, and a convenient pair
of trowsers, to avert the pernicious effects of the irons that might in future
be put on my legs.

During this time of making my cl^thes, he conducted me to all the genteel
families in the town, many individuals of which could discourse in English
sufficient for us to understand each other; and thus I precured the sympathy,
as well as generosity of the prin^^pal gentlemen and ladies of the place; and
had acquired from their bounty upwards of an hundred dollars, exclusive of my
benefactor's private purse. I dined, breakfasted, or supped, with several
gentlemen at their houses, accompanied by my worthy friend: I was particularly
urged by my liberal and humane magistrate, to be careful of my money; for he
said in the course of my journey, before I arrived at Guatamala, I had several
towns to pass, wherein the money would be found materially serviceable. On the
second day the tailor returned with the clothes and trowsers; the morning
following, my worthy host entered the room wherein I slept, and with the voice
of tenderness, feeling and love, awoke me with the gentle accents of "my
friend, arise to breakfast:" I speedily obeyed; and whilst we was at breakfast,
several gentlemen's servants came with abundance of fine clothes: my worthy
friend now proposed for us to take an airing (...), and two elegant horses was
got ready, and we (...) a few miles out of town; when he informed me that by
virtue of the warrant that delivered me into his custody, he must reluctantly
send me forward on my journey, for fear any longer detention, should, on a
future day, when the date of the warrant was occurred unto by the President,
create suspicion, and be productive of prejudice to him, and hurtful
consequences to me; and also, according to the existing laws of the country, he
was under the disagreeable necessity of having the irons put on my legs again;
and although he run a great risk in doing it, he would venture to detain me
another day.

On the morrow he procured a guard of soldiers, and after the irons was put on
my legs, over the trowsers (for which benevolent purpose he had them made) I
was mounted on horseback, accompanied by him and two more gentlemen to the next
town, about eight miles distance; where after dining together, he kindly
presented me with five dollars, and the other gentlemen followed his example;
then pressing my hand very affectionately to his breast, with the voice of
compassion and tenderness, and the tears dropping from his eyes, he said, "my
friend, I bid you adieu; if we have not the happiness of seeing each other
again in this world, our joy will be the more exquisite on our happy meeting in
the next."

In unfeigned sorrow at the s^paration, I was not behind hand with my dear and
good friend; for a flood of tears gushed from my eyes, and stopped the power of
speech* we parted -- and parted with sincere regret on both sides.

The guard now placed over me was, as may be naturally supposed, very civil and
tender, being appointed by such a humane person. In the space of ten days on
this journey, I was conducted through near fifty towns, and in each of them had
my setters renewed, by order of the chief ruling officer, and fresh guard, so
that I sometimes went through four of five towns in one day, and one day in
particular eight towns, and a different pair of irons in each place; with such
frequent changes, neither favors or frowns could be very lasting, and at
intervals I did experience both; but in general, during this journey, lenity
toward me was prevalent.

At length we arrived at the destined place; the town of Guatamala, which was
the capital of the province, and the Governor, or President of the southern
provinces did reside there. On our arrival, the guards conducted me to the town
magistrate, who after reading the President's order, and the warrant, ordered
me to the gaol till the morning.

In the morning I was had before the President, and the same magistrate; which
acted in the capacity of the Mayor. After the President had read the warrant to
me (for he had no doubt consulted with the Mayo^ about it before, and
determined in his mind how to proceed) he put a few questions to me, all to the
same purport as others had done before, and received the same replies, and not
being satisfied, he like the rest found some pretext to keep me in prison until
an opportunity offered to send me to Old Spain, for that government either to
discharge me, or send me to the Spanish mines; the latter of which he expected
would ^e the case.

I was now sent to the country prison, and as soon as the keeper had read the
warrant of commitment from the President, he looked at me with a stern and
fer^cious countenance, and led me away. The first door he opened presented a
gloomy passage, about one yard under ground: we descended the steps, and walked
on about twenty steps; here we halted till a candle was brought (two of the
soldiers with their bayonets being with us) another door was now opened, and we
descended five or six steps more, and walked about ten yards, when another door
was opened, and close to that again another; when I was ordered to take off my
trowsers that my last good friend gave me; and the cruel jailer began to equip
me with irons.

In the first place he put strong manacles on my hands; heavy iron bars on my
legs, that kept them about twelve inches asunder; chains about my waist and
neck; and during the night, my feet secured in a pair of stocks, and provision
scarcely sufficient to support life.

There was conveniences for the admission of a little air, but no light. This
dismal habitation was the recepticle of every description of notorious
malefactors; as murderers, robbers, thieves, and traitors, who are sentenced to
this gloomy cavern for their lives, never more to hail the rising sun, or enjoy
the blessed advantages of his brightness, by seeing daylight; nor the
consolation of one administering friend, and more than if they was dead; neither
is it known to their connections in the world, whether they are dead or alive.

The number of these, my sequestered companions, I cannot tell, but by the
different voices, I imagined there must be fifty or more.

About three weeks after my confinement, I was conducted by a very strong guard
(upwards of twenty men) before the president: I then related to him a full and
particular detail of all my sufferings, in the most affecting, petitioning, and
supplicating style, my feeble abilities would permit, and flattered myself with
the faint hopes of procuring my liberty; but the unfeeling wretch was
inflexible to all my prayers, tears, submission, and entreaties. He said that
all I had advanced in my defense availed nothing; I had no lawful business on
their coast, and he should proceed against me as a spy, or a thief, and forward
me to Spain in one or both of these characters.

I was now in the most deplorable situation that ever had befallen me; for I
thought that my next removal from this temporary darkness would be to the
mines, to experience eternal darkness, as far as eternity relates to this life.
Being remanded to my dungeon, all the comfort to be enjoyed was the rattling of
chains, oaths and blasphemies, of those devil hardened wretches that was doomed
to spend their days in this horrible habitation; where there was nothing to
attract the notice of the eye, but one continued scene of woeful darkness.

In a few weeks I found that a good and merciful God had not forsaken me, and
he who had led me through such a number of difficulties and dangers, would at
last stretch forth a kind hand of deliverance, and set my feet at liberty.

One morning, when the keeper came to supply the prisoners with their daily
allowance, a beautiful lady was conducted into the dungeon, surrounded by the
guard that always accompanied the keeper, for it must not be supposed that one
man could entrust himself alone, amongst a set of abandoned wretches of that
description. As soon as the lady entered, she called out, "where is the
Englishman?" -- How my heart leaped for joy at the sound: -- I immediately
answered, "here" -- no person but myself understood what she said. I was then
led out to an apartment suitable to the dignity of my visitor, who desired to
hear he particulars of my adventures and sufferings, with which I readily
complied, and gave her a minute detail of the remarkable vicissitudes of my
checkered fortune.

Her sympathising heart seemed to be pathetically affected at my past, as well
as present sufferings particularly. -- She said that her parents was from
England, and left it when she was about ten years of age, and consequently, she
still entertained an affection and esteem for her country people; and seeing me
carried before the president, she procured all the information concerning me
that possibly she could, and being convinced of my innocence, as to the charges
alleged against me, she had waited on the governor and interceded for me to
the utmost of her abilities and influence, but was sorry to say, that all her
exertions proved abortive toward procuring my liberty; and as she was
unfortunate in her endeavors to do as she would, she would do as much as she
could toward rendering my unhappy situation as comfortable as possible; and
indeed her generosity and exertions in my behalf exceeded my most sanguine
expectations; for being a lady of rank and fortune, she prevailed upon the
governor at her next interview, to free me from the greatest part of my heavy
irons, and daily sent me from her own table plenty of provisions, but could not
procure me a more comfortable situation in prison; and the dungeon where I was
confined was damp, cold, nasty, and infectious; -- the criminals die very soon
in general after this perpetual sentence is passed upon them; -- the sooner
they are dead, the more profitable it is to the contractor, who have a yearly
stipend for to provide for those thus condemned, without any regard to the
number consined.

I never had the happiness to see the face of my tender benefactress after the
first time, until I was taken from the dungeon to be sent away; which was at
the expiration of seven months from my first commitment; and during that space
I suffered so much by cold, filth, and unwholesomeness of the disagreeable
stench, issuing continually from every part of the cavern, that when I came out
to be conveyed forward, I found such an alteration in my left side, that I
could not be particularly accountable for; a kind of a stiffness, accompanied
with a chill and weakness; but free from pain.

When the day came for my removal, the warrant of my imperious judge was read
to me by an interpreter; although I had by this time attained a tolerable fluency
in the Spanish tongue. I was to be escorted from town to town till I arrived at
port Omoa, and from thence to be sent by the first vessel to Old Spain. Nothing
particular occurred on the journey -- it took us six days, and one day we
rested on account of my debilitated state of body, for I found my left side
growing worse and worse. In our journey we passed through several small towns,
and on the last day I was so weak, we did not ride more than eight miles. Being
introduced to the chief officer* I was ordered up into the country, about nine
or ten miles by the seaside, to await the sailing of a vessel: here I was
strongly ironed, and barely supported with food -- had the advantage of light
and air, but confined in a room. I remained here but a few weeks, before a
small fleet was ready to sail for Europe; but through some neglect, after every
necessary preparation was made, and I had as I thought, bid adieu to prisons
and imprisonment on these coasts, when we arrived at the town, to my great
mortification, the fleet had sailed the day before: I was now remanded to
prison until another opportunity offered, which was not more than seven or
eight days.

During the short time I was in this prison, there happened several tremendous
earthquakes, one shock of which was so powerful, that notwithstanding the
amazing strength of the fort, it was made to reel from its very foundation, and
its stupendous sides were rend from top to bottom: but these circumstances did
not make that dreadful impression upon my mind as they probably would some
years past, for being for so many years inured to unparallelled sufferings and
cruelties, the sear of death was banished, and all its hideous forms was
pleasant, as it long had been, and still would be, a welcome guest, for there
was no prospect of approaching health, peace, or happiness for me in this world.

Here I learnt for the first time that the young man of whom my hospitable
Indian had informed me of (when I escaped from the woods) had been confined in
the same prisons, and sailed some time before from this port for Old Spain, to
be banished to the mines for life, and where we probably might be
fellow sufferers together for our lives.

A vessel being now ready for sea, I was put on board, and weighing anchor, we
went before a brisk gale all the day. There was two men sent with me as a
guard, but I was entirely free from all restraint, it being needless where I
could not escape.

Having been for so many years confined in gaols and dungeons, and almost a
stranger to the refreshing virtue of fresh air, excepting my occasional (...)
from one prison to another, I now indulged (...) too freely with that
salubrious element; not considering the pernicious effects it might have upon
my already feeble constitution; but I soon had woeful reason to lament my
imprudence: for, instead of going under deck to repose for the night, I
rejoiced so much at the thoughts of liberty, air and light, that I laid down in
the longboat, and continued the whole afternoon, and all the night; and being
uncovered, I experienced the baneful influence of a very heavy dew that covered
my whole body; and when I awoke in the morning, I found to my sorrow, that I
had lost entirely the use of my left side; for though there was before an
almost useless stiffness, I now found a useless weakness, and from that time to
the present, have had no strength in my arm, side, or leg.

The vessel was to call at the Havannah, and when we arrived there, an exchange
of prisoners between Spain and England was taking place. In a few days five
hundred English prisoners was called over to be sent home, and in the hurry, I
slipped in amongst them, and was put on board, and came home to London, and from
thence to my native place, after upwards of thirteen years absence.

THE END.

