Rev. Mr. Sanders' Election Sermon.

1798.

State of Vermont. In General Assembly, 12 th October 1797.
RESOLVED, THAT Mr. ELIAS KEYS, Mr. JONATHAN ROBINSON and Mr. AMOS MARSH, be a
committee to wait on the Rev. DANIEL C. SANDERS; return him the thanks of this
House for the Sermon by him delivered before the Governor and both branches of
the Legislature on election day; and request a copy for the press.

Extract from the Journals. Examined. Attest. RICHARD WHITNEY, Clerk.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY ISAAC TICHENOR, ESQUIRE. Governor;

HIS HONOR PAUL BRIGHAM, ESQUIRE. LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR;

The Honorable the Council; AND THE House of Representatives OF THE STATE OF
Vermont



OCTOBER 11, 1798.

IN THE CITY OF VERGENNES, ON OCCASION OF General Election.

BY DANIEL CLARKE SANDERS, A. M. MINISTER OF THE CONGREGATION IN VERGENNES.

Printed by order of the Legislative Assembly.

VERGENNES: PRINTED BY ^. AND R. WAIT,

1798.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
Attachment to our Country an important duty.
"I DWELL AMONG MINE OWN PEOPLE." 2 Kings. IV. xiii.
MAY this be the language of every American, until the globe shall be lost in
undistinguished ruin, and empires rise and fall no more! Never may we be so
attached to any nation on the whole earth, as not to feel it to be the summit
of our political felicity that we dwell among our own people! The benevolent
spirit of our government; its originating in the wishes, the sentiments of
individuals; its subjection to future amendments at the sovereign will of
community; and the high state of prosperity enjoyed by all classes of citizens,
at a period too, when distresses are carried, in every form, into all quarters
of the world, induce more reasons to wish to dwell among our own people than
could ever have existed in the mind of the Jewess of Shunem.

THE good Shunamite seems to have been a bright constellation of the virtues.
Hospitable, in the most generous manner; with abundance equal to the goodness
of her heart; artless in her kindness; unaffected in her piety, often had she
entertained the prophet of the College of Gilgal. In just returns of gratitude,
the holy man of God was not to be excelled. In strong sensibility of his
obligations, he had thoughts of using his influence at the Court of his nation
to bring such modest merit into public-view. His grateful mind was busy to
discover what particular objects would meet her wishes. "Behold! thou has been
careful for us with all this care. What shall be done for thee? would thou
be spoken for to the king? or to the Captain of the host?" To most minds this
grand proffer would have been peculiarly attractive; which pride and ambition
could hardly have resisted. But she had learned to put a different estimate
upon human life. That calm enjoyment, after which the heart of man perpetually
sighs, refuses to reside in high stations; forsakes the pageantry of courts;
dreads the keenn^s^ of rivalship, the competition of interest, and the wild
envy of the ambitious. Attentive only to what promotes knowledge, virtue and
happiness, the prospect was much more inviting ^n the humble mansion of Shunam
than in the gorgeous palace of Jehosaphat, or in the honor of alliance with the
General of Judah. -- Contented in a more obscure but more peaceful situation in
her native city; delighted with opportunities of artless hospitality; attached
to her own Countrymen: prosperous under the reign of laws and government,
foreign influence could not have bribed her vanity, nor the hopes of
distinction have supplanted her patriotic attachments. To every proposal,
either of generous gratitude, or of base intrigue, she would have answered them
all, "I dwell among mine own people." Such an answer would well become the true
sons of Columbia* and would be sufficient to repel the soft insinuations of the
designing, the misrepresentations of the discontented, and the corruptions of
bribery, and leave the American character firm, unsullied and covered with
glory.

THIS passage of holy writ naturally leads us to consider patriotism as an
important duty; and to what particular objects that duty ought to be directed.

1. WE are to consider attachment to our Country as an important duty. The
sacred scriptures present us with some of the most sublime instances of love to
their Country, which ever were exhibited; some of the most patriotic heroes,
who ever shone on the stage of human action. Moses and David seem desirous to
sacrifice themselves on the altar of their Country, could their destruction
expiate the crimes of their subjects, and procure their happiness. St. Paul,
the learned orator of Tarsus, could wish himself separated from Christ and his
church, might such an event secure the conversion and redemption of his Jewish
brethren. The patriotic psalmist breathed out the most ardent love to his
Country, and made it the most pathetic part of his devotion. "If I forget thee,
O Jerusalem! let my right hand forget her cunning; if I do not remember thee,
let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I do not prefer thee above my
chief joy!" Frequent and ardent are the prayers, which ascended up from ancient
Saints, supplicating for the prosperity of their nation. It was a divine
direction to the captive Jews of Babylon to "seek the peace of the city, where
they were carried away captive; and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace
thereof shall ye have peace." How much more solemn the duty to seek the welfare
and pray for the land, which, instead of captivity, gave us birth, freedom and
happiness?

IT has been objected against the gospel revelation that patriotism is not
among the express laws of the christian legislator. His religion, indeed, is
all moral and spiritual. It would have been unworthy of his glorious design to
have published a system of human laws and politics. His kingdom is not of this
world. A political system, which would have been proper for one portion of
mankind or one degree of national improvement, would have been impossible or
injurious to another. -- His religious system was not designed to interrupt the
order of human affairs; but, by making us holy, wise and good, to render us
happy.

BUT the several duties of his religion necessarily imply the virtue of
attachment to our country. Were the spirit of Christianity felt, were its laws
universally obeyed, there would be nothing but pure patriotism and
philanthropy. The conduct of Christ exhibits a most pathetic proof of national
attachment. See his tears at the mount of Olivet, over the expected miseries of
his corrupted, deluded countrymen; and let that most moving scene speak how
high this virtue stood in his opinion!

CHRISTIANITY, indeed, does not limit our love to the nearest relatives, or to
our own particular nation. It rises above parties, climates and divisions, to
embrace, with unbounded benevolence, the world of mankind. As parts of human
nature, as aiming to increase the measure of human happiness, christians are of
no country. They are citizens of the world. In every one of the human species,
they discern a neighbor and a brother.

BUT the whole world is too large an object for the affections of the heart;
and, in practical life, we exercise most our benevolent feelings toward the
nearest objects around us. The social affections, like the expanding wave, flow
from smaller to larger circles. When they proceed beyond mere regard to
ourselves, they embrace family, town, state and nation, until all mankind
become the noble objects of benevolence. Attachment to our country, therefore,
is as prominent a feature in human nature, as much a part in the social
propensities, as that of love to the domestic circle; and to be destitute of
regard and affection to the former is as black, unnatural and detestable as to
reject the endearing ties of the latter.

THE history of human nature evinces that there is such a thing as love to our
native soil, which none, but the most detestable part of mankind, can ever
overcome. By a kind of natural instinct, nurtured by habit, strengthened by the
reasoning powers, cemented by choice, it becomes one of the strongest emotions
of the human soul. It is not eradicated from the bosom of man, until virtue
takes her eternal flight from so Vile a residence.

THIS attachment to our native soil, in all ages, in all nations, has produced
the most astonishing effects. -- Appearances would seem to justify the
sentiment that it has been the origin of most of the public spirit and virtue,
which have ever blessed mankind. This was the virtue, which wrought up the
ancients to high enthusiasm, and is so much adored by the moderns. This long
preserved the liberty of Greece, and made Rome the mistress of the world. It is
this, which has successfully repelled despotism and anarchy, and given mankind
the principal blessings of liberty and peace. For facts have established it as
an eternal truth among nations, that want of patriotic virtue to repel
aggression leaves them an easy prey to every cruel invader!

OUR country contains all, which is most sacred and dear to man. As a sacred
deposit, are committed to its soil the ashes of our nearest kindred, whose
sleeping dust sympathy and affection are daily watering with tears. -- In its
clayey bosom, it holds the remains of many of those patriotic heroes, who
sealed their blood as martyrs in the cause of independence. Even the man of
Otaheite, or the savage of the West, would prove too noble to yield such a soil
to the arts of foreign intrigue, or the hope of any invader. Here are the
dearest charities of life, which can possibly bind man to man, and give us
attachment to any spot on the globe. Our domestic connections and fertile soil;
our religion, which sweetens life with the noblest hopes; and our laws, which
secure to our enjoyment all our social advantages, all strengthen the virtue of
patriotic attachments. Every feeling, every insinuation, contrary to this
affection to our native soil, indicate a fatal tendency to all, which is base,
designing and dreadful!

2. LET us consider some of the particular objects, to which the virtue of true
patriotism ought to be directed. In the social as well as individual capacity,
the end and aim of man is to promote his felicity. The whole duty of
patriotism, therefore, consists in promoting the means, and increasing the sum
of national perfection and public happiness. The better to secure the means of
public felicity is the whole design of law, government and social compact. No
further than this is the general effect, can administration be wise, or
government prove a blessing. When general prosperity and happiness attend the
great mass of the people, when compared with other nations of mankind, the
testimony is complete, that government is founded on excellent principles, and
exercised with wisdom. There is room for just complaint, only, when public
misery, oppression and injustice are the most prominent features of
administration.

DIFFERENT nations have pursued different means of promoting public happiness.
Some have pursued a system, which should aggrandize the nation with vast
wealth. But the event has always evinced that national riches are not
sufficient to secure national felicity. Wealth infallibly introduces a high
state of luxury; which, in proportion as it prevails, destroys all the manly
virtues; renders the mind weak, effeminate, mean and impious. It debilitates
the hand of industry, and creates the introduction of idle habits, which are
the greatest artificial evils to the human race. Luxury, the parent of
idleness, has destroyed the most powerful nations, which are known on the pages
of ancient history. Kingdoms have risen from small beginnings, have succesfully
repelled the most potent enemies, which have themselves eventually fallen a
prey to internal luxury, to the bribery and venality, which that has
introduced. In Athens it produced that effeminacy, lethargy and want of public
spirit to guard their liberties and defend their country, which the eloquence
of Demosthenes could not reform, nor was the danger from a Phillip able to
arouse to duty.

OTHER national councils have cherished the arts of war, as the most successful
means of establishing public happiness and tranquillity. Strict attention to
the means of defending ourselves is, perhaps, the only method to secure respect
and to guard the blessing of peace, so long as the heart of man is depraved,
and nations thirst for domination and universal empire. But to cultivate the
arts of war for the sake of making conquest, or acquiring wealth and territory,
is the summit of national depravity. It carries distress into every quarter of
the globe, and goes far toward extinguishing that benevolent temper, which is
a primary duty of man, and disturbs that small portion of tranquillity, which
might prove the lot of mortals. The arms, which conquer other countries, are
frequently turned against their own vitals. Used with offensive intentions,
history, perhaps, does not afford us an instance, where they have eventually
contributed to national felicity.

OTHER empires have endeavored to secure permanent happiness and durable
government by cherishing a spirit of national pride. But as "pride was not made
for men," so it is not suitable to be a fundamental principle of national
policy. Instead of a tendency to increase the sum of human happiness, it
increases that of human misery. It is willing to oppress all the rest of
mankind to promote the imaginary honor of their own nation. It is an appeal to
those disordered passions, which corrupt the heart.

INSTEAD of cultivating a peculiar regard to national honor, some have
substituted a deep policy. But modern improvements evince that the rules of
government, like the primary laws of nature, are plain and obvious to every
honest heart. Deep policy, like oracular mysteries, cannot be necessary to
maintain public order and happiness; and can only be necessary to cover design,
and envelope a system, which tends to the advantage of a few, and is foreign to
the general good.

BUT secret intrigue is the base system more successfully adopted, in the
present times. The French republic, it must be confessed by their warmest
friends, as well as most inveterate foes, is a memorable example and alarming
specimen of pursuing this system. By the artful intrigues of covert emissaries,
previously admitted into countries they mean to invade, the conquest is already
made, the laurels already gathered, long before the formal appearance of an
army. The sly, insidious arts of the Directory, in foreign governments, fight
all the battles of a Buonaparte. Promises of private emoluments; offers to
faction of a revolution; polite professions of humanity and eternal friendship;
of removing every grievance of the discontented; and securing to the
treacherous the hope of paradisiacal blessings, all this looks as fair, though
it proves as fatal as the forbidden fruit. It is the system, the language, and
produces the effects of the original tempter to the miserably deluded, who
listen to the wiles of the arch charmer It is the foreground to the counterpart
of treachery, wantonness, plunder, sacrilege, and the whole work of iniquity,
which would require more than the millions of tongues in the late republic of
Venice and the ravaged incorporations of Suabia to describe. This system of
clandestine intrigue is extended over almost every quarter of the world, and
every where produces the consummation of misery and wickedness.

NONE of these means can promote the permanent tranquillity and happiness of
any nation. History and experience combine to prove that national perfection
and felicity do not arise from aggrandizement of wealth; from cherishing the
arts of war and conquest; from cultivating sentiments of national pride and
honor; from deep policy; or from artful, secret intrigue. In a great part of
the world, these are the very causes of their guilt and distress. The
durability of government and permanency of all public happiness must be founded
on principles, which are more congenial with the primary laws of nature, reason
and virtue.

THE virtue of real patriotism must be directed to different systems. Every
thing in the United States has taken a different course. Every plan of policy
pursued, every law enacted have a practical effect upon the improvement and
happiness of the citizen. The whole experience of other nations is here brought
into one center, incorporated into one code of wise laws. The principle of just
equality pervades the whole mass of the people; and the happiness or the ruin
of all orders of citizens are embarked equally in one enterprise, bound up in
one destiny. No virtuous citizen having any separate interest, like one entire
edifice, we stand or fall together.

THE means of promoting public happiness are the practice of the same virtues,
which produce the honor, prosperity and lasting felicity of the individual. The
same vices, which are disgraceful and injurious to the individual, will produce
the wretchedness and dishonor of community. The virtues, which yield respect
and happiness to a private person, would exalt any people to the summit of
national dignity, luster and perfection.

IT is, then, a self-evident axiom, that all public happiness begins in the
temper, the character and self-government of the individual. All public virtue
and happiness are made up of individual. As every particular person constitutes
a part of the great whole, so every one of his virtues or vices has a good or
bad aspect on the community; and effectually tends to give tone to public
spirit, and goes far to establish national character. -- None but virtuous
persons, therefore, can be useful patriots. In the same proportion as vice,
injustice, jealousy, profanity and impiety prevail in the life of any one, is
he dangerous to the tranquillity and happiness of the public. In order to be
useful citizens. we must be virtuous men. Even patriotism, not to say
christianity, enforces upon all the important duty to be holy and exemplary; to
meliorate the affections; to chain down the p^^^ions; and to subject themselves
to the laws of reason, conscience and revelation. To encourage private virtue
and personal goodness ought to be the first objects of civil government. To be
"terrors to evil doers," to give encouragement to those, who do well, are the
most interesting, the most successful means of increasing and preserving public
order and enjoyment.

IN the retirement of his own heart, in the domestic circle, the private
citizen can act the important part of the patriot. By instilling into the bosom
of his family and children the principles of self-government, a peaceable
temper and habits of virtue, he is sowing the seeds of public prosperity.
Future generations will feel the benefits of all such worthy exertions. He
deserves well of his country by his pious care to fit those of his charge to be
useful subjects in its government. In the circle of family, the principles of
subordination, peaceableness and benevolence are taught, which soon form the
public character of a nation. In the youthful age, in the domestic circle, the
seeds of future faction, insurrection and disorder are sown. Hence, these
depraved and abandoned characters usually arise from the lowest ranks of life;
from neglected education; from situations mean and degraded.

IN review of the means of promoting the public happiness of this growing
American empire, nature seems to direct our attention to the art of
agriculture. Proprietors of an extensive, fruitful soil, there is enough to
reward the hardy labors of the tiller. This, of all employments, is as
honorable as it is useful. It was suited to the first pure, paradisiacal state
of Eden; is still the nurse of virtue; and yields the farmer a high degree of
comfort and independence. The habits of industry, when uncorrupted by idle
emissaries of base intrigue and soft insinuation, are strong pillars of a
virtuous republic. Accustomed to domestic peace and subordination, they are
natural enemies of divisions, faction and impatience of law.

THE general diffusion of useful knowledge is among the most interesting means
of increasing the happiness of community. This enlarges the understanding,
ripens the reasoning powers, and will not suffer the manners to be barbarous.
Republicanism, above all other forms of government, depends for its very
existence on an enlightened people. Ignorance is the instrument employed to
erect the throne of despotism and ancient tyranny. Give any nation the means of
science and information, and they will be free. The chief excellence of man's
reasonable nature appears in being capable of cultivating an acquaintance with
the arts and sciences; and no nation can be either great or happy, which is not
wise and enlightened.

BUT permanency of public happiness cannot be established without cultivating
in the public mind a sense of moral obligation. The understanding must be
convinced, the heart touched with a realizing sense of duty, or the outward
restraints of law and government will always be weak and defective. Philosophy
would persuade us that the view of the nature and fitness of things is enough
to enforce moral obligation; and the native beauties of virtue are sufficient
inducements to lead men to practice it. Could such a system of religion ever be
sufficient for philosophers, it could not avail with the great bulk of mankind,
who are either blind to the beauties, or do not feel the force of moral virtue.
Divine revelation here comes to the aid of virtue, and exhibits an eternal
witness on high of all human thoughts, of all human actions; a divine
legislator uttering his voice from heaven; speaking through his laws; and
leading the imagination up to the last scene of account, the tremendous bar of
God! These are thoughts, these are views, which restrain vice; which give
virtue its surest support; which enforce moral obligation on the world; and
subject mankind to the reign of duty and law.

THE happiness of every government, therefore, must be very intimately
connected with maintaining a public sense of piety to God. The connection of
creatures with their creator is the primary, as it is the most interesting law
of their nature. Godliness has emphatically the promise of the life, which now
is, and that which is to come. The very existence of social compact, seems to
be threatened by the want of piety in the public mind. The very benefit and
solemnity of an oath depend on maintaining a public sense of the all important
relation of man to his maker. Weaken this sense of piety and reverence to the
great God, and you are guilty of dissolving the bands of society, and doing an
injury, which cannot be repaired. The sum of the greatest happiness will be
enjoyed* when the individual, is such a holy character, and practices such
amiable virtues as christianity demands. Public prosperity pervades every part
of an empire, when its members are knowing, virtuous and pious. Misery is the
infallible consequence of acting contrary to the purity and benevolence of the
gospel. The experience of all ages has left an impression of this eternal
truth; righteousness exalts a nation; but sin is a reproach, a ruin to any
people."

NOTHING, perhaps, can promote the public happiness of a nation so much as the
belief of the christian revelation. Whatever you deny of the faith and
doctrines of the gospel, you must allow, at least, that its belief has the
power to sooth the troubled mind, to relieve the anxious heart. See! how the
kind religion of the redeemer enters and cheers the solitary house of poverty;
brightens up the fallen countenance of sorrow; consoles the deepest scenes of
human distress; and strives to alleviate every burden of mortality! See! how
the young are guarded by its warning voice; how the aged lean upon its
supports; how the sick recline their heads upon its consolations; and the dying
lift a trembling eye to its all important hopes! Mark! how it sweetens the last
cup of bitterness; how it brightens the last prospects of mortals; and converts
the dark, terrible vale of death into the borders of paradise! How valuable,
how interesting, then, must be this religion, which exhibits to view the bright
chain, which connects both worlds together; and while it tends to make us holy,
amiable here, sustains us with lively hopes in the last, awful moments, and
presents us with the certain prospects of happiness hereafter, as lasting as it
is perfect^

WERE it possible for all this to be a delusive picture, drawn by the pencil of
a glowing imagination, still the feelings of the heart lead us to wish to live
and die in the firm belief of what cannot injure us; of what makes us better
men; which holds out to the dying the last hope; and administers the last,
friendly cordial to the departing soul. On this solid foundation the principal
portion of public happiness rests; and to cherish such a pure, virtuous, humane
system, exhibits both the duty and wisdom of a great nation.

BUT the infidel philosophy of the present times would strive to cloud these
bright hopes and darken these consoling prospects. Facts evince, that in order
successfully to spread the principles of revolution throughout the world, a
bold, impious conspiracy has been formed in Europe against all religions and
governments. While any sense of piety and moral obligation remained, it was
evident that the progress of revolution would be retarded, whenever it
proceeded beyond certain bounds. Men of any religious principle would revolt at
perpetration of crimes, which was necessary to assume power, more despotic than
Europe ever dreaded; would shudder at enormities, which were necessary to the
terrible work of revolutionizing the neighboring states. For this purpose,
atheism and a disbelief of every thing sacred were substituted in the place of
the holiness and pure faith of the gospel. The pleasing expectations of future
immortality were deemed to be delusive hopes, and death to be an "eve^^a^ting
sleep." In the French republic, "in the school of public instruction, atheism
is professedly taught. At an audience before the legislature, the head scholar
declared, that he and his school fellows detested a God; a declaration received
by the members with unbounded applause, rewarded with fraternal kisses of the
president, and with the honors of the sit^ing." The direct consequences of this
total destitution of religious restraints are the dreadful abandonment of all
moral obligation. Not a single virtue would stay, when their natural parents,
religion and piety, were fled. The present state of morals may be ascertained,
when, in the city of Paris only, 562 divorces took place in the short space of
three months. The laws of humanity and veracity are not better observed, when
whole armies live upon the spoils of conquest, or the effects of their
devastations are sent home to enrich the rapacious; or levy repeated
contributions, when they had entered into the most solemn promises to plunder
but once.

THESE observations are introduced to show, that where all traces of religion
and piety are eraced, there the virtues cannot reside. There the passions soon
triumph over reason, justice and humanity. Wild ambition, jealousy and
rivalship form a close succession. A series of facts demonstrate that nothing
could prove so injurious to our country as the prevalence of infidel
philosophy, French atheism and destitution of morals. Men are actual enemies to
their country in the same proportion as they are profane, wicked, irreligious,
or as they destroy the sanctions, which christianity cherishes.

THE moment the minds of Americans become corrupted with this false philosophy
and abandonment of all religious principles, their character will become
degraded, and they will render themselves deserving of the misery, which will
follow. Anarchy and domination will rise up in the place of government; and,
instead of law, you will witness to nothing but to secret intrigue and
temporizing policy. The cultivating of the moral sense and religious
obligation, in our favored land, affords the only sure support of law and
government. -- The certain hopes of christianity grow stronger as the scene
grows darker; diminish life's sorrows; and sustain us in the last shock. If to
promote the means of public happiness, be the grand objects of all civil
institutions, the interests of science, moral virtue and christianity are most
worthy the anxious care of a wise republic!

THE personal presence of your EXCELLENCY forbids expressions of high encomium
on your administration, which would be affrontive to great and delicate minds.
Permit us to congratulate one another on your repeated election to the chair of
state. The highest honors, which merit can receive, are the suffrages of a
free, enlightened people. In you, we anticipate the friend of virtue, moral
obligation and piety. Possessed of a relish for science, we view you as the
patron of useful literature. Your exertions will be animated by the reflection,
that the dearest interests of the common, wealth, and the happiness of the
public are nearly connected with your fidelity and patriotism. Eminent acts of
usefulness can only bestow distinguished honors on exalted stations. The voice
of duty will continually sound in your hearing, "unto whom much is given, of
him will much be required." The solemn truths of revelation will come to your
aid, exhibit the tribunal of the supremely just, at which all men shall give
account for every degree of trust reposed in them. Often lift the eye of faith
to the future, eternal crown, which is now sparking with unfading luster to
reward, more than reward all your virtuous toils, your patriotic cares, your
decided, persevering attachment to the public good. -- In that awful moment,
which shall dismiss you from a mortal scene, from the arduous cares of
government, the applauses of a grateful people will follow your ascending
spirit to that world of glory, which shall hail welcome kindred souls and the
pious benefactors of mankind!

YOUR HONOR, the honorable the COUNCIL and the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES cannot
lose sight, for a moment, of the interesting duties, which are now devolving
upon you. To your wisdom and fidelity are entrusted the dearest rights of
community. The grand object in view is the public happiness. Every enquiry
should be, what will render your constituents wise, virtuous and happy. The
consequences of your deliberations and acts will be extensively felt. The
lives, properties and happiness of 100,000 persons are a most sacred deposit in
your hands. Your acts will serve as precedents, which will benefit or injure
your prosperity. To make men wise and virtuous; peaceable and industrious;
attentive to the art of agriculture; attached to our native soil, to its laws,
its government and its religion, are primary objects worthy of united wisdom
and Legislative sanction.

THE interests of literature and education must always lie near to heart of a
wise, magnanimous nation. -- You, civil fathers! are now to determine the
character of the generation, which is to succeed you, when your own heads
moulder in forgotton dust. Whether your descendants shall be wise or ignorant,
depends on your decision in favor of science. Keep your subjects in ignorance,
and your descendants will ere long witness the despotism of the East, "sue for
chains, and own a conqueror."

BUT, above all, to cherish a public sense of religion, to inculcate a firm
belief in the doctrines of christianity, which is made up of all the virtues,
will best secure the largest portion of public felicity. The prevalence of its
spirit will render rulers faithful and subjects peaceable, obedient. Then, men
will universally perform those duties from choice, which power and despotism
could never succesfully extort by fear and force. Your own amiable, virtuous,
pious example will aid, beyond easy conception, the noble purposes of
legislative authority. This course of eminent goodness will secure all the
honors and applauses of grateful citizens; and when done with the transient
honors of mortals, you may enjoy the brighter prospects of a celestial crown of
glory, which fades not away!

MY BRETHREN, in the labors of the ministry* Hitherto it has been the
distinguishing honor of the American Clergy, that they have exhibited some of
the noblest specimens of patriotic attachment to their Country, in the most
perilous h^ur, in the most eventful crisis. -- May it never be said that those
of Vermont were the first to sully the glory already acquired. Be still
DISCREET; but the exigency of the times demands that you be DECISIVE. The
duties of your sacred office well accord with the views of patriotism and
politics. All aim at one object, the improvement of public virtue and
happiness. Teach men to live "soberly, righteously and godly," to live so
purely as to die in triumph, and you will effectually do the work of
legislation in making them the best of citizens. This will sooth your own
moments of mortality, by increasing the public happiness; and cause you, by
turning many to righteousness, to rise as shining stars in a celestial,
unclouded firmament!

MY audience and fellow citizens! every joy, which now swells your bosom; your
fruitful fields and plentious harvest: your peaceful families and defended
rights, are all so many witnesses of a prosperous government and wise
administration. Were the injured only to begin to complain, perhaps, not a
complaining voice would be heard. But were not every governmental act to be the
most eligible, in these unheard of times, when a perpetual succession of
incalculable changes rules the political world, our astonishment is that the
errors are not greater* Our admiration is excited, at what events have
justified, that the guardian eye of the Executive department saw the cloud
arising, when "no bigger than a man's hand," and took those salutary measures,
which, admirable to relate! everted away the bosom of the tempest, before it
overspread our threatened heads! We should recollect the difficulties, which
perpetually occur in governing a great ^^pire; which is cutting out a road of
its own choice for itself; and is making the experiment of its own wisdom and
virtue. We should be grateful, instead of being cen^^^^^. Governments, which
are purely elective, subject to be changed at the sovereign will of the people,
should forever banish discontent and complaint. Intrigue and faction can only
wish to conquer party, and (...) on its ruins to distinction and domination.
Instead of this, let us echo the patriotism of the Roman, and his language be
your motto, "what pity it is that we can die but once to save our Country!"

THE present times are the most eventful, which the historian ever recorded. A
perpetual series of revolutions, and changes of revolutionary principles, have
carried distress and crimes among a very large part of the human race. Men have
become, astonishingly, impatient of all restraint, all law and religion. The
lower classes of people are beginning to imagine themselves fully adequate to
make "laws for the representative, debate for the Senate, and pass sentence for
the Judge." Distresses, venality and crimes of foreign revolutionary
governments should teach us the wisdom justly to estimate the tranquillity and
prosperity of our own.

THE justice of the Almighty seems to be punishing the crimes of Europe, in a
manner, which produces a conviction of the ruinous nature of atheism, deism and
false philosophy, as being eventually destructive of all political order and
public safety. The entire view evinces that government cannot be permanent,
public happiness cannot be secure, which are not built on the knowledge,
holiness and piety of the individual, and on the benevolence, subordination and
virtue of families. -- Such an eventful, distressful, impious system may still
prevail among nations, until an adoring conviction, like that of the
atheistical monarch of Babylon, shall be produced, that "the Almighty rules in
the kingdom of men." This universal conviction will tend to usher in the reign
of law, benevolence, piety and religion. Even "the wrath of man will praise
God." Every mouth will be stopped, and all the world become feelingly guilty
before a Being so astonishingly great, so holy, so just and so good!

AMEN!
FINIS

