THE HISTORY AND ADVENTURES OF PEREGRINE PICKLE, WITH THE MANY DROLL TRICKS
THAT PEREGRINE PLAYED HIS MOTHER AND OTHERS; ALSO OF HIS TWO COMPANIONS,
HATCHWAY AND PIPES.

A NEW AMERICAN EDITION

LEOMINSTER, MASSACHUSETTS, PRINTED BY CHARLES and JOHN PRENTISS, FOR ROBERT B.
and AARON THOMAS, (...) JUNE, 1798.

ADVENTURES OF PEREGRINE PICKLE.
PEREGRINE PICKLE was the son of Mr. Gabriel Pickle, who had formerly kept a
shop in London, but the profits of his trade not answering to his wishes, he
retired to Cornwall, where he purchased an estate, and married a young lady,
the daughter of a country gentleman. His sister, Miss Pickle, a maid of about
forty, had been for several years his housekeeper, but there being no occasion
for her in that capacity, after he was married, she began to look out for a
husband. She was too old to attract the notice of the gentry, and because her
father had been once Lord Mayor of London, so she could not bear the thought of
giving her hand to a tradesman.

It happened that in the same neighborhood lived Commodore Trunion, who had
been bred up to the sea, and spent most of his days in the navy. He lived in a
house fortified in the same manner as a castle, and besides his domestics, he
kept along with him one Lieutenant Hatchway and Tom Pipes, who had formerly
been his boatswain's mate. With these two he used to spend the evenings at a
neighboring alehouse, where he became acquainted with Mr. Pickle, and soon
after proposed marrying his sister. Not that the commodore was in love, but
that because he could go no more to sea, he proposed to take a voyage in the
sea of matrimony. Like an honest tar he was downright in his proposals, and as
the lady found it would be needless to assume those airs peculiar to her sex,
she soon gave her consent, and a day was fixed for the nuptials.

The commodore had purchased a couple of fine hunters for himself and the
lieutenant, on which they mounted at nine in the morning to proceed for the
church, but as he had never seen any thing but naval affairs, he resolved to
tack about with the wind, as if he had been on the ocean. It happened that the
wind shifted about, and the commodore followed his course so long, that his
bride waited for him at church with the utmost impatience. At last it was
thought necessary to dispatch a messenger in quest of him, for he was so little
acquainted with the church, that it was supposed he had mistaken the road.

This, however, was not the case, for the messenger found him and his attendant
veering about with the wind like a fleet at sea, and told him that the company
were waiting for him at church. The commodore answered with great deliberation,
that he had weighed anchor about nine in the morning, for the port of
matrimony, but the wind had shifted so often about, that he believed he would
not be able to get to the harbor that day. As the messenger did not know what
he meant, he told him that he had no more to do than turn his horse's head and
follow him, by which they would be at the church in less than half an hour. The
commodore was so much exasperated at what the messenger said, that he called
him an ignorant fellow, who did not understand the trim of a vessel, and
therefore desired him to sheer off, or he would pour into him a whole
broadside. The messenger, who found what sort of a person he had to deal with,
left him, and returned back to the church, where he found the company, and the
ceremony was obliged to be deferred till next day.

In the mean time the commodore kept shifting about with the wind, till the
horses on which he and Lieutenant Hatchway rode, heard the noise of huntsmen,
and being well acquainted with the sport, they set out at full gallop, leaving
the rest of the company to weather the storm in the best manner they could.
Both the commodore and lieutenant believed they were (...) on the back of
devils incarnate, and giving up all for lost, dropped their whips, and held
fast by the pummels of their saddles. -- The horse on which the lieutenant
rode, was more nimble than the other, and getting before, he crossed into a
field of clover, which circumstance gave Hatchway an opportunity of throwing
himself off, without receiving any other hurt than what arose from his fright.

In the mean time the commodore, who had dropped his hat and wig, came up, and
seeing Hatchway, called out, "Hilloa! you have got safe into port, I wish to
God I was moored." The commodore had some hopes that a five bargate that stood
opposite to him, would stop the progress of his horse, but no sooner did he
approach it, than he jumped over with as much case as a cat would do over a
harpsicord. He was now in a state of insensibility, he knew not whether he was
dead or alive, and at last coming to a highway, enclosed by two rising grounds,
the horse jumped over it, to the no small terror of a waggoner, who happened to
be passing underneath.

By this time the commodore oververtook the horse on which the lieutenant had
rode, and both kept an equal pace together, till they came to the place where
the huntsmen were assembled to see the death of the fox. The strange figure of
the commodore in his seamen's dress, joined to the loss of his hat and wig,
attracted the notice of the whole company, and led off their attention from
poor Reynard, whose agility had furnished them with so much diversion. The two
horses were exceeding good ones, and the 'squire who conducted the sport, asked
the commodore if he would fell them. "Sell them! aye master; for they are above
my weather gage, I have commanded a whole fleet, but was never so much out of
my reckoning as to day." The 'squire finding that the commodore was a mere
novice in land affairs, purchased the horses for one fourth of what they cost,
and took the commodore home with him to his own house for the night. The
company made themselves very merry at his expense, but as he knew nothing
beyond sea terms, so he took no notice of them, and next day being properly
equipped, he returned to the castle, where he found his old friend Lieutenant
Hatchway. Next morning the wind happened to prove favorable, and left he should
once more get on the devil's back, he resolved to walk to the church on foot.
Accordingly having dispatched Tom Pipes to inform his bride, the lady met him
at the church, and the nuptial knot was tied. A grand entertainment was
provided at the castle, but when the time came for the company to retire, an
unlucky circumstance happened, which was no other than the want of a bed for
the new married couple. The commodore was so much of a seaman, that he obliged
every one in the castle to lay in hammocks, which were slung up in the same
manner as in ships.

The lady remonstrated in the strongest manner against lying in such an
indecent posture, but by the persuasion of her brother and sister in law, she
was induced to comply, and, being undressed, mounted the hammock to wait the
arrival of her spouse. Every thing being properly adjusted for the reception of
the commodore, he came into the room, or rather the cabin, where having drank a
can of flip, and received three cheers, he got into the canvass vehicle, to the
no small terror of his lady, who imagined every moment that she would tumble
out at the other side The company being now retired, the new married couple
went to rest, but no sooner did morning arrive than the lady got up and
dispatched one of the servants to a neighboring town to purchase a genteel
bedstead, being now determined to assert her prerogative as a wife, and not be
any longer subject to the whims and caprice of her husband.

When the commodore saw the bed, he swore, cursed and blasphemed, declaring
that it should be immediately consigned to the flames, but by the interposition
of Hatchway and Mr. Pickle, he was brought into a more reasonable way of
thinking, and to oblige his spouse, consented to lie in it, tho contrary to a
resolution he had formed many years before. The lady proceeded to make several
other alterations in the castle, by turning off some of the old servants, and
ordering that the guns should not be fired but in her absence, lest they should
frighten her so much as to occasion an abortion. All these acts of a new
reformation the commodore was obliged to comply with, and to console himself
under what he considered as real afflictions, he spent more of his time than
usual at the alehouse, cursing the day that ever he had weghed anchor for the
port of matrimony.

The haughty domineering temper of the commodore's lady, made her odious to
every one in the castle, but as her husband was made to believe that she was
pregnant, so he bore with it for some time. At last, all hopes of an heir being
vanished, the lady took to the bottle and religion for consolation, and the
commodore resolved to make young Peregrine his heir. Peregrine had been
sometime at a boarding school, where he had played abundance of little knavish
tricks, which were winked at by the usher, who frequently received a gratuity
from the commodore. But the usher, going away, Peregrine wrote a letter to the
commodore, who was so much pleased with it, that he went to his father, and
desired he would suffer him to be brought up under his own direction.

By this time Mr. Pickle, who had another son (...) well as a daughter, looked
on the proposal as too valuable to be rejected, so that he instantly complied
with it, especially as for reasons unknown, the mother had conceived the utmost
aversion for her eldest son. In consequence of this permission, Hatchway was
dispatched the same day in a post chaise to the school, and brought young
Peregrine home, who was now in his eleventh year, and began to display so much
genius, that every one was charmed with him. His aunt the lady of the
commodore, was so much inured to dram drinking, that when Peregrine was
presented to her, she seemed to take no notice of him, but through the persuasion
of Hatchway she came down into the parlor, and received him with seeming marks
of respect. Next day the commodore took him to visit his parents, but how great
was his surprise, when he found that his mother declared that he was not her
son, for that he had died when only a child. This, however, made no other
impression on the commodore, besides that of making him love the boy more than
ever, and therefore he took him along with him to the castle, resolving to
bestow that parental care and tenderness upon him which his mother had denied
him, although she knew it was her duty.

Tom Pipes, who all his life time had been accustomed to the practice of
mischievious tricks, became, as it were by sympathy, the favorite of young
Peregrine, who had one of the most fertile geniusses that ever fell to the
share of one of his age. As the commodore's lady often retired to her closet in
the evening, under pretense of devotion, but in reality to indulge herself with
her favorite liquors, so our young spark, with the assistance of the artful Tom
Pipes, resolved to torment her with the fear of hell and the devil. Sometimes
they would climb up to the window of her closet at midnight, and imitate the
screaming of an owl, or some other frightful creature, which operated so
strongly upon her distempered imagination, that she began to think the grand
adversary of mankind had come to take her away before her time.

But the bent of their mischievous inclinations was not confined to the lady,
for they actually directed it against the commodore himself. The commodore had
the utmost aversion to attorneys ever since a knavish one had tricked him in a
lawsuit, and therefore our adventurers resolved to try his patience on that
head, or rather to torment him, as if they had been devils incarnate.
Accordingly, they forged a letter to a country attorney, in the name of the
commodore, desiring him to call next day.

The attorney, who doubted not but he would be able to fleece the old commodore
of some hundreds, came to the castle at the hour of dinner, and Tom Pipes going
up stairs, desired his commander to come down to the parlor, to speak to a
gentleman who waited for him. This put the commodore into a most violent
passion, because he was disturbed in the middle of his mess, but recollecting
what Pipes said of the business being urgent, he went down, and demanded what
the gentleman wanted with him. The attorney told him that he came according to
an order he received from him, and the sooner the business was dispached the
better. "True, said the commodore, mad with indignation," and lifting up his
stick, gave him such a blow that he fell flat on the ground. He then hopped up
to his chamber to finish his dinner, congrattulaing himself that he had knocked
out the brains of a roguish lawyer.

As soon as the attorney had recovered himself, so as to be able to get up, he
looked about him, to see whether he could not procure evidence to support an
action on the case for an assault, but seeing none, he crawled up to the dining
room, where the commodore was finishing his mess, and told him that if there
was any law in England, he would punish him to the utmost rigor of it. He then
produced the forged letter, which had been sent in the name of the commodore,
but no sooner had the old man read it, than he ordered the attorney to be
tossed in a blanket in the castle-yard. Hatchway and Pipes performed the
operation with so much dexterity, that the skin of the limb of the law, was as
disfigured as any sheet of parchment that ever issued from his office. The
attorney having received this wholesome discipline, was then ducked in a
horsepond, and was left to pursue his journey home in the best manner he could.
Stimulated with motives of revenge, he brought his action for damages against
the commodore, and the affair was tried at the next assizes. Several witnesses
were examined, but as ill luck would have it, not one could prove a single
circumstance, so that the attorney was nonsuited, to the no small pleasure of
many persons present, whom he had by his pernicious advice, led into vexatious
lawsuits, and actually ruined, under pretense of promoting their interest.

Their next exploit was much more diverting, and conducted by the very
ingenious Tom Pipes. The hide of a large ox was made choice of, and being
properly stuffed, the jaw bone of a shark was fixed to his face, with two large
glass eyes. Within were several matches burning, which gave the whole the most
dreadful appearance, and this was fixed near the bedchamber of the commodore.
No sooner did the commodore see the dreadful apparition spewing out blue fire,
than he imagined himself in hell, for few people in the world are more
superstious than seamen. His courage, however, did not forsake him, for lifting
up his stick, he struck it such a blow, that one of the horns was almost
fractured. He then took to his heels, but could not run long, when he sunk down
with fear; for he believed the artificial apparition to be the devil. Tom
Pipes, who beheld the whole, was not willing to lose any part of the diversion,
and therefore just as the commodore was beginning to saint, he ran toward him
and tripped up his heels. The commodore being in some measure recovered by his
fears rather than the hope of delivery, called out in the most vociferous
manner, upon which the servants came to his assistance. They found him in a
cold sweat, for fear had in paired both his senses and faculties, so that he
was little better than a dead man. Hatchway endeavored to raise him up, and
enquiring into the cause of his misfortune, was told by the commodore, that he
had met Davy Jones (the name given by the sailors to the devil) and that he
knew him by his saucer eyes. It is very remarkable, that of all injuries, those
that we receive in youth make the most lasting impression, especially when they
are accompanied with circumstances of an aggravating nature. It seems that
while the commodore was only a school boy, he had been detected in stealing
deer, and being carried before a neighboring justice, his worship used him in
so cruel a manner, that he was obliged to content himself with a place in the
county goal. There he remained near a year, and his relations refusing to do
any thing for him, he was obliged to embrace the alternative, either to remain
in prison, or go on board of a ship. He chose the latter, and having undergone
all those hardships that are connected with naval affairs, he conceived the
utmost aversion to all those related to him, and refused to have any connection
with them for the future.

Peregrine, who was acquainted with every particular of this affair, told
Hatchway and Pipes that he would have a notable piece of fun at his uncle's
expense. The proposal was relished by the two confederates, and it was agreed
upon between them, that a proper person would be made choice of to come to the
commodore with a forged letter, in the name of that relation, who of all the
others, had used him with the greatest cruelty. The person made choice of for
this purpose, was the exciseman of the parish: and having received directions,
he went one morning to the commodore, about (...) hours before the usual time
of his getting up (...) The commodore swore he would not come down till the
usual time of turning out, but the exciseman having told the servant that his
business was of the most urgent nature, he resolved to comply.

Having crept out of his bed, he made shift to crawl down stairs, grumbling and
cursing all the way for being disturbed of his rest. When he came into the
parlor, the supposed relation addressed himself to him in all the fulsome
flattery that has an affect on weak minds; but the commodore, who did not
relish any thing of that nature, desired him to give over his compliments, and
come to the point at once.

Upon that the stranger presented him a letter, written, as he said, by that
uncle who had used him with so much cruelty while he was in prison, for
stealing the deer; and to add the more to the aggravation that it must
necessarily occasion, he told him that he had been to him one of the kindest
relations that ever lived.

It is impossible to discribe the perturbation of mind which the commodore
felt, when he read the letter, and at last losing all manner of patience, he
tore it into a thousand pieces, and trod upon the fragments on the floor. He
cursed all his relations to the lowest pit of hell, and declared that he would
not give one farthing, or the value of a rope's end, to keep them above board.

The exciseman who was no stranger to the character of the commodore, began to
consider himself in perilous circumstances, and therefore walked toward the
door, in order to procure a retreat, not doubting but he would be able to make
the commodore hearken to the voice of reason. He then told the commodore that
he was one of the most ungrateful wretches in the world, for using his own
relations in so shameful a manner, and concluded, by asking him what he thought
they would say of such unnatural behavior.

The commodore could conceal his resentment no longer, and turning to Tom
Pipes, ordered him to take his supposed relation to the gang way, and there
give him a round dozen doubled. Tom, tho an accomplice in (...) whole of the
scheme, yet obeyed his orders with dexterity and punctuality. He called on some
of the servants to assist him, who readily obeyed, and the poor gauger was
conducted over the draw bridge to the yard, where he was tied to a stake, in
order to undergo proper discipline. He still imagined that Tom Pipes was in
jest, but that arch-rogue who was not too fond of what we call moral
obligations, having tied him so fast, that he could not well make his escape,
went in search of a rope for the intended operation. When he arrived, the
exciseman told him that he hoped he was not in earnest, to which Tom answered,
he was very sorry for the part he was to act, but as his master's orders were
absolute he was obliged to comply with them. He then undressed the poor
exciseman, and gave him such a hearty flogging, that he cursed the day he had
ever been engaged in such an undertaking, threatening at the same time to reveal
the whole scheme to the commodore. From doing that, however, he was prevented
by Lieutenant Hatchway, who told him that if he made the affair public, he
would be found guilty of perjury, for he had personated the name of a man with
whom he was utterly unacquainted. This served to silence the exciseman, who as
soon as he was loosed from the post, took to his heels with the utmost
expedition, and ran home to his wife, who waited for him with the utmost
impatience.

It cannot be supposed that such a species of fraud and mischief, should be
long carried on without detection, and the commodore having revolved all the
circumstances in his mind, charged young Perrigrine with it. At first the boy
denied the whole, but when he had received a severe flogging, he made an ample
confession, which so much exasperated the commodore, that he resolved to turn
Hatchway out of the castle. But he had been so long accustomed to the society
of the lieutenant, as well as Pipes, that he could not live without them, so
that they were both freely forgiven.

In the mean time young Peregrine made such progress in learning, that it was
proposed to send him to some public school, and that of Winchester was made
choice of by his tutor, and approved of by the commodore. Indeed the
commodore's lady had several reasons for wishing to get rid of our adventurer;
for, besides his many knavish pranks, she considered him as a spy on her
conduct. Mr. Jolter, a reverend clergyman, of very high notions, was made
choice of and recommended by the parson of the parish to be tutor to young
Peregrine. Jolter was not a bad scholar, but he had lived so long in a college,
that his temper was soured, so that no person could have been made choice of
more improper for superintending the education of a young gentleman. Tom Pipes,
who had been long accustomed to jacket and trowsers; was put into a suit of
decent livery, in order to attend our adventurer and parson Jolter as a
footman. The commodore proposed, that they should set out to take leave of the
young gentleman's father, but the mother refused to see him, so unnatural was
she to her child, for reasons that no one could account for. The commodore,
however, made up all that was wanting in the affections of the parents, for he
adopted young Peregrine as his heir, and settled him at Winchester on the most
genteel footing. The commodore's lady made a handsome present to Mr. Jolter, as
a reward for his piety, and Hatchway insisted on staying at the school along
with Peregrine. He told the commodore, that he had some thoughts of learning
the latin lingo, although he did not at that time know the difference between a
noun and a verb. The commodore expostulated with the lieutenant on the
impropriety of thinking to learn latin at such a period of life, and as he
could not bear the thought of living without him, he told him, that if he would
return to the castle, he would give him leave to visit young Peregrine once
every month. Hatchway was not such a fool, but he could feel the force of what
was said by the commodore, and therefore having given up all thoughts of
learning Latin, he took leave of our young gentleman, tho not without shedding
tears. He said he was sure the young dog had bewitched him, for he could not
look at him without loving him. Indeed there was such an honest simplicity in
the lieutenant, that he thought well of all human raoe, and could not help
loving such as were young.

Peregrine had not been long at the school, when his genius began to
distinguish itself in a most conspicuous manner. His pupil was such an arrant
pedant, that he seemed a very proper object for him to exercise his ingenuity
upon, and therefore be began by mixing brandy and other strong liquors with his
tea, so that he was often intoxicated without knowing the cause. By such
practices he brought the character of his tutor into the utmost contempt, and
to complete the farce, Peregrine was chosen Dux or head of a select number of
boys, who resolved to shake off all obedience to their tutors. The head master
having received information of the proceedings, sent for Mr. Jolter, and told
him that he must keep a more strict watch over the morals of his pupil,
otherwise he would corrupt one half of the boys in the school.

Mr. Jolter was a good deal discomposed when he received the information, but
as nothing could be more just or reasonable, he went home, and called Peregrine
into his room. He repeated to him the dangerous consequences of such practices,
and the disgrace he would bring upon himself and relations, unless there was
some change in his conduct.

Peregrine, though a wild youth, was not destitute of good sense, and therefore
seeing the propriety of what was said by his tutor, he promised to be more
obedient for the future.

Mr. Jolter was so overjoyed at this instance of his pulpil's docility, that he
resolved to improve it to the best advantage, and therefore proposed to him the
study of the mathematics, as the only science that can enlarge the mind, by
leading it off from objects of a trifling nature. The young gentleman entered
upon the study with the utmost pleasure, but no sooner had gone through the
first two books of Euclid than he became so much disgusted with the whole
science, that he declared he would not pursue it any further. In vain did Mr.
Jolter remonstrate to his pupil on the great impropriety of his conduct; the
young gentleman remained inexorable, and nothing could induce him to proceed
any further. Indeed he shook off all manner of rerestraint, he refused to be
obedient to his tutor any longer, upon which the head master desired Mr. Jolter
to write to the commodore, that he might as soon as possible remove Tom Pipes
from attending on Peregrine, for that antiquated seaman was now become a
general nuisance to the whole school.

The truth is, Tom Pipes was at the head of every scene of mischief, and
nothing seemed to give him so much pleasure, as that of tormenting his fellow
creatures. He mingled in all their divirsions, and decided in every controversy
that arose between them. He regulated their manual exercise by his whistle, and
he prescribed rules to each of them according to their different ages. Indeed
Tom Pipes was in a manner become so necessary to the boys, that it could be
supposed that they would part with him without an insurrection taking place.
Peregrine was sensible of this, and therefore on promising to be more
circumspect, in the rest of his conduct, Pipes was allowed to continue at the
school sometime longer. This, however, was a resolution too good to last long,
as will appear from the following incident.

One day Tom Pipes having conducted some of the boys to a garden in the suburbs
they were very rude in pulling the fruit, which so enraged the gardner, that he
came to them and demanded satisfaction. The boys refused to satisfy his
demands, upon which the great dog was let loose upon them, and in the scuffle
Peregrine lost his cap. The engagement now became general, the gardner called
his apprentice to his assistance, while Tom Pipes led on the insurgents in
battle array. The gardner, who was a stout fellow, took his stand at the
turning of one of the avenues, and when Pipes advanced, he gave him such a blow
on the head, that his scull rung if it had been made of bell metal.

Pipes soon recovered from the dreadful blow he had received, and darting his
head into the bosom of the gardner tumbled him into a trench, that he had newly
dug, nor did it fare better with the dog who coming up to the assistance of
his master, laid hold of the calf of Tom Pipes' leg, and would have eaten it
for his dinner, had not the seamen turned about, and in an instant put a period
to the existence of the voracious animal.

The gardner was now so much overpowered that he knew not what to do, and his
wise having alarmed the neighborhood. Tom Pipes advised the scholars to desist,
left they should be all apprehended and committed to prison. The scholars
complied with his request, but as the gardner was rendered incapable of
following his work, and as his children became chargeable to the parish, an
enquiry was set on scot to find out the aggressors.

The result of the enquiry was, that out adventurer was found to be at the head
of this unruly mob of boys, and therefore it was ordered that he should undergo
a severe slugging, and a day was appointed for the execution of this solemn
decree.

The thoughts of being disgraced in this manner was what he could not bear, and
therefore, he resolved to make an elopement from the school. He communicated
his intentions to some of the most active of the scholars, and when the time
arrived that he was to receive the threatened discipline, they came with him
into the school, and demanded of the master that he should instantly be
forgiven. The master, however, behaved with that dignity becoming his station,
and Peregrine, notwithstanding his professions of courage, was horsed and
whipped, to the terror of all others, who should for the future offend in the
like manner, this disgrace had such an effect upon him, that he resolved to
detach himself from his disorderly companions, and apply himself in good
earnest to his studies. He was now above fourteen years of age, and in stature
and shape one of the finest figures that ever was seen. The young ladies began
to take notice of him, and there being a ball one evening he went to dance at
it, as is the practice with young gentlemen.

While he was waiting for the company, the master of the ceremonies took notice
of him, and singled out for him a partner, a young lady whose name was Emilia
Gauntlet, and sister to a young gentleman who happened to be there at the same
time. The young lady was extremely handsome, and her exterior appearance was
set off by all the improvements that the intellectual faculties can receive.
When the ball was over our hero returned to his lodgings, but he could not
sleep during the whole of the night. In the morning he arose, and having
dressed himself in the most agreeable manner, he went to the lodgings of Miss
Gauntlet, and was shown into the parlor. Emilia made her appearance in the most
enchanting dress; and the passions of our hero were now wound up to the highest
pitch. The mother of the young lady was still in bed, and when she got up she
seemed to look upon Peregrine in no very favorable light, for she considered
him in no other light than a young spark who wanted to make himself merry at
the expense of such young females as are weak enough to hearken to their
solicitations.

The young lady treated him with all the indulgence she possibly could,
consistent with the regard she ought to have had for her own character, and
invited him to visit her from time to time at her mother's house, which was
only a few miles distant. This was just what he wished for, and in the midst of
his mutual embraces, he declared to her, that his passion was the most pure
that ever took place in the human breast. Being obliged to take leave of his
charmer, he returned to school, but became so pensive and melancholy, that all
his former acquaintance began to shun his company. At last he resolved to
elope, and having tied up a bundle of linen, with other necessaries, he gave it
to Tom Pipes, and next morning they both set out together on foot, for the
village where the mother of Emilia lived.

When he came to the village, he took lodgings at an inn, and leaving Tom Pipes
to take care of his baggage, he set out for the house where his charmer
resided, struggling under all that anxiety of mind that generally takes place
in the breast of a lover.

When he came to the gate, he was so much taken up with the thoughts of the
young lady, that when she made her appearance he scarce knew her; for his mind
was tortured with all the variety of discordant passion. She received him in
the most complaisant manner, and conducted him to the parlor, where her mother
was then sitting drinking tea. This was a more favorable reception than he had
any reason to expect; but every thing succeeding so far according to his wish,
it was proposed that he and the young lady should take a walk together till
toward evening. Upon their return the mother invited Peregrine to supper, and
the young lovers being left alone, many tender things passed between them. He
protested in the most solemn manner that he loved her above every one he had
ever seen; while she on her part chid him gently for running away from school.
In this she was seconded by her mother, whose circumstances had taught her
prudence; for she was the widow of a general officer who had lost his life in
the service of his country, and had left his son in the humble station of a
volunteer, waiting for the interest of some great man to bestow upon him a
commission.

While he remained under the influence of this sweet intoxication, his absence
occasioned no small disturbance at Winchester, and Mr. Jolter wrote to the
commodore, giving him an account of his elopement. The poor old commodore
received the news of the elopement with the utmost surprise, and cursed
Hatchway and Tom Pipes, for having debauched the boy's mind, by leading him off
from a sense of his duty. Nor did he spare Jolter, whom he called an old
doting fool, because he did not keep a better look out, to prevent Peregrine
from foundering. He immediately dispatched expresses to all the seaports on
the coast, to prevent his going abroad, while Lieutenant Hatchway was
dispatched across the country, to make all the enquiries he could concerning
the young fugitive. Hatchway spent four days without receiving any
intelligence, when being benighted, he took up his lodgings at a village, where
he had not regaled himself long, when he heard the voice of his old friend Tom
Pipes, entertaining a company of rustics with a song in true sea language.
Hatchway flung his pipe into the chimney corner, and grasping a pistol in his
hand, went to the room where Pipes was, and swore that he would blow his brains
out, unless he produced young Peregrine. Pipes, not in the least intimidated,
told the lieutenant, that Peregrine was as safe as a roach, and that he would
produce him as soon as he had finished his song. Hatchway could not have any
objection to this proposal, and Tom having finished his song, and dismissed the
company, the two old mess mates retired to another room. There Pipes recited to
the lieutenant every circumstance relating to the elopement, and before they
had done speaking, Peregrine came in from his mistress with whom he had spent
the evening. Hatchway was overjoyed to see his long lost young master, but much
more so, when he found that he was sensible of his folly in running away from
school, and vexing his generous friend the commodore. At last, it was agreed
that they should set out the next morning for Winchester, and in the mean time
Peregrine went to take leave of his mistress. Their parting was truly
affecting, but as there was necessity for it, the young lady pretended to make
no objections, while her mother said all she could in favor of parental
authority, and next morning our hero returned to Winchester, where he was
received in the most kindly manner, by Parson Jolter his tutor.

The master of the school forgave him on account of his youth, but when
Hatchway returned to the garrison, and told the whole of the circumstances to
the commodore, the old gentleman was very much grieved, especially when he
began to consider that there was a young lady in the case. He resolved
therefore to lay the whole of the affair before Mr. Pickle, his father, that
proper measures might be concerted, in order to prevent his ruin. In the mean
time, Peregrine sent a love epistle to his mistress, and concluded, by telling
her, that he would never place his affections on any other object. This letter
was sent by the hands of the faithful Tom Pipes, with strict orders that it
should be delivered into her own hands, without communicating the contents to
any person whatever besides herself.

Tom Pipes being thus employed as ambassador, took his place on the box of a
stage coach, and that the letter might not be lost, he put it between the sole
of his shoe and stocking. This was very consistent with his own vulgar ideas,
but no sooner did he come to the inn, than feeling for the letter, he found
that by the motion of the coach, it was all torn in pieces. This was a most
shocking circumstance for poor Tom Pipes, who cursed both the coachman and the
coach. There was, however, no time to be lost, and, therefore, after some
reflection, he resolved to send for the clerk of the parish, and get him to
write a letter of a similar nature.

Accordingly, Tom went in quest of the schoolmaster, who was one of the most
arrant pedants that ever lived, and bringing him to the inn, got him to write a
letter in that style which those of his fraternity call the true sublime. Pipes
was so much overjoyed when he heard it read, that he could not refrain from
squeezing the pedagogue by the hand, telling him at the same time, that it was
light in its timbers, and would forever remain above water. Flushed with the
hopes of success, he set out for the house where the young lady resided, not
doubting but he would meet with a favorable reception, but when she had read
the nonsensical epistle, she concluded that either her lover was mad, or that
he had sent the letter with no other view, than to make her an object of
ridicule.

Pipes, who doubted not but he would receive a favorable answer, was dismissed
with visible marks of contempt, and next day he arrived at Winchester.
Peregrine, who had waited for his return with the utmost impatience, no sooner
saw him, than he reached out his hand for a letter, but being informed that he
had none, he immediately concluded, that Emilia had not an opportunity to
write, and therefore he resolved to wait the return of the post. But as he did
not receive any answer during the whole of the ensuing week, his pride was
summoned up to his assistance, and he began to despise the woman whom he
imagined had treated him with so much indignity.

His behavior soon reached the ears of the young lady's mother, and from that
circumstance she was convinced that he was the same coxcomb as he had
represented himself in his letter. She therefore ordered her daughter not to
think any more of him* and thus a youthful correspondence was broken off merely
by the conduct of Pipes, who took no more notice of it than if he had been
assisting in pumping a ship, or preventing one from destruction.

While things were going on in this manner, the commodore, who never lost sight
of the interest of young Peregrine, consulted the parson of the parish
concerning the most proper means to be used, and at last it was agreed upon
between them, that he should be taken from the school, and sent to the
university. Accordingly he was sent for home along with his tutor, Mr. Jolter,
who had not, during the whole time he was at Winchester, taught him any thing
that could contribute toward promoting his interest. Mr. Pickle no sooner saw
his son, than he bestowed a thousand blessings on the commodore, for having
been at so much expense in his education, but his mother was of a different
opinion, for she had conceived such an inveterate hatred to her eldest son,
that she looked upon him as an object of detestation. She ordered that none of
the servants should for the future grant him admittance to the house, which so
much exasperated Hatchway, that he swore he would be revenged on her one way or
other. Indeed, it is not to be wondered at, for the honest lieutenant imagined
that every one was as innocent as himself.

The commodore, who under an outside of savage rusticity, possessed real
goodness of heart, could not hear with indifference the manner in which Mr.
Pickle used his son, and therefore having bestowed a volley of curses upon the
whole family, he took Peregrine home along with him to the castle. It was then
resolved, that our young adventurer should be sent to the university along with
Mr. Jolter, who was still to act the part of his tutor; but he had not been
long at Oxford, when he discovered such a disposition for satire, that every
one of the young nobility and gentry courted his friendship, not doubting but
they would be able to make his ingenuity subservient to their purposes. Mr.
Jolter, who had the interest of Peregrine entirely at heart, in order to divert
him from such practices, introduced him to the company of a club of
politicians, who were reputed men of knowledge and probity, and who spent the
evenings in animadverting on the conduct of the ministry, and hatching schemes
for overturning the government both in church and state.

It is not to be supposed that a youth so volatile as Peregrine, would be much
delighted with the company of men, who instead of speaking consistant with
their characters as rational creatures, were like an assembly of quakers, or
rather of superannuated or melancholy cats. Indeed, he looked upon them in so
mean and contemptible a light, that he soon began to despise them, and one
night having made them all drunk, he started a topic of argument that irritated
their passions so much that they got to loggerheads, bottles and glasses, which
slew about in such abundance, that scarce one in the company could make his
escape without receving a mark that would put him in mind of the nocturnal
adventure.

The uproar was so great that the whole neighborhood was alarmed, and just at
that instant, the proctor happening to be returning to his chamber, took them
all into custody, except Mr. Jolter, who made his escape at the expense of a
couple of black eyes. Next morning he was summoned to attend the proctor, in
order to answer for his conduct, which frightened him considerably, but
Peregrine, who was an arch wag, told him that he would, by the help of a
certain paint, hide the circles around his eyes, to which Jolter submitted, but
when he made his appearance, the fraud was discovered, and he received a severe
reprimand.

For some time Parson Jolter was so much mortified, that he scarce knew how to
appear in public, and not doubting but Peregrine had a principal share in the
whole scheme, he could not refrain from showing marks of his resentment. This
was what the proud spirit of our adventurer could not bear, and therefore in
revenge for the insolence of his tutor, he wrote a copy of verses against him,
in such satirical language, that poor Jolter hesitated, whether he should not
lay out his last shilling, in the purchase of a rope, in order to deprive the
hangman of his legal wages.

Peregrine often used to make excursions to different parts of the country,
particularly Windsor, where while he was one day walking along with a fellow
collegian, he discovered Emilia, and made up to her. The young lady had not
forgotton the insult offered her in the odious letter, written by the parish
clerk, at the instigation of Tom Pipes, and therefore she treated him in a cold
formal manner. She refused to hear any thing that he had to say in his defense;
but after several solicitations, she agreed to honor him with an interview,
during which time the whole mystery was cleared up, and a mutual reconciliation
took place, though not before the amiable young lady procured a free pardon for
poor Pipes and the pedantic clerk. In the mean time, his long absence from
Oxford, gave great uneasiness to Mr. Jolter, who with all his faults, still
wished his pulpil well, and therefore having learned the name of the young
gentleman with whom he had made the excursion to Windsor, he went to his
chambers, and was told that Peregrine was still at Winsor along with Miss
Emilia Gauntlet, and that it would be no easy matter to disengage them from
each other.

In consequence of that information, Mr. Jolter set out for Winsor, where he
met with his pulpil, and remonstrated to him on the impropriety of his conduct.
This put Peregrine into a most violent passion, and high words arose between
him and his tutor. Mr. Jolter could never forgive Peregrine for the part he had
acted, in making him so ridiculous at the political club; and, although he was
under many obligations to the commodore, yet he would have given up his charge,
had he not been in expectation of receiving a rich living, which the aged naval
officer was expected to have in his power, to present him to, after the death
of an incumbent, who was then far advanced in years. The thoughts of such a
valuable acquisition made him keep his passions under proper restraint, and
although often insulted by Peregrine, yet he resolved to dissemble his
resentment, till such time as he was properly provided for.

Peregrine was so much exasperated at the conduct of his tutor, that he wrote a
letter to his aunt, and in answer received one which mortified his pride to the
utmost. She told him, that the commodore had all along treated him with the
greatest tenderness, and that it was his duty to be obedient to him in every
thing, but this so far from bringing his passions under the government of
reason, only served to inflame them the more, and therefore be wrote a letter
in the most polite style to the commodore, attempting to ridicule his conduct
by throwing the whole blame upon Jolter, whom he accused of tyrrany and
partiality.

The commodore, who knew no other phrases than such as were made use of at sea,
wrote Peregrine an answer, wherein he told him, that if he would be a good boy,
he would take him into favor, but if he continued refractory, he would discard
him forever.

Hatchway, who had been dispatched with this letter to Peregrine, said all he
could to persuade the young gentleman to comply with the commodore's request,
and in order to prevail with him, told him, that if he had seduced the young
lady, he was willing to take her off his hands. Hatchway had strict orders to
bring our young hero home to the castle, but no sooner had he mentioned the
affair to him, than Peregrine started up, and declared his resolution that no
person should compel him to comply with a proposal so contrary to his
inclination. Hatchway was so much irritated at what Peregrine said, that he
tripped up his heels, and laid him flat on the floor, calling him at the same
time one of the most saucy boys that ever walked between stem and stern.
Peregrine would have dropped all manner of altercation with one whom he loved
for the honest simplicity of his manners, but nothing would serve the
lieutenant, unless, he would fight him with sword and pistols. The place made
choice of for the deciding this important quarrel, was Windsor forest, to which
our two combatants walked, but in their way thither, they were met by Tom
Pipes, who armed himself with a large wooden cudgel. As Pipes had the utmost
respect for the lieutenant, with whom he had served many years on board, and as
he really wished well to young Peregrine, so he resolved to prevent any
mischief that should happen, and in consequence of that resolution, brought
both parties to agree together, and the commodore wrote a very feeling letter
to Peregrine, promising him that nothing should be wanting to promote his
interest for the future.

When Peregrine had viewed the commodore's letter, he was so much chagrined,
that he became for some weeks a perfect slave to melancholy, but the
impetuosity of his passions getting the better of every thing, he resolved to
assert his dignity as a rational creature, and not to be any longer the dupe of
a family, who seemed to seek the promotion of his interest no farther than was
consistant with their own inclinations. Stimulated by motives of resentment
against Hatchway, and still a captive to love, he went to visit his charmer,
not doubting but her conversation would contribute toward subbing off that
rusticity that he had contracted during the melancholy under which he had
labored. He told her that his uncle the commodore had proposed that he should
make the tour of Europe, and he could not help expatiating on the pleasures
that he would enjoy in the volatile court of Paris, where nothing less than
intrigue and gallantry could make a distinguishing figure.

The young lady heard him with emotion, nor was it (...) her power to prevent
the tears from dropping down from her lovely eyes, especially when she was told
that the commodore was offended at their meeting so often together. To remove
all her scruples, he told her that he would be hers to the latest period of his
existence, and at the same time endeavored to convince her of the necessity he
was under of paying an implicit obedience to his uncle's commands. The young
lady could not help feeling in the most sensible manner the force of what he
advanced, and therefore composing herself, she told him that she was perfectly
satisfied, and that for the future she would not object to any part of his
conduct, unless by some fresh action of his infidelity he should give her
occasion to do so. Every thing being thus settled in the most amicable manner,
the young lady took her leave, and our hero, who resolved to comply with his
uncle's request, dispatched the lieutenant and parson Jolter to the castle, to
inform the commodore, that as soon as he had settled a few trifling things
among his fellow collegians, he would return, and comply with every thing that
he had proposed for him, with respect to the regulation of his future conduct
particularly, and making the tower of Europe.

In his journey to the castle he took Emilia along with him part of the way,
and on the evening of the first day they took up their lodgings at a country
inn, which at that time was crowded with great numbers of people, who had been
at a neighboring fair, and were now regaling themselves with beer and tobacco.
This was (...) circumstance that our lovers were obliged to put up with: but in
the middle of the night they were alarmed with the cry of fire; and, upon
inquiry was found that the country people, having (...) drunk, had left some
candles burning, so that two of the galleries were instantly in a flame.
Peregrine and Tom Pipes started up in an instant, and saved the young lady as
well her companion; and so disinterested was poor Tom, that he refused to
accept of a reward which they generously offered him.

Next day they arrived at the house where the young lady's mother lived, but
her brother had no sooner seen our hero, than he considered him as one who had
a design to injure his sister, and therefore treated him in the most haughty
manner. This was more than Peregrine would have bore with from any other
person, but the love he had for Emilia induced him to conceal his resentment.
The young lady, who could not dissemble her passion for him any longer, gave
him a ring to keep as a token of her love, which pleased him so much that he
embraced her with all the ardour of the most tender affection, and next morning
set out on his journey.

He had not however proceeded far on his journey, when at the end of a lane he
was met by Godfrey, the brother of the young lady, and commanded to stop till
he had given him the satisfaction of a gentleman. For some time Peregrine
insulted him on account of his poverty, and told him in plain terms, if he did
not go instantly about his business, he would order his footman, Tom Pipes, to
give him a most hearty drubbing. This last expression so much exasperated
Godfrey, that he drew his sword, so that our hero was obliged to do the same,
and a furious combat ensued. Each of the contending parties were wounded, but
Peregrine having broken his sword, the other refused to take any advantage of
him; but, leaving him, told him, that for the future he must never insult any
gentleman on account of his poverty.

Peregrine, who with his foibles had a large share or humanity, no sooner heard
the last words uttered by the young gentleman than he was struck with remorse,
for having treated him so disrespectfully, and therefore going up to him
desired that he would alight from his horse, till he should have an opportunity
of explaining his sentiments. The young gentleman, who was no more than a cadet
in the army, though the son of a general officer, supposed he wanted to finish
the combat, and therefore alighting, walked with him into a room, where he
expected he would present him with a brace of pistols. But how great was his
surprise when Peregrine gave him to understand, that he was willing to do any
thing to promote his interest, and that his passion for his sister was the most
pure that could be imagined. He added that he was going to set out for France,
and Godfrey having promised to meet him at the commodore's, they both parted on
the most friendly terms.

The commodore was now turned of seventy, and so much crippled by the gout,
that he was scarce able to stir abroad. Mr. Pickle, his brother in-law, gave
him but very little of his company, so that the old gentleman was, in a manner,
restored to a new state of life, in consequence of having young Peregrine once
more to attend him. Gamaliel, the younger brother of Peregrine, was now about
fifteen years of age, but of such perverse disposition, that although his mother
considered him as her favorite, yet every one in the house, as well as in the
neighborhood, treated him with the most sovereign contempt.

One day while young Gamaliel was riding out along with his tutor, the curate
of the parish, Peregrine happened to come in sight, and Gamaliel who had been
taught to offer him all the indignities he could, rode up against him, in order
to unhorse him. Peregrine, who guessed his intention, acted in so spirited a
manner, that young Gamaliel was flung from his horse, and before he had time to
recover himself; Peregrine dismounted, and gave the curate such a hearty
drubbing, that he was not able, for several weeks after, to make his appearance
in the church, so that he was obliged to say, "Lord have mercy upon us," at
home.

Complaints were made to the commodore not the good old seaman, instead of
paying any regard to them, declared that he wished young Gamaliel had broke his
neck, so as Peregrine was out of the scrape.

As Peregrine could not put up calmy with the affront that had been offered him
by the curate, so he resolved to take a severe revenge on that reverend
gentleman. Accordingly he and Hatchway set out for the alehouse where the
curate spent his evenings, and having engaged a parlor for themselves, the
lieutenant was placed to keep a good look, while Peregrine, who was an
excellent mimic, went into the yard, and personated a dialogue between the
curate and the wise of the publican. It was not long before the landlord heard
what passed, and concluding that his spouse was gone into the barn with the
priest, he ran thither in search of the adulterers, while Peregrine got in at
the window, and set down in the most demure manner with Hatchway. As the poor
publican was too much agitated to seek for his wife in the barn, he left the
door open, and returned to the house, where he saw her go in at another door.
His suspicions were now fully confirmed, but much more so when he heard
Hatchway in his arch leering manner, tell him that he believed the curate of
the parish had some regard for his wife.

A few days after this, in order to carry on the farce somewhat farther, at the
expense of the curate, a boy was dispatched to inform that reverend gentleman
that the publican's wife was extremely ill, and that she could not bear the
thoughts of dying without speaking with him. The curate obeyed the summons;
and, in the mean time Peregrine, with Hatchway, went to the place as usual,
where they had not been long, when our young hero told the publican, that the
parson was just gone in at a private door to the kitchen. This was more than
the publican could bear; and therefore, not doubting but he would meet with the
curate at the end of one of the lanes in his return, went into the barn, and
armed himself with a flail. From thence he set out to the place where he
expected to meet him, and seeing him come up he extended the flail, which if it
had done the execution, there would have been a new place for another poor
priest. Exasperated that he had not felled the priest to the ground, the
publican once more extended the flail, but a second time missing his aim, he
struck himself on the head such a terrible blow, that for some time he
staggered in the same manner as he had often seen some of his customers do. In
the mean time the curate, who imagined that he had been beset by some robber,
grasped his cudgel and took to his heels, but the publican getting up, pursued
him, and gave him such a drubbing, that had not some laborers come up to his
assistance, he would have inevitably perished.

Hatchway and Peregrine sat waiting in the parlor till the landlord arrived,
and seeing the marks of his encounter upon him, they began to make themselves
very merry at his expense. He could not conceal from them the manner in which
he had treated the curate, whom he called a parish bull, let loose upon the
wives of all the honest men in the neighborhood.

He had scarce done speaking, when his wife came in, and told him, that some
waggish boy had sent Mr. Sackbut, the parson of the parish, to pray with her.
The publican, whose jealousy was now wound up to the highest pitch, could
conceal his indignation no longer, and therefore turning to his wife, told her,
that he had disabled the parson from praying with her for some time. This was
what the publican's wife could not bear, and therefore casting a look of
ineffable contempt on her husband, told him that he had no business to sit in
company with gentlemen, while the company in the kitchen wanted his attendance.
It was in vain for the poor henpecked husband to make any reply, for knowing
the superiority that his wife had over him, he left the room, and went to obey
her orders. Next day it was reported throughout the parish, that Mr. Sackbut
had been attacked by footpads and almost murdered, and an advertisement was
affixed to the church door, offering a reward to those who would make a
discovery, but no person came to claim it, so that the poor parson was obliged
to put up with his drubbing.

It was not long before the curate began to suspect that the whole was a scheme
projected by Peregrine, for he knew that the whole country could not produce
such two cunning rogues as Hatchway and Mr. Thomas Pipes, under whose direction
our young hero acted. He therefore resolved to be revenged on Peregrine, and
imparted his scheme to young Gam. his pupil, but as good luck would have it,
the sister of Peregrine, an amiable young lady, overheard the whole of their
conversation, and communicated it to a young gentleman, who was in love with
her; and who gave, by her direction, an account of it to Peregrine.

To counteract this diabolical scheme, it was proposed that a person should be
set to watch in an adjacent field, in order to give them an account at what
time the conspiritors came up. One whole evening was spent in vain, for none of
them came up, but on the second the messenger came to the castle, and informed
the lieutenant that three men were skulking behind a hedge near the road that
led to the public house.

This news was no sooner told, than the company sallied forth, in order to
wreck their vengeance on the curate and his pupil, but when they came to the
place, they found young Mr. Gauntlet the brother of Emily, exercising his
cudgel on a fellow whom he had got down. Peregrine, with the rest of the
company, ran to his assistance, and having taken the fellow prisoner, conducted
him to the castle along with the young gentleman, who had left his horse at the
inn. The prisoner being brought before the commodore, confessed that he had
been employed by the curate of the parish, to assassinate Peregrine, upon which
he was suffered to go about his business, to the great mortification of Pipes,
who wanted to give him a round dozen at the gang way.

The commodore treated young Gauntlet with every mark of respect, and one day,
in the course of their conversation together, discovered that he had been
formerly acquainted with his father, who at that time was only a lieutenant of
marines, tho an officer of experienced conduct.

Young Gauntlet had such scrupulous notions of honor, that before the commodore
could prevail on him to accept of as much money as would purchase a commission,
he was obliged to tell him that he was so much indebted to his father, but not
knowing what was become of him, had never till then an opportunity of repaying
it. These things being settled, and French servants hired to attend our young
hero in his intended tour, Gauntlet left the castle, and the commodore ordered
that Tom Pipes should remain at home, because he was ignorant of the French
lingo. Before Peregrine set out, he received a letter from his sister,
informing him that she would meet him at a cottage near her father's house, in
order to converse with him on some things of Importance.

He obeyed the summons, and when he came to the place, found his sister, and
was surprised to find her possessed of so many accomplishments beyond what he
expected. He proposed taking her away from her unnatural parents, but before he
had done speaking, his mother, who had placed spies on her daughter, rushed
into the apartment, and would have torn the poor young lady to pieces, had not
Peregrine interposed in her defense. The mother was so transported with rage
that she seemed like a bedlamite, and when Peregrine began to expostulate with
her in favor of his sister, she declared that for the future she should never
be admitted into her father's house. Peregrine was much troubled in what manner
he should dispose of his sister, but finding no other method of providing for
her than putting her under the protection of his generous benefactor* he took
her home to the castle, where she met with a welcome reception from the
commodore. Old Pickle was obliged to comply with the dictates of his wife,
which so enraged the commodore, that he sent him a challenge, but the other had
no intention of accepting it. Hatchway however, was extremely unwilling to lose
a little fun, and therefore returning to the castle, told the commodore that
old Mr. Pickle would meet him.

As the commodore never knew what it was to he afraid to fight, he resolved to
go, and in the mean time it was proposed that young Peregrine should personate
his father, and mimic his voice. A real farce ensued, and the poor commodore
was defeated without knowing that the conqueror was his godson.

The time for his departure drawing nigh, Mr. Jolter was made choice of to
attend him as a tutor, and having taken leave of his friends at the castle, he
set out in a post chaise for Dover. Young Gauntlet went with him to see him
safe on board, and before they parted, a plan was settled in what manner they
should correspond with each other. When they came to Dover, parson Jolter
ordered an elegant supper to be got ready, and some of the best Burgundy wine,
but scarce had they sat down, when they were alarmed with a dreadful uproar in
the next room. It happened that the dispute was between a furious Welchman, and
a poor Italian quack, who not finding proper encouragement in other countries,
had come over to England. The Welchman whose Cambrian blood was all on flame,
had got the poor foreigner down, and would certainly have killed him, had not
Peregrine and the rest of the company come to his assistance. The Welchman
said, the Italian was a conjurer, and young Gauntlet swore that he was a
Jesuit, because those Gentlemen never travel without charms and enchantments.
Peregrine however, was not so very superstitious, but told the foreigner that
he was at liberty to proceed on his journey, and that no person would molest
him.

Mr. Jolter, who had now joined the company, and heard the whole affair,
declared that he differed in sentiment from his pupil concerning witchcraft,
and supported his opinion by many quotations from scripture, as well as from
the writings of some divines in the last century. Young Gauntlet, who had been
brought up in the army, corroberated all that was said by Jolter, and told the
company that he had seen many apparitions, and was well convinced in his own
mind of the reality of witchcraft. To all this the Welcman assented by
declaring that the empire of Beelzebub was far more extensive than that of Rome,
for it had extended to Glamor^anshire, which the Romans could never conquor.

Peregrine did not choose to enter the list with three such formidable
combatants, but contented himself by telling them, that he was convinced in his
own mind, that witchcraft was nothing more than a scarecrow, or bugbear,
invented to frighton the vulgar; after which they all went to supper together
in the most amicable manner. In the course of their conversation, it appeared
that the Welchman was the same Mr. Morgan, who makes such a distinguishing
figure in the adventures of Roderick Random, and who had been some years
settled at Canterbury. It happened, that he had been sent for to wait on a sick
person at Dover, and the Italian being there at the same time, a most violent
dispute arose concerning the nature of the medicines that should be
administered to the patient.

The empiric prescribed specific medicienes, which the patient accepted of, so
that poor Morgan was dismissed without his fee. This exasperated him so much,
that he swore revenge against the Italian and not being properly qualified, or
rather not having a sufficient share of patience to reason coolly, he called
the Italian a necromancer because his medicines had the desired effect. That
every thing might be made agreeable to Morgan, who was really an honest fellow,
Peregrine made him a present of as much money as he could have expected from
the patient, and for that night the company separated, in order to retire to
their several appartments. In the morning, when they got up, they went to visit
the castle, with every other curiosity that was to be seen at Dover, after
which they breakfasted together, waiting till the packet should be ready to
fall. Morgan declared that he would not leave our hero till he saw him safe on
board, and he was as good as his word for he kept standing on the shore till
the packet hoisted fail, after which he and young Gauntlet marched back to the
inn, and having refreshed themselves, set out in postchaise together for
Canterbury.

Our hero had not gone far to sea, when the wind shifted about, and blew
directly in their faces, and the tide running high, they were in great danger
of being lost. Mr. Joter, who had been busy in attempting to solve one of the
most difficult problems in Euclid, happened in the midst of his reveries, to
hear the boy call to put out the deadlights, whch frightened him so much, that
he started up, and called out, "Lord have mercy upon us." Peregrine gave up all
for lost, and just when he was expecting that the ship would go to the bottom,
the individual Tom Pipes made his appearance on the deck. It seems that this
original genius had left the castle the day after Peregrine departed, and
getting to Dover some hours before he embarked, took his place in the packet,
and concealed himself in the hold.

Alarmen by the danger he was in, Pipes got up from his lurking place, and gave
such directions to the seamen, that the master considered him as an angel sent
from heaven to deliver them. By his skill in naval affairs, they were enabled
to weather the storm, and soon after the spires of Calais presented themselves
to their view Jolter who was a real enemy to his own country, no sooner saw
France, that land of despotism, than he began to launch out in praise of the
French government. Peregrine, who had the most contemptible notion of his
tutor's abilities, could not refrain from giving him the lie, and in proof of
his opinion, no sooner had they landed, than they were surrounded by a parcel
of custom house officers, who began to toss and tumble their baggage about,
without any regard to the so much boasted politeness of their country. As
Jolter had often been in France, and consequently was well acquainted with the
manners of the people, he gave the officers a bribe, and told them that his
pulpil was a young English nobleman, upon which they desisted from searching
any further. They told him however, that the baggage must be sealed up at the
custom house, and that there were some men ready to carry the trunks thither.
This so enraged Peregrine, that he knocked some of them down, calling them the
most opprobrious names, but in an instant a whole file of musketeers
surrounded the house.

Peregrine was not such a madman as to dispute the authority of men under arms,
and therefore turning to the corporal who commanded the party, desired him to
accompany his baggage to the custom (...) see that no harm happened to it. The
corporal was so mortified at what our hero said, that he darted him a look full
of contempt, telling him at the same time, that he was sorry he was so little
acquainted with the French laws. As soon as they had bespoke a postchaise for
Paris, our hero found that there was an English gentleman and his lady at the
same inn, and therefore he sent Tom Pipes to the kitchen, in order to scrape an
acquaintance with their footman. In the mean time he and Parson Jolter went to
view the fortifications, and upon their return, Pipes told Peregrine, that the
gentleman was an old debauchee, who had in his youth despised matrimony, but
now in his advanced years had been led into a match with an oyster wench, whose
impudence was equal to the station in which she had been brought up. He added,
that her husband, upon mature deliberation, being ashamed of his conduct, had,
in order to avoid the reproaches of his friends, and the scoffs of his
companions, brought her over to France, where it was not likely that she would
betray her ignorance, seeing that she did not understand one word of the
language. Her temper was violent as well as vulgar, and it was with much
difficulty that her husband had prevented her from engaging in an intrigue with
an officer, during one single day that they stopped at Canterbury.

Peregrine's passions were now wound up to the highest pitch, and seeing the
lady at the window he made a most respectful bow to her, which she returned a
very low curtsy. She was neatly dressed, and had he not been informed of the
nature of her former station, he would have taken her for one of those pert
ladies, who in general have that sort of impudence about them which their
station in life conceals under another name. He did not imagine there would be
any great difficulty for him to ingratiate himself into her affections, and
with that view he sent a card to her husband, whose name was Hornbuck, telling
him that as he was to set out for Paris next day, so he would be glad of his
company. Mr. Hornbuck, who had seen all manner of scenes of debauchery, no
sooner received the message, than he sent a very civil answer, telling our hero
that he was sorry he could not have the pleasure of his company, because his
wife had been for some days indisposed.

Peregrine was no stranger to his motives for sending such an answer, and being
extremely uneasy that he could not gratify his in forinate passion he set out
next morning with Parson Jolter in the post-chaise, being attended by his
French servants, and Tom Pipes on Horseback. They breakfasted at Bologne, and
it being proposed that they should reach Abeville that night, the driver went
on at such a rate, that the axle-tree broke before they had got a few miles out
of the town. This accident obliged them to return to Bologne, where being under
the necessary of waiting till next day, they saw some unfortunate Scotch
gentlemen who had been engaged in the rebellion, looking earnestly at this
happy island, from whence they were forever banished. Peregrine, who had a most
compassionate heart, could not help sympathy sing with them, although the
differed from them in political principles.

He invited them to spend the evening with him, but no sooner had they got
heated with wine, than they forgot their unhappy circumstances, and launched
out in invectives against the illustrious house of Hanover. Our hero however,
had too much generosity to triumph over their want of prudence, and although
one of them, who was the principal aggressor, had given him a challenge, yet
next morning he was so sensible of his folly, that he came to his chamber, and
asked pardon in the most submissive manner, telling him that his many
misfortunes had almost deprived him of the use of his natural reason. His
request was granted, and having breakfasted with Peregrine, they took the most
affectionate leave of each other.

Next day the chaise having been got ready, our adventurer, with his retinue,
proceeded on their journey, and Parson Jolter continued to bestow the highest
(...) on the French government. Peregrine interrupted him by pointing to the
barren desolate state of the country, and the miserable appearance of the
inhabitants in their ragged cloths and wooden shoes. Jolter finding it in vain
to dispute with one who could refute him from the evidence of his senses, said
no more till they came to an inn, where they partook of a small refreshment,
and in the evening arrived at a small village called Bernay, where they called
for fresh horses, but were informed by the landlord, that none could be had,
for the gates of Abeville were shut up, and there would be no possibility of
their procuring (...) till next morning.

Mr. Jolter, who had often traveled that road before, did not choose to
contradict the landlord, and while supper was getting ready, our hero strolled
about the yard, where to his great surprise he saw another chaise come in with
Mr. Hornbuck and his spouse. The landlord, though conscious that he had not
victuals sufficient to serve both his guests, yet admitted the gentleman and
his lady, and Peregrine, not doubting but he would find an opportunity of
conversing with the lady, sent Mr. Hornbuck an invitation to sup with him.

Mr. Hornbuck, who was really hungry, accepted of the invitation, and Peregrine
having led the lady into the room, placed her at the head of the table. During
the evening, while they were at supper, the lady could not help darting some
significant glances at our hero, which he took care to return, but that served
only to increase the jealousy of Hornbuck, who was no stranger to intrigues.

For some time he endeavored to conceal his resentment, but not being able to
contain himself any longer, he reached out his foot to tread on hers, but as
ill luck would have it, he trod on the toe of parson Jolter, who happened at
that time to have a severe corn. The application was made with so much good
will, that the parson started up, and roared about the room like a madman, to
the no small diversion of Peregrine and the lady, who laughed in such an
immoderate manner, that they had almost thrown themselves into convulsions.
Hornbuck was so much confounded at the mistake he had committed, that he begged
pardon of Jolter, who with tears in his eyes forgave him, and then they sat
down again to supper. The rest of the evening was spent in the most agreeable
manner, and when the time came that they should retire to bed, Peregrine handed
the lady into her chamber. Mr. Hornbuck had gone down to the yard, and during
that time, our hero declared his passion to the lady, but she advised him to
retire, lest her husband should come in. He was not so blind as to neglect
taking a hint upon which the safety of the lady depended, and therefore
retiring to his chamber, spent the whole night in revolving in his mind what
schemes would be most proper, in order to make Hornbuck a cuckold. The lady
spoke to him in the most favorable manner, previous to his departure, and as it
had been agreed upon that they should travel together next day, he doubted not
but he would find an opportunity of completing his design.

Next day they breakfasted at Abeville, where they learned that the landlord in
Bernay had played them a French trick, for the gates were not shut till some
hours after they arrived at the village. It was late in the evening before they
reached Chantilly, which is not much to be wondered at, when it is considered
that the journey was one hundred miles. Mr. Hornbuck was so much fatigued that
he knew not what to do for a little rest, and no sooner had he supped, than he
fell fast asleep in his chair. Jolter, whose constitution was not so delicate,
had swallowed such large draughts of wine, that he began to yawn, so that
Peregrine and the lady had some time to improve to their mutual wishes. Indeed
Peregrine had taken care to have opium administered to Jolter in his wine,
which operated so strongly upon him, that he dreamed the most horrible dreams,
and often started up in violent agonies. At last being put to bed as well as
Mr. Hornbuck, they both fell fast asleep, for the gentleman was so much
overpowered, that he even forgot his spouse. Peregrine, who longed with
impatience to enjoy the lady, went softly to her room, where he found her in a
loose gown and petticoat, and was just about completing his wishes, when Jolter
got out of bed in the next room and exclaimed fire! fire!

Women are very fertile at contriving schemes. especially where they are under
the necessity of of vindicating their honor from any aspersions that may happen
to be thrown upon it, and therefore Mrs. Hornbuck, not doubting but her husband
would awake, ran into the room where Jolter was, and cried out, "Lord have
mercy upon us, where is it?" Jolter, who was walking in his shirt, with his
eyes shut, made no answer, but Peregrine vexed even to a state of madness, gave
him such a slap on the shoulder, that in an instant he was brought back to the
use of his reason. Mean while, Hornbuck having awaked from his sleep, and
missed his spouse, doubted not but she was along with our hero, and jealousy
instantly took place in his mind. In going in quest of his wife, he found that
she had dropped her under petticoat, and there being no doubt remaining of her
infidelity, he walked up to her, and showed it to her. Her natural presence of
mind hinted an excuse, for she declared that the petticoat was not hers, she
not having such a one in her possession. Peregrine, who was very fertile at
invention, told him that the petticoat belonged to the innkeeper's daughter,
with whom he had an intrigue, and wondered how he could be so foolish, as to
prevent him from enjoying a little pleasure.

Hornbuck was too well acquainted with the tricks practiced by young gentlemen,
not to see into our hero's intentions, but without discovering the least mark
of resentment, hastened to his bed chamber with his spouse, and next morning
set out three hours before Peregrine got up.

Our hero was obliged to put up with his disappointment, and as soon as he had
taken lodgings at Paris, he sent an account of his journey to the commodore.
His next business was to have clothes made in the fashion, and then he joined
himself to a company of young gentlemen who spent the evenings in every species
of debauchery. Most of these were his own countrymen, and as they had much
money to spend, so it is not to be wondered at that they were guilty of many
irregularities. In particular they went one evening to a tavern, the landlady
of which was extremely handsome, and our hero soon ingratiated himself into her
good graces. The lady was one of those who are willing to bestow favors, so as
they could be conducted with propriety, without giving offense to the husband;
but as ill-luck would have it, her husband was extremely jealous of her, and
coming home one evening, found her in such an attitude with our adventurer,
that he could not help testifying his resentment. Peregrine, who happened to be
then on the eve of enjoyment, was so much vexed, that he knocked the husband
down, upon which the watch was called, and all the young gentlemen taken into
custody. It happened that the officer of the night was a man of prudence, and
therefore finding that little mischief had been done, he discharged them with a
gentle reprimand.

This affair made such a noise that it could not be long concealed from parson
Jolter, and as he respected the French government above all others in the
world, he considered this part of his pupil's conduct as a high indignity
offered to its laws. Indeed the tutor was such a biggoted Jacobite, that his
acquaintance reached no further than among some of the English and Irish
priests, who being extremely poor, spend much of their time in teaching
foreigners the French language, and instilling into the minds of youth the
utmost aversion to the English government. Such a person was not in the least
qualified to be the tutor of a young gentleman of our hero's spirit, who looked
upon him as a most arrant pedant. He despised every word that under the name of
instruction dropped from his mouth, so that poor Jolter, in order to make the
commodore believe that he had, at least, in some measure discharged his duty,
contented himself with writing down, from time to time, an account of the money
that Peregrine spent.

Peregrine having procured a chariot, and all other sorts of equipage,
according to the fashion of Paris, he made his appearance at all the places of
public diversion, and visited the gardens and palaces. But one day as he was
returning home, two carmen happened to meet in the streets, and their carts
being entangled, they both fell a boxing according to the mode of France. Pipes
who was then behind his master's coach, seeing one of the carmen on the ground,
and the other belaboring him in the (...) unmerciful manner, jumped from his
station, and having set the defeated combatant on his legs, told him to fight
boldly, and he would see fair play. Accordingly the combat was again revived,
and there being another coach as well as our hero's interrupted by the
engagement, one of the footmen, who stood behind: struck one of the combatants
with his cane.

Pipes, who had true notions of honor, according to the system of English
boxing, laid hold of the cane, and began to lay it about the aggressor with
great dexterity. The other footmen who were behind the coach, ran to the
assistance of their brother. This new reinforcement did not in the least
intimidate Tom Pipes; for (grasping the cane) he drove two of the footmen off,
and belabored the other in such a manner, that he was glad to beg for mercy.
The whole street was now in an uproar, for the person whose servants had been
assaulted in this manner, was one of the princes of the blood, but being a
nobleman of age and experience, and Peregrine having made some submission to
him on account of his quality, his highness took him into his chariot, and
treated him with every mark of respect. The prince, who perceived that our hero
had more spirit and education than generally falls to one of his age, took him
home to his own house, and treated him as if he had been his own son. He
introduced him to his lady, and some other very respectable persons, but he
soon found that the French ladies paid no regard to any but such as spend the
whole of their time in gaming. Not that he had any intention to desist from
gaming, but he could not see with what propriety ladies, who pretended to the
highest rank, could so far demean themselves, as to spend their time in acting
a part that set them on the same footing as those wretches whom we call common
sharpers.

These considerations induced him to enter himself into a celebrated academy,
where he became acquainted with several sensible people, but volatile
dispositions and habits, are not soon eradicated. This will appear evident from
the following anecdote. Peregrine who like most other young gentlemen, was
constantly in search of new scenes of pleasure, became acquainted with one of
the polite girls of the town, and accordingly took her into keeping. For some
time he imagined that she was one of those, who in consquence of receiving a
sufficient subsistence, would be at least faithful to him, but he was most
wretchedly mistaken, for one morning Pipes came into his room, and told him
that he saw a young spark in laced clothes go out of her chamber.

Peregrine, who had at sometimes a large command of his temper, took no notice
of what was said by Tom Pipes, but going toward evening to the house of his
dulcinea, told her that he was obliged for that night to go on some business of
importance to a distant part of the country. The lady, who was no stranger to
all the arts of her profession, pretended to be very much affected but
Peregrine taking leave of her with the strongest professions of love, returned
to his lodgings in order to prepare himself for the executing a scheme that he
had formed. About twelve at night, having given Pipes the cue, they both set
out for the place, and knocked at the door, which was opened to them by a
footman. Peregrine bolted in, and leaving Pipes to take care of the door, ran
up stairs, and knocked most violently at the door of his dulcinea's apartment.
Affairs were now in a very critical situation, but there being a window to the
street, the visitor dropped out of it, and so made his escape. Pipes, who
happened to see him descend, made up to him, and belabored him with his cudgel,
from one end of the street to the other, till being wearied with thrashing him,
he gave him up to the patrole, who took him into custody for the night in a
most wretched condition. Next morning the French gentleman was discharged, but
the dishonor of having been beaten in so vulgar a manner by an English footman,
induced him to send a challenge to Peregrine, and both met together, where our
hero came off conqueror, to the great mortification of the Frenchman, who was
one of the officers of the guards.

Parson Jolter was so much offended with the conduct of his pupil, that he
threatened to leave him and return to England, but Peregrine having made some
concessions, he was diverted from his design, and once more resolved to spend
some time longer in his beloved France. But still nothing could restrain the
impetuosity of our hero's passions, for intrigue seemed to give life to all his
actions.

One day as he was walking abroad to see some of the public places, he met Mrs.
Hornbuck, and in the most imprudent manner agreed to elope with her.
Accordingly they set out together to a village near Paris, where they gave
themselves up to voluptuous pleasure, till the poor husband having found out
the place of their residence, procured an order to take them both into custody.
The affair began to make a considerable noise in Paris, and it might have been
attended with fatal consequences, had not the English ambassador, a nobleman of
great prudence, interposed so far as to represent our hero as a young man who
had launched out into public life before he was acquainted with the world, In
consequence of that representation our hero was set at liberty, but at the same
time received a severe reprimand, with a positive injunction never to behave in
the same manner for the future.

Soon after he was set at liberty, he went one day to visit the public places,
and in one of the galleries he met with two of his countrymen, one of whom was
a physician, but one of the most arrant pedants that ever lived, on the other
hand the painter, who was the companion of the doctor, was an ignorant fellow,
who had such an opinion of his own abilities, that all the ancient painters
were considered by him as objects of contempt. With these two real originals in
their way, our hero contracted an acquaintance, not so much from motives that
could attach him to them on the principles of virtue, as that they were objects
whom he could laugh at. He attended to every thing said by them, and could
scarce refrain from laughing, when he heard that the painter condemned all the
painters whose works had done honor to the Italian schools; and the doctor,
instead of minding the duties of his profession, spent the whole of his time in
studying the most superficial parts of the Greek language.

Peregrine took the first opportunity to introduce his two new friends into the
company of parson Jolter, who received them in his usual formal manner, but as
ill luck would have it, the doctor who had borrowed his notions of government
from the Greek classicks, spoke with the utmost contempt of the French
government, as being entirely despotic. On the other hand Parson Jolter
insisted that no form of government could be so good as that which enabled the
prince to support his prerogative, because, in consequence thereof, the people
were kept in humble subjection, and none of them could find fault with the
measures of administration. At last the dispute arose to such a height, that
both parties would have gone to blows, had not Peregrine interposed, and with
the utmost difficulty made the contending parties good friends. In the mean
time the doctor, who was in every sense of the word, absorbed in the study of
the classic authors, proposed to have an entertainment, at Paris according to
the forms used by the old Romans; and our hero, with Parson Jolter were both
invited as guests. Some other foreigners were invited at the same time, among
whom was a German count, and an Italian Baron. Among other rarieties was a
dormouse pie. and a sow's stomach stuffed with an hundred different sorts of
herbs. The painter exclaimed that the Romans were the most beastly fellows he
had ever heard of, and the Italian taking the pie on his knees, the whole
contents bursled into his breeches, and made him roar out in the most
vociferous manner. The whole company was now one scene of riot and confusion;
the doctor said all he could to apologize for the conduct of poor Palate the
painter, but all to no purpose, for every one was disgusted.

It was in vain to call the company to order, and Peregrine, who was still fond
of intrigue, persuaded the painter to accompany him to the opera. There having
spent the evening, they made assignations with some girls, and were just on the
point of returning home, when their coach was interrupted by one belonging to a
prince of the blood. Peregrine would not give way, and Tom Pipes having acted
in the most extravagant manner, the whole body of them were taked into custody,
and Peregrine, with the poor painter, were committed to the bastile.

The faithful Tom Pipes, as soon as he returned home, went and informed the
English ambassador, and in consequence of his interposition, our hero and the
painter were both set at liberty. Their release, however, was procured upon
condition that our hero should leave Paris in a short time; and accordingly, as
soon as he had taken leave of his friends, he set out for Flanders.

The painter now began to have the most contemptible opinion of the doctor, and
during the whole of their journey the time was spent in mutual quarrellings,
the one calling the other a fool, and his companion retorting by the epithet
pedant. During the first day nothing was to be heard but disputes concerning
the difference between a monarchial and limited government, Parson Jolter
always taking part with the French, and the doctor at the same time condemning
them.

About seven in the evening they arrived at an inn, where a supper was provided
for them, and as the principal part consisted of rabbits, Peregrine had a
strong inclination to enjoy a little fun. He persuaded Tom Pipes to come into
the room, and tell the guests, that there was a skin of an old ram cat hanging
in the kitchen, and he was sure the body was to be served up at the table. The
painter, who had just then cut up a leg of the supposed cat began to recollect
that he had read the story in Gil Blas of Scipio's, and therefore he would not
eat any more. Parson Jolter, whose stomach was not so very squeamish, told him
that the people on the coast of France eat both cats and dogs, and that there
could be no difference in the use of the animal, except what arose from vulgar
apprehension or common inclination. This gave so much encouragement to the poor
painter, that he proceeded to eat a little more till a claw, that had been
properly placed in the dish by Pipes, happening to fall out, he dropped his
knife, and fell into a swoon. The doctor did all he could to relieve his friend
painter, to a state of sensibility, and at last having in some measure affected
it, they all went to bed, and next day continued their journey to Flanders.

During their journey, the doctor expatiated on the excellency of the roads of
the ancients, while Parson Jolter represented those in France as far superior
to any that ever had been seen.

In the evening they arrived in the neighborhood of Arras, but the gates being
then shut, they were obliged to lodge in the suburbs. It is true, they might
have spent the evening with a great deal of pleasure, but as ill luck would
have it, two French officers happened to come to the inn, and engaged in gaming
with our hero. They were so well acquainted with the principles of gaming, that
Peregrine soon found he had to do with a couple of sharpers, and in the
morning, when the landlord presented his bill, which he did with fear and
trembling, they told him that he was a most wicked rascal, who thus thought to
impose on the king's officers.

As soon as they were gone, the innkeeper came into the room, and told our
hero that it was common for the military officers to do so, for such was the
nature of the government in France. Peregrine, who had the most enlarged
notions of government, could not help looking upon him in any other light than
as an enemy to the natural rights of mankind; but making the host some amends
for the injury he had received, he proceeded on his journey along with his
company. From Arras they proceeded to Lisle, where our hero soon contracted an
acquaintance with several Scotch officers in the Dutch service, who had come
there during the summer season, to learn the art of war. One of the Scotch
officers happened to be as great a pedant in the Greek language as the doctor
himself, but then he had this advantage that he had read over the commentaries
of the chevalier Follard.

Acquainted with fortification, as laid down by Vauban, he was convinced in his
own mind that there was at least some difference between ancient and modern
fortifications. The doctor and the officer took a walk round the ramparts, and
a discourse ensued upon the the difference between ancient and modern
fortifications. The Scotch man endeavored to show, that all towns fortified
according to the modern method, must be constructed in such a way, as to be
able to resist the force of balls, whereas the doctor said, that there was
nothing could equal the methods used by the Greeks. This enraged the Scotchman
so much that he challenged the doctor, but as the son of AEsculapius had no
intention to fight, he applied to our hero, who accommodated matters in the
most amicable manner.

One day as Peregrine was walking along the ramparts, he happened to fall into
conversation with one of the Knights of Malta, who bore a commission in the
French service. The discourse turned upon the English drama, which our hero
vindicated to the satisfaction of the knight, who was himself a man of letters:
but before they had done speaking. Parson Jolter arrived in a great hurry, and
told them that Tom Pipes, having affronted a soldier, a great mob were gathered
together, and that he was in danger of being killed. Peregrine hearing the
danger his faithful Pipes was in, ran up to his assistance, and took along with
him the knight of Malta, who ordered the soldier to be taken into custody, and
brought before him. It seems that Pipes, in his walk through the town, had got
into company with some Irish soldiers in the French service, who treated him
with great civility, but the subject of discourse happening to turn upon
politics, Pipes cursed the pope the pretender, and the French king, as well as
all those who were connected with either.

This was too high an indignity for the soldiers to put up with, upon which a
battle ensued between them and Pipes, in which the latter would have had the
advantage, only he had no other weapon to defend himself but his fists.

Peregrine was so much exasperated at the conduct of Pipes, the he immediately
dismissed him from his his service; and next day the whole company set out for
Ghent.

The whole company, besides our hero, the painter, the doctor, and Mr. Jolter,
consisted of a lady of pleasure, a Jew broker, a capuchin Friar, and a young
lady committed to the care of the latter.

Jolter disputed with the Jew about the meaning of some words in the
scriptures; the doctor ridiculed the capuchin; while the painter made love to
the kept mistress: and Peregrine attached himself the young lady. When the
company had supped in the evening, they all retired to their own apartments;
but Peregrine having made an assignation with the young lady, got up about
midnight, and went privately to her chamber.

It happened that the woman of pleasure lay in a bed in the same room, and the
painter having got to the bedside just at the same time that Peregrine got to
the other; the capuchin, who had some suspicions, crawled upon his all-fours,
In order to make a discovery. He had scarce got up to the middle of the room
when the painter felt his shaved head, and the priest, who was an arch wag,
turning his jaws round, bit the finger of the painter in so severe a manner
that he screamed out fire! murder! theives! Peregrine was so much enraged, that
he knocked the painter down, and then returned to his own apartment, in order
to prevent a discovery.

Next night when they came to Aloft, Peregrine made another attempt on the
young lady, but Pall^t the painter, who had not yet relinquished his scheme,
once more got into the room at the same time. This so much exasperated
Peregrine, that he knocked him about till there was scarce any life left in
him, and then decamping in the dark, the poor painter was put to bed. The
doctor, who had been called out of bed to attend the patient, declared that he
had been bit by a mad dog, and taking up the chamber pot, emptied the whole
contents of it upon him. In the midst of his fury the painter got up, and would
have done signal execution on the doctor, had not he taken to his heels out of
the room, and overturned Jolter in the passage, who tumbled like a dead log of
wood into the kitchen. In the morning every thing being adjusted, our
travelers set out for Brussels. where Peregrine had not been long when he met
accidentally with Mrs. Hornbuck, from whom he had been separated at Paris. The
two lovers met together every evening at a private house in the suburbs, but
Mr. Hornbuck having discovered their retreat, hired two soldiers to lay hold of
Peregrine upon his return home, and actually make him a eunuch.

As good fortune would have it. Tom Pipes, who had still kept near his master,
tho not perceived by him, happened to hear the conspiratiors talking of their
intended scheme, at a public house, and went and gave Peregrine information of
the whole: our young hero had too much spirit to forget the behavior of Pipes
at Lisle, and therefore refused at first to speak with him, but the other
convinced him of the necessity he was under of being on his guard, upon which
he was once more taken into favor.

A plan was now laid to defeat the scheme projected by Hornbuck: and in the
evening. When the poor cuckold came to the place, he was dragged to the river,
and ducked over head and ears: but his cries having brought the patroic to his
assistance, our hero was taken into custody. Parson Jolter was quite confounded
at the conduct of his pupil, but as he was still under his care, he went to the
governor of the city and procured his release. They then set out for Antwerp,
where they had not been long when Peregrine fomented a quarrel between the
painter and the doctor, and nothing less than a duel was to decide the merits
of the controversy.

Pipes was made choice of as second to the painter, and Peregrine to the
doctor: but when they went on the ramparts, being both arrant cowards, they
trembled like criminals who were going to be hanged In vain did the the seconds
endeavor to force them to action, they shrunk back, and the painter at last
taking to his heels, Tom Pipes gave him a knock on the breech, which tumbled
him down. The fall of the painter gave fresh spirits to the doctor, who making
up to him, terrified him with a number of Greek verses, which he repeated from
Homer, and forced him to acknowledge that he had been defeated.

From Antwerp they proceeded to visit the most noted places in Holland, where
they met with nothing worthy of their notice, upon, which Peregrine, with his
companions set out for Harelem, and took shipping for Harwich in England, being
desirous of once more visiting his native country.

As soon as he arrived in England, he went to visit some eminent persons, whose
relations he had met with abroad, and then set out for the castle, where he was
received by the good old commodore in the most gracious manner. All the poor
cottagers who lived in the neighborhood, came to wish him joy on his return,
and within a few weeks after he had the pleasure of seeing his beloved sister
married to the young gentleman who had made his addresses to her before he went
abroad. In the mean time his parents treated him in the same inhuman manner as
before, but all this was made up by the goodness of the commodore.

Having attended the commodore with the most filial tenderness during a fit of
illness, occasioned by the gout, the old gentleman proposed making over to him
his whole estate, and to depend on him for a subsistence during the remainder
of his life but this was what our hero would by no means comply with. The
commodore being in some measure recovered. he gave Peregrine leave to return to
London, and in his way thither he met with Emilia, and offered such rudeness to
her, that she resolved to have nothing more to do with him. This chagrined him
so much, that he left her mother's house in disgust; and soon after his arrival
in London, met with her brother Godfrey, who, in consequence of his good
behavior, had been advanced to a lieutenancy. "After some days spent in the
pleasures of the town, they both set out for Bath, where by their cunning and
ingenuity they dispersed a whole gang of sharpers. At the same time they
practiced to many roguish tricks on the physicians, that those sons of the
great AEsculapius were put to the blush amidst the whole circle of their
acquaintance.

At Bath they became acquainted with a certain lady, whose sole business was to
entertain every promiscuous company in her house with no other view save that
of procuring a name. Among others who visited her was one mr. Crabtree, an old
Welsh gentleman; who, in consequence of some tricks that had been put upon him
in his youth, became an enemy to all mankind, and was in the strictest sense of
the word a misanthrope. That he might have it in his power to retail as much
scandal as possible, he feigned himself dear, so that the most secret things
were mentioned in his company, without the least suspicion that he heard any of
them.

With this person our hero contracted an acquaintance, and he soon perceived
that he was no more deaf than himself. Peregrine was astonished to hear him
repeat a vast number of anecdotes relating to the nobility, and the frailty of
nature among the females, served only to stimulate his desires, in order if
possible, to be able to add one to the number of those, who in consequence of
their levity had been seduced.

The commodore had been for some time in a had state of health, and Peregrine
thought that he could not, consistent with his duty, neglect to wait on him.
Accordingly he arrived at the castle, where he was received with open arms of
affection, and next day his generous benefactor departed this life. He had
given the most particular directions concerning his funeral: and our hero
notwithstanding his volatile disposition in other things, took care to have it
celebrated according to his desire.

The servants, whose hairs had become gray since they came to live with the
commodore, lamented the loss of an indulgent master, and the next day after his
funeral the gentlemen in the neighborhood came to congratulate our hero on his
being left in possession of so ample a fortune.

Their principal design was to try if possible, to bring about a reconciliation
between him and his mother, but all to no purpose, for she remained as
obstinate as ever, and declared that Peregrine was not her son.

In the mean time, Peregrine having settled all his domestic affairs left the
castle in order to return to London, but in his way thither be called at the
house where Emilia lived, and in a most audacious manner made an attempt on her
virtue. The young lady treated him with that contempt his conduct entitled him
to, but as her heart was not deaf to tender impressions she consented to give
him her company at a masquerade. She imagined that he would not pursue his
sceme any further; but she was mistaken, for no sooner was she mixed with the
crowd, or rather the herd, than he made a second attempt on her virtue, but was
repulsed in the same manner as before, and to complete her misfortune, her
uncle, who was her guardian, and had her under his protection, for bad him from
coming any more to his house, unless he had an inclination to be ducked in a
horse pond.

Baffled in all his attempts, he was filled with the utmost chagrine, for such
is the violent impetuossity of youth, that they are in general deaf to the
voice of reason. They go on from one degree of extravagance to another, till it
is too late to change, and they seek for pleasure where it can never be found.
Peregrine in order to vindicate his character, wrote a long submissive letter
to Mrs. Gauntlet, the mother of Emilia, but the answer he received, served only
to convince him that she looked upon him with the utmost detestation. This
stimulated him to such a height, that he resolved never more to visit the
place, upon which, after returning to spend a few weeks at the castle, he
resolved once more to drown his cares in London. Upon his arrival in London, he
met with his old friend Cadwallader the misanthrope, who informed him
concerning many curious passages relating to the intrigues of the ladies of
quality. One of them was a duchess, who had on all occasions prostituted
herself to those who were kind enough to discharge her debts contracted at a
gaming table, so that upon the whole she was in a manner a dishonor to her sex.
Another was one of those ladies who pay no regard to moral obligation, and
therefore having lost her first husband, whom she married from motives of love,
she was by the orders of her father, who at that time was one of the
commissioners in the custom house, obliged to give her hand to an Irishman,
who, taking him altogether, was one of the most insignificant wretches that
ever lived. They had not been long married, when the lady discovered such
aversion to her husband, that she began to intrigue with several of the young
nobility, and actually went over with one of them to France, where they spent a
whole summer together. At last she returned to England, and finding no other
way left, in order to support her in her extravagance, she once more threw
herself into the arms of her husband, and spent the remainder of her time in
privacy.

Peregrine who had so much art, that scarce any thing could deceive him,
resolved to make himself merry at the expense of his fellow creatures.
Accordingly he got Cadwallader to assume the character of a fortune tellers, and
in consequence thereof, he soon got acquainted with the many secrets that would
otherwise have been buried in perpetual oblivion. To a young gentleman like our
hero, this could not fail of yielding a considerable degree of entertainment,
and in consequence thereof, he was at all times able to triumph over the most
dignified female characters. Nothing was more common for him than to enter into
an intrigue with a lady of quality, and as he knew well her prior character, he
thought there could be no hurt in exposing her for the favor she had granted
him. Peregrine, who never knew where to stop, when he wanted to indulge his
favorite passion for ridicule, resolved to give such a mark of his ingenuity,
as would transmit his name to all future ages.

Among the circle of his friends, he became acquainted with two notorious
free-thinkers, or as we call them, deists, and these men having made a mock of
all sorts of apparitions, he contrived to raise a fictitious one, that actually
frightened them into the utmost state of superstition. The devil was
represented as arising from hell, to take those infidels along with him to the
infernal regions, and notwithstanding all the pretensions that our deists had
made, yet when they saw the old gentleman with the cloven foot appear, they
trembled as an aspin leaf, and for once declared, their deistical notions were
not able to carry them through in a day of adversity. They could not help
reflecting that the heathens believed there was a future state of rewards and
punishments, and that brutal fortitude to which they had so long attached
themselves, vanished into nothing.

It was not long before our hero became celebrated for being one of the
greatest wits of the town. He took notice of the conduct of the different
nobility and gentry who happened to be in his company, and he drew their
characters according to the observations he had made. One in particular, who
had been long represented as a patriot, or in other words a lover of his
country, he represented, according to justice, as a most vile infamous
debauchee, who had pretended to set up a scheme of reformation for the whole
kingdom, while he knew at the same time that he was wallowing in lust with
several common prostitutes. However volatile he might be in his own
disposition, he could not help treating with the utmost abhorence, those
wretches who set up for reformers of the nation, while at the same time their
own houses exhibit nothing but scenes of debauchery. In the public news papers,
and many other periodical works, he endeavored to represent those wretches in
their lively colors, and surely nothing could be more commendable. Shall the
debauchee set up to reform the nation and promote charity, when at the same
time he knows that he is going on in a course of impunity? Shall the
spendthrift attempt to teach economy to the people, while he knows at the same
time that he is living above his circumstances? In a word, Peregrine was
convinced in his own mind, that private virtue and patriotism must, or at least
ought to, go hand in hand together, and therefore it will appear to some of our
more sensible readers, that those who are not capable to take care of their own
affairs, will never be able to attend those of a public nature. Indeed it is a
notion that has been too much cultivated in the present age, that people may be
wicked at home, and at the same time virtuous abroad, but this is inconsistent
with the first principles of natural reason, for he that is faithful over
little, will be faithful over much.

Lieutenant Hatchway had now been married some time to the widow of the
commodore, but that lady had so far given herself up to drinking, that she was
seized with a dropsy, and there being no hopes that she would recover, her
husband sent Peregrine a letter in the style of a seaman, desiring his
immediate attendance at the garrison.

Peregrine no sooner received the honest lieutenant's epistle, than he set out
for the garrison, where he found his aunt in the agonies of death, and staid to
perform the last offices to her, after which he returned, in order to visit his
companions in London. In his way to London he called on his friend Gauntlet,
and had the good fortune to see him happily married to the young lady whom he
had courted several years. Indeed Peregrine would have willingly married Emilia
at the same time, but such was his attachment to gallantry, that he still
entertained hopes, or rather wishes, of having it in his power to seduce that
young lady, and to triumph over her shame.

Baffled however, in all his attempts on her virtue, he set out for London, but
had not been long there, when he returned to the garrison on a visit to honest
Lieutenant Hatchway, who treated him with the utmost respect. Having settled
several of his domestic affairs, he took leave of the Lieutenant, and in his
journey picked up a young gypsey, whom he resolved to take into keeping.

Tom Pipes was ordered to see her washed clean and dressed in a proper, manner,
and although her countenance had something ferocious in it, yet she was in many
respects as agreeable as some of the court ladies. He introduced her to all the
noted gaming tables, where she made a very distinguishing figure, for it was
but a short time before she made herself acquainted with all the tricks
practiced in those polite circles. But notwithstanding her natural rusticity,
yet she had the seeds of honesty in her mind; for one evening at a gaming
table, having discovered that one of the ladies was a dexterous hand at
cheating, she called her a damned bitch, and walking toward the (...) bid her
kiss her arse. The ladies present upbraided our hero, with having palmed upon
them a common trust and he having been cloyed with possession, gave her some
money, and left her to make her fortune in the world in the best manner she
could, so that she soon after became one of the women of the town.

Soon after he had discarded the young gypsey, he was advised by his old
acquaintance Pallat, the painter, who had accompanied him in his journey from
Paris to Flanders. The painter had* got some poor daubings of several capital
works of the Flemish schools, and had proposed to sell them by subscription, so
that he was under the necessity of making himself acquainted with as many of
the nobility and gentry as possible. Peregrine looked upon him with the utmost
contempt, but as he knew him to be poor, he did not say any thing to discourage
him.

In the course of their conversation, the subject turned upon gaming, and our
hero, who was altogether of a volatile disposition, embraced an opportunity
that Pallat offered him, of being introduced to the acquaintance of Lord
Sweepstakes who had for many years made the most distinguishing figure at
Newmarket. As Peregrine had a considerable sum of money at his disposal, it was
not long before he was fleeced of the greatest part: for gamblers, let their
stations, be what they will, are no better than cheats.

Vexed to find himself bubbled in that scandalous manner, he resolved to get
into the ministry, and for that purpose ingratiated himself into the favor of a
nobleman, who proposed setting him up as a candidate for one of the rotten
boroughs.

This led him into a fresh series of expenses, but the other candidate having
by opposite interest become more successful than Peregrine, he was obliged to
sit down with his loss, and curse both government and ministers.

As Peregrine had good natural parts, he resolved to become a dependant on the
ministry (...) in their vindication he wrote several very satirical papers.
This employment, however, was of too mean a nature to support a young gentleman
of our hero's spirit, especially as the dignified nobleman gave him nothing but
promises for all his trouble. It was natural for him under such circumstances
to descend gradually to meanness, and notwithstanding the elegant manner in
which our hero had been brought up, yet he became every day more and more an
object of contempt among all those with whom he had been formerly acquainted.

Tortured with these melancholy reflections, he one day took a walk to the
park, where he had not been long, when he was accosted by his old friend
Gauntlet; who, soon after his marriage, had been advanced to the command of a
company. Gauntlet was accompanied by his wife and sister, and no sooner had our
hero seen the latter, than all those former emotions took place in his mind,
that her person had first inspired. He said every thing he could think of in
vindication of his conduct, but the young lady was extremely shy, and told him
that nothing but a constant perseverance in the practice of every moral duty,
would entitle him to her favor. They conversed together sometime, and when they
took their leave, he swore everlasting constancy to the object of his love,
after which they parted for the present with very different sentiments, for our
hero was tortured with the thoughts of having incurred the displeasure of his
Emilia.

He next associated himself with a club of authors, most of whom were
despicable wretches, but they were at the same time so proud, that they would
not for some time make him acquainted with all their secrets. As his wants were
daily increasing, he had recourse once more to the minister, who had so long
filled his mind with promises that he never intended to perform* but although
several lucrative places where then vacant, yet he was given to understand that
they had all been disposed of. This declaration of the minister mortified him
so much, that he could not conceal his resentment any longer, and therefore
turning about, he left the presence chamber in the utmost disgust. From the
minister's house, he went to visit the authors, whom he sound engaged in a most
violent dispute concerning the merits of some of their performances.

Peregrine had but little to say, for as yet he was no more than a novice, but
as ill luck would have it, in the midst of the dispute, a bailiff came with a
writ against one of them. The defendant, who was no stranger to the power of
catch-poles, no sooner heard of his danger, than he jumped out of the window,
and pitching upon the top of a sedan, ovterturned it, with a young macaroni who
had been dressed out in the highest taste, in order to make his appearance at
the opera. In the mean time he became acquainted with some of those
insignificant wretches called antiquarians, who spend most of their time in
looking over old coins and manuscripts, that cannot be read but by the help of
magnifying glass, and an index to explain the contractions. He had the good
fortune however, in consequence of his political writings, to procure a small
pension from the minister, which for some time was regularly paid, but as he
still wished for a settlement, he one day put the minister in mind of his
promise, and as he did not receive a satisfactory answer, he went home and
wrote him a letter, wherein he taxed him with duplicity, and the consequence
was, that he was instantly discharged. The affair of being discarded made some
noise among those at the head of affairs; but the minister, who was hackneyed
in all the ways of iniquity, told them that our hero was disordered in his
mind, and for some time the story was believed. In revenge for being treated in
so disgraceful a manner, be commenced a writer against the ministry and treated
the whole of their conduct with such ridicule, that they became objects of
detestation to all ranks of people in the nation.

But this did not answer his expectation, for the minister who had never
entered into any agreement with him, caused him to be arrested, and from a
spunging-kouse he was removed to the Fleet prison. There he found his
confinement much better than is common in other prisons and he met with several
persons who did all they could to make his confinement as agreeable as
possible. Among others, he met with a person who had spent his whole fortune,
in order to procure justice to an injuried young gentleman, but by a quibble in
law, which will ever remain a disgrace to justice, he had been nonsuited, and
in consequence thereof, not being able to pay his costs, he was arrested and
committed to prison.

The news of Peregrine being committed to prison soon reached the ears of
lieutenant Hatchway, who with all his foibles was really a good man. The honest
lieutenant, in company with Tom Pipes, set out for London and not knowing
Peregrine was to be confined for life, proposed taking lodgings along with him
in the fleet.

Peregrine said all he could to dissuade them from such a resolution, but all
that he could prevail upon them to do was to take lodgings in the same
neighborhood. As it was their constant practice to visit our hero two or three
times in the day, and to spend the evenings with him, so one night while
Crabtree, the misanthrope was there, they happened to quarrel, and the poor
Welchman was tossed in a blanket. This was considered as such an outrage, that
the warden ordered that Hatchway and Pipes should never be again admitted into
the prison, and in the mean time Peregrine gave himself up to all manner of
sloth and nastiness.

While he continued in this deplorable situation, his old friend Gauntlet, who
had come to town in order to procure advancement in the army, came to the fleet
to visit him, and condoled with him on the unhappy state of his then
circumstances.

As good luck would have it, a person to whom Peregrine had lent some money, to
equip him for an East India voyage, happened at that time to arrive in the
Downs, and as he had (...) with considerable success, he came to the prison and
paid the debt for which our hero had been arrested.

Being thus at liberty, he went to visit his old friend the lieutenant, who,
notwithstanding some disputes that they had before, received him with open arms
of friendship. He was informed by Hatchway, that his father had been dead some
time, and that he had left his whole fortune to his son Gam. That was a most
mortifying stroke to our hero, who notwithstanding all the unnatural usage of
his parents, yet imagined that his father would have done him justice at last.
This induced him to hold a consultation with his friends, who were all of
opinion that there was something unfair, and that it would be necessary to make
a proper enquiry into the nature of the will. This led to a discovery that the
whole was a collusion carried on by the intrigues of his mother, who had got a
false will substituted in the room of the true one, to the injury of her eldest
son. This led to a further enquiry, and upon the most mature deliberation the
whole cheat was discovered. The noise occasioned by this affair reached all
over the country, but our hero, consistent with his common notions of
benevolence, made a settlement on his mother and brother, after which he took
possession of his estate, and proved himself to be the real heir at law to his
father, notwithstanding all that had been done to injure him.

Having settled every thing of importance, he went to see his friend Gauntlet,
and it was agreed upon between them to spend some time in the country. This was
in a manner absolutely necessary for our hero, who had been confined several
months, in a prison, as the principle reason was to bring about a match between
the two lovers.

Gauntlet had a real friendship for Peregrine and told him that he would do
every thing in his power to bring about an eclaircissement between him and his
sister. Accordingly our hero was indulged with an interview with his beloved
Emilia, but she was so much on the reserve that it did not give him any
satisfaction. Mortified at his disappoinment he retired into another room, but
had not been there long when he heard a dialogue between the brother and
sister, that gave him the most inexpressible pleasure. Emilia said she had no
objections to Peregrine, except such as arose from the nature of his conduct,
which on many occasions had been very irregular. To this her brother answered,
that whatever might have been his foibles, yet they were merely owing to the
unguarded sallies, of youthful imprudence, but as he had now returned to a
regular discharge of his duty as a man of honor and virtue, she could not with
the least color of reason have any objection to him.

Peregrine, who overheard this discourse, was in a manner quite transported,
and waited for an opportunity, of embracing his charmer, and running into her
room flung himself at her feet in humble prostration.

As she could not bear to see him in that attitude, she gave him encouragement
to rise, and then clasping her in his arms, he told her that he was forever
devoted to her, and that he would live and die with her. She told him, that he
had been so wicked, that he ought to have undergone a severe punishment, but as
things then were, she was willing at once to pardon him, and put up with a man
for her husband whom she believed would be an arrant tyrant. In answer to this
as he was scarce able to speak, he told her that he had eighty thousand pounds
in money, which should be at her service, and as a proof of his sincerity, he
offered to lay the whole in her lap. So shying, he clasped her again in his
arms, and sealed the contract into which he had entered, with bestowing a
thousand kisses upon her who was more dear to him than his life.

Every thing being settled for the nuptials, our hero set out for the commons,
in order to procure a license, by which his happiness was to be sealed. It is
true Emilia made some objection to his being so precipitate in an affair of
such importaace,, but her brother, the captain, having interposed, she was
brought to hearken to the voice of reason, and gave her consent to the
performance of the ceremony. Lieutenant Hatchway, who had never lost sight of
our hero, resolved to be present at the ceremony of the marriage, and as he
always liked a little fun, he proposed to make Peregrine drunk, previous to his
going to bed. In that, however, he was disappointed, for our hero was on his
guard, and took care not to drink any more liquor than was necessary.

The ceremony being over, Tom Pipes danced like a madman, as if he had been on
the forecastle of a man of war, while Hatchway regaled himself over a bowl of
rum and water, in the same manner as if he had been on the quarter deck of the
commodore's ship. At last the new married couple retired, and next day was
spent in the utmost degree of festivity. From London they set out for the
country, where our hero ordered the castle to be put in proper repair, and
having settled every thing with his tenants he went to visit his sister, whom
he found the mother of two beautiful young children.

He was, as well as his spouse, received by her with every mark of respect, and
rejoiced in having it in his power to contribute toward promoting her
happiness. He lived agreeably and happily with his dear Emilia, and she soon
made him a happy father.

Their friends and acquaintance looked upon themselves as happy in being
connected with two persons of so much worth, and their fame for the exercise of
every benevolent action, reached to the exterior parts of the country, where
their names were known.

Peregrine detached himself from every vicious practice, and day after day
convinced his wife that he was far from being an object unworthy of her choice,
or improper for her to place her affections upon.

To conclude this work it is necessary to take notice of what happened to the
other celebrated personages who have been so often mentioned in it. We have
already consigned the commodore to the silent grave, and have seen that his
widow, after having been married some years to Lieutenant Hatchway, paid the
debt of nature, and was deposited beside her first husband, or to use the sea
phrase, she was safely moored.

Lieutenant Hatchway survived the marriage of our hero about two years, most
part of which was spent in drinking his can of (...), and smoking his pipe. He
often wished for war that he might have one opportunity more of giving orders
on the quarter deck; but as nothing of that nature happened, he was obliged to
come to an anchor, and be laid up in an everlasting dock.

Tom Pipes survived him about three years, and was treated by Peregrine with
every mark of respect, and what added most to his pleasure was, that the lovely
Emilia suffered him to have a hammock to swing in, as if he had been still on
board, or in the garrison. At last a violent storm obliged him to slip his
anchor, and as there was none ready to take him in row, he went to bottom and
was never after heard of.

The doctor whose feast had made such a distinguishing figure at Paris and
antwerp, returned to London, where he published proposals for a translation of
Pindar from the original Greek; but not meeting with the success he expected,
he commenced writer for a bookseller, and did every thing in his power to
ridicule the Christian system. At last he became so notorious for his
licentious writings, that an indictment was preferred against him, and being
found guilty on the clearest evidence, he was committed to Newgate, till such
time as he should pay a fine according to the judgment of the court. There he
continued near two years in the utmost state of penury, till at last being
forced by necessity, he wrote in defense of administration, and in consequence
thereof procured his release, and at the same time received a pension of three
hundred pounds a year, by the intercession of those in power.

The minister of state, by whose cruelty our hero had been so long vilely
oppressed, was, in consequence of a change at court, turned out of all
employments, and spent the remainder of his time in fomenting schemes to cross
the measures of government. At last he died, not only unpitied, but even hated
by all those who had formerly known him, nor was there one left to shed a tear
over his grave. He had domineered over his fellow subjects while he was
entrusted with power, but no sooner were his remains laid in the grave, than
some of the meanest of them trod on them.

Pallat, the painter, who was one of the most arrant blockheads that ever
lived, published proposals for some of his daubings, but they were executed in
so wretched a manner, that he became an object of detestation to all these who
knew him. His family was reduced to want, and his creditors becoming clamorous,
he was arrested, and glad to take up the same lodgings in the Fleet, from which
our hero had been so fortunately delivered. There he remained till he was set
at liberty by an act of insolvency, and the rest of his days were spent in
penury, which would have been still greater, had not our hero contributed
toward his assistance.

With respect to our hero, he soon obtained a seat in parliament, and made a
most distinguishing figure as a a British senator. His family increased in the
course of time, and such was his benevolence, that he never lost sight of such
opportunities as put it in his power to be serviceable to his fellow creatures.
From the whole of these circumstances we may learn, that it is never too late
to refrain from vicious courses, and that whenever information takes place,
beneficial consequences will follow. Such is the nature of things in this
world, that we never know when to form a judgment till we are directed by the
consequences, and this should teach us to watch over every part of our conduct*
and to make it appear to the world that we are not unworthy members of society.

SELECT SENTENCES, Worthy observation of the present age.
A MAN may have a thousand intimate acquaintances, and not a friend among them
all. If you have one friend think yourself happy. When once you profess
yourself a friend, endeavor to be always such. He can never have any true
friends, that will be often changing them.

Complaisance, or as Lord Chesterfield calls it, the suaviter in modo, renders
a superior amiable, an equal agreeable, and an inferior acceptable.

Excess of ceremony shows want of breeding. That civility is best which
excludes all superfluous formality.

No man has a thorough taste of prosperity, to whom adversity never happened.

None more impatiently suffer injuries than those who are most forward in doing
them.

A more glorious victory cannot be gained over another man, than this, that
where the injury began on his part, the kindness should begin on ours.

We should take a prudent care for the future, but so as to enjoy the present.
It is no part of wisdom to be miserable to day, because we may happen to be so
tomorrow.

The man who is destitute of good sense, is unhappy in having learning; for he
has thereby more ways of exposing himself.

The character of the person who commends you, is to be considered before you
set a value on his esteem. The wise man applauds him whom he thinks most
virtuous; the rest of the world him who is most wealthy.

A good man will love himself too well to lose, and his neighbors too well to
win, an estate by gaming. The love of gaming will corrupt the best principles
in the world.

It is the infirmity of little minds to be taken with every appearance, and
dazzled with every thing that sparkles; but great minds have but little
admiration, because few things appear new to them.

He that is truly polite, knows how to contradict with respect, and to please
without adulation; and is equally remote from an insipid complaisance, and a
low familiarity.

Nobility is to be considered only as an imaginary distinction, unless
accompanied with the practice of those generous virtues by which it ought to be
attained. Titles of honor conferred opon such as have no personal merit, are at
best but the royal stamp set upon base metal.

Truth is always consistent with itself, and needs nothing to help it out. It
is always near at hand, and sits upon our lips, and is ready to drop out before
we are aware; where as a lie is troublesome, and sets a man's invention upon
the rack; and one trick needs a great many more to make it good.

He that lies in bed all a summer's morning, loses the chief pleasure of the
day; he that gives up his youth to indolence, undergoes a loss of the same kind.

Fine sense and exalted sense are not half so, valuable as common sense. There
are forty men of wit for one man of sense; and he that will carry nothing about
him but gold, will be every day at a loss for want of ready change.

A man should never be ashamed to own he has been in the wrong; which is but
saying in other words, that he is wiser to day than he was yesterday.

Wherever I find a great deal of gratitude in a poor man, I take it for granted
there would be as much generosity if he were a rich man.

Flowers of rhetoric in sermons of serious discourses, are like the blue and
red flowers in corn pleasing to those who come only for amusement, but
prejudicial to him who would reap the profit.

It often happens that they are the best people, whose characters have been
most injured by slanderers; as we usually find that to be the sweetest fruit
which the birds have been picking.

The eye of a critic is often like a microscope, made so very fine and nice,
that it discovers the atoms, grains, and minutest particles, without ever
comprehending the whole, comparing the parts, or seeing all at once the harmony.

Honor is but a fictitious kind of honesty; a (...), but a necessary substitute
for it in societies who have none; it is a sort of paper credit, with which men
are obliged to trade, who are deficient in the sterling cash of true morality
and religion.

The chief advantage that ancient writers can beast over the modern, seems
owing to simplicity. Every noble truth and sentiment was (...) the former in a
natural manner, in word and (...), and incapable of improvements. (...)
remained for later writers, but affectation, (...), and conceit?

If to do, were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been
churches, and poor men's cottages princes' palaces. He is a good divine who
follows his own instructions; I can easier teach twenty what were good to be
done, than to be one of the twenty to follow my own teaching.

THE GHOST.
A London gentleman went to see his relations in the country. The house was
full, a wedding being celebrated there. Only one room was vacant. There no one
chose to sleep, as it was supposed to be haunted. The London spark had no fear
about him, and said he would sleep there. He fell asleep. About three in the
morning he was wakened by the opening of the door, and the entrance of young
women in appearance, with only a night dress an head, ann shoift on. This
lovely appearence walked two or three times about the room, and at length laid
itself down on the bed. The young gentleman did not much like his unknown
bedfellow. He lay as far as he could on the other side. After sometime he
perceived his bedfellow breathe, and supposing her to be true flesh and blood,
and no phantom, he ventured to touch her. He was confirmed in his opinion, and
finding a ring on her finger, he gently took it off. She lay some time, and he
did not disturb her. She then got up, and went out of the room as she came in.
The young gentleman perceived how the room was haunted, by a female walking in
her sleep. The morning came. The family were inquisitive about him. He desired
the family might be summoned, when lo! the ring fitted the eldest daughter's
finger, who had been in great tribulation about the loss. "This, Sir," said he
to the father, "is the lovely spirit which haunts the room." She declared
herself perfectly ignorant; but was convinced of its truth because of the ring.
"Well, Sir," said the father, "if you have no objection, since my daughter has
been to bed to you, you shall go to bed to my daughter; and there is 5000l. for
her portion." The match was that day consummated.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The following advertisement appeared in the Dublin Universal Advertiser, about
twelve months ago. As they exhibit the rivalship of two Frizures eminent in
their profession, it cannot be unentertaining.

ADVERTISEMENT I.
SIGNIOR Florentini, having taken into consideration the many inconveniences
which attend the method of hair dressing, formerly used by himself, and still
practiced by M St Laurent, humbly proposes to the ladies of quality in this
metropolis, his new method of stuccowing the head in the most fashionable
taste, to last with very little repair during the whole session of parliament.
Price only five guineas.

FLORENTINI.
N. B. He takes but one hour to build up the head, and two for baking it.



Answer by Sr. LAURENT.
WHEREAS dear have appear vone scandalous advertisement of Signor Florentini,
much reflection on Mr. St. Laurent's capacite for hair-dressing; he defy said
Signor Florentini to tell any inconvenience dat do attend his method, odewise
he shall consider said Florentini as beutesen and calumniateur.

St. LAURENT.

ADVERTISEMENT II.
FLORENTINI, who was not so good at English as the other, replies by his
Interpreter.

WHEREAS Mr. St. Laurent has challenged Signior Florentini to produce an
instance where his (St. Laurent's) method of hair dressing is inconvenient to
the ladies; he begs to observe, that three rows of iron pins thrust into the
skull, will not fail to cause a constant itching, a sensation that must distort
the features of the face, and disable it so that a lady by degrees may lose the
use of her face; besides the immense quantity of pomatum and powder, laid on
for a genteel dressing, will after a week or two breed mites, a circumstance
very disagreeable to gentlemen who do not love cheese; and also affords a fetid
smell not to be endured. From which, and other objections too tedious to
mention, Signior Florentini apprehends his new method is entirely free, and
will admit of no reasonable exception whatever.

FLORENTINI.

ST. LAURENT replies.
HAH! hah! hah! dear is no objekshion den to Signior Florentini's way of
frizing de hare of fine lady? I shall tell him von, two, three. In de fourst
place, he no consider, dat his stuccow will be crack, and be break by de
frequent jolts to vich all ladies are so sobject, and dat two hour baking vill
spoil de complekshon, and hort de eyes. And as to his scandaleuse aspershon dat
my method breed a de mite, so odious to gentlemen who do not love de cheese, I
say it is false and malitiouse; and to make good vat I do say. I do invite all
gentlemen of quality to examine de head of de Countess of -- (var I had de
honor to dress four week ago) next Monday at twelve o'clock, through Monsieur
Closent's great microscope, and see if dear be any mite dear, or oder ting like
de mite vatever.

N. B. Any gentleman may smell he ^^^^ship's head ven he please.



The controversy ended in a duel, but no hurt; as the combatants behaved like
flash and fribble; but what ever was the cause, it is certain the monstrous
fashion soon ceased; and in a few months the ladies recovered their natural
proportion, and became a piece of themselves.

FINIS.

