UNIVERSAL DAMNATION, AND SALVATION, CLEARLY PROVED BY THE SCRIPTURES OF THE
OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT. Specially recommended to the perusal of those who
believe in the SALVATION of all Mankind.

It is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law to do them.

GAL. chap. iii. ver. 10. He said unto them, It is not for you to know the
times or the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power.

ACTS, chap. i. ver. 7. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord
come, who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest
the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.

1st COR. chap. iv. ver. 5. BOSTON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY B. EDES, jun.

-- 1798. --

THE following Discourses (said to be the production of a respectable Clergyman
in the Episcopal Church) were found in manuscript among the papers of a
deceased member of the First Church of Universalists in Boston. A number of the
members of that Church having perused them, and finding them to contain very
clearly the doctrine and sentiments which they profess -- have contemplated the
plan of publishing them: And they presume, the coincidence of the Principles
they inculcate with their own religious belief (although they were written by a
gentleman of different persuasion) will plead their apology to the Author (if
living) for publishing them without his previous knowledge.

SERMON I.
ROMANS VIth CHAP. 23d VER. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God
is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


THE business of a minister of the gospel is to preach PEACE both to them that
are afar off, and to them that are nigh, and to testify to those who believe in
Jesus that they are not under the law but under grace; yet those who have
profaned christianity even in the days of the apostles, and ever since,
generally have had an unaccountable fondness for being under the law, though
the law was a ministration of death as St. Paul expressly testifies; and the
apostle of the Gentiles had much trouble with the Galations in this matter,
they had been led away by those who taught them that their salvation depended
on their keeping the law themselves, which made the apostle say, Knowing that a
man is not justified by the works of the law, for I through the law am lead to
the law, that I might live unto GOD, I am crucified with CHRIST! nevertheless I
live: yet not I, but CHRIST lives in me: and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the son of GOD, who loved me, and gave himself
for me. I do not frustrate the grace of GOD: for if righteousness come by the
law, then CHRIST is dead in vain. He calls them foolish, and inquires who has
be witched them; -- to let go the truth of the gospel which they had embraced;
to take hold of the law, and reasons with them, by inquiring if they received
the spirit by the works of the law, or by the preaching of the gospel; knowing
that they had received the spirit by the having of faith, he inquires, Are ye
so foolish? having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?
Having received the spirit by hearing the glad tidings of the gospel, do you
look to be made perfect by the observation of the law? -- the law that made
nothing perfect, only had its use in bringing in a better hope by which we draw
nigh to GOD. And he lets them know that as many as are of the works of the law,
are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one who continues not
in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do them. After which
says he, Ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law? I am
afraid of you, says he, left I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. If we
were to take a critical view of those who profess to believe in Christ at the
present day, I believe we should find them to be chiefly Galatians. Though
Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth before their eyes in the New
Testament, crucified among them, -- crucified in that mystical body of which he
is the HEAD and they the MEMBERS, -- tasting death, the wages of sin, for every
man, -- being made sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Yet they generally cry out this will not do, this
is an easy way to heaven: No, no, there is something for us to do, we must do
something. One says, we can get no title to heaven unless we believe: Another
says, we must repent before we shall have any title: Another says, we must
believe, repent and be baptized, and be holy both in life and heart. -- These
are the conditions of our having a title to heaven. A title must come from an
owner, an heir, or purchaser. Jesus Christ says, All things that the Father
has are mine, and this power, right or privilege is given, that he should give
eternal life to as many as are thus given him. -- Again, he is the appointed
heir of all things, therefore our title must flow from divine love, Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
sons of GOD, and if a son then an heir of GOD through CHRIST. It is true, we
have been captivated and alienated from our owners, to whom we belonged by
right of heirship; and in our alienated estate have been guilty of breach of
law, which curses every one that continues not in all things written in the
book of the law to do them. But praised be his name, in his love and pity he
has redeemed us from our captivity, and has delivered us from the curse of
the law being made a curse for us; therefore we are his by purchase, for he
has purchased eternal redemption for us. In short, if Jesus had not been made
of God unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption -- if he
had not been the Lord our righteousness, repentance would have been to no
purpose; we should have found no place for repentance, though we had sought it
ever so carefully with tears! for God who changes not, had pledged his truth,
that the soul that sinned should die. -- But we are told that those speak
smooth things who tell us that the gospel is a proclamation of peace and good
tidings. As the Holy Ghost foretold by the evangelical prophet, that the gospel
would be saying, How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
publishes peace, that brings glad tidings of good -- that publishes
salvation; that says unto Sion thy God reigns! thy watchmen shall lift up
the voice, with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to
eye when the Lord shall bring again Sion. For the Lord has comforted his
people, he has redeemed Jerusalem. The Lord has made bare his arm in the eyes
of the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our
God. We are also told, that Jesus himself read in the synagogue of Nazareth,
this passage of the prophet Esaias, where it is written, The spirit of the Lord
is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he
has sent me to heal the brokenhearted; to preach deliverance to the captives,
and recovering of sight to the blind; to set at liberty them that are bruised;
to preach the acceptable year of the Lord -- and he closed the book, and began
to say to them, this day is the scripture fulfilling in your ears. But if any
thing like this is now taught to be the spirit of the gospel, we are told it is
an easy religion -- too easy to be true; even by those who esteem themselves
experienced christians: It is, I say, called daubing with untempered mortar: As
though no mortar would satisfy them but what bears a striking resemblance to a
sort of mortar sometimes used in the eastern parts of the world, which mortar
is called Bitumen, and with which the walls of ancient Babylon were cemented,
as historians tell us; which mortar is so tempered as to be exceeding hard when
dry: yet contains so much sulphurous matter that when fire is applied it will
burn like pitch, and consume with intense heat. But since the walls of the
ancient literal Babylon were cemented with sulphurous mortar, that the wall of
the mystical Babylon, of which the literal was a figure, should be cemented
with mortar strongly tempered with brimstone or sulphur, is no great wonder,
especially when we consider that mystical Babylon is the kingdom of Satan!
which is the abomination of the earth.

MANKIND, since the fall of Adam, have pretty generally shown an aversion to
what they esteem an easy religion. It was upon this principle that the
vengeance of GOD was not to be averted, unless they themselves did some very
great thing to appease his anger, to satisfy his justice, and to procure his
favors, which is a very natural conceit for a blind and timid mind.
Accordingly we read that the prophets of Baal upon mount Carmel, when Elijah
was present, not only called upon their god from morning till evening, but also
leapt upon their altars, and cut themselves with knives and lancets, till the
blood ran down; thinking no doubt that their god would be moved with compassion
to them and graciously answer them, when he saw how hard and severe a service
they offered him: this I am sure was no easy religion, or any way pleasant.
Another deity was not to be approached by his followers except through a stream
of their own sons and daughters blood, and none but the children they loved
most, could be accepted to pass through the fire for a sacrifice, to pacify
Molock's rage. But I never heard any that profess christianity applaud that
religion for the hardness and severity of the services, though I think it must
appear indeed very hard and severe to any that ever felt parental affection.

THE Jews, it seems, were very much pleased with this hard religion, and quite
sick of the worship of JEHOVAH, it was so easy, though an heavy yoke, and under
the Jewish economy, when compared to the service of love and gratitude which
Christianity recommends! But I think the same notion is very common among those
who profess christianity.

THE Papists think that the Protestants have an easy religion, too loose and
easy to be good; he does not take that pains the Papist does to reconcile his
God to him: The Papist perhaps goes a long pilgrimage, walks barefoot with an
hair cloth next his skin; at certain times whips himself severely! and the more
he afflicts his flesh the more he pleases and reconciles his god to him; as he
supposes his religion is an hard, severe religion, and therefore in his esteem
must be the safest. -- When a man undergoes so much to gain the good will of
God, the Papist thinks he must gain it; -- just so among Protestants, they that
make their religion the most hard and painful task, think with a pleasing
reflection, that they have done so much for God -- or at least been such
faithful laborers in his service, that they must be more high in his esteem,
so more safe than others. Thus painful and industrious are men in general who
have any zeal for the religion they profess, to make out a wedding garment of
their own filthy rags. How much beneath the dignity of the God of love, are all
these notions! -- It is true that God's law was violated by us in our first
(...), and we were all become objects of punishment: His justice could by no
means excuse the guilty. But what could we do to reinstate the honor of this
law, and to satisfy his justice -- Nothing but suffer the penalty of the law --
eternal death! and then justice would have been ever inflicting without ever
being satisfied! But God whose ways are as much above our ways, and his
thoughts above our thoughts, as the heavens are high above the earth; instead
of looking to us for satisfaction, he provided an ample satisfaction to his
justice in our own behalf. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all; that with him he might also freely give us all things! How infinitely
noble was this! -- It was an act indeed worthy of GOD, who is love! When the
eternal God in the brightness of his glory, and transcendent wishes of his
love, has made mercy, and the very truth of justice to meet and embrace each
other in his Son! so that our sins are no more forever; -- how low and pitiful
does every attempt of ours to appease his justice now appear.

BUT after all that has been said, if no religion can be safe but an hard one,
that requires something very great and severe to please the Almighty, let it be
taken notice of and remembered, that the religion which is accused of being so
easy a way to heaven, points out the hardest method of satisfaction to divine
justice, and the most costly manner of purchasing heaven for men, that the
professors of any religion ever thought of, even an infinite satisfaction or
infinite sacrifice! No less than the blood and agonies of the Son of God
himself. One would think that this is a method of satisfying justice and
procuring a title to heaven and eternal happiness, sufficiently hard to satisfy
any man in his senses. Mankind in general have had a notion that some great
things must be done; some hard or dear sacrifice must be made to God, to honor
his justice and procure a title to his favor and eternal happiness: and so far
as their knowledge extended they have judged very right in this particular, but
then God himself has provided this great something, this dear sacrifice: he has
been to us an infinite and everlasting Father, has provided himself a lamb for
a sacrifice, infinitely more dear and precious to him than all the wisdom and
ingenuity of the whole world could ever contrive. But after all this, men who
think themselves greatly skilled in divine knowledge, cry this will never do;
we must do something; if this is all, the justice of God will never be
satisfied for us, we shall never have a title to heaven if CHRIST's merits are
not sufficient to satisfy justice, even to the last mite, and to purchase for
us an eternal inheritance in heaven! then Christ is dead in vain, and our
preaching is vain, your faith also is vain, ye are yet in your sins, then they
also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished, and Christ never rose
again for our justification, nor purchased eternal redemption for us; though
St. Paul expressly says he did. Heb, ix. 12. By his own blood he entered once
into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.

BUT only figure to yourself a poor criminal confined in irons for treason
against his king, condemned by a fair and righteous trial, of a just and
equitable sentence of death pronounced upon him: The king says to his son, let
us procure a release for this poor criminal; such an one as shall be consistent
with strict justice and the highest honor of the law -- the prince, the king's
son, replies, I am ready and rejoice to do thy will. The son goes, even to the
prison, and there pays down an immense sum for the ransom of the prisoner, even
before his eyes, and also procures, he purchases for him an ample and clear
deed to a most elegant house in the city and a plentiful maintenance for life!
The prince steps up to the poor forlorn criminal, with all the cheerful
benevolence that could possibly adorn the most lovely person of a man, and
knocks the irons off the prisoner, and delivers him his pardon, signed and
sealed, acknowledged and recorded, to an elegant seat, and plentiful
maintenance for life in the royal city! at the same time pulls off his dirty,
greasy, vile rags with which he was covered, and clothes him with a new, rich
and beautiful, neat and clean robe, and says to him in the most obliging manner
you are heartily welcome to my father's presence and mine, to your elegant
house and fortune and to all the privileges of the royal city. The poor
prisoner not a little coufused, looks round him! -- carefully picks up his old
clothes which instead of being worth any thing, are a vile and abominable
nuisance, and says to the prince, I must do something for the king your father,
otherwise I shall never get clear of the gallows after all, nor see the fine
house you tell of: I have nothing in the world to give the king but these old
clothes, there are some spots of dirt and grease upon them I confess, but as
you take them home you will be so good as to wash out these spots before you
present them to your father: there are a few rents and holes too in them I
think, but you can carefully darn them up so curiously, and where it is wanted
set in here and there a new piece of cloth so neatly that they will never be
seen; this you will do too before you present them! I wish I had something
better to present to your father, he is an excellent king, but this is the
best, nay all that I have. -- The prince, with an air of kindness nobly shining
in his countenance, replies, my father and I did this kindness knowing that you
had no reward to give us, if you had been able to have recompensed us, you
would have been able to have helped yourself: we ransomed you because you had
nothing to pay but your life, no recompense to offer -- my father and I have
every thing to enjoy, and stand in need of nothing; enjoy what is given you with
gratitude, that is enough for you! my father and I, have the pleasure and honor
of doing you this kindness, and that is enough for us: -- The poor bewildered
man stares a little and then replies, aye you don't mean as you say, nor as the
writings say which you gave me -- It is a conditional bargain (or covenant I
might have said) and a very good one if I come up to the conditions. I plainly
see that you mean a condition, though you don't expressly say it, (and I can
easily infer it from this that) if the gift was certain and free without
conditions says one, I should immediately become abominably licentious! If I
knew that the fine house and maintenance, and city privileges were certainly
mine, I should no longer feel any relish for them, I should not care any thing
about them, and to tell you the truth, it I knew that my ransom from the
gallows was complete and certain, I should not feel one spark of gratitude to
you nor your father, for all you have done for me! but since it is a
conditional ransom, the thoughts of being brought with solemn pomp and parade
to be publicly executed, so strikes my soul through and through with their
terrors, that I am absolutely afraid not to feel grateful and thankul in some
degree! A poor sort of gratitude and praise indeed, says the prince; if my
father had been pleased to require any conditions of you as a sort of requital
for showing this mercy, how heartily would he despise the shuddering services
that proceed from abject fears. -- Well, says the ransomed criminal, you must
take my old clothes and make the best of them you possibly can; some places in
them I see are entirely wanting, you must set in little slips of this fine new
robe where they are wanted: I hope that will please your father! -- But a new
piece of cloth, put into an old garment, says the prince, makes the much worse
you know, and besides, he does not want your old clothes. -- I hope he will
accept of them, says the infatuated man, but they look so bad I am afraid he
will not, and then I shall be undone, for I have nothing else to give him, and I
must do something you know. -- Present yourself to him, says the prince, with
your new robe on, which I gave you. -- That will not do, says the man, I repeat it
again, I must do something for him! -- Poor deluded man, (says the prince) you
are beside yourself. The goal-keeper has used you very ill, he has amused you
with so many follies and falsehoods, and kept you in a dark room, so dark that
you are become hardly capable to judge rationally of any thing I say to you;
this goal-keeper it was that seduced you into the act of treason at first, and
has been insensibly seducing and deceiving you ever since; he will be punished
in due time: -- by-and-by I will send my servants with an order to the goal
keeper, to thrust you out, and when my servants shall lead you out in the fresh
air, where you will behold the pleasant rays of the sun, from which you have
been long hid, then you will come to yourself again, and be joyfully led to
your new seat; where I will meet you, and give you joy of your new habitation!

THUS, however firmly men are assured that CHRIST has purchased eternal
redemption for them, and secured their title to heaven, yet talk of conditions,
and insist upon doing something to get a title! even those who cry out against
works have this something to do to gain a title to happiness, as well as
others, though they are careful to call that something they have to do by a
different name from works! But what says the Almighty to the prophet Isaiah, He
that kills an ox is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he
cut off a dog's neck; he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swine's
blood; he that burns incense, as if he blessed an idol. -- Thus far is any
thing that we ourselves can do from purchasing for us a title to the favor of
GOD or an inheritance in his kingdom. -- Every attempt of this kind we make, is
no better than a smoke in the nose of our GOD.

To the same purpose is the 10th chapter of St. Paul's epistle to the Hebrews,
It is not possible, says he, that the blood of bulls or of goats should take
away sins: wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, the son of God
says to his Father, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body haft
thou prepared me: in burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou have had no
pleasure: Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of
me) to do thy will, OGod. Above when he said, Sacrifice, etc. thou would
not, neither had pleasure therein, which are offered by the law. By the way
don't you imagine that the Jews thought that GOD had pleasure in those
sacrifices of theirs, which were offered by the law? Then said he, Lo, I come
to do thy will, O God: By the which will, we are sanctified through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all, says the apostle. Jesus
performing this will of GOD once, sanctifies us. The apostle adds, for by one
offering he has perfected forever them that are sanctified, and their sins and
iniquities will I remember no more says the Lord; now where remission of these
is, there is no more offering for sins. You will observe that here is not one
intimation that we have something to do to become perfect forever, but the
contrary, we see Jesus has perfected forever them that are sanctified. This is
not to be done, but done already. Jesus has done it.

BUT by this time, I fancy some of you want to put me in mind of the words of
my text lest I should lose sight of them, and so forget to give you a
particular account of them. -- The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God
is elernal life in Christ Jesus our Lord, as it stands in the original. -- The
original of the New Testament is the truth, even the very words of the
Apostles, as they wrote them, but the translation into English which you read,
is the work of men in England, about an hundred years ago, and so far as they
have given you an exact translation, or an exact meaning in English of the
apostles words, so far its the truth as it is in JESUS, but no farther.

I PURPOSE to examine each part of my text distinctly, and give you the meaning
of the words as near as I am able to, and

1. What is here meant by Wages: 2. What is meant by Sin: 3. What is meant by
Death: 4. What is meant by the Gift of God: 5. What is meant by eternal Life:
6. What is meant by the assertion that this eternal Life is in CHRIST JESUS our
LORD.
But the Consideration of these distinct parts of my text I shall defer till
another opportunity.

SERMON II.
ROMANS VI. 23.

The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.


IN my former discourse on these words, after a number of general observations,
I proposed to examine each part of my text distinctly, and in their natural
order.

1. What is here meant by Wages: 2. What is meant by Sin: 3. What is meant by
Death: 4. What is meant by the Gift of GOD: 5. What is meant by eternal Life:
and, 6. What is meant by the assertion that this eternal Life is in CHRIST
JESUS our LORD.
1st. What is meant by this expression in the text, -- Wages. -- The Wages of
Sin is Death.

WAGES are what is due to any one for what he does, what he deserves either of
reward or punishment. -- The payment of what any one has merited, and what he
is supposed to expect, commonly in consequence either of a promise or
threatening.

WAGES are generally supposed to arise from a pre-contract: this is the case
here. The law of GOD is called a covenant of Works; consisting of promises of
life and happiness, as the reward of obedience; and threatenings of death and
misery, as the punishment of disobedience. He that docth those things shall
live in them, says the law. If he keep all my statutes and do that which is
lawful and right he shall surely live; in his righteousness that he has done
fe shall live: But behold, says the LORD GOD, all SOULS are mine, the SOUL
that SINS it shall DIE: in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely
die, says the LORD GOD to Adam. -- And again, the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him: Thus you see the Wages of the righteous are also
denounced to them by the law; the soul that sins shall die, for the wages of
sin is death. Such are the Wages of sin, and justice never suffers them to go
unpaid! Another thing to be considered in Wages is, that they become due at a
certain period of time; and this time is commonly mentioned in the contract, if
not, they are immediately due when merited.

THE law says, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die; and the
giver of this law never had the character of refusing to pay laborers their
Wages. Vengeance is mine says the LORD, I will repay. Nor had he ever justly
the character of withholding any part of the Wages: 'Till heaven and earth pass
away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till all be
fulfilled says JESUS CHRIST. And again, if thou be cast into prison, verily I
say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing! In another Evangelist, the last mite! So that you may be
sufficiently assured of this, that no one ever merited any kind of Wages of
GOD, either of reward or punishment, that ever was or ever will be defrauded of
any part of them, even the least mite; for it is written, the recompense of a
man's hands shall be rendered unto him: for he is faithful that has promised,
and will bring it to pass; he is a just God, he is a God of truth: you may
indeed rely upon his word; he won's alter the thing that is gone out of his
mouth.

But I hasten to the 2d thing proposed, which was to examine, what is meant in
the text by Sin.

THE apostle John tells us that all unrighteousness is sin; and that whosoever
commits sin, transgresses the law, for sin is the transgression of the law.
And Jesus himself tells us, that the first great Commandment in the Law is,
thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind: and the second is like unto it: thou shall love thy
neighbors as thyself: on these two commandments, hang all the law and the
prophets. Hence it is easy to see, that whatever there is in us, that is in any
respect inconsistent with loving God with all our hearts, or any neglect of
loving our neighbor as ourselves, is sin, if we prefer any personal pleasure
or personal safety, to doing (his) GOD's will; or if we at any time love
ourselves better than our neighbors, we commit sin. -- If we have any desire
that our neighbors should meet with any trouble or difficulty; or take any
degree of pleasure in the sufferings of any one, or attempt to injure any one,
though in the smallest degree, whatever provocation he offers us, we commit sin!
the certain wages of which is death. -- What! says one, the least offense
possible the most trifling misconduct punished with death! Yes -- Is this
certain? Indeed it is, it is not said the Wages of great sins is death but not
of little ones: The law curses every one that continues not in all things
contained in the law. -- But, all things! I thought says one, that he who
commits murder, or blasphemy, or some such capital crime, and did not repent,
was entitled to death, but that every offense, even the smallest, would incur
death, is what I did imagine no one believed; does any affirm that every
offense, even the least, merits so severe a condemnation as Death! -- What
says the Scripture, He that offends in one point is guilty of all. I should
think, continues he, that the infinite kindness and clemency of GOD would
rather overlook petty faults, than thus heavily punish them. -- No, we are
plainly told that GOD will by no means clear the guilty: but for every idle
word which men speak, shall they give account in the day of judgment! -- What
then will become of us all, says he, by such doctrine? for there is not a man
in the world without his faults. -- True, we are told plainly that there is not
a man that lives and sins not; in many things we offend all, says the
apostle; and my doctrine is not mine but the word of GOD. -- But what is to be
done with us all? says the man: what will become of us? -- Why just what the
Word of GOD says, By the deeds of the law shall no ftesh be justified in his
sight, for every mouth shall be stopped and the whole world become guilty
before GOD. See Romans iii. 19. They shall be all proved guilty of sin; and the
wages of sin it death. -- I thought, says the man, here you was preaching up
the salvation of all men, but now you seem to be preaching up the damnation of
all men! This is explaining the law which many think to be a very principal
part of preaching the gospel of peace: This is showing the condemnation of all
men by the law; for we are plainly told of the law that it is a ministration of
death; but do none escape this death which is the wages of sin; do none escape
this condemnation? -- Not one of all the race of Adam, for they have all
sinned! And we are told that the whole world shall become guilty before GOD,
and we are told that he will by no means clear the guilty! -- Worse and worse
says the man: I think, says he, the mortar you daub with is tempered as high
with brimstone as any body's; nay more so, for I don't hear that you clear any,
but condemn all the world! The most censotious besides you, leave at least room
enough to creep out themselves, but you don't do that! -- No, we think with the
apostles, are we better than they? no in no wise, for the scripture has
concluded all under sin: But to be plain with you, says he, don't you think
that so much as one of the human race will finally be saved? The answer to this
question will be most seasonable and perhaps fall in its proper place, when we
consider the latter part of the words of the text.

I THINK, says he, you have at this time, preached up the law strict enough for
any body -- indeed those of your way of thinking, though they don't incline to
preach very much upon the law, yet when they take it in hand they make thorough
work of it, meaning, I suppose to do this piece of work so effectually that it
shall not need to be taken in hand so often. For my part says he, I had rather
have more of the law preached, but then I would choose to have it a little more
mild; for I don't after all see why the law may not justify, or at least excuse
those who honestly mean to keep the law, though they often break it, through
infirmity or surprise, or ignorance, or through want of consideration! but if
they try to do as well as they can, and are sincere and habitually obedient and
lament their backslidings, it looks hard indeed that they shall not be accepted:
surely the law of God cannot be so rigid. When a man has done as well as he can,
he cannot do any better; and what would you have him do? I answer in the words
of the great apostle to the Gentiles, If there had been a law given which would
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law, but the
scripture has concluded all under sin. -- Says he, and you know the wages of
sin is death. -- How fond are people of trying to make the law a ministration
of life; how many attempts to mitigate the severity of it: though after all it
will look them in the face, and make them afraid, as long as they seek to be
justified by it: however they take great pains to smooth the terrors of it, and
to explain away the severity of it, the Wages of Sin is Death; especially great
acts of sin, they imagine; if they be not repented of, but continued in. -- No,
the law condemns them if they are guilty of but one breach of it! For he that
offends in one point, we are told, is guilty of all! and cursed, if he
continues not in all things written in the book to do them, but they will
endeavor to get clear of all those plain and stubborn declarations by
asserting that they don't mean as they say, and so take for doctrines the
commandments of men, making void the law of God through their traditions, as we
are told the Jews did. This they do because they see no way of escaping the
sentence of the law, but by mitigating the strictness and severity, and by
making the law more pliable, for they must at all events, contrive some way
themselves of living excused by the law, since the lawgiver has plainly told
them; that he will by no means clear the guilty. See Exodus, xxxiv. 7. But the
soul that sins shall die. See Ezekiel 18th chap. But to avoid being slain by
the law, men will seek out many inventions. I was alive to the law once says
St. Paul. He could find out how he might be justified, or at least excused by
it; but when the commandments came says he, it appeared in its true light,
exceeding broad; sin revived and I died, he saw himself condemned to death by
the law, the slightest sins in the esteem of men are notwithstanding mortal in
the sight of GOD, as they are deviations from the rules of equity and
righteousness.

IT is absurd to conceive that man, created in the image of God, and bound by
every tie of allegiance to be subject and obedient to his infinite Cicator. It
is wretchedly absurd to conceive, that in these circumstances, man should sin
at all and not be punished; to sin venially as the Papists call it, so slightly
as that GOD will put up with it without punishing it, is not to sin at all, the
very pretense is a contradiction; for every sin is nothing else: Even the least
sin that ever was committed is nothing less than the transgression of the law!
and therefore incurs the penalty of the law, which penalty is death, the curse.
Consequently by sin, the text means all manner and degrees of sin, none of
which are venial, but all give us a sure title to death. The transgression of
the law of God, even the least of them, do far more justly merit death than the
greatest oftenders against the law of man, the dignity of our divine lawgiver,
and the obligations both of right and gratitude to him are prodigious
aggravations to the sins we commit against the precepts and commands of our
supreme sovereign, for who can express the infinite disproportion there is
between us and him? Are not we his creatures, the work of his hands, and has he
not a full right and unlimited property in us? Wherefore are not our oftences
against him, yea, the least of them, sufficiently provoking and criminal to
deserve death? Undoubtedly they are! They give us a sure infallible title to
death, which is denounced in many other passages of scripture, as well as my
text, to be the just reward and appointed wages of sins.

BUT I pass on to examine in the 3d place, WHAT is meant in the text by Death,
that death which all sin has a sure title to. -- Death in its utmost limits, no
doubt contains every thing that is in any measure grievous or destructive,
either to soul or body: Thus Pharaoh besought Moses to entreat the LORD his GOD
that he would take away this death, only alluding to the Locusts that had
overspread the country, and eat up every herb which the hail had left.

So St. Paul says, he was in deaths often; and this besides, the different views
he had, that the law condemned to death; it was the stripes and labors and
imprisonments, with that long catalogue of troubles he endured, which besides
their present pain, tended evidently to the temporal destruction of his body:
And so upon that account are perhaps styled so many distinct deaths, or rather
degrees of death! But the death of the body is completed in its absolute
separation from the soul in its dissolution! Death also comprehends all the
darkness, terrors and afflictions of the mind, all that remorse and inward
distress and confusion of soul which are the consequences of sin, and every
painful idea that arises from a sense of guilt and the fear of punishment. All
the guilt, distress, darkness and fears of the soul are its death; this is
spiritual death, or the death of the soul, thus denounced by the law; the soul
that sins shall die; this death of the soul or spirit is called spiritual
death. -- When it is complete in an absolute and perfect separation and
cessation from every kind and degree of hope, comsort or any thing pleasing, it
is the very blackness of darkness in the mind, and the complete anguish of
distress and horror! not admitting the least view of divine favor, or the
least degree of sense of the beauty of holiness, a perfect deadness to all
goodness, righteousness or happiness, and a continuance in this state forever,
is eternal death, the wages of sin!

A MAN is said to be dead in trespasses and sins in the language of scripture,
when he is devoted to the service of sin, and sees himself condemned by the
law, and is ignorant of the salvation of GOD, has no relish for holiness; but
his mind, dead to every thing spiritually good, his mind is under the the
sentence of the law, which is death; like a criminal sentenced to death by
human laws, who knows of no certain way to escape the execution threatened,
that he may have some flattering hopes, that seem to bewilder without reason or
foundation.

THOSE who are dead in trespasses and sins, frequently feel much sorrow and
inward heaviness at times. When evil accidents befall them, they are often
alarmed: particularly when sickness threatens them, it is not uncommon for them
to be in great dread, fearing that a summons is sent to call them to that
impartial reckoning, in which the Devil and their own guilty minds will prove
accusers; in this state of fearful expectation, the incessant clamor of an
enraged conscience must be distressing beyond expression! how extreme the
agonies of a guilty mind. If we had never felt any thing of this kind, by
experience it would be difficult if not impossible to paint the severity of
them. We could not figure to ourselves, if we were utter strangers to them, how
sad, how severe and insupportably gloomy they are many times, vastly worse than
a temporal death: and sometimes put the miserable object upon the project of
forcing themselves out of the world to avoid them. However, these guilty
agonies are a sad, though lively figure of spiritual eternal death, the wages
of sin; which after as many thousands, as many millions of ages of years, as
there are sands on the sea shore or atoms in this whole globe of earth, is no
nearer a period or conclusion than at the first moment of its beginning. These
are the wages of every sin, even of the least that was ever committed against
the law of God: It deserves death, temporal and spiritual; the death both of
the body and soul, and this death to remain forever: to be without end or
intermission. I need not undertake a particular proof of this duration of
death, bodily and spiritual, and eternal, being the sentence of the law of GOD
for fin; for I think it is even a common phrase, that sin deserves and is
threatened with death, temporal, spiritual and eternal.

THE law that denounces the wages of sin to be death, gives not even the least
hint or intimation of any cessation or release from that death! so that would
we know what is meant in the text by that death which is the wages of sin, we
must form in our minds a completed apprehension of all ill, of all the pains
and distresses of the body, together with its separation from the soul, its
utter dissolution, and of all the extreme agonies of the soul, without one
spark of joy or hope, for an eternal duration; and then consider that this is
the sentence of GOD's law upon every son and daughter of Adam, for St. Paul
tells us plainly that the scripture has concluded all under sin; there is none
of them righteous; no not one -- in many things we offend all: and lest we
should try to excuse some, we are told that by the offense of Adam, judgment
came upon all men to condemnation. -- I hope that none who hear me shall think
that I am faulty, for not preaching up the terrors of the law.

IF any of you are fond of what some term law works, I think they must be
satisfied, for to declare, as I do, that every, even the least offense against
the law of GOD, merits the death of soul and body to all eternity, and that all
the evils we can conceive of as pertaining to the man, forever are to be taken
into this idea of death: -- and that all the natural descendants of Adam,
without exception have been proved guilty and sentenced to this death by the
law, and that no one jot or tittle of this law could ever fail or be excused
from taking effect, is, I think, preaching the law strict enough for any body.

YE that talk of keeping the law or obeying the commands of GOD, in order to be
saved by it, what do you think of it? I know that this method of preaching the
law must be strict enough for you. -- Perhaps some one might make this reply, I
know that by the deeds of the law no flesh shall be justified in his GOD's
sight, but then if I believe and repent, and strive to keep the commandments of
GOD, and do generally, and habitually keep them, I expect that CHRIST will
satisfy for those instances in which I fail of my duty. -- Then you suppose
that a new piece of cloth put into an old garment will not make the rent worse,
though CHRIST was of opinion that it would: You think then that a garment,
consisting of some old cloth and some new, if joined together, will make a
perfect garment, fit to appear in before an infinitely just GOD! But it seems
that JESUS himself is not willing to put a piece of his new cloth into our old
garment, because he judges that it will make the rent worse! for the new cloth
will not fasten to the old nor by any means adhere to it; -- the old would break
away in the attempt. And if it would adhere, the garment after all would be but
a patched thing, and would not look like the coat of JESUS, which we are told
was without seam, woven from the top throughout, and not suffered to be rent
even by the soldiers. John xix. 23. And though his body was pierced and his
blood poured out, yet his seamless coat was by no man rent: therefore you have
sufficient assurances that Jesus will never tare up his seamless coat to patch
yours; besides, a patched coat would hardly look like a wedding garment. So
that it is very plain that you must fail in that attempt.

ST. Paul never made any mention in any of his epistles, of mending our old
garment with slips or pieces of CHRIST'S new robe of righteousness! -- He
exhorts indeed to put off the old man which is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts; and to put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. iv. 22-24. Observe, my brethren, the
apostle don't say, put off part of the old man which is partly corrupt,
according to the lusts that are partly deceitful, nor put on some little part
of the new man, which is partly created in righteousness and true holiness.

ST. Paul says to the Colosians, chap. iii. verses 9, 10, and so on, Ye have
put off the old man with his deeds: and have put on the new man, which is
renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him: where (says he)
there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian,
Scythian, bond nor free: no part of the old man remaining: but says he, Christ
is all and in all. Take notice that the apostle don't say, that CHRIST is part
and in part of all, but, CHRIST is all and in all.

BUT, says the objector, Do you agree with the doctrine of the church of
England in this matter, and her interpretation of scripture concerning this
doctrine, that no part of our old garments, or righteousness can be accepted in
GOD's sight? as coming up to the demands of the law, the church of England in
her articles of Religion has set to her seal that it is true. -- Article 13th.
-- Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his spirit,
are not done as GOD has willed and commanded them to be done; no doubt but
they have the nature of sin; -- but this, says the objector, condemns but only
part of our works, and those too which are before the grace of CHRIST and the
inspiration of his spirit; but does not at all condemn as defective, those
works of ours which are the fruits of faith in CHRIST, which proceed from a
true and lively faith. This is but a poor way of proving that the whole of any
thing is condemned as defective because some part of it is. Well then, let us
examine the 12th article in which are these words: Albeit that good works which
are the fruits of faith, and follow after justification, cannot put away our
sins and endure the severity of GOD's judgment. Here then you see that the
articles of the church of England condemn our works, both before and after
faith, as defective; even those that are the fruits of faith cannot endure the
severity of GOD's judgment: though in the close of this 12th article they are
said to spring out necessarily of a true and lively faith, insomuch that by
them a lively faith may be as evidently known as a tree discerned by its fruit.
This, says the objector, has a plausible appearance of condemning all we do as
defective in the sight of GOD's law, I must own; but yet I cannot think, that
the church of England ever meant to condemn them all as defective: I think they
could not. -- Well, let as examine further then; article 11th has these words,
We are accounted righteous before GOD only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST, for says the 18th article, Holy scripture does set out
unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved. Thus fully
has the church of England set her seal to the truth of this doctrine, and I
feel happy that my following the exact truth of scripture in this point, and
closely adhering to it, does not expose me to any just imputation of departing
from the doctrine of the church of England. But I may freely declare that no
works of ours whatever from our birth to our death will stand the strict test
of righteousness in the fight of GOD, or bear the impartial examination of his
justice, and let us desire with St. Paul, to be found in Christ not having our
own righteousness, which is of the law, but the righteousness of GOD, and that
we may know him and the power of his resurrection, who rofe from the dead for
our juslification.

THE law was given by Moses, and was a ministration of death; but grace and
truth came by Jesus Christ; and though the letter kills yet the spirit gives
life. My words, or the words I speak unto you, said Jesus, are spirit, and they
are life. We are told the first man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam
was made a quickening spirit: had it not been for sin, man might have lived
prosperous and happy in an earthly paradise: -- his life, free from cares and
unmixed with sorrow. Sin first made man acquainted with trouble, and it is our
guiltiness of mind, under a sense of the law, that increases the number and
heightens the malignity of all our afflictions. It is the consciousness of our
manifold sins, and the dread of Almighty vengeance, in minds destitute of the
light of life, that arms the disasters of the world with such a killing force,
and sometimes makes the load of temporal evils too heavy for men to bear, when
the mind seems the only part immediately effected. When men have lively notions
of the terrors of wickedness, what is it but only this one evil that can indeed
wound their spirit with trembling concern, and the most cutting anguish; and
would they not think it a happy deliverance to be set free from that dreadful
bondage to fear, which has made many go into a complete destruction, and many
to cut their own throats, to drown their sense of the fear of eternal death,
the wages of sin, in a deluge of their own blood! Would not they who are
tormented with such outrageous fear, think it a blessed deliverance, now to be
saved from it? -- and like the man that was among the tombs, to be set calm and
in their right mind at JESUS' feet? -- Would they not think it of some benefit
to man now to have the gospel of peace proclaimed, though it was represented as
good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people.

BUT to show what is an effectual deliverance now from this awful bondage to
fears, belongs to the consideration of the remaining part of my text, which I
hope will be the matter of our agreeable contemplation at a future opportunity.

SERMON III.
ROMANS VI. 23.

The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.


IN discoursing heretofore on these words, I proposed to examine distinctly,

1. What is meant by Wages: 2. What is meant by Sin: 3. What is meant by Death:
4. What is meant by the Gift of GOD: 5. What is meant by eternal Life: and, 6.
What is meant by the assertion that this eternal Life is in CHRIST JESUS our
LORD.
THE first three of these I have carefully considered; and shown that Wages are
that which is due either of reward or punishment: to every one according to
what they have done: the payment of what every one merits by the tenure of the
divine law, which is a covenant of works, consisting of promises of life and
happiness for the reward of unfailing obedience, and of threatenings of death
and misery for the punishment of every instance, for every kind and degree, of
disobedience: he that does the things contained in the law, shall live in them,
but the soul that sins shall die, says the law, and that GOD never did nor
ever will defraud any of their wages, not even of the least farthing of them,
but the recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him. Secondly, I
showed what was meant by Sin, that all unrighteousness is sin, every instance,
in thought, word or deed, that is contrary to or not fully up to loving GOD
with all the heart, and our neighbors as ourselves; and I proved by the most
plain and full testimony of scripture, that every one of the natural
descendants of Adam are finners, and have merited the Wages of Sin, which is
Death; that nothing which any one of them do from their birth to their death,
comes fully up to the demands of the divine law, and that to this truth the
church of England has set her seal, particularly in her 11th, 12th, 13th and
18th articles of Religion. Thirdly, I showed what Death it is that is threatened
to every one for the wages of sin: That it comprehends all the evils that can
take hold either of body or mind; all the pains of the body together with its
total dissolution, and all the guilty agonics of the soul, together with its
complete separation from every spark of joy or hope; and this stare both of
soul and body to continue for ever and ever; this is what is commonly called
death, temporal, spiritual and eternal, and that by the holy and just law of
GOD, this sentence passed upon every son and daughter of Adam, the scripture
having concluded all under sin, and that GOD, who is true, has declared that he
will by no means clear the guilty. So that since the fall of Adam, it was never
possible that either he or any one of his descendents should escape this
punishment, this curse, even death, the just wages of sin: and though the law
of GOD is holy, just and good, yet to us it is no other than a ministration of
death, as St. Paul expressly testifies.

THUS I have explained the law to you, and used my endeavor, that no part of
the truth of it should be kept back from you; and though upon the last
interview I brought you no farther on your way than under the very center of
this dark cloud, the ministration of condemnation, and there left you for a
little space, but not without an intimation that I purposed to carry you
farther, yet now I have met you here, to conduct you from the clouds of
darkness and fear, to that great mountain which GOD by the mouth of his prophet
Daniel, has promised shall fill the whole earth, where is fullness of light and
joy, and though it is an established truth, that no one of the guilty race of
Adam could escape the curse of the law which is death: but sentence of
condemnation has passed upon all: for the word of GOD is sure, yet I now come
to you in the fullness of the blessings of the gospel of peace, to testify to
you in the words of the Holy Ghost, delivered by the prophets Isaiah and
Jeremith, that your warfare is accomplished, that you have received double for
all your sins; the Lord has accomplished his fury; for as St. Paul testifies,
Christ has appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. I am come to
declare unto you, that the gift of God is eternal life, in Christ Jesus our
Lord. What a glorious light is this -- the thunderings and lightnings, the
clouds and thick darkness that overshadow mount Sinai, with all their terrors,
are dispersed, and the Son of Righteousness has arisen with healing in his
wings.

I NOW come to the consideration of the 4th particular in my text, to show,
What is meant by the Gist of GOD.

THE thing given, the apostle declares in my text to be, eternal life. St. John
tells us, that God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in his son.
See 1st John, v. 11. The tradition of the world, says, that God will give
eternal life to those who now obey him, and believe the gospel; but to none
else; and to the believers God will not give eternal life, till the day of
judgment! but we see the apostle of our Lord differs from this tradition of
men. St. Paul in my text, does not say the gift of God will be eternal life
sometime or other; but he says, it is eternal life. And St. John says, God has
given to us eternal life: as already given, not as something to be given
hereafter. -- When GOD gave his Son, he gave us eternal life: They speak of
this eternal life as already given, not as something to be given hereafter.
When GOD gave his Son, he gave us eternal life, for this life is his Son. And
JESUS said, I am the way, the truth and the life. Ye are dead, (says St. Paul,)
and your life is hid with Christ in God. And we are told that when he who is
our life shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory! So that JESUS is said
to be our life, because he not only redeemed us from death, the wages of sin,
but procured for us life by his obedience to the law; for life is the reward of
righteousness by the law, and he is the head of every man; and being righteous
for every man, because he is the Lord our righteousness, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him: For he, we are told, was made of God unto us
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. So that we being the
righteousness of GOD in him, have life, the reward of righteousness. We live
because he lives; he is the vine and we the branches: we received our life from
him, he is the root that supports us; the head of every man is CHRIST: We are
expressly told, and if the head lives the whole body lives. So that GOD'S
giving his Son, includes the gift of eternal life to us; for we are expressly
told, that this life is in his son. Again, the gift of God is free; no purchase
of ours: It is unconditional respecting us; no condition required but what
CHRIST has already fulfilled. To give and then require of us to purchase the
gift is beneath the dignity of our heavenly Father. No, the gift of GOD is
free; for says St. Paul, in the 5th chapter of his epistle to the Romans, Not
as the offense, so also is the free gift. For it through the offense of one,
many be dead; much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, has abounded
unto many. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the
judgment was by one [i. e. one oftence,] to condemnation; but the free gift is
of many offenses unto justification.

BUT says the objector, We are exhorted to repent, therefore this is a
condition of our receiving this gift. I answer, this gift is already given, GOD
has given to us eternal life, says the apostle John. Yes, says the objector,
he had given eternal life to them whom the apostle was talking to, for they had
repented. I answer, St. Paul in his epistle to the Romans, chap. 11. verses 28,
29, says of the unbelieving, impenitent Jews, as touching the election, they
are beloved for the Fathers sakes. For the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. For (says he) God has concluded them all in unbelief, that What?
that he might damn them all? No; that he might have mercy upon all. So that if
you will believe St. Paul, the gift of God is free and without repentance; nay,
even those who are concluded in unbelief, as all the nations of the Jews were;
were not these concluded unbelievers, that all, or even any one of them might
perish, but that GOD might have mercy upon all of them -- that our merciful
high priest might have compassion upon the ignorant, and those that are out of
the way, as the same apostle tells us in his epistle to the Hebrews, and though
the Jews stumbled at that stumbling stone, as it is written, Behold I lay in
Zion a stumbling stone and rock of offense, yet (says the apostle) have they
stumbled that they should fall, God forbid. Though they stumbled, yet he
abhorred the very idea of their being lost: no, it could not be; those who
stumbled were to rise again; as God told Simeon, when he took up the child
Jesus in his arms being in the temple, and the Holy Ghost being upon him, says
to Mary the mother of Jesus, this child is set for the fall and rising again of
many in Israel. So that those who stumble or fall were however to rise again:
so that the more you examine the gospel of God's grace, the more plainly you
will see that the gift of God is free -- his grace is free -- for God, we are
told, commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us. He did not wait for our faith or repentance, no; when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. See Romans 8and10. --
And if this is by grace (St. Paul tells us) then it is no more of works:
otherwise grace is no more grace -- every one who believes in the true Christ,
who is the head of every man: for we are told, there should be many false
Christ's, and that they should deceive many; but every one who believes in the
trueChrist, who, we are told is the savior of all men, will see that he is the
end of the law for righteousness. And if he is the end of the law, the law came
to an end in him. The demands of the law fully answered and satisfied by him,
then what can be left for us to do to purchase this gift, which is already
given us? But if we have something to do to obtain this gift, then it is no
longer a gift, much less a free gift, but a bargain. But says the objector, is
not the gospel called a covenant, -- the new covenant; and better than the old
covenant; and does not a covenant suppose conditions to be performed? Yes, the
gospel of the grace of GOD is called the New Covenant, and GOD promised by
Isaiah, to give his son for a covenant of the people. And as JESUS is our
covenant -- the covenant of the people, the conditions to be performed were all
due from Jesus alone, and he has performed them so that the covenant is
finished forever. Hence St. Paul calls the blood of JESUS, the blood of the
everlasting covenant.

THE first covenant was broken by us, and so came to an end. We being
unfaithful GOD would trust us no more, but gave his Son for our covenant, which
perfectly secured the performance of the conditions on our side; JESUS has
already performed every tittle that was required: so that it is not left in our
power to break this covenant; it is already completed, and so must last
forever: therefore the blood of JESUS is styled the blood of the everlasting
covenant -- the covenant that will last forever. The mountains shall depart,
and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee! neither
shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that bath mercy on
thee: in a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee says the Lord thy redeemer: And
every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall condemn. This
is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me,
says the Lord. See Isaiah xv. 8, 10, 17. Therefore as our righteousness is of
the LORD, it is perfect, and the covenant secured forever, and no conditions
required of us as individuals; it is the gift of GOD, and his gift is free. The
new covenant in Christ's blood is the sure mercies of David; our sins and
iniquities will GOD remember no more.

Now says St. Paul, where remission of these is there is no more offering for
sins. But many think they have still an offering to make; some conditions to
perform; in order to fulfill their part of the covenant of grace, which if true,
would make it a covenant of works as much as the first covenant was, and then
the new covenant might be broken by us; and then how would it be an everlasting
covenant -- how would it be the sure mercies of David. If it was left to us to
keep or break, how would it be sure at all? GOD has promised that the covenant
of his peace shall not be removed: Because our righteousness is of him, it does
not depend on ourselves, but our eternal life is the gift of GOD, we don't
purchase it -- for it is freely given.

GOD sent his Son to redeem us -- to sulfil the law for us -- to do every thing
for us that was necessary, in order to GOD's being just, and at the same time
the justifier of the sinner. Therefore it is all of GOD -- his free gift
already given -- It is GOD that justifies, who is be that contemns: it is
CHRIST that dies, yea, rather that is risen again. This is our security --
this is our rejoicing -- this is our life -- this is the gift of GOD: for not
by works of righteousness which we have done, but by his mercy he saved us --
it is already complete -- Though all we have gone astray, every one to his own
way, yet the just Judge has laid upon JESUS the iniquities of us all, and JESUS
has already put away our sins by the sacrifice of himself. This sacrifice alone
was sufficient without any of our doings, to put away the sins of the whole
world.

JSEUS was the lamb of GOD, that took away the sin of the world: that tasted
death for every man; that gave himself a ransom for all; that was made a curse
for us; that was made sin for us; that finished the transgressions and made an
end of sin: for he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
says the apostle, but for the sins of the whole world.

BUT says the objector, don't you depart from the doctrine of the church of
England, when you say that the sacrifice of Christ alone is sufficient without
any of our doings, to put away the sins of the whole world. I remember, says
he, that you undertook to prove upon a former occasion, that by the articles of
the church of England, all our righteousness from our birth to our death, even
the best of it, even that which proceeds from a true and lively faith, is
defective, and will not stand the test of GOD's justice, or the severity of his
judgment; and you seemed to have more to say for yourself than one would have
imagined; but when you assert that CHRIST has already done all that is
necessary to reconcile the justice of GOD to us, without any doings of our own,
I don't see how you will prove that to be consistent with the doctrine of the
church, that we have nothing left for us to do, to escape eternal death -- the
wages of sin, but that CHRIST has done all, Well then, let us hear the
beginning of the prayer of consecration in the communion service, which is
this: "Almighty GOD, our heavenly Father, who of thy tender mercy did give
thy only Son, Jesus Christ, to suffer death upon the cross for our redemption,
who made there (by his one oblation of himself once offered) a full, perfect
and sufficient sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world!" -- What can be more express than this? If CHRIST's death upon the
cross, is a full, perfect and sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world, what can infinite justice do more? Would it be just to require more than
what is a full, perfect and sufficient satisfaction to justice? But says the
objector, I cannot think that this was meant to exclude our faith, repentance,
and all our obedience from being necessary to satisfy the justice of GOD: so
that now his law has no demands upon us.

BUT do you suppose that the church of England would offer that to satisfy the
demands of GOD's law which she has declared in express words will not endure
the severity of GOD's judgment; would she offer more than what she has
pronounced sufficient satisfaction? This would be works of supererogation,
which she condemns in her 14th article. But says the objector, do you think it
is the doctrine of the church that what Christ has done already, is sufficient
to satisfy the justice of God for the sins of every man in the world? so that
our repentance, or any thing we can do, is not necessary to satisfy the demands
of the law?

HEAR what she says in her 31st article, in which are these words, -- The
offering of CHRIST once made, is that perfect redemption, propitiation and
satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both actual and original, and
there is none other satisfaction for sin but that alone. And the 11th article
says, we are accounted righteous before God only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and not for our own works or deservings. Is this the
doctrine of the church of England? says the objector. -- I answer, Yes; if you
will take her word for it: these are her words, which I have recited; the very
words: as you may easily find by looking into her articles of Religion, which I
promised to preach agreeable to, when I was ordained. Says the objector, I used
to have a good opinion of the church of England, but if she holds to such
doctrines, I am quite out with her, I never mistrusted that she held licentious
doctrines: according to this I may live as wicked as I please, and get to
heaven at last; for if the justice of God is already satisfied, for all the
sins of the whole world, both original and actual, this justice can never take
hold of me. -- This is licentious, abominably licentious, I answer: I have
shown you the doctrine of the church of England, but do not ask or desire you
to call it licentious. St Paul in the 2d chap. of his epistle to Titus, at the
11th verse, expressly says, as it stands in the original, -- has appeared the
grace of GOD, bringing salvation to all men; and the angel of the LORD, who
brought the news of a Savior born, says, I bring you good news of great joy,
which shall be to all people: Yet the apostle Jude, in the 4th verse of his
epistle, tells us of ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness; but did that prove that it was not the grace of our God,
because they turned it into lasciviousness? No, by no means.

BUT having considered the gift of GOD; though not near so fully as I intended,
for want of time, I mean to say more of it when I come to the close of my
subject; yet I think I have proved it to be a free gift and no purchase of
ours, and a durable gift, without depending on any conditions to be performed
by us; the gifts and callings of GOD being without repentance, and so cannot be
lost by us, but must last forever, and I having shown this to be agreeable to
the doctrine of the church of England, and I am now ready to enter upon the
next particular in my text, which is Eternal Lise, the thing given; but this
must be referred to another opportunity.

SERMON IV.
ROMANS VI. 23.

The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is aternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.


I HAVE in former discourses, considered the particulars of Wages, Sin, Death,
and the gift of God; now therefore I come to confider the thing given --
eternal Life.

THE expression, eternal Life, has in the New Testament, several meanings:
Jesus Christ himself is called Life, and eternal Life, not only because as GOD
he is perfection of life and independent existence, but also as our mediator
and head; he is the fountain and author of our spiritual and eternal life, for
says St. John, the life was manifest and we have seen it and show unto you that
eternal life which was with the father and was manisest unto us and we are in
him: that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ this is the true God and
eternal life; and Jefus says, I am the very truth and the life -- he that has
the son bath life. Again, eternal life means an eternal duration of pertect and
complete happiness in the future world.

THEY who asked Christ, What they should have, having forsaken all and followed
him? he says, in the world to come, eternal Life. It is called an eternal
inheritance; a city that has foundation, whose builder and maker is GOD --
where there shall be no more death, crying or sorrow, where all tears shall be
wiped off all faces. -- GOD's favor which is life -- his presence which is
fullness of joy -- a place at his right hand, where are pleasures for evermore.
It is styled entering into the joy of our Lord -- the redeemed of the Lord,
shall obtain gladness and joy -- and sorrow and mourning shall flee away. It is
called joy -- crown of rejoicing -- being presented before God faultless, with
exceeding joy; being with Christ to see his glory -- a state of incorruption,
immortality, -- and many other expressions are used to paint it out.

AGAIN, the present knowledge of our title to eternal happiness, and knowing
Christ, who is our title, is called life eternal: to know Jesus Christ is life
eternal, we are told -- He that has the son, that is, the knowledge of him,
has life; he that has not the son, has not life; i. e. he is destitute of
the knowledge of salvation: So he that believes on the son, has everlasting
life. 1st John. c.5. Not shall have it but has it now, i. e. the knowledge of
it. He that believes in me though he were dead, his body separated from the
soul, yet he shall live, the knowledge of JESUS would be to his soul, life and
joy; and he that lives is possessed of temporal life in his body, and believes
in me shall never die, said Jesus; i. e. the knowledge of his title to eternal
life, and happiness in Christ, will ever be a source of life and joy to his
soul: whether in the body or out of it. Life and immortality are said to be
brought to light by the gospel, i. e. the gospel brings to us the knowledge of
our title to life and immortality: But the matter is so plain I need not
multiply proofs. Every one must be sensible that whenever he comes to the
knowledge of his having a sure title to any good thing, his mind immediately
comes into a comfortable possession of it, thought it is not yet come. And in
temporal things it often happens, that the prospect of a good is a greater
enjoyment than the actual possession of it -- but in spiritual it is not so:
however when we come to the knowledge of our sure title in Christ to eternal
life: our mind, enter into immediate possession we enjoy the comfort of it the
mind feels a sense of its spiritual life, the soul begins to live; it begins
its eternal life, for as the Father has life in himself so has he given to
the son to have life in himself. John v. 26. and the bread of God which comes
down from heaven is he which gives life unto the world. John vi. 30. -- So
Jesus the fountain and author of our spiritual and eternal life, communicates
to us by his spirit the knowledge of himself; then the spirit taking of the
things of Jesus and showing them to us; we are refreshed and begin to live, the
branches receive nourishment from their vine, and became thrifty and
flourishing. -- The Members receive nourishment from their head. -- And this
knowledge of our being made perfect in our head, is in us, a well of water
springing up to everlasting life.

AGAIN, the expression eternal Life, in scripture, sometimes means our title to
eternal life. St. Paul exhorts Timothy to hold on eternal life, i.e. to adhere
closely to his title to eternal happiness -- to keep a lively remembrance of
his title to eternal life, to lay fast hold of it with his mind; I suppose I
need not tell you that this eternal life was not an object to be literally laid
hold of with his bodily hands, Jesus said to the Jews, John v. 39. search the
scriptures for in them ye think ye have eternal life. -- How, eternal life in
the scriptures! why certainly no more than a title could be meant.

You have so many acres of land in such a place says one -- How does that
appear -- Search your deed from such a man, says he, and there you will find it
-- not so many acres of earth, with rocks and trees, literally rapt up, in a
piece of paper, but such and such words written, which give you a title to it;
-- Search the scriptures, yes, not only read them but search them, as one
searches for hid treasures, and then you will find that they testify of JESUS,
and clearly point out your title in him, to a blessed and eternal inheritance.
If people would search and critically examine the scriptures, as they generally
do the last will and testament of a rich parent, -- what then? Why then, the
children of this world, would not be so much wiser in their generation than the
children of light, as they now are. Our spiritual Father is rich indeed, and we
are told, rich unto all, and is not his last will and testament, worthy of a
close examination? certainly it is, but how few of his children know what is
conveyed were men as superficial in the examination of matters of a temporal
kind, as of the scriptures, the interest of this world, would be in a much more
confused situation than at present it is -- But to return, eternal life, in the
language of scripture commonly means a title to everlasting happiness, gained
not only by the perfect obedience of Christ, to all the commands of the law:
but also by his suffering death, the wages of sin, the penalty of the law; and
thereby having obtained eternal redemption for us, made our title clear to
eternal life, as St. Paul testifies. For all that stood in our way, to keep us
from eternal happiness, was the curse of the law for disobedience, and the want
of perfect righteousness or obedience to the law, which obedience, strictly
merited eternal life by the terms of law He that does the things contained in
the law shall live in them; if he keep all my statutes, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live he shall not die.

Now JESUS was made a curse for us -- the iniquities of us all were laid upon
him, and he tasted death for every man, and so acting for every man, when he
died, we were all dead, the whole sentence of the law executed upon us, if one
died for all, says St. Paul; and for this cause says the apostle, He is
mediator of the new testament; that by means of death for the redemption of the
transgressions under the first testament, they which are called might receive
the promise of eternal inheritance -- So that the curse of the law for
disobedience was taken away by Jesus -- and he being righteous having kept the
law perfectly, for he did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; brought
in everlasting righteousness, as we are told, and being the Lord our
righteousness; consequently nothing remained to hinder our title to eternal
life, of which St. Paul speaks, Romans v. 18. Therefore, as by the offense of
one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the righteousness
of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life.

THIS is the gift of GOD which the text informs is eternal life, God gave his
Son to satisfy the demands of the law -- and to purchase for us a title to
eternal life: so that this gift of eternal life is in Christ alone; and
therefore not at all in any thing we have done, or can do. -- When God gave us
his Son he gave us the merit of his death, to free us from the contemning
sentence of his law; and when God gave us his Son he gave us the spotless
purity of his life, for our title to eternal life.

ALL this was contained in the gift of his Son; and all this was a free gift;
for God so loved the world, while we were yet sinners, that he gave his son; --
when we were enemies he spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us
all. How shall he not with him also freely give us all things. For we are told
God sent not his son, to condemn the world; but that the world through him
might be saved. The righteousness of Christ was given to us. St. Paul mentions
our receiving the gift of righteousness, Romans, v. 17, and says of CHRIST,
that he is made of God unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption; and his name is, the Lord our righteousness; so that eternal life,
which is the reward of righteousness, is already given, for when GOD gave his
Son for a covenant of the people, he gave a convenant well ordered in all
things, and sure; for when God promised that in the seed of Abraham, all the
families of the earth should be blessed, he spoke not of seeds as of many, but
of one, which is Christ, and to him the promises were made; and we are told
that the promises in Christ Jesus are not yea and nay; but yea and amen to the
glory of God: that is sure and certain, for GOD we are told, will have all men
to be saved, Jesus gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.
-- This is the mystery which St. Paul tells us, has been hid from ages and
generations, but now is made manifest to his saints; to whom GOD would make
known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; the
gift of eternal life is directly opposite to death -- the wages of sin; death
demanded by the law for transgression, is endless miserys. Life, the gift of
GOD, is endless happiness, death was our just due; but life is a free gift; one
we could merit; the other we could not: death contains every thing evil and
distressing; eternal life contains every thing good and joyful. The law was a
ministration of death; the gospel the word of life: we are not under the law
but under grace; we are dead to the law, but alive to GOD; our death by the
sentence of the law was endless, but Christ in whom we died, was God as well as
man, and so by means of his infinite dignity and excellence, paid the whole
debt, in a very short space of time. How precious this gift of GOD! It destroys
death, and introduce life: it is perhaps the gift which Solomon spoke of which
is, says he, as a precious stone in the eyes of him that has it, whithersoever
it turns it prospers.

THIS gift of eternal life in Christ Jesus, is what all the rhetoric in the
world cannot fully express the greatness of, nor our most extensive thoughts
comprehend. For the very objects of wrath and death, in the sight of God
himself, should by a bleeding dying Savior God, be ransomed to eternal life,
is a gift which surpasses every thing, for greatness, but the very giver
himself.

IT is worthy of a GOD!

THIS gift of God is by grace; and not on condition of our doing something
ourselves; God has himself given the conditions -- the spotless life of Christ,
and his precious blood: God has given the condition with the gift; and made it
sure to all the seed: God has not given us another covenant of works, -- for
then St. Paul tells us, the reward would be of debt, and not of grace; but now
the reward is all of grace; eternal life is not the reward of our doings or
deservings, it is the gift of God.

UPON the last Lord's Day, I left you to meditations upon the holy law of God
-- to contemplate upon his perfect justice. I left you at the foot of mount
Sinai, in plain view of the mount that might not be touched, that burned with
fire, which was covered all over, every part of it, with blackness and darkness
and tempest, and where there was the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of
words, which they that heared, entreated, they should not be spoken to them any
more, for they could not endure that which was commanded. And if so much as a
beast touch the mountain it shall be stoned or thrust through with a dart: and
so terrible was the sight, that Moses himself, the servant of the Lord said, I
exceedingly sear and quake: But this day I have been leading you or at least
attempting to lead you from that mountain of darkness and fear: to the
delightful view of mount ZION, the city of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, of which many excellent things are said; particularly that it is a
city at unity in itself, and the joy of the whole earth, not a part of the
earth.

I HAVE been leading you also to a view of the general assembly and church of
the first born, which are written in heaven: and to a view of God the judge of
all; and of the spirits of just men made perfect, to a view of Jesus, the
mediator of the new covenant, and of the blood of sprinkling, which speaks
better things than the blood of Abel, which cries to heaven for vengeance on
his brother, for this blood of sprinkling has satisfied all vengence of
justice and proclaims the joyful sound of peace and eternal life to all, even
to those who shed it, forgiveness and reconciliation in Christ Jesus our Lord
-- the words of the dying Savior were, Father forgive them for they know know
not what they do.

THE last particular in my text, I hope will be the matter of our agreeable
contemplation at a future opportunity.

SERMON V.
ROMANS VI. 23.

The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.


IN my former discourses upon these words, I have considered the expressions of
Wages, Sin, Death, the Gift of GOD, and, eternal Life; But now I come in the
6th and last place to examine what is meant by the assertion, that this gift of
GOD which is eternal Life, is in JESUS CHRIST our LORD.

FROM what I said in my last discourse upon this text, I think it did appear
that this expression, eternal life, has a particular reference to our title to
eternal life: You know it is a very common way of speaking with every person,
to say, that an inheritance or any thing else is given, when no more than a
clear title is given, and the person to whom the title is given many times
comes not into the actual and full possession of the thing given, till a
considerable time after; and sometimes the person given to, knows nothing of
the gift, even for years afterward, though all that time his title is full,
and every whit as clear in itself as it is when he comes to the knowledge of
it; and though the thing is said to be given to him and to be his, yet it is
often said he has it not, till he comes to the actual possession of it; and
sometimes we say he has it, because the title is given, though the actual
possession has not yet taken place: So St. John tells us, that God has given us
eternal life, and this life is in his Son. The apostle means the title, and not
the full and actual possession, yet in our own person. I think it must be
evident to any one that does at all consider the matter, because we are not in
actual possession ourselves, what Christ has done is our title, and God gave
his son to do what he did; in a figurative way of speaking indeed we may be
said to possess eternal life now, as those who believe enjoy a comfortable
knowledge of it.

AGAIN, those who believe and those who do not, already partake of some of the
negative effects of it, i. e. the sentence of eternal death is not actually
executed upon them personally, and for this reason, because this sentence was
fully executed upon their head and surety, who therefore contains their
exemption from death, and their title to life in himself: again, we may in a
figurative way of speaking be said to possess eternal life, because we live
free from any damnation of death in Jesus the head of every man; our first
fruits is gone to appear in the presence of GOD for us. It is within the vail,
into the most holy place, in Heaven itself, that Jesus the forerunner is for us
entered, as we are expressly told; and has sat down at the right hand of GOD;
and therefore has taken possession of our eternal inheritance for us;
consequently, we by him who acts for us as our Mediator, have already taken
possession, when christ ascended, of that everlasting inheritance of glory
which is the reward of all his toils even of his blood and sweat and perfect
innocence, and in the eye of the law he is their all.

AND he keeps possession of that precious reward purchased for the whole body
of human nature by him the head, and so will bring all his members where he
himself is at the time appointed, then the whole harvest will be collected into
that heavenly garner, where the first fruits went formerly, to make way, even a
free and open passage for us the whole harvest, into that blessed place, where
we are told there are many mansions, but we ourselves as individuals are not
yet actually entered into that eternal inheritance to which we are now heirs,
and therefore we have literally as individuals, a secure title in him who is
the covenant of the people, the everlasting covenant, that is already fulfilled
and perfect, and so can never be broken, that covenant which we are not only
told, is well ordered, but is also sure, therefore this eternal life is the
gift of God; our title is by promise, it is by grace, St. Paul tells us, to the
end that the promise might be sure to all the seed -- but if it was not by
grace but a promise by our works, it would be sure to none of the seed, because
they all sin.

I THINK that I have opened my way, and made it clear to the business
immediately before me; at least it appears to me so -- and I hope it does or
will appear so to you who hear me.

THE business immediately before us is, to show that the gift of God which is
eternal life; i. e. our sure title to it is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And that
I may do this to the best advantage, I will enter upon it in two ways.

FIRST negatively, that this eternal life or title to it which is the gift of
God cannot possibly be any where out of Christ, and then show, secondly, how
this gift of eternal life our title to eternal blessedness is in Christ; but
first negatively, that our title cannot, possibly be any where out of Christ,
let us search a little: but where shall we look? look to God says one, but the
sure word of prophecy tells that God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them -- why not imputing them?
because Christ took them away, so that the first attempt to run away from
Christ, we have run into him -- God was in Christ -- and we don't read of his
being out of him since; but let us once consider things that are not, as though
they were -- let us consider the divine nature as not united with the human:
well where shall we look for our life in God, distinct from the man Jesus? --
What shall we look to in God, shall we look to his justice? justice will not clear
the guilty, it condemns us; shall we look to goodness for mercy? mercy cannot
oppose justice, for God is one: he is not opposed to himself, his truth is
concerned in the matter, that justice should have its course -- Shall we look
to wisdom? it cannot be the wisdom of God to exercise one attribute in
opposition to another. If justice condemns us, no one of his attributes will
oppose justice, how does he save us by grace or mercy at all then? he saves us
in Jesus, who suffered the demands of justice; so that justice and mercy are
united in him and go hand in hand, consequently we can find no God our savior
out of Christ.

WELL then, shall we look to ourselves for a title to life? we are sinners and
the wages of Sin is Death: shall we look to the law of God -- that curses every
one that continues not in all things written in it to do them. That as a
ministration of Death, shall we look to the scriptures for life -- they testify
of Jesus: shall we look to the gospel in particular, that knows nothing save
Jesus Christ and him crucified: Shall we look where else, to any name out of
Christ, or sect, or denomination of religion, any where possibly to be found
that promises life or salvation out of him. But there is no other name given
under heaven, among men, whereby we must be saved. Well then, it is necessary
at last to look to Christ for life, since we cannot find it any where out of
him -- but can we find our life in Christ? yes, there it is to be found,
blessed be God, God has given to us eternal life and this life is in his son.

BUT this brings me to show, SECONDLY, How this gift of eternal life, our title
to eternal blessedness, is in Jesus Christ our Lord: that our title to
everlasting happiness is in Christ Jesus, not only my text, but many other
passages of scripture do fully assert, particularly St. John's words, which I
just now recited, are as express as it is possible for words to be; God says,
He has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

THAT our title to life eternal, if we have any title, is in Christ, is plain
and certain; you cannot deny it I am sure, I think that you will not. The
scripture is so very express in this point, that it appears that none that
reverence the oracles of truth, and hear what they say respecting this matter
will have the hardiness to dispute the point; yet how general people assert
what is plainly and totally, opposite or contrary to it, for instance, one of
your aquaintance dies, we attend his funeral, the question is, what is become
of him? why, there is reason to hope for good Estate, that he will appear at
Christ's right hand: what reason? he was an upright, sober, religious, good
sort of a man: -- here you see people look to the man himself to find his title
to eternal life: they pretend to find in him and by the works of the law too,
though by the deeds of the law no flesh shall be justified: but he shows marks
and evidences of his having made his peace with God; says one: but had the poor
miserable man, no mediator to act for him, that he was obliged to undertake the
business himself; of making his peace with God? St. Paul in his epistle to the
Ephesians. 2d chap. 13 verse and onward, says to the Gentiles, to whom he wrote.
But now in Christ Jesus, ye who were sometimes afar off, i. e. ye Gentiles, are
made nigh by the blood of Christ: for be is our peace, who has made both one,
i. e. Jew and Gentile, and has broken down the middle wall of partition
between us; having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of
commandments contained in ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new
man, so making peace; and that he might reconcile both, i. e. both Jew and
Gentile, unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby.

HERE you see, St. Paul never thought of our making our own peace with GOD
ourselves, but talks altogether of Christ's being our peace, and of his
reconciling us to God, in one body by the cross: you see he seems to think that
Christ has made our peace with God already, and therefore our title to peace is
in him.

ANOTHER of our acquaintance dies -- the word is, there is little or no hope of
him. But why? He was a poor creature, a hardened sinner. He has no title to
heaven then you think. No. What Is the matter, why has not he a title? Because
he was a wicked, impenitent wretch. But don't St. Paul say to Timothy, This is
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. But he died impenitent. What
then? Why, he cannot be saved. But don't St. Paul say -- the gifts and calling
of God, are without repentance! -- Here, I think, you must all see, that people
in general look for a man's eternal life in the man himself: they don't appear
to suspect that it is to be found any where else: they expect to find the man's
title to happiness in him. They seek the living among the dead. There is not a
man in the world that can show any title to eternal life in himself. God has
given us eternal life in his Son, and no where else. -- How vain and
unseriptural are the traditions of men!

BUT it is high time for me to show particularly how our title to eternal life
is in Christ Jesus; but what hinders or prevents from our having a title to
eternal life in ourselves without a Mediator.

GOD made man at first upright, and in his own image, and if he had continued
so, none of you can harbor the least doubt, but that his life would have been
eternally happy: But he fell into sin: What then? Why the sentence of death
passed upon him: For what? For sin; for the wages of sin is death the text
tells us; but what else is there, that prevents us from having a title to
eternal life in curselves? It is the want of a perfect righteousness; for in
Romans, x. 5, St. Paul says, Moses describes the righteousness of the law,
that the man that does those things shall live by them. But we are told that
Cursed is he that continues not in all things written in the book of the law
to do them. So that the righteousness that gives us a title to life, must be
perfectly faultless; the least failure or defect destroys us forever; so that
nothing is wanting in us for a title to eternal life in ourselves, but these
two things, a freedom from sin, and a perfect righteousness; which is a full
compliance with every thing the law commands. If there is any thing wanting in
us besides these two things, I shall be exceedingly obliged to any man in the
world to let me know it -- to point it out to me: But it is evident to a moral
demonstration, that nothing else but these two things are wanting in us, in
order to a title in ourselves to eternal life. We want in ourselves a freedom
from sin and a perfect righteousness, nothing else is wanting; for take away
sin, and there is no condemnation; and let us have a perfect righteousness, and
then the promise is, The man that does these things, shall live by them. God
says, If a man keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he
shall surely live, he shall not die: but every one that knows any thing about
the scripture or himself, must at once confess, that none of us, have either of
these two requisites in ourselves: neither a freedom from sin, nor a perfect
faultless righteousness, for we have all sinned and come short of the glory of
God. There is not a man that lives and sins not, there is none righteous no
not one: the scripture has concluded all under sin. In many things we offend
all, says the apostle; therefore we have no perfect, righteousness in
ourselves; therefore by the deeds of the law no flesh shall be justified in
God's sight; But Christ Jesus is the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of
the world, having put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. We are told death
was what all men were sentenced to for sin; we are likewise told Christ tasted
death for every man.

We thus judge, says St. Paul, that if one died for all, then were all dead,
and he died for all, says he; so that death the wages of sin for every man, God
has paid to Christ already; laying upon him the iniquities of us all, Isaiah
liii. 6. And God was not unjust, he did not withhold or keep back any part of
the wages; he paid the whole of our wages, to the Captain of our salvation. So
that here is a perfect freedom from sin, from guilt, from transgression, from
condemnation, from death; but where is it? Not in ourselves, but in Christ
Jesus: so that a freedom from sin, which we before observed, was necessary to a
title to life, is sound in Christ Jesus, and no where else; no atonement for
sin any where else. In Christ Jesus our Lord, we can find this purgation or
purification from sin for all the world -- in his bloody sweat which was in the
garden -- by the holes made by the thorns on the head -- by the scourge on his
back -- by the nails in his hands and feet -- and by the spear thrust into his
side: We can find the atonement, in his blood, which was shed for the remission
of sins. Well, then we found at least, one requisite or necessary condition to
a title to life which is a freedom from sin, but this is found in Christ, even
in his death and suffering.

Now then let us look for the other thing necessary in order to a title to
life, -- and that is, a perfect righteousness, an unsailing compliance with all
the commands of God's law.

I SUPPOSE none of you will deny that Christ was righteous: He was the lamb
without spot; he did no sin we are told, neither was guile found in his mouth;
he came to do the will of God, and declared that one jot or tittle should in no
wise pass from the law till all was fulfilled. He is called Jesus the
righteous, his name is the Lord our righteousness; he suffered the just for the
unjust. Well then, we have found that which the perfect and holy law of God
promises, life; even a perfect righteousness, in Christ, who is our surety, so
that we have found both the conditions of a title to life, and we have found
them in Christ, even a perfect atonement for sin, by which the sin of the world
is taken away and a perfect righteousness of one by which the many are made
righteous as we are told: now what is there wanting to our title to eternal
life? surely nothing, the gift of God is eternal life in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Then we have found our title there: there we have found every thing that gives
a title, we have found death the wages, fully suffered, the whole penalty
inflicted, death tasted for every man, and that perfect righteousness of one by
which the many individuals of mankind are made righteous, all this we have
found in Christ; when God gave his son, he gave all the conditions of our
eternal life in him, so that our title is in him, it is given in him: this,
even a distant view of it, made the prophet Daniel, speak of the seventy weeks,
at the end of which the Messiah, even Jesus was to come, to finish the
transgression, and to make an end of sin; and to make reconciliation for
iniquity and to bring in everlasting righteousness. Daniel ix. 24. This made
David say, to his Lord who was also his son, all my springs are in thee, Psalms
lxxxvii. 7. And God says of his people, their righteousness is of me, and he
has given it to us in Christ. So if any ask you: where is your title to heaven?
do not deny the Lord that bought you, by sitting up any thing in yourselves for
a title, but tell them your title is in Christ. But have you no title in
yourselves? no, we had a title to eternal death, because in ourselves we were
sinners, and are so still in ourselves, and the wages of sin is death, but we
have lost our title to death. -- How lost your title to death? Because the
sentence of death was executed upon us. Where? In Christ, when in Christ! When
he died on the cross, and put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. If one died
for all then were all dead. But how is your title to heaven in Christ? Because
he was holy, harmless and undefiled, as we are told. But what is that to you?
Why, He was of God made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption: he is the Lord our righteousness. -- But how does his righteousness
give you a title to heaven? It is the reward God promised to obedience; Jesus
was obedient, and so had a title to the reward, in point of strict justice, and
God never withholds the wages he promises, for he is a just God. -- God gave
his righteousness, and will give the reward of it.

But the world being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God, says St. Paul: For, says he, Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believes: Every one that believes he has
done all for us, that the law required, don't undertake to keep the law in
order to get a title to heaven; they don't go about to establish their own
righteousness to get a title, for they have found the end of the law, even
Jesus Christ, who fulfilled even the last tittle of it, so that they look to
Christ as their title to eternal life.

CHRIST is expressly styled the savior of all men, the savior of Adam and
Eve, and Cain and Abel, and all who lived before the flood, of all who lived
before the child Jesus was born; as much as he is of Paul, or Peter, or any of
the Apostles, or any of us, who live since his coming into the world: the
savior of all men, from Adam to his youngest son he will ever have born. For
Jesus Christ, the righteous, we are told, is the propitiation for our sins, and
not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. The eleventh
chapter of Saint Paul's epistle to the Hebrews, is surely a list of men, from
Abel to David, and the Prophets, who believed the promises of God, which were
to be accomplished in Christ; for the restitution of all things was, we are
told, what God spoke by the mouth of all his holy prophets, ever since the
world began.

AN intimation of life, and happiness in Christ Jesus, immediately followed the
sin of our first parents in paradise; the seed of the woman was promised to
bruise the serpent's head. The assurance of a Redeemer was renewed to the
patriarch Moses, who we are told, esteemed the reproach of Christ greater
riches than all the treasures of Egypt. The very law of Moses, particularly the
ceremonial part of it, pointed to eternal life in Christ Jesus: their
sacrifices of propitiation, figured out the death of that lamb of God, that
takes away the sin of the world. His promises of a land flowing with milk and
honey, were designed for no more than figures of the glory and riches of the
heavenly canaan; the ordinances of the Jewish worship, pointed out redemption
of mankind in one body in Christ.

BUT what must distinguish between the Jews having these privileges under the
dispensation of the law as it was given by Moses, and their having them by the
law: -- for they did not belong to the law as such; for it was only the Mosaic
dispensation of the law prefigured? The gospel -- the gospel was that better
covenant, which brought in a better hope, and was established upon better
promises; and published to Abraham for an hundred and thirty years before the
law was given at Sinai: -- a promise which the law, with all its thunder and
terrors could not disannul. For was there ever any other name whereby men could
be saved, but the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- This is the true
foundation, upon which men have ever been building, wood, hay and stubble, as
well as gold and precious stones, and they suffer loss when their works are
tried, and burnt; yet themselves shall be saved, though it be so as by fire:
for this foundation, even Jesus, was and still is, the end of the law; the sum
and substance of every promise; the life of every ordinance; for all out of
him, was but a dead letter. But now the shadows of the law are dispelled, the
veils laid aside; the true sacrifice for sin offered; death abolished by Jesus
Christ, and life and immortality brought to light by the gospel.

WHAT remains of this subject, is an answer to several objections, which I must
put off till another opportunity.

SERMON VI.
ROMANS VI. 23.

The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.


I HAVE heretofore considered each particular of my text in their natural
order: After a short review of what has been already said, what now remains is
to answer some objections which are made against the doctrine contained in the
words of my text.

WHEN I first made choice of these words for the subject of our meditations, I
expected to have finished what I had to say upon them, in two discourses; but
after I had entered upon this ground, I found it a field so extensive, that I
sound it impossible to do it any tolerable justice, without taking somewhat of
a distinct view of each particular part: which has made it necessary for me to
entertain you with the most grand and principal views, that this extensive
field afforded: for no less than three weeks successively I made choice of this
particular text, because it held up to our view in one single verse, a complete
summary of both, the law and the gospel, of the covenant of works and the
covenant of grace; of the death of the human world, and its restoration to
life: of the just severity of God's judgment, and the everlasting covenant of
his peace, of the condemnation of the whole body of human nature, to endless
misery under one head, and of the complete ransom of the very same body, and
its clear title to everlasting happiness, under another head. The first head
was of the earth, earthy; the second head was spiritual, even the Lord from
heaven: The first covenant, under the first head, gendered to bondage
universally; the second covenant, under the second head, is an universal
introduction into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

THE first covenant condemns the whole body of human nature in its head,
without a single exception; the second justifies and saves the whole body of
the same human nature in its second head, without a single exception. In short,
the first covenant condemns Adam and all his posterity to everlasting
damnation. The second covenant justifies Adam and all his posterity, to eternal
life. The first covenant was but of short continuance, and made way for the
second; the sccond is the everlasting covenant of God's peace; which on our
part is fulfilled already to the last title; and on God's part he has promised
expressly, that it shall never be broken.

I CHOSE this passage of scripture, that I might discover to you, both the law
and the gospel in one single view, that you might learn to know them apart --
that you might know what is law and what is gospel. I presented them to you,
both in one field, that you might view them both at once, without any thing
between them, except a single word, a particle which denotes distinction;
contrariety: The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life;
that you might so critically distinguish them, as to be able to know the law
wherever you meet with it in scripture, -- particularly in the part of it
called the New Testament; and that you might be able to know the gospel
wherever you meet with it in scripture, as well in what is called the Old
Testament as the New: for people generally run into this grand mistake, that
all that is contained in those books of scripture, commonly called the Old
Testament is law, and that all that is contained in those books wrote by
Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Paul, James, Peter and Jude, commonly called the New
Testament, is gospel, every word of it: But the gospel was preached to Adam and
Eve, by Christ himself, when they received the promise of the seed of the woman
to bruise the serpent's head. Christ the son of God, conversed with men
frequently, in a sensible way, even from the creation of Adam, till his own
incarnation, and then till his ascension into heaven. But of God, even the
Father, we are told, no man has seen him at any time. And again, God whom no
man has seen or can see.

BUT Christ preached the gospel to Abraham, St. Paul says, Galatians iii. 8.
The scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen througb faith,
preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed. This was the gospel of peace. All such like
unconditional promises of good, were the preaching of the gospel of peace. But
promises, on condition of perfect obedience were law. David preached the
gospel, and even Moses, himself, and all the prophets; the prophecies of
Isaiah, are a very great part if not almost all gospel -- But besides preaching
by words, it was preaching by Hierogliphicks or figures pretty constantly, from
Adam's time till Christ the substance of all those figures, came in person: For
what were the sacrifices, of Abel, Noah, and Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but
preaching Christ by figure and pointing to him as the true sacrifice for sin?
And what was the Jewish tabernacle, and temple, and their whole worship, their
ceremonies of purification and all their sacrifices, but preaching gospel by
figure, and pointing out Christ the savior of the world? Again, What is
commonly called the New Testament, is far from being all gospel, for what is
the greatest part of Christ's sermon upon the mount, and several other
discourses to the Jews, but law, even the most perfect explanation of God's
law, the covenant of works, that ever appeared in the world.

WHAT are all the quotations from the law which are to be found in St. Paul's
Epistles, where he introduces the law, to show its insufficiency for salvation.

WHAT are all these but plain law; the covenant of works? And what is the first
part of my text? The wages of sin is death, but a view of the whole substance
of the law of God, the covenant of works. So far as we have any thing to do
with it since the fall of Adam, for being sinners, all the claim we could lay
to the law was only threatenings; we had nothing to receive from the covenant
of works but condemnation; but the promises of good things annexed to obedience
in the law, we in ourselves are nothing to do with, because we had not that
obedience which was the indispensible condition. But all the promises of good
things, and all the declarations of good things given to us, without any thing
required of us, as the condition of our title, whether found in the Old
Testament or in the New, are the gospel of the grace of God; they are gifts by
grace and not of debt; for the gift of God is eternal life, in Christ Jesus our
Lord: and the gifts and callings of God are without repentance, without any
conditions required of us, the gospel is the covenant of God's peace -- It is
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people; for the head of every
man is Christ -- He is the Savior of the body, the Savior of all men we are
expressly told, by the word of truth, but methinks I hear an objector to this
purpose, how comes it to pass that of all the clergy of the Church of England,
you are the only one, that ever found out that is the doctrine of the Bible,
that all men have a title in Christ to eternal Life; that all men will finally
be saved, and how does it become you as a clergyman of the Church of England,
to teach a doctrine so contrary to what is, and ever has been taught by that
Church, so no difference to be paid to any of her bishops, or the judgment or
opinion of any other, of her great and learned men, nor indeed to the opinion
of the whole Christian church, for seventeen hundred years; I answer, I am not
the only one of all the clergy of the Church of England, that has found this
doctrine in the Bible; and if I was the only one, surely I have a right to
preach the gospel even the truth as it is in Jesus if I find it, whether I
agree with another man or not, unless the authority of men is greater than the
authority of God; certainly I have no right to preach, what I think to be
inconsistent with the truth, however as a clergyman of the Church of England, I
have a right to judge for myself, of the promises of God, for the church of
England in the close of her seventeenth article of religion directs thus, even
these very words, we must receive God's promise, in such wise as they be
generally set forth in the holy scriptures; but as she has not told in her
articles howGod's promises are to be understood, except as they are generally
set forth in the holy scriptures, she certainly leaves it to me to judge for
myself of these promises, and I do judge them to be, promises of eternal life
to all mankind without exception in Christ Jesus our Lord: and the articles of
the church of England, as I have heretofore, taken notice, do set forth the
offering of Christ once made as a perfect redemption, propitiation and
satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original and actual: now
I ask, if there is perfect satisfaction made by Christ, for every sin of the
whole world, how justice can ever condemn, or execure the sentence of the law
for sin, upon any one individual of the human race? when a perfect satisfaction
is already made to God, for all the sins of men, to demand the payment over
again is evidently the highest injustice -- As great injustice, as it would
have been, to have punished all mankind with everlasting misery if no one of
them had ever sinned; if every sin of the whole world is satisfied for; it is
plain and evident that every man must be saved: For what can condemn any man if
the sins of all are satisfied for? if they are not saved, it is plain they
cannot be punished; but there is no middle way between salvation and damnation,
so that you must see the church of England, has in her articles, taught the
salvation of all men, at least implicity; and am I to be condemned for
differing from all the church clergy in doctrine because I preach up the
doctrine of the 39th article? is this a crime to preach up the doctrine
contained in the articles of the church of England, because it is said none of
the rest of the clergy teach so, but the contrary? Will the preaching up the
doctrine of the church of England contradict the doctrine of her clergy? This
would be a sad thing indeed: Can preaching the doctrine of the church of
England, be showing disrespect to her Bishops, or great writers, or Clergy who
composed the 39 articles? Was it not the Bishops and Clergy of the church of
England, and was it their doctrine; or did they set forth a doctrine for the
church of England, different from their own doctrine? But my teaching that all
mankind will finally be happy, is not preaching contrary to what is, and ever
has been taught by all the rest of the Clergy of the church of England. For no
less a man than archbishop Tillotson, has been wrote against for preaching this
doctrine; and at least in one of his sermons, he did intimate that this was his
opinion, though at the same time, he appeared to be in darkness and doubt about
it, and several others of the clergy of the church, have taught the salvation
of ALL MEN. Mr. Murdon, a church clergyman now living I suppose, has for a
number of years, preached the same doctrine, as I do openly and fully; and has
printed a book upon the subject, and yet is in full and regular standing under
his Bishop. Dr. Steed, a clergyman of the church of England, who died a few
years ago, and was greatly admired as a preacher, in most parts of England,
styled by late writers, the ingenious Dr. Steed, in a sermon which he delivered
in St. Paul's Cathedral Church in London, speaking upon the Redemption has
these words; Our Savior laid down his life for the sins of the whole world, be
came, that as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive: that as by
one man's disobedience many, the many, or mankind in general, were made
sinners, treated as such, and made subject to death, the wages of sin; so by
the obedience of one many were made righteous. Again, speaking of Christ, says
he, The sphere of his beneficence extended backwards to the foundation of the
world, and reaches forward to the last conflagration, he became the savior of
all ages: from the first birth of time to its last period: The father of
mankind, from the rising of the sun, to the going down of the same. The
blessings of his coming into the world are as extensive as the world, and as
lasting as eternity. Says he, Behold the Son of God, pouring forth his blood,
as well as prayers, even for those that shed it; behold him at once bearing the
insults, expiating the sins, and procuring happiness for mankind, till at last
he bows his sacred head, and shuts up the solemn scene, with these short but
comprehensive words, IT IS FINISHED: -- the great, the slupendous work is done.
The universal sacrifice, which shall take in all mankind, and which all mankind
shall contemplate throughout eternity with awful joy and gratitude, is
completed: -- the benefit of whose actions and sufferings reaches to all ages,
all nations, all mankind. Our Savior was a person born for the whole world,
for which he died, a blessing to all mankind, from the beginning of time, and
whom all mankind will have reason to bless, when time shall be no more.

YOU may depend on it, that these words were preached in St. Paul's church in
London; so that as a Church Clergyman I am not teaching a doctrine which is
contrary to, what is or ever has been taught all the rest of the Clergy of the
Church of England. I don't know that I have ever said any thing that more
strongly points out the salvation of all men, than these words of Dr. Steed, I
have just now recited, though I must confess, that in some other passages of
his sermons, he says what seems inconsistent with those passages I recited; but
what I did recite he no doubt said. But I am supposed to differ from the whole
body of the Christian Church, for seventeen hundred years; I answer, this would
be a melancholy consideration indeed, if it were true: But can the tradition of
the whole body of the christian church, make void the gospel, the everlasting
covenant of God's peace, but then, the tradition or opinion of the christian
church, pretty universally for a thousand years out of this seventeen hundred,
has been in favor of popery; therefore if the opinion of the body of the
christian church is a sure proof of what is the true meaning of scripture, then
surely, we ought all to become Roman Catholics immediately, for popery has the
opinion of the whole body of the christian church pretty universally in its
favor for ten hundred years, and the main body of the christian church against
her, for no more than about seven hundred years, and two hundred years of these
seven, if the opinion of the whole christian church had been taken, I strongly
suspect that the vote would have turned in favor of Popery: If the general
opinion of the christian church is any proof, to determine what is right and
true: Why are not you all Papists? If it is no proof, why is it alleged
against me? The truth concerning the christian church, I take to be this: --
The opinion of those that called themselves christians almost universally
through the world, was in favor of Popery, from about the year fifteen
hundred; since the year fifteen hundred, Christians have been divided into two
great classes, being generally Roman Catholics or Protestants; but the Roman
Catholics most numerous. From the Apostles time till the introduction of
Popery, is a period of about four or five hundred years; in which time, the
general opinion of the Bishops and Clergy of the Christian church was, that all
mankind would be finally and everlastingly happy, if we believe Dr. Whitby, who
was esteemed a great and learned divine of the church of England; and very
profound in his knowledge of antiquity, having spent much time in searching the
records of the primitive church, and cannot be supposed to give this account
through any prejudice in favor of this doctrine, that all men will be saved;
for he wrote a considerable treatise against bishop Tillotson, for intimating,
or hinting in a sermon that all men would finally be saved. Says Dr. Whitby,
This has been the constant doctrine of the church of Christ, owned by the
Greek and Latin fathers; -- among the Greek fathers Chrisostom, whose words are
these, When the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, then all Israel shall be
saved, at the time of Christ's second coming, and the consummation of all
things. -- They of the people of Israel, who for their unbelief were deserted
that God's mercy might be showed to you: they shall not always be left in
unbelief, says Origin: But when the dispensation of the sulness of the Gentiles
is completed, they also shall find mercy; Israel may then also enter; for if
the sulness of the Gentiles be come in, then all Israel shall be saved, and
there shall be one fold, and one Shepard. Dr. Whitby adds these words All the
Latin fathers who have left us any commentaries, or notes on this epistle,
meaning the epistle to the Romans, are plainly of the same mind, as you may see
by consulting Hilary the Deacon, Primasius, Sedutius, and Haymo: from those of
the prophet Hosea; The children of Israel shall abide many days without a king,
and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an altar, and
without an ephod, and without a teraphim: afterward shall the children of
Israel return and seek the Lord their God: and David their king, and shall fear
the Lord, and his goodness, in the latter days. Hosea, chap. iii. ver 4, 5.
which St. Augustine produced, to prove, that the carnal Israelite who now will
not believe, shall hereafter do so. He says, Nothing is more manifest, than
that by David their king, the prophet means Jesus Christ, in whom they now
believe not. -- St. Cyrel says, Here is a manifest declaration of what shall
hereafter happen to the adulterous synagogue, and that she shall be received
again, that Israel should not always be rejected, but being recalled and
converted again to the faith, should own Christ, according to the flesh, to be
the king of all, and that his glorious grace should be afforded to her to the
end of the world. -- St. Jerome, having cited those words of Christ, spoken to
the barren fig tree, Let no fruit grow on thee forever, Mat. xxi. 19, he bids
us diligently consider, that he says not forever and ever, but only in
seculum, for that age; and when that age is past, and when the fullness of the
Gentiles is come in, then shall this fig tree bring forth her fruits, and all
Israel be saved. -- Dr. Whitby immediately adds these words, So generally did
this doctrine obtain among the ancients: and, says he, this doctrine has the
sufferage of all the ancient fathers.

Now my hearers, you are able to determine whether by preaching up the
salvation of all men, I have departed from the opinion of the whole christian
church; for so long a period as seventeen hundred years. I am sure you will
throw out of the question the opinion of the christian church, when almost
swallowed up in Popery for a thousand years, then I have the opinion of the
whole body of the christian church, according to Dr. Whitby's account, in
favor of the doctrine I preach, for a period of between four and five hundred
years, and that immediately after the apostles: But exclusive of popery, you
may believe that part of mankind perish everlastingly; have the opinion of
almost half the christian church, I mean the Prorestant part, for a period of
between two and three hundred years; so that throwing Popery out of the
question, the christian church speak in my favor, for about double the time,
that part of them give their voice in your favor; they give their voice in my
favor immediately after the Apostles left them: Part of them now give their
voice in your favor, after forsaking some of the superstitious fears of Popery.

Now were the primitive Christians as likely to derive errors from the
Apostles, as the Protestants to derive errors from the Papish Church, out of
which they came? surely not. But, says the Objector, It this doctrine of the
salvation of all men be true, what good does preaching do? for all men are safe
upon this plan whether they know it or not. I answer, that the common notion
is, that the purpose of preaching is to show men how to get a title to heaven;
but this never was the true meaning or purpose of preaching the gospel: -- the
purpose of preaching the gospel is to show people that they have in Christ a
title to heaven already: it is the gospel of the grace of God, good tidings of
great joy, which shall be to all people. It was promised to Abraham, that in
him; in his promised seed, all the nations shall be blessed. This you know St.
Paul calls preaching the gospel to Abraham. Gal. iii. 8. It was not telling
Abraham or the nations, how to get a blessing but only making it known that
they were to be blessed; life and immortality are brought to light through the
gospel, we are told, but preaching the gospel do not make life nor immortality;
it only brings them to light, what was not known before, light we are told
makes manifest, but it cannot make manifest, that which is not; it can only
make that manifest that is in being already! bring that thing to our knowledge,
which we did not know before; mankind did not know that there was life or
immortality for them, but there was really both; otherwise the gospel could
never have brought them to life: the preaching of the gospel, does not tell us
how to make our peace with God, but tells us that Jesus is our peace, that
Jesus has reconciled both Jew and Gentile unto God, in one body on the Cross,
so making peace; St. Paul, tells us what was the purpose of his preaching. See
Col. i. 25, 26, 27, I am made a minister, says he, according to the
dispensation of God given to me, for you, to fulfit the word of God, i. e. what
God has promised, even the mystery which has been hid from ages, and from
generations, but now is made manifest to his saints: to whom God would make
known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles. --
And further on he says, that he labored for them, but for what purpose was all
this to them? he tells; that, their hearts might be comforted being knit
together in love, and unto all riches of full assurance of understanding to the
acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, in
whom are bid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: Now (says he in another
place) the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing: the gospel
is preached that people may believe it, and the defired effect is, that they
may be filled with all joy and peace in believing? People think it would be
very kind in God, to show them how they themselves, may certainly get a title
to eternal life: is it not quite as kind in God, to give them a title freely,
and then make it known to them, that they have a title? Does it do people no
good to fill them with joy and peace in believing; it is true, preaching the
gospel of peace, does not teach people how to get a title to eternal life, but
it does better, it shows them that they have a title already, and is not this
worth showing? had not you rather be brought into the glorious liberty of the
children of God, now, than to remain in bondage to fear; if you have a title to
life in Christ, is it not worth knowing? Is it as well for you to be in
darkness, fear, perplexity, under the cloud; thundering terrors of the law, for
a hundred or a thousand years! as to be all that time in a state of joy and
peace in believing? You know those that believe the gospel of peace have joy
and peace in believing; but faith comes by bearing, says St. Paul: and how
shall they bear, says he, without a preacher? As it is written, How beautiful
are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and publish glad tidings
of good.

It is true the title of all mankind to eternal life is secure, whether they
know it or not, for their life is not in their own custody, but is hid with
Christ in God, and though the ravenous vulture, devoured their first life, which
was by the law, yet they have another life by grace, hid in a secure place
where this vulture's eye never saw -- A place secure from moth and rust, that
mocks the sly approach and baffles all the presumptuous violence of pilfering
thieves; but does it give men satisfaction to know their security? the gospel
of peace is preached that you may know Jesus who is your life, your peace, your
security, whom to know, we are told, is life eternal, he is shown, that you may
now begin to be refreshed with spiritual life and joy, and that when you die
you may die in peace and sleep in Jesus, and when you awake be satisfied with
his likeness, that you may have part in the first resurrection; for the dead in
Christ shall rise first, and boly and blessed are they that have part in the
first resurrection, over such the second death has no power, that death in
trespasses and sins, in which others will continue till the book of life is
opened to them and they read, The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

To you the gospel is preached, that you may now read your new name in that
book, which contains your life, and shows you in Christ passed from death to
life; that when you first rise from the grave, your heads may be encircled with
brilliant crowns of glory, and seated upon thrones with Christ, to judge the
world, and to judge angels, not the holy angels, but those goats which are on
Christ's left hand, who we read, are reserved in chains of darkness to the
judgment of the great day, when God shall bruise Satan under our feet, and then
cause him to depart into the fire prepared for him and his angels. Is not a
part in the first resurrection worth having, think ye? If your title to life is
sase, don't you want to know it? If the glory of the riches of God's grace is
free, is it therefore unworthy of preaching? If your title to life is sure, is
it no matter if the things which make for peace, is long hid from your eyes? Is
a continuance in bondage through lear of eternal death, as good a way of
spending your time as any? Is not the glorious liberty of the children of God
now worth enjoying? Is it as comfortable to die in the fearful looking for of
judgment, as to die in peace? Is it as eligible to die in sin as to sleep in
Jesus? Is it no matter whether we rife with a sense and apprehension of
everlasting shame and contempt, or with a crown of rejoicing? Is it no matter
whether we stand at the last day before God, dead with guilty fear, having our
mouths slopt with a sense of guilt, waiting to be slain by the sword that
proceeds out of the mouth of the judge, which bring into a condition of being
made spiritually alive again, by the opening of the book of life, or whether we
sit all that time on thrones in judgment with Christ? and at last, is it no
matter whether we are some of the greatest or least of Christ's brethren;
whether we are to be greatest or least in the kingdom of heaven, because we are
to be finally in it? Sr. Paul says, As one star differs from another star in
glory, so shall the resurrection of the dead be: all the stars in the firmament
shine, you know, yet one star differs from another star in degree of glory,
one star is said to be of the first magnitude, another of the second, and
another quite small in comparison with the first, yet they all shine, and have
their degree of glory.

By this time, I hope you are all satisfied that, the gospel is worth
preaching, if it does bring life and immortality to light, but if you are not
satisfied, yet we are told the foundation of God stands sure, and though you
should not believe the record God has given of his son, and so as the apostle
expresses it, make God a liar, yet as the same apostle immediately adds; This
is the record, that God has given to us, eternal life, and this life is in his
Son.

AND my text tells us, the gift of God is eternal life, in Christ Jesus our
Lord; There it is, whether we have now a view of it, or not, whether this great
thing in this our temporal day, be hid from our eyes, or not, but that this
mystery of the gospel of the grace of God may be now manifested in all our
eyes; that we may be comforted and knit together in love; the God and Father of
the spirits of all flesh grant through Jesus Christ.

Now therefore to the one infinitely wise, good, and eternal GOD, in Christ, be
rendered all honor and glory, thanksgiving and praise, might, majesty and
dominion, world without end.

AMEN.
ERRATUM -- Page 6, line 19, for " bruised" read bound.


