The Alien and Sedition Laws, and Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions.
PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE LEGISLATURE OF MASSACHUSETTS.
The Alien Act.
An Act concerning Aliens.
SEC. 1. BE it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America, in Congress assembled, That it shall be lawful for the
President of the United States, at any time, during the continuance of this
Act, to order all such Aliens, as he shall judge dangerous to the peace and
safety of the United States, or shall have reasonable grounds to suspect are
concerned in any treasonable or secret machinations against the Government
thereof, to depart out of the territory of the United States, within such time
as shall be expressed in such order -- which order shall be served on such
Alien by delivering him a copy thereof, or leaving the same at his usual abode,
and returned to the Office of the Secretary of State, by the Marshall or other
person to whom the same shall be directed. And in case any Alien, so ordered to
depart, shall be found at large, within the United States, after the time
limit^ed in such order for his departure, and not having obtained a license
from the President to reside therein, or, having obtained such license, shall
not have conformed thereto, every such Alien shall, on conviction thereof, be
imprisoned, for a term not exceeding three years, and shall never after be
admitted to become a citizen of the United States.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, That if any Alien, so ordered to
depart, shall prove, to the satisfaction of the President, by evidence to be
taken before such person or persons as the President shall direct, who are, for
that purpose, hereby authorized to administer oaths, that no injury or danger
to the United States will arise from suffering such Alien to reside therein,
the President may grant a license to such Alien to remain within the United
States for such time as he shall judge proper, and at such place as he may
designate. And the President may also require of such Alien to enter into a
bond to the United States in such penal sums as he may direct with one or more
sufficient sureties, to the satisfaction of the person authorized by the
President to take the same, conditioned for the good behavior of such Alien
during his residence in the United States, and not violating his license, which
license the President may revoke whenever he shall think proper.

SEC. 2. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the President
of the United States, whenever he may deem it necessary for the public safety,
to order to be removed out of the territory thereof, any Alien who may or shall
be in prison in pursuance of this Act; and to cause to be arrested and sent out
of the United States such of those Aliens as shall have been ordered to depart
therefrom, and shall not have obtained a license as aforesaid, in all cases
where, in the opinion of the President, the public safety requires a speedy
removal. And if any Alien, so removed or sent out of the United States by the
President, shall voluntarily return thereto, unless by permission of the
President of the United States, such Alien, on conviction thereof, shall be
imprisoned, so long as, in the opinion of the President, the public safety may
require.

SEC. 3. And be it further enacted, That every Master or Commander of any ship
or vessel, which shall come into any port of the United States after the first
day of July next, shall, immediately on his arrival, make report in writting to
the collector or other chief officer of the customs of such port* of all
aliens, if any, on board his vessel, specifying their names, age, the place of
nativity, the country from which they shall have come, the nation to which they
belong and owe allegiance, their occupation and a description of their persons,
as far as he shall shall be informed thereof, and on failure every such master
and commander shall forfeit and pay three hundred dollars, for the payment
whereof on default of such master or commander, such vessel shall also be
holden, and may by such collector or other officer of the customs be detained.
And it shall be the duty of such collector or other officer of the customs,
forthwith to transmit to the Office of the Department of State true copies of
all such returns.

SEC. 4. And be it further enacted, That the Circuit and District Courts of the
United States, shall respectively have cognizance of all crimes and offenses
against this Act. And all Marshals and other officers of the United States are
required to execute all precepts and orders of the President of the United
States issued in pursuance or by virtue of this act.

SEC. 5. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for any Alien who
may be ordered to be removed from the United States by virtue of this act, to
take with him such part of his goods, chattels, or other property, as he may
find convenient, and all property left in the United States, by any alien, who
may be removed, as aforesaid, shall be, and remain subject to his order and
disposal, in the same manner, as if this act had not been passed.

SEC. 6. And be it further enacted, That this act shall continue and be in
force for and during the term of two years from the passing thereof.

[ Approved by the President June 25, 1798].

The Sedition Act.
An Act in addition to an act, entitled, "an Act for the punishment of certain
crimes against the United States."
SEC. 1. BE it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled, That if any persons shall unlawfully
combine or conspire together, with intent to oppose any measure or measures of
the government of the U. S. which are or shall be directed by proper authority,
or to impede the operation of any law of the United States, or to intimidate or
prevent any person, holding a place or office in or under the government of the
United States, from undertaking, performing or executing his trust or duty; and
if any person or persons, with intent as aforesaid, shall counsel, advise or
attempt to procure any insurrection, riot, unlawful assembly, or combination,
whether such conspiracy, threatening, counsel, advise, or attempt, shall have
the proposed effect or not, he or they shall be deemed guilty of a high
misdemeanor, and on conviction before any court of the United States having
jurisdiction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five thousand
dollars, and by imprisonment during a term not less than six months, nor
exceeding five years; and further, at the discretion of the court may be holden
to find sureties for his good behavior, in such sum, and for such time as the
said court may direct.

SEC. 2. And be it further enacted, That if any person shall write, print,
utter or publish, or shall cause or procure to be written, printed, uttered or
published, or shall knowingly and willingly assist or aid in writing, printing,
uttering or publishing, any false, scandalous, and malicious writing or
writings against the government of the United States, or either house of the
Congress of the United States, or the President of the United States, with
intent to defame the said government, or either house of the said Congress, or
the said President, or to bring them or either of them into contempt or
disrepute; or to excite against them, or either or any of them, the hatred of
the good people of the United States; or to stir up sedition within the United
States; or to excite any unlawful combination therein, for opposing or
resisting any law of the United States, or any act of the President of the
United States, done in pursuance of any such law, or of the powers in him
vested by the Constitution of the United States or to resist, oppose, or defeat
any such law or act; or to aid, encourage or abet any hostile designs of any
foreign nation against the United States, their people or government, then such
person, being thereof convicted before any court of the United States, having
jurisdiction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand
dollars, and by imprisonment not exceeding two years.

SEC. 3. And be it further enacted and declared, That if any person shall be
prosecuted under this act, for the writing or publishing any libel aforesaid,
it shall be lawful for the defendant, upon the trial of the cause, to give in
evidence in his defense, the truth of the matter contained in the publication
charged as a libel. And the jury who shall try the cause, shall have a right to
determine the law and the fact, under the direction of the court, as in other
cases.

SEC. 4. And be it further enacted, That this Act shall continue and be in
force, until the third day of March, one thousand eight hundred and one, and no
longer: Provided, that the expiration of the Act shall not prevent or defeat a
prosecution and punishment of any offense against the law, during the time it
shall be in force.

[ Approved by the President July 14, 1798.]

Virginia Resolutions.
VIRGINIA, to wit: In the HOUSE of DELEGATES, Friday, December 2^ st, 1798.
RESOLVED, That the General Assembly of Virginia does unequivocally express a
firm resolution to maintain and defend the constitution of the United States,
and the constitution of this state, against every aggression, either foreign or
domestic, and that they will support the government of the United States in all
measures, warranted by the former.

That this assembly most solemnly declares a warm attachment to the union of
the states, to maintain which, it pledges all its powers; and that for this
end, it is their duty, to watch over and oppose every infraction of those
principles, which constitute the only basis of that union, because a faithful
observance of them, can alone secure its existence, and the public happiness.

That this assembly does explicitly and peremptorily declare, that it views the
powers of the Federal Government, as resulting from the compact, to which the
states are parties; as limited by the plain sense and intention of the
instrument constituting that compact; as no farther valid than they are
authorized by the grants enumerated in that compact, and that in case of a
deliberate, palpable and dangerous exercise of other powers not granted by the
said compact, the states who are parties thereto have the right, and are in
duty bound, to interpose for arresting the progress of the evil, and for
maintaining within their respective limits, the authorities, rights and
liberties appertaining to them.

That the General Assembly does also express its deep regret that a spirit has,
in sundry instances, been manifested by the Federal Government, to enlarge its
powers by forced constructions of the constitutional charter which defines
them; and that indications have appeared of a design to expound certain general
phrases (which having been copied from the very limited grant of powers in the
former articles of confederation were the less liable to be misconstrued) so as
to destroy the meaning and effect of the particular enumeration, which
necessarily explains and limits the general phrases; and so as to consolidate
the states by degrees into one sovereignty, the obvious tendency and inevitable
consequence of which would be, to transform the present republican system of
the United States, into an absolute, or at best a mixed monarchy.

That the General Assembly does particularly protest against the palpable and
alarming infractions of the constitution, in the two late cases of the "Alien
and Sedition Acts," passed at the last session of Congress; the first of which
exercises a power no where delegated to the Federal Government; and which by
uniting legislative and judicial powers, to those of executive, subverts the
general principles of free government, as well as the particular organization
and positive provisions of the Federal Constitution: and the other of which
acts, exercises in like manner a power not delegated by the constitution, but
on the contrary expressly and positively forbidden by one of the amendments
thereto; a power which more than any other ought to produce universal alarm,
because it is levelled against that right of freely examining public characters
and measures, and of free communication among the people thereon, which has
ever been justly deemed, the only effectual guardian of every other right.

That this state having by its convention which ratified the Federal
Constitution, expressly declared, "that among other essential rights, the
liberty of conscience and of the press cannot be cancelled, abridged,
restrained or modified by any authority of the United States," and from its
extreme anxiety to guard these rights from every possible attack of sophistry
or ambition, having with other states recommended an amendment for that
purpose, which amendment was in due time annexed to the constitution, it would
mark a reproachful inconsistency and criminal degeneracy, if an indifference
were now shown to the most palpable violation of one of the rights thus
declared and secured, and to the establishment of a precedent which may be
fatal to the other.

That the good people of this Commonwealth having ever felt and continuing to
feel the most sincere affection to their brethren of the other states, the
truest anxiety for establishing and perpetuating the union of all, and the most
scrupulous fidelity to that constitution which is the pledge of mutual
friendship, and the instrument of mutual happiness: The General Assembly does
solemnly appeal to the like dispositions of the other states, in confidence
that they will concur with this commonwealth in declaring, as it does hereby
declare, that the acts aforesaid are unconstitutional, and that the necessary
and proper measures will be taken by each, for cooperating with this state, in
maintaining unimpaired the authorities, rights and liberties, reserved to the
states respectively, or to the people.

That the Governor be desired to transmit a copy of the foregoing resolutions
to the executive authority of each of the other states, with a request, that
the same may be communicated to the legislature thereof.

And that a copy be furnished to each of the Senators and Representatives,
representing this state in the Congress of the United States.

Attest, JOHN STEWART, C. M. ^.
1798, December the 24 th, Agreed to by the Senate, M. BROOK, C. ^.

Kentucky Resolutions.
In the House of Representatives, November 10 th, 1798,

THE HOUSE according to the standing order of the Day, resolved itself into a
Committee of the whole on the state of the Commonwealth, Mr. CALDWELL in the
Chair.

And after some time spent therein the speaker resumed the Chair, and Mr.
Caldwell reported, that the Committee had according to order had under
consideration the Governor's Address, and had come to the following RESOLUTIONS
thereupon, which he delivered (...) the Clerk's table, where they were twice
read and agreed to by the House.

I. RESOLVED, that the several states composing the United States of America,
are not united on the principle of unlimited submission to their General
Government; but that by compact under the style and title of a Constitution for
the United States and of amendments thereto, they constituted a General
Government for special purposes, delegated to that Government certain definite
powers, reserving each state to itself, the residuary most of right to their
own self Government; and that whenever the General Government assumes
undelegated powers, (...) acts are unauthoritative, void, and of no force: That
to this compact each state (...) as a state, and is an integral party, its
co-states forming as to itself, the other party: That the Government created by
this compact was not made the exclusive or final judge of the extent of the
powers delegated to itself; since that would have made its discretion, and not
the constitution, the measure of its powers; but that as in all other cases of
compact among parties having no common Judge, each party has an equal right to
judge for itself, as well of ^^ss actions as of the mode and measure of redress.

II. RESOLVED, that the Constitution of the United States having delegated to
Congress a power to punish treason, counterfeiting the securities and current
coin of the United States, piracies and felonies committed on the High Seas,
and offenses against the laws of nations, and no other crimes whatever, and it
being true, as a general principle, and one of the amendments to the
Constitution having also declared, "that the powers not delegated to the United
States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to
the states respectively, or to the people," therefore also the same act of
Congress passed on the 14th day of July, 1798, and entitled "An act in addition
to the act entitled an act for the punishment of certain crimes against the
United States;" as also the act passed by them on the 17th day of June, 1798,
entitled "An act to punish frauds committed on the Bank of the United States"
(and all other their acts which assume to create, define, or punish crimes
other than those enumerated in the constitution) are altogether void and of no
force, and that the power to create, define, and punish such other crimes is
reserved, and of right appertains solely and exclusively to the respective
states, each within its own Territory.

III. RESOLVED, that it is true as a general principle, and is also expressly
declared by one of the amendments to the Constitution that "the powers not
delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the
states, are reserved to the states respectively or to the people;" and that no
power over the freedom of religion, freedom of speech, or freedom of the press
being delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it
to the states, all lawful powers respecting the same did of right remain, and
were reserved to the states, or to the people: That thus was manifested their
determination to retain to themselves the right of judging how far the
licentiousness of speech and of the press may be abridged without lessening
their useful freedom, and how far those abuses which cannot be separated from
their use, should be tolerated rather than the use be destroyed: and thus also
they guarded against all abridgement by the United States of the freedom of
religious opinions and exercises, and retained to themselves the right of
protecting the same, as this state by a Law, passed on the general demand of
its Citizens, had already protected them from all human restraint or
interference: And that in addition to this general principle and express
declaration, another and more special provision has been made by one of the
amendments to the Constitution, which expressly declares that "Congress shall
make no law respecting an Establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press," thereby
guarding in the same sentence, and under the same words, the freedom of
religion, of speech, and of the press, insomuch, that whatever (...) either,
throws down the sanctuary which covers the others, and that libels, falsehoods,
and defamation, equally with heresy and false religion, are withheld from the
cognizance of federal tribunals. That therefore the act of the Congress of the
United States, passed on the 14th day of July 179^ entitled "An act in addition
to the act for the punishment of certain crimes against the United States,"
which does abridge the freedom of the press, is not law, but is altogether void
and of no effect.

IV. RESOLVED, that alien friends are under the jurisdiction and protection of
the laws of the state wherein they are; that no power over them has been
delegated to the United States nor prohibited to the individual states distinct
from their power over citizens; and it being true as a general principle, and
one of the amendments to the Constitution having also declared, that "the
powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution nor prohibited by
it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people," the
act of the Congress of the United States passed on the ^^d day of June, 1798,
entitled "An act concerning aliens," which assumes power over alien friends not
delegated by the Constitution, is not law, but is altogether void and of no
force.

V. RESOLVED, that in addition to the general principle as well as the express
declaration, that powers not delegated are reserved, another and more special
provision inserted in the Constitution from abundant caution has declared,
"that the migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now
existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress
prior to the year 1808." That this Commonwealth does admit the migration of
alien friends described as the subject of the said act concerning aliens; that
a provision against prohibiting their migration, is a provision against all
acts equivalent thereto, or it would be nugatory; that to remove them when
migrated is equivalent to a prohibition of their migration, and is therefore
contrary to the said provision of the Constitution, and void.

VI. RESOLVED, that the imprisonment of a person under the protection of the
Laws of this Commonwealth on his failure to obey the simple order of the
President to depart out of the United States, as is undertaken by the said act
entitled "An act concerning Aliens," is contrary to the Constitution, one
amendment to which has provided, that "no person shall be deprived of liberty
without due process of law," and that another having provided that in all
criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a public trial by
an impartial jury, to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to
be confronted with the witnesses against him, to have compulsory process for
obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the assistance of counsel for
his defense," the same act undertaking to (...) the President to remove a
person out of the United States who is under the protection of the Law, on his
own suspicion, without accusation, without jury, without public trial, without
confrontation of the witnesses against him, without having witnesses in his
favor, without defense, without counsel, is contrary to (...) provisions also
of the Constitution, is therefore not law but utterly void and of no force.

That transferring the power of judging any person who is under the protection
of the laws, from the Courts to the President of the United States, as is
undertaken by the same act concerning Aliens, is against the article of the
Constitution which provides, that "the judicial power of the United States
shall be vested in Courts, the Judges of which shall hold their offices during
good behavior," and that the said act is void for that reason also; and it is
further to be noted, that this (...) of Judiciary power is to that magistrate
of the General Government who already possesses all the Executive, and a
qualified negative in all the Legislative powers.

VII. Resolved, that the construction applied by the General Government (as is
evinced by sundry of their proceedings) to those parts of the Constitution of
the United States which delegate to Congress a power to lay and collect taxes,
duties, impo^^s, and excises; to pay the debts, and provide for the common
defense, and general welfare of the United States, and to make all laws which
shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers vested by
the Constitution in the Government of the United States, or any department
thereof, goes to the destruction of all the limits prescribed to their power by
the Constitution. That words meant by that instrument to be subsiduary only to
the execution of the limited powers, ought not to be so construed as themselves
to give unlimited powers, nor a part so to be taken, as to destroy the whole
residue of the instrument. That the proceedings of the General Government under
color of these articles, will be a fit and necessary subject for revisal and
correction at a time of greater tranquillity, while those specified in the
preceding resolutions call for immediate redress.

VIII. RESOLVED, that the preceding Resolutions be transmitted to the Senators
and Representatives in Congress from this Commonwealth, who are hereby enjoined
to present the same to their respective Houses, and to use their best
endeavors to procure at the next (...) of Congress a repeal of the aforesaid
unconstitutional and obnoxious acts.

IX. RESOLVED, last, that the Governor of this (...) is hereby authorized and
requested to communicate the preceding Resolutions to (...) of the several
States, to assure them that this Commonwealth considers Union for specified
National purposes, and particularly for those specified in th^^^ late Federal
Compact, to be friendly to the peace, happiness and prosperity of all the
(...): that faithful to that compact, according to the plain intent and meaning
in which it was understood and aceded to by the several parties, it is
sincerely anxious for its preservation: that it does also believe, that to take
from the states all the powers of self government, and transfer them to a
general and consolidated Government, without regard to the special delegations
and reservations solemnly agreed to in that compact, is not for the peace,
happiness, or prosperity of th^se states: And that therefore, this Commonwealth
is determined, as it doubts not its Co-states (...), namely to submit to
undelegated and consequently unlimited powers in no man or body of men on
earth: that if the acts before specified should stand, these conclusions would
flow from them; that the General Government may place any act they think proper
on the list of crimes and (...) themselves, whether enumerated or not
enumerated by the Constitution as cognizable by them: that they may transfer
its cognizance to the President or any other person, who may himself be the
accuser, counsel, judge, and jury, whose suspicions may be the evidence, his
order the sentence, his officer the executioner, and his (...) the sole record
of the transaction: that a very numerous and valuable (...) of the inhabitants
of these states, being by this precedent reduced as outlaws to the absolute
dominion of one man and the barrier of the Constitution thus swept away from us
all, no rampart now remains against the passions and the power of a majority of
Congress, to protect from a like exportation or other more grievous punishment
the minority of the same body, the Legislatures, Judges, Governors, and
Counselors of the states, nor their other peaceable inhabitants who may
venture to reclaim the constitutional rights and liberties of the states and
people, or who for other causes, good or bad* may be obnoxious to the views or
marked by the suspicions of the President, or be thought dangerous to his or
their elections or other interests public or personal: that the friendless
alien has indeed been selected as the safest subject of a first experiment: but
the citizen will soon follow, or rather has already followed; for, already has
a Sedition Act marked him as its prey: that these and successive acts of the
same character, unless arrested on the threshold, may tend to drive these
states into revolution and blood, and will furnish new calumnies against
Republican Governments, and new pretexts for those who wish it to be believed,
that man cannot be governed but by a rod of iron: that it would be a dangerous
delusion were a confidence in the men of our choice (...) silence our fears for
the safety of our rights: that confidence is every where the parent of
despotism: free government is founded in jealousy and not in confidence it is
jealousy and not confidence which prescribes limited Constitutions to bind down
those whom we are obliged to trust with power: that our Constitution has
accordingly fixed the limits to which and no further our confidence may go; and
let the honest advocate of confidence read the Alien and Sedition Acts, and say
if the Constitution has not been wise in fixing limits to the Government it
created, and whether we should be wise in destroying those limits? Let him say
what the Government is if it be not a tyranny, which the men of our choice have
conferred on the President, and the President of our choice has assented to and
accepted over the friendly strangers, to whom the mild spirit of our Country
and its laws had pledged hospitality and protection* that the man of our choice
have more respected the bare suspicions of the President than the solid rights
of innocence, the claims of justification, the sacred force of truth, and the
(...) and justice -- In questions of power (...) no more be heard of (...), but
bind him down from (...) not by the (...) of the Constitution. That this
Commonwealth does therefore call on its Co-states for an expression of their
sentiments on the acts concerning Aliens, and for the punishment of certain
crimes herein before specified, plainly declaring whether these acts are or are
not authorized by the Federal Compact* And it doubts not that their sense will
be so announced as to prove their attachment unaltered to (...) Government,
whether general or particular, and that the rights and liberties of their
Co-states will be exposed to no dangers by remaining embarked on a common
bottom with their own: That they will concur with this Commonwealth in
considering the said acts (...) so palpably against the Constitution as to
amount to an undisguised declaration, that the Compact is not meant to be the
measure of the powers of the General Government, but that it will proceed in
the exercise over these states of all powers whatsoever: That they will view
this as (...) the rights of the states and consolidating them in the hands of
the General Government with a power assumed to bind the states (not merely in
cases made federal) but in all cases whatsoever, by laws made, not with their
consent, but by others against their consent: That this would be to surrender
the form of Government we have chosen, and to live under one deriving its
powers from (...) own will, and not from our authority; and that the Co-states
(...) to their natural right in (...) not made federal will concur in declaring
these acts void and of no force, and will each unite with this Commonwealth in
requesting their repeal at the next session of Congress.

EDMUND BULLOCK, S. H. R.
JOHN CAMPBELL, S. S. P. T.
Passed the House of Representatives, Nov. 10th, '98. Attest, THOMAS TODD, C.
H. R.
IN SENATE, November 13th, 1798, unanimously concurred in, Attest, B. THURSTON,
Clk. Sen.
Approved, November 16th, 1798. JAMES GARRARD, G. K.
BY THE GOVERNOR, HARRY TOULMIN, Secretary of State

PRINTED BY YOUNG and MINNS, PRINTERS TO THE STATE.


