A SERMON, PREACHED IN THE EPISCOPAL CHURCH IN DEDHAM, DECEMBER 25, 1797; BEING
THE FESTIVAL OF CHRISTMAS. BY THOMAS THATCHER, A. M. MINISTER OF A
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN DEDHAM.

"RARA TEMPORUM FELICITATE, UBI SENTIRE QUAE VELIS ET QUAE SENTIAS DICERE
LICET." TACITUS. Dedham: PRINTED BY MANN AND ADAMS. 1798.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE following discourse was delivered in the Episcopal Church in Dedham, on
Christmas day, 1797, in compliance with the wishes of a number of respectable
characters, and also the request of the Rev. WILLIAM MONTAGUE, who was engaged
to preach on the same day in another Church.

Soon after, I was informed that it was the unanimous desire of the hearers
that the sermon might be printed, and I was solicited to furnish a copy for the
press; in consequence of which I have submitted it to public inspection.

As my design was to honor the Savior of Mankind, and promote charity and
benevolence among his followers of all denominations, I hope the purity of the
motive will expiate any imperfections, that may appear in the performance.

THE AUTHOR.

A SERMON.
LUKE ii. 10th and 11th verses. Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all people. -- For unto you is born this day, in the city of
David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.
THE design of the Deity in sending a Savior into the world, who should adorn
our nature by his example, reform us by his laws, and expiate for our crimes by
his death, was so vast in its nature and important in its consequences, that
none of the component parts of it, which are discoverable by reason, are
unworthy our notice. The curiosity of a speculative mind would of itself
naturally excite an enquiry into every part of the Divine conduct unfolded by
the works of creation, or the facred scriptures. But here the strong and
powerful motive of interest would be superadded, to awaken our contemplation on
the most wonderful event in the history of the intelligent world.

According to our ideas of power, wisdom and greatness, we should naturally
suppose that the first scene, which introduced so illustrious a character as
the Lord Jesus Christ unto the human drama, must be grand and awful, and
attended with every circumstance of pomp and magnificence, which could strike
the eyes and the senses, of men. This opinion would be warranted by a sacred
precedent, the promulgation of the law from Mount Sinai. If on that occasion
the mountain was covered with smoke, the thunders, the lightnings and the found
of the trumpet occasioned terror and dismay in the minds of those people, on
whose account these divine energies were displayed, might we not infer that the
effects of it in the natural world, (...) would be proportionally more great
and astonishing, when ushering in a still more glorious demonstration of the
Eternal to his creatures? In a word, that when the Desire of all Nations made
his appearance not figuratively, but literally, God would shake the heavens and
the earth, and fill, not only his temple at Jerusalem, but the whole earth with
his visible glory?

In these, however, as well as in our other reasonings on the government of
God, we find that our most plausible opinions are not always the best founded.
Greatness and simplicity are nearly allied. Objects, which dazzle at the first,
soon become familiar to the eye. Like the sensible horizon, they diminish in
estimation, on experiment and knowledge. Others, which appear minute and
inconsiderable, upon a closer inspection discover marks of the deepest
contrivance and profoundest design. The most beautiful and magnificent fabric,
that was ever reared by human hand, can by the eye of the ingenious artist be
easily traced from the basis to the superstructure; while the origin of the
smallest insect in the animal or the arcana of the least plant in the vegetable
world, cannot be explained by the most learned philosopher. The reason is
obvious. -- The first is a human, the second a divine production.

Corresponding with our last remarks, the birth of Jesus Christ was not
attended with the false glare of worldly glory and grandeur, nor with that pomp
and ostentation, which affect the imagination and senses of the weak and
unthinking of mankind. On a review, however, of all the circumstances which
attended that event, it would not be difficult to demonstrate that the wisdom
of God in the moral and intelligent, is as much superior to human calculations,
as his sublime and beautiful productions in the material creation are
preferable to the monuments and beauties of art. For this cause the humble and
retired village of Bethlehem was preferred to the populous and superb city of
Rome for the first appearance of the Messiah. A manger, not a palace, was the
first seen to which the first and best of God's intelligent creatures was
introduced. The unkind and inhospitable temper of those who were present as
spectators, was a presage of the ingratitude of that world which he came to
redeem; while at his birth, the contrast between heavenly honors and earthly
debasement was an emblem of his future condition in the world -- a striking
picture of a life made up of indigence, misery and wonders.

The Almighty, however, gave to mankind sufficient indications of his divine
agency in so important an event as the nativity of the Redeemer. The celestial
messengers were directed to announce those joyful tidings to the shepherds in
the vicinity. Other occurrences equally remarkable engaged the attention of
those who, from the language of their ancient prophets, were waiting with
anxiety for their patron and savior, and fully persuaded that the auspicious
era was at hand.

The words of the text are a part of the message announced by the angel. They
point out his birth, and describe its effects. As my main design is to speak
this day on the important advantages that mankind have derived from the advent
and mission of Christ, I shall take the liberty to invert the order of the
verses in further prosecuting the subject.

I. I shall make some remarks on the wisdom of Providence, that the birth of
Christ should be circumstanced in the manner related by St. Luke and another
evangelist. For unto you is born this day a Savior which is Christ the Lord.

II. Take a summary view of the extensive advantages which mankind have derived
from the example of Jesus Christ, and the principles of his religion. Behold I
bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all people.

III. Offer a few reflections.

First, I shall make some remarks on the wisdom of Providence, that the birth
of Christ should be circumstanced in the manner related by St. Luke and another
evangelist. For unto you is born, etc;.

First of all, the nation among whom he was born had been from remote antiquity
favored with a divine revelation; in which clear and strong indications were
given of the designs of Providence respecting the redemption of mankind by
Christ. To Abraham, the first of the Patriarchs, it was declared, that in his
feed all nations of the earth should be blessed. To his two immediate
descendants a promise of like import was uttered. To Moses, the great and
inspired lawgiver of the Jews, it was foretold, that a prophet like unto
himself should arise armed with plenary powers, for the propagation of true
religion and moral virtue in the world. By the succeeding prophets,
particularly Isaiah, not only the great and mavelous, but many of the most
minute events of his life, as well as of the circumstances of his sufferings
and death, were predicted with historical exactness. A people, who had such
credentials of the divine promises, were not (...) the most likely to receive
the Messiah, but were the fairest and fittest judges of his pretensions. For
they had little else to do, but to inspect the inspired language of their laws
and prophets, and compare it with the accomplishment in his life and actions.
This cause may be rationally assigned why, in the counsels of Heaven, an
obscure part of an obscure country was preferred, for the dawnings of the light
of the world, to Greece, with her literary same, or Rome, with the splendor
and majesty of her conquests.

In the second place, the family, from which he descended afford us a remark
similar to the last. Humble and depressed in their fortunes, so far as to be
obliged at his birth to take advantage of the sacrifice customary for the poor;
at the same time venerable for a long line of ancestors, embracing both the
sanctity of Patriarchs and the majesty of Kings. From these facts it is clearly
evident, that wealth is of no consequence in the sight of God, and that he
meant, to introduce. Christ and his gospel independent of any human influence;
at the same time it was ordered by Providence, that nothing mean or degrading
might take place in the nativity of so illustrious a personage.

Thirdly, The omens and (...) attending his birth were just indications of his
character and errand to the world. The Star in the east was a harbinger of the
Sun of Righteousness. The anxious enquiry of the wise men implied, that a
system of truth and righteousness was wanted to instruct mankind,
notwithstanding the wisdom of the world. The pacific manner in which he was
introduced to the world; quadrated with the humble temper and benevolent;
conduct displayed in every part of his private life or public ministry. The
cruel jealousy of Herod was the first accomplishment of those inspired
predictions, which announced him to be a man of sorrows, from the cradle to the
cross, while his divine preservation from the designs, of that tyrant was a
presage of the success of his gospel against the clashing interests and corrupt
morals of the world.

A fourth observation which occurs, is, the fitness and prosperity of that
precise period of time assigned for his birth. The Assyrian, the Persian, and
the Grecian monarchies had been swallowed up by the Roman power. Profound peace
was established in all parts of the civilized world. From the causes last
mentioned, it was a task neither difficult nor dangerous to travel from one
country to another. It was an age which has been renowned for the progress of
urbanity, and of the arts and sciences. The inestimable remains of ancient
literature, the sublime efforts of genius which have scarce ever been equalled,
and we are sure have never been exceeded by any nation or individual from that
era to the present, amply qualified that generation to detect falsehood and
imposture. For had the prejudices of the Jews been such as to admit a deceiver
from the hopes of national grandeur; still they were but an inferior, weak
province of a foreign government. Had Christ appeared at an earlier date, the
division of mankind into small governments, independent of each other, and
mutually hostile, would have required as constant prodigies in the whole
process, as were wrought at the first promulgation of the gospel. The general
expectation of both Jews and Gentiles that a prince and lawgiver was soon to
arise, who should govern the earth, prepared their minds for the reception of
the Christian system, and its Author. Had God longer delayed his gracious
designs, their expectations would have languished for want of their completion.
It was therefore in the fullness of time that God sent forth his Son. By the
convulsions and revolutions which preceded that event, the words of his holy
prophet were fulfilled. Every valley shall be exalted, every mountain and hill
shall be made low, the crooked shall be made strait, and the rough places
plain. The glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it
together.

The incidents already enumerated, justify the observations of a learned and
ingenious author on the resurrection, which we think will equally apply to the
nativity of Christ, viz. that God, in unfolding his purpose to the world,
differed widely in his operations, from what would have been expected or
calculated by human sagacity. That by a sovereign act of power he could have
subdued the whole human race to his law and will, there is no manner of
question. But, by adopting a different method, he has shown that his
dispensations in the order of grace shall cooperate with his natural
providence, and the settled laws by which rational, free agents are governed.
In consequence of this arrangement, the sentiment of St. Paul was fully
justified, the weakness of God is stronger, and the foolishness of God is wiser
than man. By instruments apparently the most feeble; from causes the most
improbable, he has displayed the strongest tokens of his goodness to mankind.
He has bestowed the most valuable legacy (with deference be it spoken) which
it was in his power to confer on the work of his hands.

Of the truth of the last assertion we shall be sufficiently persuaded, from
the observations which will occur in the second head of discourse.

II. Let us take a summary view of the advantages, which mankind have derived
from the example of Jesus Christ, and the principles of his religion. Behold I
bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all people.

Here we may make a pertinent enquiry, what changes have taken place in the
religion, moral habits and customs of men, in consequence of the coming of
Christ, and at the same time demonstrate the superiority of the motives to
piety and social virtue, which are derived from our holy religion.

1. To the gospel mankind are indebted for that first and grand article of all
true religion, the UNITY OF GOD. This truth had not only been obscured, but
obliterated by idolatry. Although the religion of the Jews, as delivered by
Moses, made this a principal and positive article in their creed; yet their
frequent relapses into the idolatry of other nations, and the very unworthy
notions of the divine attributes, that were admitted among their traditions,
prove that they, as well as all the rest of human kind, stood in need of a
teacher, who, by a divine warrant and by divine authority, should give them a
proper view of the subject. Granting this to be the case, with a people
favored with a pure though partial revelation of the Deity, we may very
naturally conclude, that in nations and countries walking by the light of
nature, it would be far worse. History confirms us in this supposition. For not
merely the heavenly bodies, the sun, moon and stars; but deceased princes and
heroes, benefactors or tyrants of mankind, yea the beasts of the field, and the
inanimate parts of creation, received those honors which are alone due to the
Governor of heaven and earth. Who can reckon up the number of human victims,
which were sacrificed, either to procure their favor, or to appease their
wrath? Was there a passion or appetite, however black or polluted, lurking in
the heart of man, but received a religious consecration, and was made a part of
divine worship? The ears of the chaste would be wounded at the recital of the
impure and abominable, those of the humane and compassionate, with that of the
infernal barbarities of the pagan rites. A bare allusion to many of them would
be too indecorous for an assembly of Christians. Such facts did however exist,
as to justify the description of them by St. Paul in his epistles. Professing
themselves to be wise they became fools, their foolish hearts were darkened,
they were given up to a reprobate mind, they changed the glory of the invisible
God, to the likeness of corruptible man, to beasts, to birds and reptiles. As
far therefore, as the primitive religion of nature, which comprizes the idea of
one God, and him infinitely powerful, wise and good, is preferable to the
abominations of the heathen, with all their brutal and barbarous modes of
worship; as far as mankind have been enlightened in these doctrines by the
gospel, so far I affirm we are indebted to the birth and ministry of Jesus
Christ for the light and knowledge we enjoy. We shall offer no other argument
in favor of our last assertion, than by asking, in the language of a late
learned and eminent writer, Thomas Sherlock, Bishop of London.
In what nation, city or even village, has the doctrine of one eternal God been
publicly taught, except among the Jews, previous to the commencement of
Christianity?

2. The state of the heathen morality, compared with that of the gospel, will
give us a further view of the superior advantages we enjoy. The belief that we
are accountable to a being, who is infinitely pure and holy, who will reward
the most secret acts of goodness, and punish vice whether secret or open, is I
say common to every denomination of Christians, however they may differ from
each other in modes of worship. To do justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly, to do to others as we would that others should do to us, to forgive our
enemies, and, as far as is consistent with self preservation, to restore them
to our affections, to harbor no malignity in our hearts, neither to envy the
rich, nor despise the poor, to visit the afflicted, the friendless and the
destitute, and relieve their necessities, to conduct in every relation of life
as a good neighbor and a good citizen, to be severe and critical in examining
our own conduct, to exercise charity, candor and moderation to all others,
these are truth, which were taught by the precepts, and exemplified in the life
of our blessed Savior. Compare for a moment the principles and morals here
laid down, with those of the heathen world, where revenge was in many places
considered as a virtue, where patriotism was but a faction against the liberty
and happiness of every country but their own, where men were in no capacity to
learn truth or purity of conduct from their laws, from their philosophers, or
from their social institutions, where the violation of virtue or decency was
scarce thought worthy of a slight reproof, much less of a legal prohibition,
where every crime against the peace of society or individuals could be
justified from the example of their Gods.

I am aware it will be objected, that the writings of many eminent men among
the heathen recommended the practice of the social virtues, and exhibited
sublime sentiments of piety, in some respects not inferior to those delivered
in the New Testament. But in reply, it may be said, that their influence and
authority was greatly circumscribed, and there was such a mixture of the
religious traditions of their country, as rendered it impossible that any
general body of ethics should be collected from them. We do not wish to
depreciate their characters. We admire the efforts of their minds, laboring
under so many disadvantages. That the academy at Athens and the public school
at Sparta produced men of shining parts and romantic virtues, we do not deny;
but let us look for a moment into the private manners of their best disciples;
how very remote were they from uniform morality! In one instance we know that
the government of the civilized world was left to one of the most eminent
philosophers of all antiquity. Yet when supreme power was united with the
highest degrees of human wisdom and dignity of character, that it produced no
general change for the better. It scarcely cleansed the polluted atmosphere of
the court.

3. Let us consider the alteration in human laws and customs, by the
propagation of the gospel.

Under the heathen system, slavery or death was the usual consequence of being
vanquished in war. This warranted the most internal cruelty in the conqueror,
and the most obstinate resistance in the vanquished. But the gospel, by the
doctrine of forgiving enemies, recommending them as objects of our love, has
softened the serocious passions of men, changed the stern countenance of war,
and in an infinity of examples bettered the condition of mankind. It has made
good the pretensions of its divine Author, who declared, that he came to bring
deliverance unto the captives, the opening of the prison to them that were
bound, and to loose those that were appointed unto death. Equally salutary were
the consequences of the gospel, by which polygamy was abolished, and the
affections and senses of men restrained within such limits, as from their
tendency, promote friendship, mutual confidence, and the care of posterity. In
a word, by liberating the fairer part of creation from the dominion of lawless
appetites, by rendering the state of marriage honorable and mutually
advantageous, the source of innumerable private blessings; where every man's
home would be an asylum amidst the cares and trials of life, where he might
find the partner and companion of his heart instead of the slave of sensual
appetite.

I add, that the constituion of the gospel is highly favorable to the
abolition of personal slavery. Its most sacred mysteries are communicated
equally to the rich and poor, to the master and servant. The sentiment that
every man is accountable for his actions at the tribunal of Jesus Christ, that
no distinctions will be admitted but those of a moral nature, the doctrine
delivered by the holy apostle St. Paul, that in Christ there is neither bond
nor free, but all one, could not but have made a deep impression, and procured
a decisive influence on all, who embrace that holy system, to treat all mankind
as brothers. It must from its tendency have inculcated the principles of
liberty and equality, so far as they can exist consistently with order and the
social compact.

In addition to those last mentioned, may we not ascribe to our holy religion
the benefits which arise from literature, commerce and resinement, which have
rendered Christian countries so far superior to the other parts of the globe?
The care and pains with which the inspired writings were preserved, rendered
the original languages, in which they were written, absolutely necessary to be
known, and the duties of devotion performed in the Latin language throughout
Europe for many generations, were means in the hands of Providence for
preserving the noble compositions of the ancients from destruction, under the
great eclipse of literature by the invasion of the Goths and Vandals in the
West, and the Scythians and Arabs in the East, who effected the destruction of
the Roman Empire. Otherwise, for any cause we can assign, the arts and sciences
would have been buried in the ruins of the Roman government. The civilized
parts of Europe would have known no resurrection of literature, but would in
all probability have been as barbarous and brutal, as those nations on the
extremity of Asia or America, which have been visited by modern navigators.

4. Let us consider the superior motives, by which we are excited to moral
virtue under the gospel, to what were ever laid before mankind previous to that
dispensation. The doctrine of pardon upon penitence, the sufficency of the
Savior's expiation to compensate for our imperfect nature, and to raise us to
a sphere of existence far beyond what the most perfect innocence could have
hoped for from natural religion, have their origin in the New Testament. But,
lest such indulgence should be a foundation for licentiousness, and counteract
the purity of the Christian doctrines, we are assured that the Supreme Being
will admit none to his favor, till, subdued by divine grace, and clothed with
humble reliance upon his goodness, both their hearts and habits are changed.

But among all the visible effects of the gospel, none are more worthy our
grateful commemoration, than the doctrine of the immortality of the soul, and
the resurrection of the dead. Human laws and penalties from large experience
are proved to be insufficient either to encourage the good or to awe and
reclaim the wicked, unless aided by the hopes and fears of another life, in
which reward and punishment will be adjusted, not according to the promiscuous
plan of Providence in this state, but by the everlasting principles of truth
and righteousness. In this therefore man in a social view has reaped
innumerable benefits from the coming of Christ. What might be considered a
probability from the natural hopes of mankind, and the writings of great and
good men not inspired, in consequence of the evidences and light of our holy
religion, may be viewed as a moral certainty. If in the present mixed state all
things come alike to all, and there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked; if the sinner be clothed in purple and fare sumptuously every day, and
the true child of virtue is deprived of the common bounties of heaven, our holy
religion assures us, that in a very short time this scene will be shifted, the
former will be comforted, the latter punished. Vice will be stripped of its
false ornaments and its crown. Persecuted, conflicting, and persevering
goodness will be reserved to adorn the triumph of the Redeemer at the great
day. These hopes of our holy religion have banished the fears of silence and
perpetual sleep. They teach us, that He, who was raised from the dead, will
illuminate us through the dark valley of the shadow of death, and introduce us
to the paternal mansions he had prepared, where are collected the wise and good
of all past ages, whose numbers will constantly augment to the conclusion of
time. If these doctrines give a relish to prosperity, how much more necessary
are they for the unfortunate? If they are a stimulus to virtue, are they not
still more wanted as a check upon the wicked?

Here, my brethren, you see a small part of the glorious events, that have
taken place in consequence of the birth and advent of the Redeemer to the
world. Might not the celestial messenger, more especially when unfolding the
dark volumes of futurity, he foresaw the splendor of the spiritual throne of
David, and those blessings to the human kind which originated from the gospel,
be justified in declaring, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall
be unto all people. Well might his celestial attendants respond to his
sentiments, glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and good will toward
men. Well might the aged and venerable prophet, inspired with more than mortal
joy, sing his "nunc dimittis:" Permit thy servant to depart, for mine eyes have
seen the salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all people.

I now hasten, in the third place, to offer a few reflections.

First, Something will be expected concerning the religious festival itself. A
question of this kind will naturally arise in your mind, why, if the birth of
Christ be attended with so many advantages to mankind, should not this day be
honored with religious solemnity? Wherefore have our ancestors of the
New England states, who founded our churches, refused it that honor and notice
paid by all other Christians? In reply, under patience and candor of the
audience, I shall give you some among the more important of their objections,
adding at the same time some sentiments of my own.

In the first place, These objections I have stated in my own language, from
reading and recollection.
the day has never been identified with such correctness, as to warrant its
observation, Were we to determine by the time in which Zacharias officiated in
the temple, we could gain no light upon the subject, because the order and rank
of priests were varied at the pleasure of the Roman Governors. In the next
place, all their public records perished with their temple. Should it be
computed by the Roman census, when Cyrenius was president of Syria, that period
is placed by some expositors at an earlier season of the year. To the last
objection may be added another; that of shepherds feeding their flocks by
night. Though Palestine be in a climate much warmer than our own, yet such an
employment was improbable at that late season of the year. To this perhaps
their successors would add, that the reformation of the calendar half a century
ago, has caused a variation of eleven days in the time of its celebration.

They further objected, that the festival is enjoined neither by Christ nor his
apostles in any part of the New Testament, that there are no traces to be found
of it in the early and pure ages of the church; from whence they drew this
inference, that at an after period it was substituted for some pagan festival,
after the church had become corrupt.

They considered it as a festival enjoined by human authority, and therefore,
as they disputed all pretensions of that kind, as invading the kingdom of
Christ, they on that account refused it any particular notice or honor.

Lastly, it is probable, from the rigor and severity of their principles, they
might dislike the manner in which it was observed by the ignorant and
unthinking part of the community, and might therefore view it as productive of
dissipation and indecent mirth, and consequently hostile to the interests of
piety and virtue.

These arguments have been recited rather to gratify the hearers than with a
view or wish for polemical discussion. The greater part of them at the present
day, considering the mutual good sense of those who deny or admit their weight,
are of very little consequence. I conceive the fameness of the day is given up
on all hands by the present Gregorian calendar. Good men we are sensible may
differ in their opinions how far a power enjoining a positive act of worship,
unexceptionable in itself, may be lodged in the church. But at the same time,
however different their apprehensions of the lawfulness of the authority, they
may all perform the same acts of worship from different motives. Some may view
the celebration of this day as an act of piety, because it has its origin in
venerable antiquity, and is supported by the example of the greater part of the
Christian world. Others, from voluntary effusion of gratitude to the memory of
Christ. A third party, having no objections to offer, may esteem it a mark of
charity and catholicism to unite in the devotion of their fellow Christians.

If it be admitted by the candid and moderate of both parties, that some day
should be set apart for this purpose, I think we may infer, that the practice
of the churches of England and Geneva, the Protestant churches in Germany, the
Greek churches in Asia and Europe, which last comprize the religion of the
Russian Empire, should give a decided preference to the present time.

For my own part, though I have the highest veneration for the founders of the
New England churches, yet I conceive it may be possible that, with hearts
filled with piety, they might vibrate to an extreme in lesser matters. As a
mere human and compulsive injunction, I should protest against the observation
of the day. But as a free-will-offering to the Lord Jesus Christ, as a
voluntary honor to the season of his birth, I could heartily wish, that every
temple consecrated to the most high God throughout the land were opened to
commemorate, with proper sensibility and fervent gratitude, the benevolence of
the Deity in sending a Savior. Certainly the thousands, nay millions of
sincere Christian professors, engaged in this holy act of devotion and piety,
would warm and elevate our religious affections. For just is the observation of
the wise man, iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his
friend.

In the second place, the day itself may lead us to some collateral reflections
on the advantages of such religious institutions as occasion pleasure to the
mind, and admit of some entertainment to the senses. It may be justly offered
in their defense, that when limited by a strict veneration for religion and its
Author, restrained by decorum from sensual excesses, when they neither are
allowed to promote idolatry, or trespass on the calls of common life, they
deserve reverence and attention not only from the devout man, but even from the
good citizen. The Deity in the abstract is too sublime for our conceptions. His
original cannot be investigated by the most profound thought or elevated powers
of the human soul. We therefore form our ideas of him from the noblest images
of created excellence; from the best moral and intelligent qualities of the
mind. These, though infinitely short of his essence, yet are necessary aids to
assist us in the duties of piety. For who can by searching find out God, who
can find out the Almighty to perfection? It is high as heaven, what can thou
do? Deeper than bell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer than
the earth, and broader than the sea. The Almighty, therefore, in exhibiting
himself to his creatures, has condescended to the present frame and condition
of man. Accordingly he manifested himself to his ancient people by visible
demonstrations of his power. To Adam under the representation of a man walking
in the garden in the cool of the day; to Moses and the people of Israel by a
pillar of light; and afterward to the same people by the Shechinah, which was
a symbol of his power and presence, residing between the Cherubims. Last of
all, he manifested himself to mankind by his Son, the brightness of his glory,
designed as a very picture of himself, through which they might adore him. From
these facts we inser, that though idolatry is justly to be reprobated, yet from
the nature of mankind, religion ought, in some measure, to be adapted to the
senses. And we are justified in this observation by the words of the apostle,
wherein he directs, to glorify God not only with our spirits, but with our
bodies which are his.

Social worship, the observation of the Sabbath, Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper, are essential, in the present order of nature, for the preservation of
the Christian system. We therefore find each of these strictly enjoined, either
by precept or example, in the New Testament. Our annual Fasts and
Thanksgivings, considered as voluntary homage to the Supreme Being, deprecating
his displeasure, soliciting his protection, and acknowledging his past
goodness, are not venerable merely for being coeval with the settlement of the
country; but are customs wise and good in themselves. Very few are there, who
are so capable of contemplation, as to support internal religion, if all public
forms should be laid aside. Of these, none are more pleasing than such as
awaken a cheerful gratitude to God, or lead us to meditate on such parts of the
divine conduct, as are in the highest degree interesting to ourselves.

This subject is more important, than we should at first suppose. For it may be
an enquiry worthy of wise and good men, whether the gloomy medium, through
which religion has been viewed by many in the land, has not had a tendency to
promote insidelity or despair? Whether it may not have been productive of the
horrors of fanaticism, arising from the most unworthy notions of the divine
character, on the one hand; or on the other, of that irrational exuberant
enthusiasm, so hostile to order and decency in public worship; the parent of
confusion and every evil work? Were I compelled to choose, I should rather
adopt a religion admitting as sacred rites sports and pastimes perfectly
innocent, than one holding up to view our Heavenly Father as an implacable
tyrant, enacting laws impossible to be obeyed, and for their necessary
violation, inflicting punishments unspeakably severe, infinitely
disproportional, and terrible beyond conception; and, furthermore, representing
his favor as conciliated by no other means, than by sacrificing, to what is
blasphemously styled his glory, the love of our proper nature implanted in us
by himself, and by a cheerful acquiescence in suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire to expiate the unpardonable crime of our existence.

Thirdly, The pleasing union of different denominations of Christians in the
solemnities of the day leads me to remark, that the variety of sects in the
Christian world, although considered as a defect, are essential, in the present
order of things, for the preservation of religion and morality. Did our nature
and circumstances admit, nothing would be more grateful to a pious mind, than
that all the children of Adam, with one mode, heart and tongue, should pay
their devout acknowledgments to their common Parent and Benefactor. But from
dear bought experience we find, that all attempts to introduce uniformity in
matters of religion have not only been inefficient, but productive of infinite
evils in society. A variety of religious denominations may, for aught we know,
be the most suitable to the unsearchable nature of the Deity. It is morally
certain, however, that it is a necessary check on superstition, and promotes a
laudable emulation among different sects to rival one another in animated
devotion, and purity of conduct. If a single sect, however pure and honest in
their intentions, should prevail so far as to exclude a toleration of others,
it would soon resemble a great body of stagnant water, which, by becoming
corrupted, emits polluted air and pestilential vapors. The pure principles of
Christianity would become contaminated by a communication with the interests of
this world. The churches might increase in the splendor of their appearance,
but internal piety and the majesty of holiness would vanish. The generous and
liberal provision, devoted for the purposes of public instruction, would
eventually become the exclusive patrimony of pride, indolence, and interest
with the great, instead of the rewards of true godliness, strict morality, and
literary labor.

Fourthly, While we contemplate the blessings which have flowed from the birth
of the Savior, let us not forget to praise God for the light and knowledge of
the present day, for the reformations in religion by reducing it to its
primitive simplicity. Within two centuries what a happy change! The iron hand
of persecution is not only maimed, but we hope stricken off from the trunk. The
United States of America are added to the list of Christian nations, who, to
the blessings of religion in its native simplicity, have added such free and
glorious constitutions of civil government, as have exhibited the highest point
to which human felicity can be carried. The most free and rational enquiries on
civil and religious subjects are not only allowed, but invited. The four,
unsocial spirit of bigotry is obliged to lay aside its former insolence, and
disguise its nature, or retreat to the habitations of ignorance and folly. And
it is with pleasure I can announce, that the liberal and catholic spirit among
Christians of different opinions at the present day, reflects high honor on
our common gospel. We feel, and may we ever feel its blessed effects! Let us
then lay aside all bitterness, and even coolness and shyness to one another;
like brethren of the same family of different christian names. Let our only
zeal and emulation be, to excel each other in piety, and in the practice of
those virtues that embellish and dignify human life.

Our own age has been pregnant with wonders. From causes little contemplated,
the most surprising revolutions have taken place in the old world. Already
superstition has fallen from her basis. On her ruins has been erected the short
but abominable dominion of atheism. The votaries of the former we hope will be
convinced by their intercourse with foreign countries, that they have seen
Christianity through a false medium. The advocates of the latter have, by a
dreadful experiment, been convinced of these eternal truths, that man was made
to worship God, and that society cannot subsist without religion.

But however these important commotions may operate on the minds of men in
those parts of the globe where they exist, I sincerely pray they may have a
tendency to excite in us a love and reverence for the religious institutions of
our country. Look to the effects of that piety and those manly virtues for
which our venerable ancestors were renowned. Behold them in the numerous and
beautiful fabrics erected to the honor and worship of God, in our
universities, in our public schools of learning, in the rapid progress of the
arts and sciences, in all the comforts and even elegancies of life, in their
industry, and those improvements, which have rendered our land the praise and
joy of all the earth, in a community the most moral and enlightened of any
known from the creation to the present day; religion, I say the religion of
Jesus was the soul that animated all their labors, and converted a gloomy
wilderness to a paradise for their offspring.

These are sufficient causes, my brethren, why we should venerate the religion
delivered by Jesus Christ; -- Non haec solemnia nobis,
Vana superstitio veterumve ignora deorum,
Imposuit.
Virgil, Ae. viii. 185.
why we should look upon it not as a vain and popular superstition, but as the
noblest inheritance we have derived from our fathers, as a tie of common
confidence, equally a bulwark and ornament of our country.

While we see the partial effects of the Redeemer's kingdom thus salutary to
mankind, what may we not infer, when he shall consummate his kingdom in the new
heavens and earth which shall be prepared for his residence! When the body of
sin shall be destroyed, and nature, purged from her ancient contagion, shall be
restored to her primitive innocence and glory! When his right hand shall slay
the crooked serpent, and the brightness of his coming shall scatter and destroy
the effects of death and natural evil! These things may appear distant to us;
but he who has promised is faithful. From the honor and veracity of his
character, it would be impious to question the assurance that is given, that
the kingdoms of this world should become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ, and he shall reign forever and ever.

Animated and inspired by these hopes, let me conjure you to pour forth your
warmest affections, your sincerest gratitude, to the infant of Bethlehem. What
a triumph did our nature receive, when perfect holiness in the person of
Immanuel came and dwelt in flesh! When he overcame the sharpness of death, he
opened the kingdom of heaven to all true believers. Let the incense you now
offer to your great Friend and Benefactor, be sincere piety, accompanied with a
humble and contrite spirit. Trust me when I assure you, that this will be a
more acceptable present to the great Judge of hearts, than thousands and tens
of thousands of victims, which you might offer, or shrines and temples of the
highest beauty and magnificence, which you should erect in honor of his memory.

FINIS.

