Rev. Mr. THAYER's DISCOURSE ON THE FEDERAL FAST, MAY 9th, 1798.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED, AT THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH IN BOSTON, ON THE 9TH OF
MAY, 1798, A DAY RECOMMENDED BY THE PRESIDENT, FOR HUMILIATION AND PRAYER
THROUGHOUT THE UNITED STATES.

BY THE Reverend JOHN THAYER, Catholic Missioner.

Printed at the pressing Solicitation of those who heard it.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON.

1798.

TO THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CONGREGATION OF BOSTON.
GENTLEMEN,
AS a native American I sincerely rejoice, that you concur with me in the
sentiments of zeal for the cause of my country, and of indignation against its
insolent enemies, which are expressed in the following discourse. I most
cheerfully acquiesce in your urgent and reiterated request, that it may be
printed, not so much from the estimation in which I hold the discourse itself,
as from a conviction, that every friend to his country ought, at the present
alarming crisis, to speak out, and contribute his mite toward rousing and
maintaining the public spirit. -- It is truly pleasing to me, and will be so, I
am persuaded, to every sincere lover of his country, to every genuine
federalist, in the town, that, though mostly foreigners, you are fired with the
same ardour, in the cause of America, which warms the breasts of its native
citizens. -- The like spirit of federalism will, I trust, be discovered in
every catholic society throughout the United States.

THOSE who have read the many excellent pieces, which have recently filled our
gazettes, will perceive, that, besides several expressions, I have sometimes
(though rarely) adopted whole passages, with some slight alterations, without
giving credit. -- The discourse, these passages excepted, is an original
composition.

I offer my sincere thanks to my townsmen for their unusually prompt and
liberal subscription. Above 400 copies were signed for in about twelve hours.

Copy-right secured according to law -- that the profits, if any should arise
from the sale, may be applied to the building and ornamenting of a place of
worship for the Roman Catholics of Boston.

1 THESSALONIANS, V. 17, 18. PRAY WITHOUT CEASING -- GIVE THANKS.
IN the words just read, the inspired apostle inculcates on us the two
important duties of prayer and thanksgiving, which the President of the United
States invites us all to perform on this day. We have need to pray for the
pardon of our sins, as a nation, and as individuals, and to humble ourselves
profoundly before God on account of them; and we have need to pray for the
continuation of the mercies, both spiritual and temporal, which we have
hitherto enjoyed. To the proclamation of our Supreme Magistrate, our Right Rev.
Bishop has been pleased to add his strong recommendation, in which, in addition
to the objects of humiliation and prayer common to all our fellow-citizens, he
urges us to beseech the Lord to put a stop to the dreadful persecution which is
now ravaging his own church, and to comfort and strengthen its visible head.
But, though the duty of humiliation and prayer be incumbent on us at all times,
and more especially at the present, still, seeing the astonishing change that
has lately taken place in the public mind, I consider the duty of thanksgiving
as yet more pressing -- I shall, therefore, at this time, mention to you some
of the motives which should excite us all to gratitude and thanksgiving to the
great Bestower of all good; and, as I proceed, I shall, from time to time, make
such reflections as are proper to incline our hearts to prayer and humiliation.

DURING the whole course of my ministry among you, my brethren, I have never
before entered into any details concerning political affairs; nor should I do
it now, were it not to teach you to appreciate duly the government under which
you live, and to point out your duties toward it.

1. THE first blessing which demands our cordial thanks to God is, that we live
under the freest and most easy government in the world. The constitution of the
United States unites a proper degree of energy with all the liberty which any
reasonable person can desire. It is well-balanced, our executive, legislative
and judicial authorities being independent of, and mutually checked by, each
other. They all emanate from the people at large; who have always the power to
put an end to any real abuses which may take place, by displacing their present
representatives and appointing others that have their confidence -- and as long
as the great body of the people do not see the necessity of a change of men and
measures, we may rest assured, that the abuses, however they may be magnified
by party-scribblers and declaimers, are not of a very alarming nature. Under
such a government as this, every insurrection against the constituted
authorities, or opposition to them, is a revolt of a part against the general
will, by which those authorities exist, and is highly criminal. Praised be God,
that this happy constitution, under which persons of all denominations enjoy
entire security for their lives, property, and liberty, whether spiritual or
political, is still unimpaired and in full operation; and that all the attempts
to overturn, or to weaken it, by concentrating all its powers in the single
house of representatives, have only served to throw light upon its principles,
and to give it additional strength.

2. ANOTHER cause of thanksgiving to God is, that the administration of this
most excellent constitution, ever since its first establishment, has been
committed to men eminent for their wisdom, firmness, and patriotic services. I
need only mention a WASHINGTON, that guardian genius, that savior of his
country, that ornament of the human race, to excite in all your hearts the
warmest feelings of esteem, gratitude and love. -- Long may he enjoy the charms
of that retirement in which he has chosen to spend the evening of his life: may
the blessings of this country and of the universe be yet many years his reward;
and at length, enriched with every christian as well as moral virtue, may he
enter the realms of everlasting felicity.

WE have great reason to be thankful, that, when that approved warrior and
admired statesman resigned the helm of state, and sought the repose which his
age and health required, God did not permit the intrigues of a foreign,
insidious nation to succeed in raising the man of their choice to the
presidential chair; but inspired us with sufficient courage to place at our
head a statesman and patriot, whose ability and integrity, proved in the most
trying times, eminently entitle him to our confidence and affection. Such is
the illustrious JOHN ADAMS, the present President of these states. This great
man can have nothing in view but the happiness and prosperity of his
fellow-citizens, with whose fortunes his own, and those of his family, are
evidently and inseparably connected.

HE wishes for no power unwarranted by the constitution, and for no support
incompatible with the generous spirit of freedom. Since the publication of his
instructions to our messengers of peace, we have learned, better than ever, to
appreciate his worth. We are now assured of his moderate and conciliatory
temper, as well as of his decisive firmness. Under such a leader we have
nothing to fear: never will he sacrifice the honor of his country; never will
he relinquish any part of that independence which has long been the object of
all his toils and labors, and for the obtaining of which so many of our brave
countrymen have spilt their blood and lost their lives. Let us offer up our
fervent prayers to Heaven, on this day, that his invaluable life may be
preserved, and his health continued; that God would give him wisdom to discern
what are the best measures to be adopted for the good of his country, and the
fortitude to put them into execution, in spite of every obstacle and
opposition; and that all those who assist him in council may be men of ability
and integrity, so that the public may receive no detriment from incapacity or
dishonesty. Let us all resolve to give him a generous and cordial support, and
openly avow this resolution by setting our names to the manly and spirited
addresses which are now proposed for the signature of all citizens. Let us tell
him, that we feel, as we ought, the value of that liberty which we enjoy, and
that we pledge our fortunes and sacred honor to defend it with loyalty and
fidelity, under the banners of the government which we have chosen. Let us
express our indignation at the repeated insults offered to this government,
which has sought peace by every possible mean compatible with the dignity and
honor of an independent nation. Let us declare, with the firmness and
self-respect of freemen, our readiness to unite in every effort, which shall be
made, to prevent our being subjected to the degrading conditions which a
foreign nation seeks to impose upon us, as preliminary to all negotiation for
peace, and that we consider war, with all its attendant calamities, as by far
the least of the two evils. Let us show, that we love the government which
protects us, and that we are not divided from it, either in interest or
affection. In fine, let us express our warm and unequivocal approbation of the
wise and temperate system which has hitherto been pursued with regard to
foreign nations, and our increasing confidence in him who presides over us with
so much wisdom and prudence.

3. A THIRD motive, which we have, of the sincerest thanks to Heaven is, that,
while a spirit of disorganization and disorder has produced such baleful
effects in other countries, America, in spite of the effervescence produced
among us by the extraordinary exertions of foreign and domestic intriguers, yet
remains in a happy state of tranquillity. France appears to have been raised up
by God for the chastisement of an impious world. I speak not of France governed
by the descendants of St. Louis; it was then the guardian of religion and good
morals, and the asylum of the unfortunate. Happy land! where I received the
most valuable part of my education, and where I passed my happiest years among
esteemed friends and beloved associates! alas! to me no more! they are all
either cruelly butchered, banished, or reduced to wretchedness at home. If I
forget thee, O dear, charming abode, may my right hand forget her cunning; may
my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. But now, how changed! my heart sinks
within me, my spirits die away, when I recall the fate of some of my dearest
inmates. But soon the painful recollection is swallowed up in the consideration
of the complicated distresses of that once highly favored empire.

FRANCE revolutionized is more truly the scourge of God, than was ever Attila,
or any other barbarous conqueror recorded in history. Its tyrants, like Satan,
their father, may be literally said to go about, seeking whom they may devour.
If we cast an eye over the map of the world, we shall find, in almost every
part, most dreadful traces of their destructive plans. The miseries which they
have spread throughout the globe are beyond all the powers of calculation; --
miseries so universal as to have excited the horror of all who have the
feelings, or merit the name, of human beings -- miseries which will never be
effaced from the memory of mankind, and which entire ages of peace and
tranquillity will be scarcely able to repair. What unparalleled calamities have
they not inflicted on their own wretched country! what wanton cruelties and
atrocities have they not committed there! their own writers confess, that, by
the different modes of destruction, the guillotine, shooting, drowning, and the
like, upwards of 30,000 persons were killed at Lions, and that that once
magnificent city was in great part levelled to the ground, -- that, at Nantz,
according to the lowest estimate, 27,000 (some say, 40,000) were murdered,
chiefly by drowning, THIS mode of putting people to death they blasphemously
called the National Baptism.
so that the water of the Loire, on which it stands, became putrid, and was
forbidden to be drunk, -- that at Paris, 150,000, and in la Vendee 300,000 were
destroyed. They own themselves, that, since the beginning of their execrable
revolution, two millions of their nation have been sacrificed, of which 250,000
were women, and 30,000 children: and in this immense carnage are not included
the soldiers who have perished in camp and fallen in battle, nor the unborn
infants who were destroyed together with their mothers. -- Look into that
country, and examine its present state -- Though, by plunder, forced loans,
contributions, and other iniquitous means, its lordly rulers have made a very
great part of the riches of Europe to concentre there; still, by their narrow
policy, by the ruin of all manufactures, commerce, and every other regular
source of wealth and revenue, and by the entire subversion of all public
confidence, they have reduced the wretched inhabitants to a state little short
of actual beggary and starvation. No slavery can be equal to their's: their
condition is the most degraded that can be conceived. Every thing they possess,
and even their very persons, are in a constant state of requisition; that is,
they must be given up at the call of their rapacious masters, under pain of
death, if they refuse. No man there dares write, print, speak, or even
indicate, by the smallest sign, any disapprobation of whatever measures may
chance to be dictated by the faction actually in power. Every press is seized
that sends forth the least word in opposition to the mandates of the haughty
directors, and the editors are put to death, imprisoned or banished. The people
have no stable, fixed laws, by which to regulate their conduct: one edict is
scarcely rendered public before it is annulled by another directly contrary; so
that what is considered as lawful, and even patriotic, today, may tomorrow be
accounted a crime worthy of death and confiscation.

UNDER these accumulated calamities, the wretched slaves might find their yoke
less galling, their burdens less insupportable, if they could enjoy, as it were
by stealth, the consolations of religion, for which they hunger and thirst. But
no: their tyrants have nearly dried up this source of comfort. And here, my
friends, what horrid scenes present themselves to our recollection! Many years
before the revolution burst forth, the self-styled philosophers, a tribe
composed of deists, atheists and materialists, had, by their secret clubs, by
impious and obscene publications, and by various other means, suggested by the
infernal spirit, attempted, and in part succeeded, to corrupt the different
classes of society in France. But never could their system of impiety take
effect upon the great mass of the citizens, who found, and ever will find,
their happiness in the belief of religion. They had long plotted the utter
extirpation of all religion, but, in the first place, of that which, by its
greater extension and superior attachment to order and good government, stood
more immediately in the way of their nefarious projects: this religion was the
ROMAN CATHOLIC: its overthrow was, therefore, resolved on; and the moment they
had trampled down the ancient authorities of the kingdom, they employed every
artifice, and made every effort, to effect their purpose. They began their
impious attack on the church, by degrading her ministers in the eyes of the
populace, by stripping them of those distinctive garments of their order,
which, for ages, had rendered them respectable to the faithful. They then
deprived them of their livings and other possessions, and represented them as
inimical to the true interests of the country, because they would not take
oaths which tended to nothing less, than the renunciation of the authority of
the sovereign pontiff and of the bishops; in a word, of the catholic religion,
which had been transmitted to them through several succeeding centuries. Upon
their noble and almost unanimous refusal to apostatize from their faith, one of
the most horrible persecutions (and perhaps the most so), that was ever
levelled against the ministers of the altar, commenced, and has continued, with
almost unabating fury, until the present moment: according to the very last
authentic accounts, the priests are still hunted down, and very great rewards
are offered for delivering them up. Thousands of these holy men, of these
generous confessors of Jesus Christ, have been put to death, by drowning,
shooting, and guillotining, or have perished through want and ill treatment.
Thousands and tens of thousands of them have been banished from their homes,
destitute of all means of subsistence, by the bloody edicts of the monsters of
France; or have gone into voluntary exile, and are now wandering in foreign
climes, where they either suffer all the horrors of indigence, or prolong their
existence by the precarious charities of strangers. I need not inform you, my
brethren, that the two excellent priests, who govern this flock with so much
profit, and who are so deservedly dear THE Rev. Messrs. MATIGNON and CHEVRUS,
who now superintend the catholic congregation in Boston.

WE can assert with truth, supported by the whole current of ecclesiastical
history, that, in no age or country, have the clergy, as a body, ever conducted
themselves with so much prudence, dignity and heroic firmness, as the gallican
clergy have done, through a nine years insidious, violent and bloody
persecution.


to you all, are here only in consequence of the terrible vexations in their
own country.

BUT the cruelty of the persecutors was not confined to the different orders of
the clergy; it extended even to the poor, innocent, defenseless nuns, who, by
almost entire exclusion from exterior conversation, and a consecration to the
tranquil exercises of devotion, were become far more timid than the weakest of
their sex who live in the world. Bands of armed ru^^ians were sent into their
sacred asylums, who used every species of violence to force them to take the
sacrilegious oath to give up their religion. Many of those unoffending virgins
expired under the murderous lash, to preserve inviolate fidelity to their vows.
Very few of them indeed were terrified, or even seduced, into a compliance with
the orders of their tyrants. At length, when all means of perversion had been
essayed in vain, a barbarous edict strips them of all their property at one
stroke; their convents are declared to belong to the nation; and, in one day,
all those helpless victims, to the number of 30,000, are turned out by force to
all the miseries attendant on a state of poverty and want. Many of them had
grown old in the cloister; many of them were sick and infirm; all of them had
given up, under the sanction of former laws, whatever they possessed in the
world, and of course found themselves in the utmost distress. No consideration
of this kind was capable of touching the more than adamantine hearts of their
enemies, who, to aggravate their wretched and forlorn situation, forbad all
persons, under the severest penalties, to harbor more than two of them
together. All the eloquence that ever fell to the lot of a mortal would be
totally inadequate to point out, in their real turpitude, only a small part of
those deeds of horror which have taken place in France within these few years
past. The many traits of savage barbarity related in the history of the world,
all collected and united together, appear tender mercies, when compared with
the refined cruelties of the sanguinary factions of that country; cruelties not
committed by a few unlicensed individuals, amid the disorders of a revolution,
but by commission from the men in power, and under their immediate eye. Were I
to enter into a few details, such as are given by the writers of their own
party, the hairs of your heads would stand erect; an involuntary tremor would
seize every joint and limb of your bodies; -- loving husbands and wives, you
could not resist the shock; tender mothers, you would faint at the recital; and
your modesty, my virgin hearers, would be indeed most sensibly wounded. I,
therefore, turn from these abominable scenes.

To all their inhuman deeds, they have added the most horrid impieties and
profanations. They have stripped the churches of the holy vessels, vestments
and other things consecrated to the worship of God, and have converted them all
to common uses. Some of these venerable temples they have turned into
play houses, stores, rope-walks, stables, and the like; and others they have
devoted to the worship of impious men and prostituted women, to whom they have
paid the most extravagant honors. They have respected nothing that has the
least relation to religion. They have commanded all bibles, prayer-books,
sacred images, etc. to be brought forth, and have consumed them in one common
mass. Nor, in this respect, has one religious profession been more favored
than another; for the dissenting meeting houses, and even the Jewish
synagogues, were emptied also, and their contents committed to the flames. They
have spared no one of the sacred institutions of Christianity; and, in order to
obliterate it entirely from the memory of mankind, they have made it a crime to
pass the first day of the week in exercises of religious worship (a practice
co-eval with the existence of the Christian religion), and have introduced, in
its stead, the decade, a day wholly devoted to profane amusements.

BUT the funest effects of the revolution in France have not been limited to
that country -- it has also proved a sweeping deluge to their West India
colonies: it has carried devastation and ruin into those once flourishing
islands, under the pretext of spreading among them the blessings of freedom:
the slaves have been let loose upon the whites; the richest towns have been
given up to plunder, and burnt; and a war of extermination has been declared,
and still furiously rages.

IF we look into the European world, and consider the countries which the
French have either conquered, or seduced to fraternize with them (as they term
it), we shall see every where, that, notwithstanding their most solemn promises
of liberty of conscience, of security of life and property, they have uniformly
robbed the churches, taken away the lives and estates of those who would not
join in all their atrocities, deprived the people of the freedom of religion,
plundered them by their armies, levied upon them the most grievous
contributions, forced them to give up their strongholds, and to maintain their
conquerors among them for the purpose of keeping themselves in subjection.
Holland Bishop Watson.
was an hive of bees; her sons flew on the wings of the wind to every corner of
the globe; and returned laden with the sweets of every climate. Belgium was a
garden of herbs, the oxen were strong to labor, the fields were thickly
covered with the abundance of the harvest. Unhappy Dutchmen! they still toil,
but not for their own comfort; they still collect honey, but not for
themselves! France seizes the hive as often as their industry has filled it.
Ill-judging Belgians! they no longer eat in security the fruits of their own
grounds; France, all-grasping France (whose never-ceasing cry is, "give,
give"), finds occasion, or makes occasion, to participate largely in their
riches; it is more truly said of themselves than of their oxen, they plough the
fields, but not for their own profit.

IT would take up far more time than could be possibly given to one discourse,
to follow their murdering bands to all the places through which, like
destroying angels, they have spread terror and desolation. Wherever they have
met with the least resistance, especially if an individual Frenchman was killed
in the conflict, whole bodies of respectable magistrates have been made to
expiate, with their lives, the pretended rebellion; entire cities have been
threatened with extermination for the same offense, and nothing but enormous
sums of money have been able to save them from the impending ruin. Like
impetuous torrents, in the rapidity of their course, they have borne down every
thing before them; and, without distinction of friends and enemies, they have
effaced, from the list of independent nations, Geneva, Genoa, Venice, and the
papal territory.

THE Pope had been for ages, by the liberality of Christian princes, a very
considerable temporal sovereign. His dominions had been secured to him by the
same solemn treaties, which had hitherto bound kingdoms and states to each
other. Yet, in spite of those treaties, no sooner was the National Assembly
formed, than it forcibly wrested from him a valuable part Avignon.
of his possessions, under a pretext, which would sanction every robbery, viz.
that it would be a very convenient addition to the French empire. From that
first aggression they have never desisted, one moment, from their project of
destroying the temporal sovereignty of the Roman Pontiff, and, if possible, of
putting an end to his spiritual supremacy in the church. And, though our Holy
Father has constantly shown himself the most pacific of men, a true disciple of
the meek and humble Jesus; though this his disposition has been evident before
the eyes of all Europe, as Buonaparte See his letter to the Pope.
is obliged to acknowledge; though his unfeigned piety, his firmness and
moderation amidst the greatest difficulties, his spirit of sacrifice and
concession wherever his conscience and duty were not implicated, have drawn on
him the veneration and love of all good men, the admiration and esteem of his
enemies, and have created a lively solicitude, among the most judicious
dissenters from our faith, for the preservation of his person and
temporalities; -- notwithstanding all this, the terrible and all-devouring
republic has, at length, made an occasion to rob him of all his states; and, in
order to secure the cooperation of his own subjects, in the iniquitous work,
she has flattered their ears with the siren sound of freedom, which will very
soon terminate in the most wretched slavery.

LET me here fix your attention, for a few moments, on the common father of all
the faithful. Perhaps, while I am now speaking, he is exposed to the most
ignominious treatment, is insulted and reviled, as was the Redeemer of the
world, whom he represents on earth; perhaps he is now confined to a horrid
dungeon, loaded with chains, as was St. Peter, to whom he is a most worthy
successor; or, perhaps, he has fallen a victim to the fury of the enemies of
God and man, and has thus become a glorious martyr for the holy catholic faith.
Children are obliged to pray for their parents; the church is bound to pray for
her head: thus did the primitive Christians for St. Peter, who, on account of
their prayers, was delivered from prison by the miraculous interposition of an
angel. Our reverend Bishop has ordered every priest to pray for the sovereign
Pontiff, in an especial manner, during six successive months. It is a duty
which we most cheerfully undertake. -- We hope, that each one of you, who has
the smallest love for his religion, will unite his prayers to those which are
ascending, from every part of the catholic church, for the same important
object. But, while we urge you earnestly to pray, we, at the same time, exhort
you not to be discouraged at the present gloomy aspect of affairs in the
church. Though some fanatics, in the jacobinic vehicles of slander and abuse,
have lately very much exulted over the misfortunes of the Pope, as if the fall
of antichrist THERE are many persons who fancy, and boldly assert, that all
the impieties and disorders of the French revolution are so many steps to bring
about, what they term, the millenium, a mere chimerical state, which will never
have an existence except in their imagination. If such be the prelude, how
glorious must be the millenium itself! -- Strange, that they do not clearly
see, that all these things, instead of being signs of the overthrow of
antichrist already established, are the predicted forerunners of his
approaching reign!
were near at hand; we catholics despise such ranting stuff, knowing, as we do,
with the certitude of divine faith, that all their silly forebodings will prove
vain; and that the church will stand and triumph, in spite of earth and hell
combined against her. -- God has declared, that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against her; and his word will be fulfilled. She has past through far
more grievous trials: all the powers of the world were leagued against her from
her very infancy; and for three hundred years together the greatest part of her
chief pastors spilt their blood in her defense. Her past preservation is a
pledge of future protection. All her sufferings were foretold by her Divine
Founder, who took care to build her upon so solid a rock, that she will ever
stand immovable amidst all the floods and storms of persecution and impiety
which may beat against her. Pope Pius the VIth is the successor of St. Peter,
the prince of the apostles; he is the vicar of Jesus Christ on earth, and the
visible head of his church; and, therefore, whatever may be his fate, yet,
assure as God is true, so sure he will have a successor, even until the end of
ages. Mighty revolutions shall take place throughout the globe: kingdoms shall
be changed into republics, and republics into kingdoms: civilization shall
succeed to barbarism, and barbarism to civilization: Amid all these
vicissitudes, still the bark of St. Peter, with his successors at the helm,
shall sail triumphantly down the stream of time; and never will the pilot
appear more venerable, than when he guides the vessel amidst the howling
tempests and raging billows. We ought, indeed, to be deeply humbled, that
iniquity is permitted to go to such lengths against God's holy church; we
ought, each one, to consider our sins as, in part, the causes of this terrible
calamity; we ought, therefore, to resolve on a reformation of life, especially
at this time, when the charity of very many catholics is become cold, when the
enemies of the church are her own favored children, whom she has brought up
with the tenderest care and affection, and fed with the word of God and the
sacraments. But, I repeat it; we must not be dismayed, as if all were lost.
God's promise will have its full and perfect effect: he is still the strong and
Almighty Lord: his arm is not shortened; he will yet protect his church, which
he has purchased with his own precious blood: her enemies will all be defeated
and confounded; and she, like gold tried in the fire, will be purified from all
her dross By dross I mean bad members of the church, whether they be clergymen
or laymen. -- These are separated from her by the fire of persecution. -- By
dross I likewise intend all deviations, in practice, from the holy doctrine and
morality of the Catholic Church, which we hold to be always infallible and
invariable. -- We believe also, that the church is infallible in her general
discipline, that is, that her rules of government for all the societies in her
communion, however varied according to circumstances, are always infallibly
best, every thing considered -- and this triple infallibility, of doctrine,
morality and general discipline, we suppose to be fully implied in Christ's
promises, that he will be always with his church, that the gates of Hell shall
never prevail against her, and that the Holy Ghost shall teach her all truth
and abide with her forever.
in the crucible of tribulation, and will shine more bright and glorious than
ever. Let these reflections be your consolation. WHAT is here said, it is
hoped, is a sufficient answer to Dr. Belknap's remarks on popery, in his
fast-sermon. After " about twenty years of attentive contemplation, with the
best helps," he has at length made the ludicrous discovery, that the English
and French governments are " rotten toes of Nebuchadnezzar's image," and that
the pope is doubtless a beast and a whore. Wonderful proficiency in study! --
Quere. How happens it, that the word whore, which the lowest of the vulgar can
scarcely utter without a blush, can be employed so freely before the most
respectable congregations, consisting in great part of modest ladies? -- I
should have thought, Doctor, that, after the observations which I addressed,
some years since, to you and to your brother Lathrop, and which, to this day,
remain unanswered, mere shame would have prevented your repetition of the same
insipid ditty.

Dr. Morse has certainly deserved well of his country for his interesting
abridgement of the infernal conspiracy of the ILLUMINATI. -- From the peculiar
hatred which these miscreants bear to the Roman Catholic Religion, as directly
opposed to their projects of immorality and disorder (of which L'abbe Baruel
furnishes abundant proof in his memoirs of Illuminatism), he might be led to a
better opinion of its High Priest -- Notwithstanding which, this respectable
personage is so great a bugbear in his eyes, that even he cannot conclude his
fast-sermon without twice attacking him. -- It is curious, that the ministers
must be always seeking some occasion of venting their spleen upon the poor
pope. If he is falling, in God's name, let him go off the stage in peace -- At
this moment, when our church is opposing deism, atheism, and every other system
of impiety; when our clergy, with the pope at their head, are victims for the
common cause of christian morality and good government, as well as for their
attachment to their peculiar dogmas of faith; and when even dissenting
ministers, whom I could name, own that they should be incapable of the same
courage; is it not carrying insult and outrage to the extreme, to persist in
calling antichristian the church which performs such wonders against all
antichristian doctrines? I really flattered myself, that this canting style
was out of date, at least among the ministers of Boston and its vicinity.




ALL the miseries which the French have occasioned, and are now occasioning,
are but the beginnings of what they meditate. Their object now clearly appears
to be universal domination; and, without a miraculous interference of divine
providence, we have much reason to fear that they will obtain it, at least on
the continent of Europe. Spain, Portugal and Switzerland seem just ready to
fall within the fraternal embrace of those ministers of divine vengeance. --
What will be the fate of England, against which their hatred and malice appear
principally levelled, or, rather, for whose immense riches they have the most
voracious desire, a period, not far distant, must disclose. -- In the mean
time, we ought to wish ardently and pray fervently for the preservation of that
magnanimous kingdom, the only remaining bulwark, in Europe, against the inroads
of barbarism.

LET us now consider what has been the baseness and injustice of that GREAT
NATION, (as they insultingly call themselves) toward America. At a very early
period of their revolution we acknowledged their existence as a republic, and
formally received their ambassador; for which act we hazarded the displeasure
of the principal powers of Europe then leagued against them, and war with the
most formidable of them all. We sent them our bread when their ports were
blockaded, and they were in a starving condition. We even went so far as to pay
into their hands, and long before it became due, the debt which we had
contracted with their good king, whom they had most inhumanly murdered. Our
merchants were seduced to carry them the rich produce of our soil; and, to the
eternal infamy of that swindling republic, they yet remain entirely unpaid, or
else have been obliged to receive depreciated paper. Our vessels have been
embargoed in their ports, to the very great damage of their owners; our
merchants have been plundered, for years together, to the amount of millions;
the stipulations of our solemn treaty with them have been continually violated;
-- and all this injurious treatment was given us under the frivolous pretext of
imperious necessity; the sense of which phrase is more intelligibly expressed
in the high-wayman's words; your purse or your life. -- The despots of France
have continually interfered in the concerns of our government, from which they
have endeavored, by their spies, their bribes, and their nefarious and artful
intrigues, to divide the body of the people. They have treated our chief
magistrates with the utmost indignity and contempt: they have persuaded the
people to despise and vilify their rulers, to control the authorities
constituted by themselves to act in their behalf, and to establish a system of
disorganization and a wild, unprincipled, democracy, in place of our present
rational liberty, which is supported by law and order. -- All these aggravated
wrongs, all this accumulation of unmerited injury and abuse, we have forborne
to resent, still hoping for redress from that generosity and justice which are
innate in the human heart. We have used every mean of conciliation compatible
with the dignity and honor of an independent, sovereign, people. -- Our
government first sent over to them a gentleman of the highest respectability,
with full powers to adjust all existing differences; but he was spurned from
their presence, and treated with the most marked contempt. But, duly
appreciating the great blessing of peace, our President still persisted in his
conciliatory conduct; and, to the gentleman, whom they had already refused, he
joined two others of our most distinguished citizens, fondly flattering
himself, that this mark of condescension and deference would produce its proper
effect. But no sooner do they arrive, than they are treated with the most
sovereign indignity. Still they wait with patience: they supplicate: they
suffer every degradation to effect a reconciliation, While this discourse was
preparing for the press, the memorial of our envoys made its appearance. Their
humble and adulatory language to the tyrants of France can scarcely be excused
by the ardent desire of peace which dictated it. In every thing else it must be
gratifying to the honest pride of true Americans.
or even an interview, with the insolent usurpers of despotic power. -- And
what is the answer which their agents return to all these humiliations? It is
this, my friends: " You must first put into our hands thirty-three millions of
dollars, as a free gift and as a loan; that is, more silver than can be carried
in a hundred wagons, each loaded with a ton weight: and all this enormous sum
only to be admitted into our sublime presence, in order to be told, whether,
and on what terms, we will make peace with you; for which peace, if we
condescend to make it, you must give us as many millions of dollars as we shall
be graciously pleased to demand; and our demand shall not be regulated by the
justice of your claims which we acknowledge and laugh at, but by our power to
exact and by your ability to pay -- and if you refuse these conditions; if you
do not give us, as long as you have any thing to give; we will ravage your
coasts; we will treat you as we have treated Holland, Geneva, Genoa, and the
other republics; nay, we will destroy you as a nation, and parcel you out to
whomsoever we please, as we have done with the most ancient republic in the
world, VENICE, which we had but just before declared free and independent."
Such is the substance of the answer given to our envoys by the haughty sultans
of France -- and is there a single freeman in America, whether a native or a
foreigner, whose blood does not boil within him at the bare mention of so much
insolence, and who does not reply to it, in the language of our envoys; we will
make one manly struggle before we comply?

THOUGH many may have been misled, in time past, from want of proper
information, and from an opinion that France was fighting in the cause of
liberty, no one now, since their iniquitous and oppressive conduct toward this
country has come to light, unless he be a hired villain, or naturally delight
in confusion, bloodshed and rapine, can find the least apology for them. -- The
charm of the word liberty, with which they have so long fascinated the ignorant
and unwary, is now dissolved. Honest men can now openly and freely express
their sentiments, without any dread of that impudent, hectoring faction, which
has so long terrified peaceable people into silence, and, in some measure,
overawed our government.

FROM a review of what has been said, we see great cause of humiliation, before
God, for the extreme depravity of the human heart. In the conduct of the
usurpers and people of France, we discover what men are capable of, when they
renounce their God and religion, and give themselves up to their passions. --
We should also be humbled, in the divine presence, on considering, that we are,
at least, the partial causes of the awful judgments which are abroad in the
world: nor must we flatter ourselves with being less guilty than others,
because we are less severely chastised. Our situation hitherto has been truly
enviable. While we bewail the crimes by which we have merited God's anger, and
deprecate his wrath, we ought to give him unfeigned thanks for all our
blessings. While a notable part of the civilized, christian, world has, for
several successive years, heard nothing but the din of arms and the confusion
of war; we have enjoyed the happy effects of tranquillity and peace. -- While
Jacobinism, by which I mean the principles of anarchy, disorganization, plunder
and murder, has spread its baleful influence throughout the fairest portions of
the universe, it has evidently made but small progress in America,
notwithstanding the unwearied efforts which have been made for its propagation.
That this is the case, is now very visible from the unanimous determination,
which has burst forth, from one end of the Union to the other, to support our
happy government, and to sacrifice every thing rather than to submit to
national degradation: an unanimity, in my view, far greater than that which
prevailed during our revolutionary war. In that war, many of our most
respectable and virtuous citizens were on the side of Great Britain from real
motives of loyalty and of conscience; but no American can plead loyalty,
religion, conscience, or any other honorable motive, for dissenting, from the
body of his countrymen, in the noble stand they are now making against the most
unjust, imperious, insulting and impious nation that inhabits the globe. None
but the basest and most treasonable of motives can influence such a wretch. I
hope, my brethren, there is not an individual among you all, who does not feel
the same patriotic enthusiasm which animates the breasts of native citizens.
Besides the motives for indignation, which the generality of them have, against
the vile miscreants of France who wish to lord it over the world, you, as
Catholics, have a motive yet more powerful; which is, that they have profaned
and destroyed your churches, barbarously oppressed, banished, and murdered,
your bishops, priests, monks and nuns; and have carried their audacity so far,
as to lay their sacrilegious, polluted, hands on the Lord's anointed, the
visible head of the church, the common father of all the faithful. -- May we,
then, never again hear from the mouth of any Irish Catholic, that he rejoices
at every victory, and applauds every action, of the French, because they are
the enemies of his English oppressors. Granting the reality of the oppression
of which you complain, and that you have suffered it all purely on account of
your attachment to the catholic faith, which has been the glory of your nation
from St. Patrick to the present day: yet what has this in common with the
defense of the constitution, the government and laws of united America? -- This
country has received you into her bosom with the greatest affection: she makes
you partakers of the same privileges and I SPEAK here of the federal
government; for, in several of the states, as in Massachusetts, Roman Catholics
are subjected to certain disqualifications.
immunities which her native sons enjoy: she takes under her protection your
lives, property and religion. The most of you are probably settled her for
life: many of you have wives and children, to whom you are tenderly attached,
and whose welfare, as well as your own, is intimately connected with the
welfare of the country. It is, therefore, evidently your interest, that America
remain free and independent, in order that the blessings of liberty and good
government may be transmitted to your posterity. It would be the height of
baseness and ingratitude not to join heart and hand in defending the land where
you earn your bread, and enjoy all the happy advantages which result from
social life. England, which you deem your enemy and oppressor, it is true, is
grappling with the nation which is now plundering and insulting us. It is not,
for that reason, the cause of England that we are called to defend. -- I know,
that, to engage the ignorant and unwary on the side of France, it has been said
by her partisans, that she is defending the cause of all the oppressed,
throughout the world, against their tyrants, and the cause of republicanism
against monarchy: but this language is too stale to pass current, at this time,
even with the most uninformed; especially since she has swallowed up all the
republics of the old world. -- France is the great oppressor of the universe;
and, therefore, opposition to her is ths common cause of the human race against
their tyrants, plunderers and murderers: it is the cause of every regular
government, and of all civilized society against disorganization, anarchy and
terror: it is the cause of all religion and virtue against deism, atheism and
every species of immorality: it is your cause; it is my cause; it is every
honest man's cause: it is a cause, in which are deeply interested our lives,
our property, our liberty, our conscience, our every thing that is dear to us
for time and eternity. -- Fly, then, to the standard of this country; and
oppose, by every mean in your power, all the open or insidious attacks of the
enemy. Cheerfully subscribe your names to the address of this town to the
President of the Union, in which an offer of life and fortune is made to him
for the efficient defense of the country. No neutrality, my brethren: " he that
is not with me, is against me," is as true with respect to the land that feeds
you, as with respect to God himself. -- Avoid all those men who seek to inflame
your passions against England, in order to range you on the side of France.
Read none of those seditious, lying, papers, in which our own rulers, the men
of our choice, and all their measures, are perpetually villified, calumniated,
and misrepresented, and in which every thing that is done by the French,
however absurd, inconsistent and infamous, is forever extolled, and held up as
the model of perfection; -- papers which, with truth and liberty for their
motto, are always replete with falsehood and with the sentiments of slaves.

IF you wish to escape the horrors which jacobinism has produced in France, and
wherever else its pestilential maxims have gained ground, you must strive to
destroy it in the bud; that is, you must suppress all insubordination,
disobedience, or even disrespect, toward your civil rulers, as well as toward
your ecclesiastical superiors. You have heard much of the rights of man, it is
high time now to attend to the duties of man. Remember, that no one can ever
have a right to do wrong, and that obedience and respect to your lawfully
established rulers are among your strictest duties. The contrary conduct is
extremely wrong and sinful. -- A spirit of disobedience and revolt is strangely
prevalent among children and servants. This is, at present, a very general
complaint; WITHOUT being a prophet or the son of a prophet, I venture to
predict, that proper subordination, among the youth of this town, can never be
re-established, until the mode and degree of correction be again placed in the
hands of the schoolmasters. Their situation, at present, is too servile and
dependent.
and it is an abundant source of jacobinism in the state. -- Attend, therefore,
to family discipline; keep your dependents in proper subjection, and they will
contract those habits of obedience and submission which will render them good
citizens, and which will effectually counteract all the attempts of
disorganizers to introduce anarchy and confusion into this now peaceful and
happy land.

AMEN.

