Mr. THAYER's ARTILLERY ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON, DELIVERED BEFORE THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY, IN
BOSTON, JUNE 4, 1798; BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR Election of Officers.

By NATHANIEL THAYER, MINISTER OF THE CHURCH IN LANCASTER.

BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING. 1798.

A SERMON.
Proverbs xvi. 32. HE THAT IS SLOW TO ANGER, IS BETTER THAN THE MIGHTY; AND HE
THAT RULES HIS SPIRIT, THAN HE THAT TAKES A CITY.


SOLOMON wisely decided the comparative merit of characters. Viewing through an
impartial medium their motives, plans of conduct, and respective influence on
the public manners and happiness, "he weighed them in an even balance," and
suffered intrinsic excellence only to preponderate.

The contrasts, exhibited in the text, bring to view a respectable proportion
of every community. Either impetuosity or moderation, rashness or courage,
pusillanimity or fortitude, contentracnt or ambition, generosity or avarice are
leading features in the character of the principal members. These virtues or
vices, according to their natural tendency, lead to the elevation or debasement
of personal virtue, and to the promotion or destruction of national honor and
happiness.

Men, who lust after power, and are ambitious of extensive dominion, are justly
characterised partial in reflection, hasty in resentment, precipitate in
decision, and instead of acting on the broad scale of virtue or of public
utility, solely aim after personal aggrandizement. Blindly pursuing their mad
schemes, they forget, that an equitable exercise of power is the offspring of a
well regulated heart, and that to check the turbulency of passion, is the best
assistant in effecting honorable conquests. Strangers to consistency, deaf to
the voice of conscience, and enemies to reason, they impetuously press forward
to the accomplishment of a favorite object, and rely for the purest felicity on
the subjugation of millions to their despotic sway.

On the other hand, a perfect control and deliberate indulgence of passion lead
to justness and extent of thought, coolness of decision, and a proper estimate
of the views, purposes and provocations of individuals and of communities. The
man, who is slow to anger, suffers no ill founded prejudice, supersicial
examination, hasty opinion or wild resolution to direct his conduct. But
relying on the deliberate conclusions of unbiassed reason, his chief employment
is the discovery of what is right and fit, and the public benefit is the grand
object of his pursuit. These seize are evidently the result of laudable
proficiency in self-government. When opposed to the petulant, to unprincipled
seekers after power, or to such as are desirous of laying a foundation for
universal empire, this description of characters is entitled to high applause.
In their practice is implied a respect for the dictates of reason and the
precepts of the gospel, a commendable solicitude for the harmony and happiness
of society, and an active purpose to extend the knowledge and to promote the
principles of the divine government.

The observations already made, exhibit the outlines of the characters of those
members of society, who give unbounded license to passion, and of such as
restrain it within reasonable limits. To display more explicitly the properties
of personal discipline, as opposed to an insatiable thirst for power or
extensive conquest; to deduce a preference in favor of the former, from the
good effects it tends to produce; to confirm our remarks by historical
examples; and to offer some reflections suggested by the situation and
prospects of our country, form the design of the ensuing part of the discourse.

The general characteristic of personal discipline is the honorable supremacy
it preserves over passion, and the subserviency it extorts from it, to the
elevated desires, purposes and pursuits of reason.

No conflict is ever more dangerous, violent or eventful, than this, maintained
between these two essential and important parts of every human character. It is
dangerous, because reason is likely to be wounded and overcome in the contest.
It is violent, because the "casting of firebrarnds, arrows and death" is the
natural product of excessive passion. It is eventful, because there is no
empire so despotic, no tyranny so oppressive, no victory so haughty and
insolent, as that which is supported or gained by passion. A rising superior to
this danger, a successful opposition to this violence, and an entire defeat of
the hope of obtaining a victory can only be effected by the man who habitually
"rules his own spirit."

A criminal error in the ambitious, in men aspiring after power, whose wishes
are scarcely limited by the universe, and who cherish the intention to conquer
and oppress it is inhabitants, is that they neither estimate the design,
dignity, nor capacity of reason. Hurried blindfold by lust, pride or avarice,
personal elevation is the motive, riches or grandeur the object, and deathless
fame the anticipated reward of their unabating enterprise. Alexander and Julius
Caesar are striking examples of the despotic influence of passion. Ignorant of
self-command, and fearful of attacking so rough, untried and formidable a
fortress as their own hearts, they wandered abroad in pursuit of something,
which could equal their ambitious views. Wrapped in the illusions of fancy,
these insolent and overbearing demagogues vainly hoped, that idiots, with
respect to the first principles of government, might honorably aspire after,
and sustain universal empire. These are two of numberless instances of the
frenzy and distraction, occasioned by checking the exercise, and resisting the
authority of reason.

Another distinguishing property of personal discipline is fortitude, which
enables the mind to bear insolent treatment, originates just conceptions of
it is nature, and dictates the exercise of patience in devising means of redress.

To oppose insolence with forbearance is an important christian attainment.
This is the genuine fruit of fortitude, which is a chief promoter of the
dignity and usefulness of man.

Rightly to comprehend an injury, to conceive of it is tendency, and to judge of
the intended extent of it, are exceedingly necessary, to proportion wisely our
resentment to it is deserts. Precipitancy, jealousy or petulance entirely
prevent these acquirements. They delude the fancy, contract the understanding,
warp the judgment, and sear the conscience. Certainly then, a perfect
self-command will totally exclude these vices, as enemies to liberal
investigation and opposers of truth.

Fortitude is the desirable and happy medium between insensibility and
rashness. It is not inconsistent with a keen sense of injuries, neither is it
superior to resentment. It wisely discriminates between a hasty and
inconsiderate sally of passion, and a deliberate provocation.

Equally distant is this virtue from cowardice as from insensibility. Although
it is not hasty to resent an injury, it is prepared to repel it. Although it
admits every honorable expedient to redress a grievance, to be preferable to
sudden and open hostility, yet says it is brave and pious patron, "Though an
host should encamp against me, yet will I not fear."

Diametrically opposed to the condescending qualities of this amiable and
christian virtue, are the impetuosity, violence and pride of persons, whose
ambition is solely directed to the taking of cities. In an opposite scale with
the prudence, forbearance, patient inquiry, firmness and magnanimity of such as
cultivate the former, may be placed the inconsiderateness, temerity, avarice
and insolence of those who cherish the latter, and this will lead to an
impartial opinion of this part of their respective characters.

As self-government begets a nobleness and elevation of soul, to estimate and
endure injuries, it also originates a boldness of sentiment, an animated,
rational and inextinguishable courage.

Temperance and perseverance in the moment of severe trial are prominent
features in the heroism of a truly valiant man. Neither appalled by the
approach of danger, nor alarmed by it is probable consequences, his manly
firmness and intrepidity serve for a shield, which the impetuous ardor of a
hostile foe can never penetrate.

True courage is distinguished from it is counterfeit by a constant preparedness
for the severest conflict, by a noble contempt of life and it is most valued
comforts, when the interests of liberty, virtue or religion are at hazard.
Every partial or interested consideration is sacrificed to the advancement of
the public good.

A man of courage exhausts not his ardor on trifling, ludicrous, or unimportant
occasions, but wisely apportions it to the value of the object, and the urgency
of the season.

This virtue is especially distinguished from the licentious fury of an
avaricious pursuer of power or conquest, as it is restrained by reason, and
receives additional and well-directed fervor from exercise.

Having taken this view of some of the discriminating properties of personal
discipline, let us contemplate it is most important effects, and ascertain their
preference to the disgraceful consequences of an ungoverned lust of empire.

Undisturbed reflections, equanimity and rational comfort are the streams,
incessantly flowing from this pure source, to refresh the individual.

Entertaining only moderate views and reasonable expectations, having
enlightened reason for his unerring and sure guide, he is not precipitated into
the transports of passion, which occasion a departure from a steady course of
virtuous practice. Always having command of his understanding and reflection,
he is not fickle in his inclinations, nor unstable in his purposes. Being
settled, resolute and conscientious, his mind is undisturbed, his conscience
calm, and all his reflections cheerful.

This perfect self-command is also a very happy mean of promoting the true
dignity of man. It preserves in their proper subordination the inferior
qualities of his nature. It gives full scope to the active energies of the
mind. It completes the social, moral and religious character.

On the other hand, an ambition for power or conquest is always restless.
Originating in selfish and avaricious views, exercising the corrupt and
perverse dispositions of the heart, and having for it is object the
establishment of universal despotism, it tends to enervate the mind, to produce
a constant fermention in the heart, and lastingly to check the exercise of
every social and pure sentiment.

The efficacy of self-government when exercised by the members of a community,
is also particularly noticeable, as it is tendency is, to promote and preserve
harmony and order.

As personal comfort is the fruit of a peaceful and undisturbed mind, so the
welfare and happiness of a nation must depend on a freedom from the excesses of
unbridled passion. A restless and peevish, an irritable and turbulent temper is
a principal cause of the uneasinesses and contentions, the tumults and
commotions, which have defaced the beauty, and interrupted the order of the
moral kingdom of God.

Private grudges and public contests, in connection with the long train of
calamities, resulting from war, may be traced to this impure and corrupt source.

Individuals and nations, who have lusted after conquests, have mistaken their
tendency, and the effects, they have generally produced. Instead of enriching,
they impoverish, instead of strengthening, they weaken a government. The
resources, extensively distributed, are beyond the reach of being suddenly
called into action, or of assisting to ward off any unexpected or unforeseen
disaster. The Romans therefore, are the only ancient nation, who have grown
rich by their conquests, and this because they exacted very little in the form
of tribute. Priestly's Lectures on History.


This disposition, which has often proved ruinous, and laid a foundation for
national degradation and disgrace, it was an express purpose of the Jewish
dispensation to prohibit. They were forbidden to undertake any wars through
caprice, ambition or a disposition for conquest, and as a check to the
unnecessary waste and havoc, which are authorized by the practice of other
nations, were asked this simple question; Are the trees enemies, which can
fight against you, so that you must cut them down? Jews' Letters in answer to
Voltaire.


The disposition, example and instructions of our Divine Master and his
immediate followers tend to undermine this corrupt principle. The numberless
precepts, to guard against ostentation, envy, pride, and to "take heed, and
beware of covetousness," are so many moral lectures on the importance of
personal discipline, and are intended to prevent the growth of a tyrannical and
domineering temper.

Hitherto in this country little encouragement has been found for the
indulgence of an unreasonable desire of power, or a spirit of conquest. The
early education and habits of it is inhabitants, the laws, the government, and
especially the christian religion are peculiarly favorable to the extinction of
an ambitious and dissocial spirit, and give all possible patronage to the mild,
peaceful and unaspiring qualities of the heart.

It should neither be charged to ostentation nor ambition, if, from the history
of the present age, we adduce examples for an unequivocal illustration of the
sentiment, we are endeavoring to establish.

To avail ourselves of a decided proof, that personal discipline is preferable
to a lust of empire, we need only contrast the meek, contented, firm,
courageous, unambitious and unassuming disposition of a WASHINGTON, with the
proud, ostentatious, lustful, and aspiring temper of a Buonaparte.

We may also successfully oppose the unexampled patience and perseverance,
magnanimity and well regulated independence of an ADAMS, to the headstrong
lusts and passions, or even to the most respectable seize of all the
proud plunderers and conquerors of the world.

Still more forcibly to demonstrate the idea, we may pursue the analogy between
the moderation, forbearance, justice and unvaried inflexibility of the SUPREME
EXECUTIVE of our Nation, and the precipitancy, inconstancy, violence and
outrage, which have prevailingly dictated the measures of the Directory of
France.

The event of the present contest for dominion in the elder world, it is
impossible certainly to predict. It seems however, that no limits are fixed to
their desires, nor any bounds set to their efforts. If an opinion may be formed
from the past dispensations of providence, it appears, that a nation, which
presumes to wage war with the universe, and in effect to assume the
prerogatives of its SUPREME FORMER and GOVERNOR, must be humbled.

After their wanton avowal of being in quest of universal empire, and of it is
being their fixed purpose to fraternize and subjugate this western world, the
sons of freedom must be seized with more than lethargic stupidity, not to be
aroused. When reminded of the political annihilation of Venice See the
dispatches from our Envoys Extraordinary in France, to the Executive of the
United States.
as an example of their future debasement, and when the insolent and perfidious
treatment of Italy, Holland and Switzerland A judicious, impartial and
interesting detail of the conduct of France toward these nations, is contained
in the "Observations on the Dispute between The United States and France,
addressed by Robert Goodloe Harper of South Carolina, to his constituents."
Every candid peruser will be satisfied, that such instances of wantonness and
insincerity should inspire the inhabitants of these States with caution and
firmness.
are heartily considered, the native energy of independent Americans will no
longer sleep. The love of rational liberty, for which they are deservedly
characterized, and a just appreciation of the earnings of honest and laborious
industry, will command an obedient attention to the calls of their country, and
a willingness to make every reasonable sacrifice for it is permanent security.

In a season of common danger, the benefit of associations, formed to extend a
knowledge of the military art, is readily perceived. There is then in reserve a
competency of the skill, dexterity, firmness and heroism, which are
indispensably requisite to the successful defense of an invaded country. A
hopeful prospect then presents, of finding experienced veterans, who resolutely
resist the first transports of passion, and who are impelled to action by a
nobler motive than a love of conquest. In such schools, a knowledge of tactics
is acquired, a spirit of enterprise encouraged, and patterns of patience and
intrepidity uniformly displayed.

The exemplary attention, which has been paid to the diffusion of military
skill, reflects honor on our rulers, as it is a demonstration of their
unabating vigilance, and is a consoling circumstance at the present interesting
period. It inspires a sanguine belief, that "if imperious necessity urge," we
shall not be found encumbered by a stupid languor, neither hurried to action by
an impetuous zeal. But persuaded, that our resentment is authorized by the cool
discussions of reason, and possessed of the fortitude, which is the best and
most impregnable armor, the anticipated hour of danger will be realized by us,
to be a season of perfect security.

Neither Lacedaemonian folly or superstition shall ever regulate the vibrations
of the hearts of Americans. Being satisfied that the measure of aggression and
insolence is filled up, whether the moon shall have just commenced it is course,
is totally eclipsed, or shines in it is full brightness, if our country call, we
must obey.

While the general attention of our citizens to the making of laudable
acquirements deserves highly to be applauded, it is with particular pleasure,
Gentlemen of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company, that we recognize the
purpose of your institution, witness it is present flourishing condition, and
assure you of our firm reliance on your experience, fortitude and courage.

Educated in the belief, that temporary amusement or pleasure is but a
secondary consideration in the establishment of such a seminary, you will
consider it is primary purpose to be a school, in which you may imbibe the
principles, cherish the views, and form the habits, which are calculated to
render you eminently serviceable to your country.

The distinguishing traits of a good soldier are skill in his profession, a
perfect control over his passions, calmness in the hour of trial, and an
enlarged patriotism. Regulated by these, you will never-suffer your regard to
the public interests, to vent itself in a furious or overheated zeal, neither
when difficulty approaches, will you want the courage, resolutely to embrace
every necessary mean for the defense of your dear-bought privileges. As a love
of power or conquest is a debasing passion, when cherished as any other than a
subordinate motive, you will evidence it to be your prevailing principle, to
contend rather for safety than triumph, for the common good than personal glory.

To the friends of America it is an exhilarating circumstance, that in your
number is perceived some of the temperate, yet inflexible, resolute and active
supporters of the late glorious revolution. An equally generous principle with
that, which then glowed in your bosom, we doubt not, if circumstances require,
will again stimulate you to action. On you we rely for an example of prudence
to our youth, of restraint, to check their natural impetuosity, and of wisdom,
to direct their ardor into it is proper channel. May the efficacy of your
exertions be perceived, the respectability of your institution increase, and
numbers in future be found, worthy of being added to your fair catalogue of
Patriots.

My Fellow Countrymen will permit me to congratulate them on the mixed
moderation and perseverance, coolness and decision, wisdom and uprightness,
which dignify the transactions of our government. These truly form a splendid
exhibition of the glorious triumphs of reason.

Every honest member of the community will feel indispensably obliged, to
cultivate the same pacific and condescending temper. Such are the present
limits of our country, that extent of territory can be no motive with us, to
endeavor to increase our power, or to enlarge our conquests. Our affluence and
prosperity have so rapidly increased, that it would be madness to apply to this
source for a valuable addition. Unless therefore the dignity of our government,
or our rights as an independent nation are implicitly or openly disputed, it
will be honorable in us, to "study the things, which make for peace," and to be
anxious to obtain "no other conquests, but those of the passions, and no other
triumphs, but those of justice and humanity."

For the acquiring of this disposition we are to remember, that the adventurer
in the christian warfare is required, to be "temperate in all things." The
licentiousness of ungoverned passions, and the visionary projects of insatiable
ambition do not accord with the requisitions of the gospel, or the spirit of
it is Divine Author. When pointed to "the kingdoms of the world, and the glory
of them," which are happily suited to nourish the vanity of a corrupt heart, so
perfect was his self-command, that he viewed them as a gilded trifle, and the
felicity they promised, empty and delusive.

In attempting to copy this perfect pattern of subjection to the discipline of
reason, it will be laudable in us, to aim after a humble but the greatest
possible resemblance. The season of combating our appetites and passions, and
of endeavoring to subject them to the suggestions of our understanding, and the
laws of the gospel, will be but short. "Eternity will be long enough to repay
us." There will then be a full display of the conquests of reason.

The fading glories of this world will soon lose their attraction. Uncorrupting
palms of victory are promised to the perseveringly patient, resolute and
intrepid. The faithful subjects of communities and empires are then to be
admitted into "a kingdom, which cannot be moved;" where the SUPREME LORD of the
universe maintains an equitable and impartial dominion, and the righteous shall
come off conquerors, and "more than conquerors" over the enemies of their
spiritual comfort, "through Him, who has loved, and who has given himself for
us."


