DRAMATIC DIALOGUES For the Use of Schools.

BY CHARLES STEARNS, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH, AND PRECEPTOR OF THE LIBERAL
SCHOOL IN LINCOLN.

How charming is divine Philosophy --
Not harsh and crabbed, as dull fools suppose,
But musical as is APOLLO's lute;
And a perpetual feast of nectared sweets,
Where no crude surfeit reigns.
MILTON's COMUS. PUBLISHED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

LEOMINSTER, MASSACHUSETTS, PRINTED BY JOHN PRENTISS, and CO. FOR THE AUTHOR.
1798.

TO COLONEL ABIJAH PIERCE, Moderator, DEACON EDMOND WHEELER, Treasurer, The
Scribe of the School is Preceptor, and Author of this work.
HON. EBENEZER BROOKS, Esquire, JOSEPH ADAMS, Esquire. JOHN CODMAN, Esquire,
SAMUEL HOAR, Esquire, DEACON SAMUEL FARRAR, DEACON DANIEL BROOKS, CAPT. DANIEL
HARRINGTON, CAPT. JOSHUA BROOKS, LIEUT. WILLIAM LAWRENCE, LIEUT. BULKLEY
ADAMS, LIEUT. LEONARD HOAR, LIEUT. ABNER MATTHIES, MR. JOHN ADAMS, MR.
ZECHARIAH SMITH, MR. EPHRAIM FLYNT, MR. EPHRAIM WESTON, MR. ANDREW ADAMS, MR.
ISAAC MUNROE, MR. ELIJAH FISK, Associated PROPRIETORS of the LIBERAL SCHOOL in
LINCOLN;
TO THE GENTLEMEN AND LADIES, STUDENTS OF SAID SCHOOL,
THIS WORK IS HUMBLY DEDICATED BY THEIR SINCERE FRIEND, AND MOST OBLIGED HUMBLE
SERVANT,

The Author.

INTRODUCTION; SHOWING HOW TO CONDUCT AN EXHIBITION, AND ENSURE SUCCESS; WITH
REMARKS ON THE CHARACTERS, ATTITUDES, GESTURES, etc. OF THE PERFORMERS.

Introduction, etc.
SOMETIMES human beings are unreasonably charmed with novelty; and at other
times reject that which is useful and good without sufficient trial. What has
appeared wrong, on account of some adventitious circumstances, has been
rejected, as wrong in its own nature. This has been exactly the case with
school exhibitions -- They are in themselves exceedingly useful -- When they
are properly conducted they enlarge the ideas and polish the manners of
students. They show an example of moral precepts represented in real life --
But by means of some injudicious attempts, the public mind seems greatly
prejudiced against them. It is said they are expensive, that they encourage
profanity and vice; that the feelings of students are often hurt by the
distribution of parts -- or their parents cruelly mortified -- that students
acquire by them an indecent confidence, and that they intrude upon studies more
necessary and useful than rhetoric -- and they are imitations of a theater,
which is always a seminary of vice. Yet we believe, that they may be so managed
as not to be chargeable with any of these evils; but be productive of a most
innocent and rational amusement, and not only improve the outward carriage of
the students; but implant the most useful morals in them; and in the minds of
their friends, who attend their performances. And the design of the
introduction of this work, is to show how this may be done. For perspicuity's
sake I shall consider myself as speaking to a person who wishes to know my
sentiments of an exhibition.

SECTION I. OF GUARDING AGAINST PREJUDICES.
IT is vain for a student, new from a university, to think of confronting the
prejudices of a people by mere assertions; and confidently reprobating their
opinions -- Mankind resent such treatment; and the prejudice is the stronger
from that very cause. It is best to begin with a small exhibition, and only ask
to show a few pieces -- People are afraid of what is done in the dark -- for
that reason get some popular person or persons to look over your pieces before
exhibition, and show the utmost readiness to have them rejected if thought
improper. Then tell those, who inspect your pieces, by no means to admit such
as they dislike. And if there be a single word, or phrase, which offends, let
it be struck out without mercy. If they should reject all but simple dialogues,
be content. But exhibit them in the most advantageous manner.

When the audience can bear dialogues, the number of dialogists may be
increased, and soon it will be found that dramas, if not in themselves
offensive to religion and morals, will be perfectly harmless -- Adhere to the
system of correcting them perfectly before they are given out to the students,
by yourself and by others. Women are generally better judges of the delicacy of
writings than men. -- Apply then to some of the most sensible, and best
educated ladies, in the town, or district, where you keep a school; and desire
that they will examine your pieces, and note every passage which offends them.
Such passages must all be sacrificed, and there is no loss in the case -- You
will probably substitute better phrases in the room of those excepted against,
get a character for modesty, and acquire a purity of style in your original
compositions.

Do not imagine that your pieces in order to please must be calculated, to
excite laughter. Those which excite the loudest peals of mirth often please the
least on the whole. -- People often laugh at buffoonery, and when they go away
from the scene, where they saw it, are angry with, and condemn themselves for
being pleased, even for a moment. You may insert diverting p^^ces, and it is
generally best in the course of an exhibition, to have one or two that are
laughable, but it is not advisable to have your pieces mostly of that cast.
Those which are sublime, which waken the mind and benevolent affections* which
excite the sentiments of piety or show moral principles to advantage, will
please all people who are not idiots or totally corrupted in their mental
taste. Most of the pieces performed at an exhibition should decidedly be of the
useful kind* and those which are more diverting, should be perfectly harmless
-- It is best never to descend lower than those which promote politeness and
good humor.

Another thing should be attended to with great care. That none of the pieces
be of such a nature as to bear even a plausible application to any person in
the town, or district* where you are, in the way of ridicule -- The wounds of
ridicule are incurable, and the attempt of taking off individuals, is never
forgiven. -- Rather drop a diverting piece, or let vice pass unpunished, than
offer a direct affront to any person by an exhibition. And avoid all general
satire -- It can never be just -- If a married man be a ridiculous character;
let it be, because he abuses his wife or his children -- If an old bachelor,
because he is mischievous and ill-natured -- an old maid because she is
vicious, and disturbs the peace of families -- a lawyer for knavery -- a priest
for keeping low company -- a merchant for cheating -- is lawful prize for
ridicule. But nothing that is good or useful, or even harmless should be
ridiculed -- And good men and women are found in all the lawful employments of
life -- above all things religion -- marriage -- and necessary and useful
labor, should be exempted from ridicule.

Let not exhibitions be too expensive -- People are generally hurt by expense,
and will not long love that which draws their money from them -- In some
instances, bands of music have been hired, a great expense has been incurred
for dresses, decorations for a stage, machines, and what not. Exhibitions can
never become customary with all these appendages -- They would banish
themselves by the mere cost of maintaining them -- Only reflect that you are at
the head of a school, and are not the manager of a theater, and you will avoid
those extremes -- The object of speaking in schools is, to use the student to a
clear, and judicious mode of expression, and action, on all the occasions of
life, and business. This may be provided for at a very small expense, as we
shall show in another place.

Be very careful that the sentiments contained in your pieces be just and
philosophically true -- that they be wholly purified from all profane, obscene
and low, black-guardly sentiments, and phrases -- and that the phrases which
express humor, as those peculiar to clowns, cits, sailors, soldiers etc. be
such, as will not offend persons of modesty and good taste. By these means you
will avoid having a bad impression on the minds of the audience in the first
and most simple performances of rhetoric, and if they be performed well it will
create a desire to hear those which are more perfect till at last you may
freely exhibit whatever is promotive of piety or morals, and be only the more
approved as the performances are more complete -- But we must now describe the
apparatus and manner of an exhibition.

SECTION II. OF NECESSARY PREPARATIONS.
IT is necessary in your schoolhouse, to have a small esplanade, or stage. If
no one be made in the construction of the house you may erect a temporary one.
It will be very convenient to have a room behind the stage, to which the
performers can withdraw, when they should be supposed absent. About this stage,
on a frame erected for the purpose, you may draw curtains, to conceal the
stage, occasionally* from the audience. This will give opportunity to represent
different scenes of action. Then by tables, books, etc. the stage may represent
a study -- by national arms, and emblems etc. a court -- by military trophies,
an encampment or field of war -- by means of shackles, chains etc. a prison --
by handsome furniture, a gentleman's parlor -- by cheap furniture, of the rural
kind, a cottage or shepherd's tent etc. Thus on a stage of no more than twelve
feet by eight -- by such judicious alterations, effects may be produced on the
imagination, which are truly surprising, if we consider the cause, and it may
be done without any extraordinary expense.

Beside the curtains which are drawn around the stage, there should be one
drawn across from side to side, which may totally hide the back-scene, and be
so contrived, as to open at the end, and in the middle. Persons engaged in
opposite parties, sentiments, or interests, or who are any way at variance,
should enter on opposite sides of the stage. If during the representations they
be not reconciled they should also depart on opposite sides, if they become
friends they should go off on the same side etc. while the others are
performing; they, who are to follow, must remain concealed behind the back
curtain, if there be no drawing room behind. If there be a drawing room behind,
that is properly the place for the performers who are waiting -- the curtain
opens in the middle to receive some grand or august character -- Or opening
into another room, it may represent objects at a distance -- Or it may
represent an action which is seen from one room into another. As in the "
Orphan of China," the opening of the curtain in the middle, and the ladies
closing the door by standing close together, while the children, threatened to
be kil^ed by the Tartars, are behind them, produces a striking effect on the
imagination and feelings of the audience. And this back curtain will be found
of great use in all representations of the dramatic kind -- Such an appara^^s
as this will cost little or nothing, and will be found sufficient for any thing
which can be well represented by the boys and girls of a school. Being thus
furnished with a stage, next it must be our care to furnish the stage with
performers. Masks, dresses arms, emblems, professional implements, may easily
and occasionally be procured, as they may be of use, by borrowing them of the
owners.

SECTION III. OF SELECTING THE PERFORMERS.
IT should be a capital maxim in selecting the persons to perform, that they be
heartily willing for the enterprise and desirous of distinguishing themselves
-- Unless your superiors or employers require, never take any person who
expresses reluctance to be a speaker. Such will never perform well. And be
assured that the parents or guardians of each student, approve of his being
instructed in rhetoric, before you bestow your pains upon him. By these
precautions you will not only avoid blame; but escape a derangement of your
exhibition after it is formed.

You will also have a set of lively, animated acto^^ -- and have them perfectly
at your own command -- advise the best speakers to undertake parts, but compel
none -- advise, if you fear having too many, the poorer speakers not to take
parts -- but if they be greatly desirous, accept them. And let them begin with
the shorter parts, and those which require the least skill in speaking -- And
it may be questioned whether an exhibition appears so well, to have all the
parts uniformly executed according to the strict rules of good speaking; as it
(...) to have the principal parts, exceedingly well performed, and the under
parts with less skill -- Cicero observes that the Greek players who had under
parts purposely fell short in some degree, of what they could perform, that the
principal parts might appear to greater advantage -- The less able speakers may
not be useless to you.

In this first selection by these means you will have a lively spirited corpse
of volunteers for your exhibition -- and you will have no guardian or parent
blaming you for compelling his boys or girls to speak against their wills and
exposing their weakness, in case they should be ^^successful.

Before you distribute the parts other points are to be considered -- It must
not be thought that you intend to mark the foibles or vices of any of your
performers in public. Should you assign the part of a clown, to a person
naturally clumsy and awkward, he, and his parents, might think you meant it as
a stigma upon him, or the family. Should you assign the part of a rogue, to a
boy who is known to be such a character; it will give offense. And neither of
the parts would be performed well; through an uneasy consciousness which would
attend the performance. If you would escape the uneasiness of relations or
discontent in your school, all assignments which would carry a pointed
reflection on individuals or families must be avoided -- And there are certain
principles which may help you out of all difficulty.

Scholar^ uniformly perform best in the character which (...) to them, or that
which is directly the opposite. When the part which is natural to any one is a
good part, and represents a good, or harmless character, you may assign it to
him without scruple -- He will perform well because ^e is in his own natural
way -- But the character of a ^o^ue is best performed by a very honest person,
provided he understands the business of taking off characters well. The honest
man's aversion to a rogue causes him to observe the p^ar features of the
character. From which (...) he will strike it off in a lively manner, and feel
no kind of fear lest it should be applied to himself -- Also a person who when
he pleases can behave very gentcelly, yet possesses a good imitative faculty
best performs the character of a clown, and the best tempered girl in your
school should have the part of Keensight in "The Mother of a Family" -- The
part of an old maid should go to a girl in the school who is most popular among
the young gentlemen -- The principle is, we perform well in the character which
is natural to us* because we are then in our own way, and we observe most the
traits of that character which is most contrary to us, and therefore can
counterfeit it the easiest.

But, as to grave and serious characters being good, they must be assigned to
grave and serious persons -- Merry or cheerful characters to persons of the
same cast. A general is ill personated by a palefaced boy -- He should be a
large man and a noble figure -- A magistrate the same, when he appears in his
proper character -- A Lady of eminence should be represented by one tall, well
proportioned, and pe^^onable -- And it would be most absurd to represent a
shepherdess the Venus of the groves but by a girl who is beautiful in reality.

And it may not be amiss in many cases to let the scholars choose the parts for
themselves or draw them out by lot in case there is like to be a competition --
And it may be settled also as a principle after the parts are assigned that any
who please may change between themselves, if both may thereby be suited better.
And to conclude this section in a few words -- Endeavor to designate your
performers in such a manner as to have them easy and satisfied, and if possible
let none of their friends be discontented -- For it is often from the
resentment of persons who think themselves hurt; that clamors have been raised
against the study of rhetoric, which is by good judges though it a necessary part
of education (...) a free state.

SECTION IV. OF DISTRIBUTING THE PARTS.
FOR the principal character in each piece you will doubtless select a speaker
on whom you can depend for steadiness of temper, and complete self command --
You will do the same for any persons who will perform the single pieces. If you
have a single piece to begin your exhibition, let it be given to a person of
great firmness. For complete coolness, and selfcommand, are in no part of an
exhibition, so necessary as in the first piece that is spoken. The first piece,
spoken well, gives such a spring to the spirits of the performers who are to
follow; as will carry with it the most happy effects, through the whole exhibition
-- And in fact the first performance is the most difficult and most trying to
the feelings of the performer. If it should fail it will sink the spirits of
the other performers, and probably spoil the whole exhibition. For performing
the last piece which should be a single one, and an epilogue to the whole, you
should have that speaker in your school, who has the most sweet and harmonious
voice, with the most easy and gentle manners, and in every view the most
pleasing speaker. For this part should make the audience feel intensely, and as
it was said of Pericles the Orator, should leave the sting of pleasure in the
hearts of the hearers. If you have an intermediate single piece, any good and
clear speaker may have it and we shall show hereafter of what advantage such a
piece may be -- The rest of the parts may be disposed of according to your
discretion. Only due regard should be had to the voice and manner of
performing. -- A slow mournful voice suits a melancholy part; a voice hard and
sharp an angry character, a soft and sweet voice and manners agree to a father
of a family, a lover, a flatterer etc. a lively sharp voice to a merry
character etc. but a little attention and experience is worth more than a
thousand rules.

To avoid giving offense by distributing the parts; take notice how many
performers you have, and let the single pieces be considered. Let each student
who desires it have nearly as many lines to speak, as they who perform the
single pieces -- the least offensive way of disposing of the single pieces
which are considered as most honorary because in them the whole attention of
the audience is turned on the speaker -- is to dispose of them in the school by
ballot. Let the students ballot for the persons to perform them -- while the
precep^or holds a negative upon their choice in case they choose wrong -- In
this way all odium of partiality is avoided. And let the highest candidates,
who miss o^ single pieces, have the principal parts in the other performances
-- there is no danger in this way. A school ^ill seldom choose wrong. The
preceptor is never considered as in the fault. The scholars are pleased, and
easy among themselves. And it is a good exercise to train them up to act the
part of judicious electors in a free state. If those who must take under parts
be good speakers, and desire it, give them a duplicate of parts -- that is, two
parts, each making up in the whole, nearly as great a number of lines as those
have who have single parts or principal parts in dialogues -- those who are
content with short parts, leave content, and urge no more upon them.

As to the quality of the parts assigned, some will show the speaker to
advantage, and some will not -- the expression of a vicious character is
generally bad -- to assign an immodest or profane part to any scholar, male, or
female, is wrong. There should be no such in school -- such par^^ as while they
are performing put a modest, and conscientious mind in pain, should be
industriously avoided.

But it is necessary sometimes to represent vicious parts, else the virtuous
characters would not appear to advantage. Much of the admiration of virtue
depends on its being contrasted with vice -- such passions as jealousy,
discontent, ill humor, etc. must be represented. The repre^entation of them the
not agreeable, yet is not disgusting, neither in a moderate degree does it
excite horror. They may therefore make a part in a school exhibition without
any impropriety.

Now as the base passions give a person a disagreeable appearance, if you
assign only a part which represents a scholar in a disagreeable view to the
audience, you mortify the scholar, and give pain to his relations and friends.
For this reason the most disagreeable parts should be assigned to those who, in
the other part of the duplicate, have the most agreeable -- never assign two
very agreeable parts, or two very disagreeable once to the same scholar but
treat the parts, as Laban did his daughters; make the good ones put off the bad
-- two parts of middling length, or goodness, may be assigned together, or
otherwise, let a good and a bad, a long and a short one, go together. By this
method your scholars will be satisfied, and you will have the credit of acting
impartially.

SECTION V. THE ARRANGEMENT OF AN EXHIBITION.
BEING stored with single pieces, dialogues, dramas, and all legitimate
materials of an exhibition -- nothing profane or indecent being admitted --
having also digested righteous principles of assigning parts in your mind and
completed that difficult work; it now remains, to arrange those parts so, as
to constitute an agreeable whole -- the first thing is to determine how many
single pieces you will have. You may think it an arbitrary matter, but it is
not -- there ought to be two, three, or five -- one single piece makes the
exhibition appear odd* It must then have a head without feet, or feet without a
head -- two single pieces convey an idea of a beginning and end, in regular
method -- but such an exhibition, tho it may not offend, because it is regular,
will not please in the highest degree, because it does not excite an idea of
variety which is sufficiently clear -- five single pieces, unless you mean to
have a very long exhibition, will be out of all proportion with the other parts
-- and four exactly divides the exhibition into halves, and annihilates the
pleasing idea of variety in the general arrangement.

Three single pieces seem then to be the number most convenient, and we shall
call them the prologue, the intermediate, and the epilogue. -- Very much of the
eclat of an exhibition depends on these -- we shall therefore describe them in
their order with the parts which should come between them.

1. The PROLOGUE or introductory piece should always be assumed from some topic
which is calculated to waken the tender feelings of the audience, and dispose
them to candor -- the tender sensibility of youth, their desire to please,
their expectations of kindness from their parents and friends, are suitable
ideas for a prologue. And these may be mixed with any other which may prepare
the audience to receive the exhibition kindly -- It should be spoken generally
in a rather low pitch of the voice and with the air of diffidence, expressive
of the modesty of the students and the respect which they feel for the
audience. Nothing is more absurd than blustering, and towering rhetoric in a
prologue.

If there be any serious business of the school, such as examination of
scholars in reading, philosophy, or any branch of science, it best comes in
immediately after the prologue, and while the attention of the audience is not
yet fatigued. But if every thing of this kind has been transacted before;-let
the most serious and sublime pieces follow the prologue. While the attention is
not yet fatigued the serious and the sublime strike the mind with much the
greatest advantage. Matters which are weighty and apply to the judgment, are
ill introduced after the mind is already overcharged. They cannot be received
with the approbation they deserve, and consequently will be thought to be dull,
and insipid.

It is a mistake to suppose an audience will not relish serious matter --
Variety is pleasing to the human mind; and that exhibition will please most,
which has some pieces serious, some highly argumentative and rational, some
pathetic, some merely interesting, some highly diverting. -- But most
exhibitors err in forever aiming to excite a laugh. They are often
unsuccessful, and then it occasions disgust. -- And they are in danger of
making the whole a scene of low buffoonery.

When the dialogists have transacted all matters of the most serious and solid
kind, it will be best to vary the exercises, and bring in the

2. INTERMEDIATE -- a single piece, taken from any topic which is amusing. It
should be a piece which requires no great attention of the mind to understand
it; and it ought not by any means to be pathetic or sublime; but some pretty
speech, which shall relieve the attention, and give the mind opportunity to
recruit itself for the Dramas which are to follow. The fable of the Two Ladies,
the Florist and the Bear, is a good example. The characteristic of this part is
that it entertains the mind without fatiguing it, and leaves all the stronger
passions unengaged for the pathetic scenes which are to follow. Next after the
intermediate should come in the most interesting and passionate pieces which
you have to exhibit. These will take less, if exhibited after the audience have
been raised to a high pitch of mirth. Then to conclude the dialogistic
representation, introduce a piece which is highly diverting* and thus the mind
will find itself agreeably relieved from the intensity of the passions, and you
will then, to conclude your exhibition, only want a good*

3. EPILOGUE or concluding part. This part will contain many interesting
matters; compliments to the audience, for their candor and attention; thanks to
the parents and guardians for affording the means of instruction; addresses to
amicable and parental affections; school mates taking leave of each other, etc.
-- And indeed polite and genteel address and compliments to several parts of
the assembly, will make the varied substance of this part. A well written
Epilogue, in which all the ornament and pomp of verse may be shown, all the
graces of the most refined elocution should be displayed, pronounced in a mixed
school by some elegant young lady, will give such a finishing stroke to the
whole, as to leave the audience little power or will to criticize upon the
performances. And they must go away pronouncing it a good exhibition. If they
find their feelings are not shocked, or their reason affronted, but with the
entertainment they have received good principles, which remain fixed in their
memories, they will not long be enemies to exhibitions.

SECTION VI. OF THE LENGTH AND QUANTITY OF AN EXHIBITION.
THE time of an exhibition ought not to exceed four hours and half, or at the
most five hours. Lengthy entertainments, where the audience are so confined,
will necessarily grow tiresome: and the best pieces, after the hearers are
tired, make no favorable impression. Four or six dramatic pieces are enough.
Let two of four and three of six dramatic pieces precede the intermediate, and
the same numbers follow it: thus you will have either seven or nine pieces in
the whole; and the odd numbers are best, because they remove the idea of
uniformity, which is tiresome when carried to an excess.

SECTION VII. REMARKS ON ATTITUDES, GESTURES etc.
THE first thing necessary for a person performing well is, that which is
necessary to all polite behavior in genteel companies. It is to enter an
audience or company in an easy and graceful manner, and leave it in the same
style. The gentleman or lady who is to perform, must be able to enter without
trembling and extreme agitation -- with a steady countenance, suited to the
part to be performed -- and must do the honors of entrance, in a bow or
courtesy, in an easy and elegant manner, whenever that is required. -- And even
in burlesque or passionate parts, the entrance or exit must be suited to and
entirely governed by the part to which it belongs.

To bring your scholars to act thus easily and genteely, attend first to the
neatness of their persons. See that they be cleanly, and neat in their dress,
that they be well washed and combed every day. This done will give them genteel
feelings, which will express themselves in genteel airs. Allow no scholar to
affect oddity or to dress in an absurd, and uncouth manner. Use them to decent
and handsome positions in reading -- correct them if they hang their heads down
on their bosoms or on one side, if they stoop forward or strut back
immoderately. Suffer them not to lounge and loll about, to distort their faces,
or limbs, to roll their eyes about, or make any awkward or disagreeable motion,
with them.

Instruct them how to come into a room and how to go out -- Let a young
gentleman always stand firmly on his feet to make a bow, and learn to bring up
his feet to a firm position -- without appearing to design it -- When a man
beings up his right foot so that the heel of it shall be two or three inches
distant from the buckle or shoetye of the left, he stands in a good position to
make a bow -- He should take off his hat, raising his hand to his head in a
spiral line -- not catching it off, in a direct line, either sideways, or
before. He should bend his body not in one point only, but its flexture should
begin from the neck and proceed from thence gradually downward -- And a bow to
express reverence, should at least be so low, that the eyes in their natural
position in the head, should be directed to the feet of the person to whom the
bow is made. However it must be varied according to the greater or less degree
of respect to be expressed by it -- There should be no toss of the head, no
hitch, or jerk in making a bow. But the motion of it, should always be smooth
and easy both in falling and raising of the body -- The hat should be put on
with the hand moving in a spiral line, as in taking it off -- and in taking off
the hat, and putting it on, you should never bring your hat between your face,
and the face of the person to whom your speech is directed -- The arms should,
in entering a room, hang easy by the sides, neither extended in any direction
nor hanging exactly parallel to the sides of the body.

A young Lady should in general enter a room with a steady modest countenance.
She should bring up her feet to a firm position to make a courtesy. Perhaps as
good a one for general use as any is to have the heel of the left foot at a
moderate distance from the shoetye of the right, and govern her motions with
her right foot; or if a lady does not find this easy, let her take the reverse,
or any position in which she can stand firm to command her motions, and her
figure not be ungraceful -- It is very graceful to bring her clothes forward by
a small almost imperceptible motion, so as to hide the flexure of her limbs,
before she lets herself down -- Then she should appear to sink with an easy
motion, as low as intended, and if she can add a very small motion, as if
withdrawing through modesty from the object to which she addresses herself, it
will make her appear very graceful. She should with an easy motion, rise to her
natural mode of standing -- Here let it be observed that her arms should not be
folded on her lap; but hang in an easy manner, at the sides. And the
withdrawing motion, should be very small, in all instances. And by persons who
naturally stoop forward it had better be wholly omitted. Nay it had better be
omitted by all who cannot perform it gracefully.

If your scholars have had the advantage of a good dancing school, it will save
you much attention to these matters -- but if they have had no instruction of
this kind, it must be given, or you never will have a good exhibition.

The main difficulty is to get a scholar into the habit of entering into and
going out of a room with perfect composure and ease of mind. For this end it
will be useful to let your scholars, taking their turns, go out of the school
room, speaking something to the student, as "ladies, or gentlemen," (as the
case may be) "we wish you a happy day" or in entering -- saying "gentlemen or
ladies I am very happy to see you" or any other civil sentence or phrase --
this should be done while they are conscious of being observed by the school.
And when they are able to do this composedly, you will soon find them able to
perform any thing with composure, which you can wish them to perform.

For the movements of the hands, etc. etc. and how the passions are expressed
-- you may look into any of the common books on this subject. The "Art of
Speaking" says as much on that head* as is useful, and even more. As to the
expression of the passions in the countenance, the Plate of the passions in the
English "Preceptor;" or in Hogarth's "Analysis of Beauty," will teach more than
all the written precepts in the world.

But the rhetoric of young ladies should be suitable to their sex. It should
never be violent. A lady should never extend her arms at full length, or strike
her bosom with her hands, or raise her hand aloft, above her head -- a lady in
any violent passion should not give it full vent; but appear to be endeavoring
to suppress it. -- And never even till death should lose her care for decency
-- And a lady should never address an assembly at large; but may speak to her
parents, her guardian, her school mates, etc. And of all things a lady should
never address herself to the young men. It should always be considered that a
young lady in a school is not actress but merely a scholar. Her object is
learning. She should behave exactly as we might rationally suppose a genteel
lady would behave in such a situation -- except only in burlesque parts, and in
them no lady should trespass upon decency.

All the performers in dialogues should appear to address each other, and to
take no kind of notice of the audience, unless the parts they are performing
requires it -- The performers should move about on the stage as the action of
the piece requires -- neither should they stand toe to toe like boxers, nor
should they move but with reason, and to heighten the effect of the piece.

As much of gesture as can be applied with reason; as much motion on the stage,
as is proper and natural, should be used. It makes the pieces lively, and is
very interesting to the audience -- But more should not by any means be
admitted.

It is foreign to the purpose of a school to overload exhibitions with music
and adventitious ornaments; they cover the faults of a bad exhibition but spoil
a good one by drawing off the attention of the audience from the speaking and
manners of the students to other objects -- the elocution and polite behavior
of the students are the grand points to be regarded -- yet a few musical pieces
may be admmitted if properly applied.

In their behavior the young ladies should be guarded from mincing fidgetry and
all silly coquettish airs; should use no affected graces, nor should they be
allowed to use any familiarity with the young men, which might offend the
nicest taste.

The young gentlemen should behave properly to the ladies, treat them
respectfully and offer them no rude or even familiar behavior, so as in the
least to offend persons of delicacy -- A young gentleman acting a rational part
should always address a lady standing at her left hand, and bearing his weight
on the foot next to her, to give himself the air of tenderness and respect -- A
young gentleman may kiss the hand of a lady in token of respect; or he may
support her with her arm. But proper amorous kissing, embracing, are things
which nature never meant to be exhibited in public.

And tho the practice of modern theaters may be otherwise, it is a rule given
by Horace in his "Art of Poetry," that no savage murders or peculiarly shocking
barbarities be represented on the stage -- Every thing of that kind if supposed
at all should be imagined to be done at a distance.

The dresses should be suited to the character, but they need not be expensive.
A simple wreath of laurel may denote a conqueror, a diadem a monarch; his badge
of office any magistrate. We know so little of the dress of ancient and foreign
nations, that any very simple device answers to convey the idea of office.

SECTION VIII. OF REHEARSALS; AND HOW TO KNOW WHEN THE STUDENTS ARE FIT FOR
EXHIBITION.
EVERY thing which is absurd in action or speech strikes any person
instantaneously who has but a little knowledge of what is right; let your
scholars in a great measure correct one another. As to entrances and exits,
practice your scholars to go in turns and make their exit and entrance under
the observance of the school, till, on the performance, the looks of the school
testify approbation -- For if there be the least awkwardness, those who are
observers will perceive it, and it will affect them very strongly -- Tho they
mean to be extremely kind to one another, they will not be able to suppress a
laugh. But when all are come to the point that they perform passably, they will
mutually show their approbation in their countenance -- The like may be said of
gesture. When one part of the school are spectators and the other part
performers, those gestures which affect the spectators agreeably, are with very
few exceptions good. Those which affect them disagreeably, bad -- The
principles of these affections are properly natural.

IT is generally best, if your school be large, to divide it, and not always
have the whole school together at rehearsals. And especially, if you, to save
the time of your scholars and prevent the study of rhetoric from intruding on
other studies, have your rehearsals in the evening; it will be best to divide
the school, that the scholars may not be kept out too late in the evening and
incur censure on that account.

In your rehearsals, correct all false pronunciation first. Make them recite
and pronounce the pieces well. Then add gradually the graces of motion, and
corporal gesture. And when you find that while one party of your scholars is
performing, the rest who make a little audience are properly affected -- you
have obtained your aim. If the genteel scenes produce strong expressions of
approbation -- if the ridiculous parts readily and promptly excite laughter --
if the pathetic ones bring tears into the eyes of the auditors; then your
pieces are ripe for exhibition. And to delay it longer would be to let the
ardor of your scholars abate; and, consequently, to lose in some measure, the
life of your exhibition.

It is a great point both at rehearsals, and exhibitions, to keep up the
courage of your scholars. Always correct them, unless they show obstinacy, in a
mild tone of voice. Assure them that they will soon overcome all difficulties,
and do very well -- you must possess their confidence else you cannot inspire
them with courage -- frequently talk with them about speaking, and gesture, and
show that you mean never to hurt their feelings if you can possibly avoid it.
Yet correct every instance punctually in which your scholars fail; and assure
them, that it is necessary to give them a good appearance, and make them
eminent speakers, and in prompting both at rehearsals and exhibitions, always
speak very distinctly, but in a soft and encouraging tone of voice, that your
scholars may not lose the command of feeling, by apprehension of your
displeasure.

If any of your scholars make an absolute sauxpas and get entirely out; by a
preconcerted sign, let them retire, saying nothing about it -- say not a word
to them of disapprobation; but encourage them, and bring them on again in
another place -- by this device you may in many instances conceal the fault
from the audience, or you may prevent its being very sensibly felt.

Yet the scholars should understand that they have the utmost displeasure of
their preceptor to fear, if they wilfully do any thing that is improper at an
exhibition. For unless he be able to command the prompt obedience of his
scholars, it will be absolutely unjust that he should be answerable for the
event.

SECTION IX. OF THE BENEFIT OF SCHOOL EXHIBITIONS.
WHEN school exhibitions are regulated by reason, divested of extreme expense,
and conducted with propriety they are of very great use -- they awaken the
ambition of students, and they become desirous of behaving in a rational
manner. We suppose in saying this, that the parts they have performed be such
as reason and religion do not disapprove. That they are replete with good
sentiments, and promotive of good morals. It has often been observed, that
where there have been in the same town, schools on the same footing in other
respects, yet some have had exhibitions and others not, that the schools in
which there have been exhibitions, have not only excelled in the point of
exhibitions but in every other. The rudest nymphs or swains by practicing on
rhetoric will soon acquire polite manners, for they will often personate the
most polite characters. And tho the surly majesty of some male despots among
us, may envy the graces of rhetoric to women, because they find themselves
already outdone by women in every other excellence; yet it is certain, that a
clear, genteel manner of expressing themselves, is a vast advantage to women,
in forming that important alliance, which is to last for life. -- And in the
marriage state the mother who has been taught to read and speak with propriety*
will be of unspeakable advantage to her children in forming their elocution in
early life. And we know that bad habits formed in childhood, stick to many
gentlemen of the court the pulpit, and the bar* all their lives. Let school
exhibitions consist of laudable materials, and be managed with prudence, they
will be of great advantage to both sexes, and form for all hearers an useful
and instructive entertainment.

DRAMATIC DIALOGUES.

Preface to the Dialogues.
IN the following dialogues the author has aimed to exemplify the principal
virtues and vices of human beings, some times a moral principle, is best
represented affirmatively; the principle stated and the example given. An
instance of this kind you have in Lucy, the principal character in the first
Dialogue -- Here the principle is set forth, directly in an example of virtue
-- Sometimes the necessity of a virtue is shown, by the embarrassments
attending the opposite vice -- As in the character of Fieldfare in the
Foundling, or of Amesa in Scanderbeg -- This resembles the Reductio ad abs^rdum
so familiarly known in Logic and Mathematics -- The Author thinks that neither
of these procedures can be objected to on just principles, for we may practice
virtue directly on its own principles, or may set ourselves right by avoiding
that which is wrong.

It may possibly be objected, that some of the characters are too high charged
and exceed any thing found in real life -- The character of Nelly in the
"Mother of a Family," and of Butterford in "The Maid of the groves," and of
Puffpaste in the 'Founding,' if any, will be though it of this kind -- But the
author had his reasons for this seeming excess. In the character of Nelly he
would represent the prodigious disadvantage, under which even a woman of a good
mind may appear, totally destitute of proper education -- In that of Butterford
he would show how extremely disagreeable a man of fortune is, void of virtue
and good breeding -- In the character of Puffpaste he would show that an honest
well meaning man, will, notwithstanding the utmost disadvantages, with respect
to external appearances, have something entertaining and agreeable about him,
and will in fact appear superior to a man of the greatest refinement of
education who yet neglects virtue -- These characters are so exaggerated that
young persons, who are always wanting in experience, may the better discern the
intention of them.

It may be said that some of the pieces cannot pretend to originality -- That
there is a resemblance between "The Triumph of Temper" and Shakespeare's "Taming
of the Shrew;" between the "Father of a Family -- and the "Pere de Famille" of
Diederot. That the "Little Box" is partly taken from the "Cistellaria" and
partly from the "Poenus" of Plautus -- That the "Captive" savours strongly of
the "Capteivi of the last mentioned author. That the "Orphan of China" has been
better dramatized by Voltaire and Dr. Murphy. That the "Discontented" wife, is
but the enlargement of the "UxorMempsigamos" of Erasmus. The author will deny
nothing of this; but say that he has given those pieces a cast better fitted
for schools than their originals, and they are so far new that he believes that
there is not a correspondent page between his book and any other book now in
print.

Should the critics of the age make any remarks upon this; or any of the
author's works, he means to profit by it -- He will be ready if his work should
outlive the present edition to alter any sentiments, word, or phrase, that
proves to be wrong, as his aim is to gain esteem, if he gains it at all, by
fair means -- and he would do as much good as he is able in the short space of
life allotted to man -- Wishing, he confesses, for some degree of approbation
for wellmean^ endeavors, he resigns himself to the candid and impartial public.

LINCOLN, DEC. 26, 1797.
The Woman of Honor. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
GOODNESS OF HEART AND VERACITY OF SPEECH.
The right conduct of human life depends not on the understanding alone. A good
heart inclines to right actions, and often guides a person where reason might
have failed -- And veracity of speech is the quality of any person, which most
effectually enables him, or her to gain confidence among acquaintance.

PERSONS.
MEN.
THORNHILL -- a rich young 'Squire. BLANFORD -- a suitor to Belinda. MR. MERTON
-- a farmer, uncle to Belinda. AIMWELL -- suitor to Lucy.
WOMEN.
MISS LUCY PLAINWORTH -- a girl of strict honor. BELINDA -- a wild young girl,
her cousin. MARCIA -- a sensible girl, jealous of Lucy's reputation. SOPHIA --
friend both to Lucy, and Marcia. BETTY -- a maid at service.
SCENE. -- A Farmer's house in Springfield, in Massachusetts -- or may be
supposed in any wealthy neighborhood in the country.

Dramatic Dialogues.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- BELINDA and LUCY.
Bell. -- running in. LUCY, do you not intend to go to the ball?


Lucy. What Ball do you mean?


Bell. Cousin Fireflash this day is twenty one; and he gives a splendid Ball to
all his acquaintance.


Lucy. I am invited and mean to go.


Bell. Mean to go! and here you sit drudging like some tame old house wife, with
a dozen Children.


Lucy. I am making some clothes for my little brothers and sisters. Yet I shall
go to the ball when my partner arrives.


Bell. What concern have you to make clothes for the children? Let mothers take
care of their own little brats themselves. What have such persons as you, and
I, to do with them?


Lucy. If I look a few years back, I find I was such a little brat myself; and
I cannot help feeling affection for the poor helpless beings.


Bell. I always hate to look back.


Lucy. You may look forward then, if you please, you will soon have the care of
such creatures.


Bell. O fie, you are always thinking of being married, keeping house, and
having a family.


Lucy. No you are first in that. I only considered that young and single* I am
already bro't to that point. The feeble state of my mother leaves the chief
care of the family with me.


Bell I pity you, indeed I do.


Lucy. You need not pity me. It is not burdensome. I have the approbation of my
conscience.


Bell. Conscience! what has such a thing as you to do with conscience? But folks
say that you are a girl of rare principles you always act on strict honor and
practice -- no little conven^ent deceits -- that you had rather be virtuous
than fine; and above all qualities you prize goodness of heart*


Lucy. I wish all this were true concerning me most sincerely.


Bell. Wish it were true; how unpolite! Miss Fashion says she heard so; and that
you read godly books on Sundays. But she could give no credit to such a
scandalous report.


Lucy It is of very little consequence to me. My sentiments depend not on Miss
Fashion, or any one else.


Bell. So I believe. There is nobody talks, dresses, or acts as you do -- Your
handkercheif ( Touches her under her chin with a fan.) is not half pufft high
enough, I can really see that you have a chin, and a part of a neck is to be
seen.


Lucy. Are they not in condition fit to be seen? Why should I hide them?


Bell. Why you are a very wise, gracious, good sort of a girl to be sure -- Do
pray marry a Parson, and as you have a tart and ready wit, assist him in making
his sermons. -- Lend your husband your wit and eloquence, and he may make
sermons which may keep one awake.


Lucy. I wish to treat religion and all that concerns religion with proper
respect. Your wild flights make me laugh -- Yet were you to take counsel, from
some of that kind of men, it might do you no harm.


Bell. Well you will run me down in talking, I suppose; but I must go, I have a
cap to make, a gown to alter, and a hat to trim and a thousand other little
things to do, before I can go to the ball. [Belinda withdraws.]


[Betty enters with a letter.] SCENE II. -- LUCY and BETTY.
Lucy. IS the tea ready Betty.


Betty. Madam here is a letter from the sweetest gentleman you ever saw.


Lucy. A letter for me! If any gentleman wishes to speak with me, let him come
himself.


Betty. He would, but he is afraid his uncle will be angry, and his uncle has a
great fortin. The old fellor has a despot cough, and is thought to be in a
presumption -- If he dies you will have a grand husband with a fine fortin.


Lucy. I have as much pride as his uncle -- I will have no connection with a
family which disowns me -- Besides there is no rich uncle in the case -- It is
only the plot of some low fellow who is ashamed to be seen by daylight. Take
the letter away.


Betty. Why madam, you are very nice to be sure, your cousin Clara is not so
squeamish* she has a Loveyer that writes her the sweetest letters you ever saw,
all about altars, and raptures, Ange^s and torments, Cupid^s darts, flames of
love and broken hearts -- You cannot think how happy she is.


Lucy. Cousin Clara -- you astonish me.


Betty. Yes, and she slips him into the house anights as sly! and then they
whisper for hours together. The family grumble, but she says she don't care
She Will get some justice with a scorched wig, or old broken minister, to marry
them up as nice as pyecrust -- without publishing intentions, and then the
family may grumble at their leisure.


Lucy. Away with your letter, Betty. I will not have it -- I hired you to take
care of the kitchen, not to assist me in these affairs. If I cannot do all the
work of this kind, which I have to do, it shall remain undone. [Marcia enters.]


Betty. I am sorry you will not take this letter, he is really a pretty gentleman
and I am afraid it will break his heart.


(Affects to talk pitifully.) Lucy. Then you, or any one that pleases, may mend
it. I will have no correspondence with a fellow who dares not show his head in
the family -- Go, Betty, and get tea ready.


SCENE III. -- MARCIA LUCY and BETTY.
Mar. WILL you let me see that letter, ( takes the letter from Betty who goes
out.) shall I open it?


Lucy. Shall I give you leave to open the seal when I would not do it myself?
Let it be sent back just as it is.


Mar. It is not sealed.


Lucy. It may be inscribed or signed, and to give it you, may imply some breach
of trust.


Mar. (partly opening the letter.) It is neither signed, nor inscribed. It is
an open billet by some body to be delivered by Betty into your ^and.


Lucy. You may do as you please.


Mar. (Opens the letter fully) O you are rich, Lucy, here is a bank note of
fifty pounds.


Lucy. Then probably it is from some gentleman of fortune, who would make an
ill use of his money -- Some rich villain.


Mar. But stay, I believe it is a counterfeit. I have a true bill, let us
compare ( Compares the two bills.) It is a counterfeit certainly, I believe the
work is all of a piece.


Lucy. I though it so from the beginning.


Mar. But let us see the precious letter. Meet me at the elms at the bottom of
your garden, Betty will inform you of me. Well, this is an elegant billet to be
sure.


Lucy. It is from some low, dirty knave. A man who pretends courtship is always
a knave, or ill^bred, if he dare not face the eyes of the family. But I
remember my promise to Miss Speedwell, to meet her at six o'clock -- I must go.
Betty!


Betty. Here madam.


Lucy. If Mr. Aimwell comes before I return, introduce him to my Father in the
parlor, or to my brother in his study; and be sure to tell him, that I am only
gone out a few steps, and shall return soon.


Mar. O it seems that you are engaged to Mr. Aimwell.


Lucy. I am for this evening; why do you laugh?


Mar. To find you so tender of the gentleman's feelings as to give him notice
of your speedy return.


Lucy. He is a gentleman of character, he has taken a proper notice of me. Why
should I not be grateful? while I am engaged to him, I will treat him with
respectful attention. After that, I shall do as I please.


Betty. O, I see the reason why you would not take the letter from the
gentleman I recommended. You think you have found better prog, the "full soul
eats raw honey-combs" as the Apostle Solomon says.


Lucy. Betty, retire with your prog and your impertinence, and mind the
business of the kitchen.


Betty. That Is the harshest word I ever knew come from my mistress's lips.
Indeed she is a sweet woman, and I must obey, for she knows I want money.


[Exit Betty muttering^] Mar. But I do not see why you should be so particular
about giving the gentleman notice of your return.


Lucy. Might he not imagine I absented myself on purpose to avoid him, and
conceive an ill opinion of me -- Or wait in cruel suspense till I returned --
Is it not unwise to offend a reasonable being; and wrong to hurt an innocent
one? But I must go, my friend, and return in a few moments.


Mar. Let me go with you. [They go out.]


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- MARCIA and SOPHIA.
Mar. WELL what do you think of our Lucy?


Soph. She is very singular, she acts precisely, and by rule, yet with ease --
It is the native goodness of her heart which guides her, she wishes to do
right, and that guides her to do it.


Mar. It is surprising to see how she is liked by the young gentlemen. The most
artful women, who sometimes please the men, and sometimes plague them, are
nothing to her for gaining their esteem.


Soph. I suspect one reason why many women are not pleasing to men is because
all their conduct favors of artifice, and indicates want of good principles --
I do not think that men in general are very fond of coquetry in women.


Mar. Then women are generally mistaken. And their education is often conducted
wrong. Many are brought up to act the coquette from their cradles. Miss Lizard
says that to hold a lover long, you must hold him uneasy.


Soph. Either her system is not good, or she does not use it, for she has had
six new suitors in six months, and the last is said to have left her much
against her will. But my cousin Fidelia says the best way to keep a lover is to
make him contented with his choice, and to improve one's self continually, so
that the last interview shall always be the most agreeable.


Mar. Much Fidelia knows about it, she never had but one suitor in her life.


Soph. I do not think that against her; for she has always kept him; ^e as the
needle to the pole-^ar. You never see her, in any public place, but he is
always by -- and all his leisure hours, instead of gaming and frequenting
taverns, and horse races -- he passes in her company.


Mar. Then they will be disgusted with each other soon -- They cannot always
live upon sweetmeats, I am sure.


Soph. Longer than you imagine. They intend to try it for life. He has
purchased a house, and her household furniture is all ready.


Mar. Well this is a pretty affair indeed that such girls as Fidelia and Lucy,
who can boast of nothing but beauty, good sense, education, and virtue, should
gain the confidence of the finest gentlemen; and be married just when they
please. When we that are rich, and can dress fine, and understand exactly all
the arts of gaining the affections, must sit by. And if we can be bridemaids,
it is a great honor.


Soph. We must bear it, for the present, with patience; and establish some
principles which will cause our acquaintance to place confidence in us.


Mar. As much as I hate reading, I would study Fordyce, Addison, and all the
moral writers, a twelve month, to get such a name as Lucy has. A gentleman said
this morning -- "That he should depend on her promise, as much as on the rising
of the sun -- and were he to love her, and be denied; he would go strait to the
river, and take his plunge at once -- and once for all, for he should not
expect to move her, by art, or persuasion, any more than to move the earth from
its center."


Soph. It is a great advantage to have such a reputation for truth and
constancy.


Mar. I know it and am vexed that I cannot have it -- and I will have it, one
way or another -- But do you know what a trial Lucy will have this evening.


Soph. Not I indeed.


Mar. You know she is engaged to Aimwell, and Squire Thornhill swears he will
dance with none but her. He admired her at the ball after the review. -- He
finds Aimwell has been before him; but he says Aimwell shall not have her. You
knew he is handsome, rich, eloquent and for so wealthy a man, he has a good
character. As to Lucy's fidelity I am not so sure.


Soph. But should we rejoice in other's misfortunes -- It might make it the
better for some others were Lucy's reputation lowered a little -- But I shall
not attempt it.


Mar. Perhaps I shall not be so scrupulous -- But hush she is coming this
moment.


[Lucy reenters.] SCENE II. -- MARCIA and LUCY.
Mar. WELL miss Lucy, Aimwell is not yet come, tho you was so careful that he
might not wait in painful suspense.


Lucy. He will; or if he be so ungenerous as to break his engagement he will
find that I can easily obtain another partner.


Mar. True you may. There is squire Thornhill, who is very earnest that you
should go with him. Aimwell does not come, you had better agree with him at
once.


Lucy Not till I am certain, whether Aimwell will come or not.


Mar. It grows late, Thornhill desired that I would speak for him -- It is best
not to affront him -- He is very rich, he is handsome, has a good name, and is
a fine scholar, and he is positive that one day you must be his wife.


Lucy. Thank his self importance. Not unless I please.


Mar. But you cannot please otherwise.


Lucy. If I break my word, he will only despise me and have a great right to do
it.


Mar. He is so enamored of you that he will easily overlook it -- I would give
him liberty to come.


Lucy. Positively, I will not, and if you say any thing more of it, I will be
affronted.


Mar. Well, I say no more. But you may give Thornhill his opportunities at the
ball.


Lucy. Neither will I do that. I will treat Aimwell while I am engaged to him,
with respectful attention.


Mar. But such is Thornhill's respect for you that he means to send Aimwell a
challenge and fight him.


Lucy. Aimwell has courage -- Sophia support me -- I Am -- faint, [Sophia
supports her, conducts her out, and returns -- Marcia stands looking after
them.]


SCENE III. -- SOPHIA and MARCIA.
Soph. YOU have carried the matter too far.


Mar. I did not think of affecting her so deeply --


Soph. She is engaged -- It is a decided matter. You and I may be bride maids
again soon.


Mar. I have been too wicked -- she is certainly a good girl and if Aimwell
gains her he will be richer than Thornhill or any one else. -- Let Us go, and
see her.


[They go out.] ACT III.
SCENE I. -- THORNHILL and LUCY.
[Lucy comes in as if avoiding Thornhill -- he pursues her and catches her by
the arm.] Thor. NO Lucy I must not be denied -- you must and shall hear me?


Lucy. Not unless I please. Who has given you authority over me.


Thor. You are obstinate beyond all reason, a lady of the first rank would not
reject my offers.


Lucy. Then I am in the second rank; and am not fit for you.


Thor* You trifle with the sincerest and most passionate heart -- if you refuse
me I shall die by this hand.


Lucy. If you are passionate enough to kill yourself, you ought to die, that
other people may be safe; yet I am under no obligation to do an unjust action
because you are disposed to do a rash one.


Thor. Aimwell think to engross your perfections! He has no title to them. The
very pretention shall cost him his life.


Lucy. You would persuade me to a base action which is the attempt of a knave,
and knaves are always cowards.


Thor. Then I Will arm immediately, and Aimwell shall know I am no coward.


SCENE II. -- AIMWELL and LUCY.
Aim. LUCY, my dearest friend, what discomposed you?


Lucy. The odious importunity of Thornhill; he has the audacity to threaten
your life.


Aim. I shall live t^ the age of Methuselah, if nothing kills me but Thornhill.


Lucy. But he is in a terrible passion.


Aim. Yes and his cowardice will soon cool him -- A man who lives in so much
pleasure as Thornhill, has no serious though it of dying.


Lucy. But you know not what may happen if you fight him.


Aim. Fight him! he never will give me the opportunity.


Lucy. But I may not be quite so unconcerned.


Aim. I thank you a thousand times for that friendly concern you show for me,
but you may rest secure that nothing formidable will ever take place on my
account, and his* I shall accept no challenge from him and if he has the
insolence to attack me I shall defend myself without ceremony. -- Be at ease on
my account. I am in no danger from him.


Lucy. I hope it is not inconsiderate in me to own that I am interested for
your life, and happiness. Were I to lose you, I should lose a valuable friend.


Aim. Your approbation teaches me the value of life. Adieu for the present. I
shall in a few moments attend you to the ball.


SCENE III. -- SOPHIA, LUCY, MARCIA and BELINDA.
Soph. I AM happy to see you return.


Lucy. I lost myself for a moment, and am afraid that I appeared foolish to you
-- and betrayed myself -- but the idea of fighting always affrights me.


Soph. All shall be a profound secret.


Lucy. I thank you, ladies -- I am not now in fear -- Aimwell will not fight
unless assaulted, and then Thornhill is no match for him. [Belinda enter.]


Mar. You need not fear any thing from us. I must admire your character; tho it
throws mine into the shade.


Bell. Yes, every one loves Lucy and we may as well submit to it as not, for
there is no help for it.


Lucy. But you will excuse me while I dress for the ball. [Exit Lucy and
Marcia.] [Blanford enters.]


SCENE IV. -- BLANFORD and BELINDA.
Bla. I AM very unhappy, Belinda -- there is no sort of carriage to be obtained
in this place, and I shall be deprived of your company. [Exit Sophia.]


Bell. I know not how to give it up. I had great expectations from this evening
-- I have not been home except on foot for three months.


Bla. I will use further endeavors but I have very little expectations of the
happiness of waiting on you this evening. [Exit Blanford.]


SCENE V. -- Re-enter LUCY and MARCIA.
Bell. MY dear ladies, what shall I do? Mr. Blanford can obtain no kind of
conveyance for me.


Lucy. Why your uncle has horses and carriages enough.


Bell. But I dare not speak to him -- I took a sleigh last winter -- without his
leave -- and went out with a young wildfire Buck, against whom he had often
cautioned me -- the wretch got liquor in his head -- overset the sleigh on a
bridge, and threw me, and my sister, into the river -- we escaped drowning and
got home. But as we were drying our wet clothes by a great fire, the fire took
our clothes, and burnt them up -- my uncle, to punish us, forbade us even to
ask for any carriage, for six months.


Lucy. But I am not afraid to ask him -- and he is coming in a few moments,
I Will ask him for you, may I do it?


Bell. Yes, but I will be absent, for I cannot bear to see how much more
confidence you have with him than I -- It is so hard to persuade him. I wonder
what is the reason that old folks are always so unwilling that the young, ones
should have any pleasure.


Mar. You mistake their views -- they are not unwilling, they enjoy their youth
over again to see their children happy -- but can you wonder that they are
concerned for the safety of their children and the honor of families -- your
uncle has been offended with you -- but by a prudent conduct you will soon
recover his affections.


Bell I begin to think that it is best for young ladies to be thoughtful
prudent, and virtuous; and always to adhere to ruth; I have a great mind to be
such an one myself -- Clara's misfortune has made me feel very serious.


Mar. Clara's misfortune?


Bell. She had a l^ver, with whom she conversed by means of her maid -- unknown
to her nearest friends -- but the lover has left her, and h^s go^e off with the
maid and marries her. And now it is known, that he courted the maid in reality,
and Clara only to get his board in the family.


Mar. What does poor Clara say? --


Bell. That she will go to Vermont, or Ohio; for she is ashamed to live among
people who know her. [Exit Bell.]


[Enter Mr. Merton.] SCENE VI. -- MERTON and LUCY.
Mer. LADIES you seem to be merry, all in preparation for the ball.


Lucy. No we are very sad, because Belinda cannot go with us.


Mer. Why; she has been rather wild and -- so --


Lucy. Lend me a chaise then on her behalf. I will be responsible.


Mer. You are honesty and truth itself; by every one's acknowledgment -- the
chaise shall be at your orders, Miss Lucy, and if my girl goes into good
company I shall be glad.


Lucy. A thousand thanks to you sir -- now I shall rejoice more for Belinda
than for myself [Exit Merton.]


[Belinda reenters.] SCENE VII. -- LUCY, MARCIA, BELINDA.
Lucy. NOW ladies we are all furnished -- Belinda you shall have a conveyance.


Bell. O Lucy! how do you make every body do just as you please? You are the
most artful girl in the world.


Lucy. I have no art but to mean the thing that is right. Your uncle is very
willing and says that if he can keep you out of ban company; you shall have
good company, and enough of it.


Mar. Ladies, the gentlemen are just now with their carriages at the door --
Now we shall be merry -- But what alls you Lucy?


Lucy. I do not know. But I always feel a damp on my spirits when I first set
out on a party of pleasure, something seems to whisper me, that a scene of
pleasure is always a scene of some danger. But when I am once engaged, then
Corresponding to the French phrase " Vive la bagatelle."
"long live trifles" I can be as merry as any of you.


[All leave the stage.] The Male Coquette. A COMEDY, IN THREE ACTS.
ABSURDITY OF LYING, AND HYPOCRISY.
Common lying, either of the malicious or mavelous kind, is offensive to all.
-- And why not that officious lying, by which we would recommend ourselves to
particular persons, ladies or friends, whose favor we desire? Ardent lips and a
wicked heart, says a very intelligent writer -- are like a potsherd covered
with tinsel.

PERSONS.
MEN.
CAPT. FLASH -- an officer in the recruiting service, and a male coquette.
TUKELY -- a plain, honest, industrious citizen. BLUNT -- a confident of Capt.
Flash.
WOMEN.
MARIA -- sister to Tukely. WIDOW LOVECASE -- an idle, rich widow* ELIZA -- a
cunning sprightly girl. Citizens' daughters, courted in turn by Capt. Flash.
AMORET, LISETTA, NARCISSA, PHILENIA,

SCENE -- Hyde Park in London.

THE MALE COQUETTE.
ACT I.
SCENE I -- TUKELY and BLUNT.
Blunt. BETWEEN you and me, Tukely, I do not much prize my intimacy with the
Captain.


Tukely. Why?


Blunt. I do not love to be trusted with so much wickedness. He has engaged the
hearts of a number of women, and then left them to miserable disappointment.


Tukely. Then you ought to expose him publicly.


Blunt. He tells me all his triumphs, and then says, Now you will not say a
word of it to the ladies.


Tukely. Have you promised him secrecy?


Blunt. No, I never did, nor laid myself under any obligation to him; but I
shall not like to have the name of betraying conversation.


Tukely. I find he has marked out my sister for his game. I shall prevent him
there. For I will kill him, right or wrong, before he shall win my sister, and
bring infamy on our family.


Blunt. I was never ambitious of conquest among the ladies. Loss of reputation
is worse than death to them; and occasions great misery among their near
relations, however innocent. I cannot build my happiness on the misery of
others.


Tukely. Then I think a man of your blunt honesty ought to expose the Captain.


Blunt. I shall not speak of his gallantries which have been confided to me; at
least not publicly. There is a tacit reliance on one's secrecy in matters
which affect reputation, whether we have promised secrecy or not.


Tukely. Then I will sift him myself -- I Will improve the hints you have given
-- I shall soon have an opportunity to practice; for my sister is coming --
Step aside while I address her on the subject. -- Exit Blunt on one side the
curtain -- Enter Maria on the other.


SCENE II. -- TUKELY and MARIA.
Tukely. MARIA you are quite premature. The Captain is not yet abroad.


Mar I wish, George, you would learn a little manners. You are forever meddling
-- and love to interfere with every agreeable prospect I have.


Tukely. I confess that I would willingly prevent your disappointment.


Mar. What do you mean by that?


Tukely. I mean that you have nothing agreeable to expect from Capt. Flesh


Mar. Profound wisdom to be sure! why so.


Tukely. He has the character of courting a dozen ladies besides.


Mar. There are many people who are very malicious when they see others happier
than themselves.


Tukely. I know it, but common fame often tells the truth nevertheless.


Mar. For my part I find it impossible to doubt of his fidelity.


Tukely. But if the shadow of a doubt remain, would you not wish it removed,
and be happy?


Mar. Certainly Now, George, you speak to the purpose, how shall that be done.


Tukely. Capt. Flash takes his stand commonly near the ever green hedge by
Rosamond's pond. It is a spot very convenient to talk wit^ people aside.


Mar. The Captain is very ingenious to avail himself of favorable circumstances.


Tukely. Now if you have any curiosity, that is to say -- plant yourself behind
that hedge. It is impenetrable to the sight, but you may hear any thing said on
the opposite side, tho spoken in a whisper.


Mar. That I shall certainly do, and I am in no fear of hearing any thing
d^sagreeable, unless I be sick of hearing my own praise. [Exit Maria.]


SCENE III -- BLUNT and TUKELY.
[Blunt reenters here.] Tukely. NOW I believe I shall accomplish my purpose,
nor need you risk your character for secrecy by exposing the Captain.


Blunt That will be very pleasing to me, I know myself naturally honest, and
detest the Captain's proceedings -- yet have scruples about revealing them.


Tukely. Women are sometimes saved, as well as lost by their curiosity. I have
contrived to plant the ladies with whom the Captain converses in such a manner,
that each shall hear what he says to those who come after.


Blunt. That plan is excellent, and to use one of the Captain's own phrases,
you will blow him up.


ACT II.
SCENE I -- Capt. FLASH alone.
NOW let me take my stand; and when a lady whom I have in view comes along ( He
takes out his glass and peeps at the ladies.) Now I see several of the quarry
-- I must contrive to take them separately -- They will save me the trouble,
for they will come on purpose to talk with me -- Split me if I think any man on
earth was ever more successful with the ladies -- My person, and arts are
absolutely irresistible -- Tender creatures, it grieves them to refuse me, and
let it grieve them, I have slain as many of them in my day as ever Sampson did
of the Philistines, and unless I am greatly deceived this will be a grand day
for Capt. Flash; but hush! there is the elegant and sensible Maria, who is more
than half a captive this moment. (Maria enters) Maria! the delight of my soul,
stay a moment and hear the declaration of the tenderest passion, that ever
warmed the heart of man.

Mar. Your compliments, sir, are excessive, and you must suppose me
insupportably vain i^ I place any confidence in them.


C. Flash. Try me then, Maria, make full proof of my love, if you once admit me
the partner of your heart and fortunes, you shall know my constancy, and my
truth.


Mar. But were I to believe the character which fame has given of you I should
suppose you engaged to a score of women already.


C. Flash. Common fame is a liar, split me to atoms if I do not think you the
finest woman my eyes ever saw.


Mar. O you make me quite ashamed.


C. Flash. Those blushes ( gently touching her under the chin with his hand)
alas! they heighten the beauty which before was too excessive. Divine Maria --
That face, those eyes, those cheeks, those lips! they are the tyrant of my
soul, they have led me into everlasting captivity. But what do people say about
me? What is the voice of fame?


Mar. They say you are a worthless coxcomb. That you will not attend the army
lest you should be obliged to fight. That you have studied Ovid's Art of Love
instead of the art of war; and that you pretend to be in love with twenty
ladies at a time.


C. Flash. And did you believe all this? Can a woman of your sense think with
the vulgar and have such superstitious fancies?


Mar. I am sensible that the world at large is injurious to men of merit. Truly
I did not believe it.


C. Flash. Then you will give me liberty to call on you to tea, and in the
evening we will find opportunity for a larger conversation, when we will engage
in the delightful and rapturous task of explaining our hearts to each other --
Shall I come? shall I come?


Mar. Yes -- yes -- you -- may; but be a little on your guard in respect of my
brother George.


[Exit Maria.] C. Flash. Stab my vitals. How weak women are -- This Maria in
other matters is a sensible girl; but by the force of love and flattery she
melts like wax before the flame -- Ah Maria you may be an honest woman at
present; but you have not long to boast of it -- Let me see who comes next O!
(Peeps in his glass.) On my l^fe the fat buxom widow. Let me re^o^no^e her a
little. I must vary my mode of attack: a maid must be won by a regular siege
and cautious approaches; but a widow may be taken by assault.


[ Widow (...)] SCENE II. -- CAPT. FLASH and LOVECASE.
C. Flash. My charming widow, this ^^ felicity; to meet the delig^^ of mine
eyes in so advantageous a place -- Here a little aside from the company indulge
a word with me.


Love. It is in vain Captain for me ^o think of conversing with men. That man
of worth, who once delighted my soul, is no more -- Shall I receive the
addre^^^s of other (...) before the earth is dry on his grave?


C. Flash. You know by experience the worth of a man of merit. Your good sense
will lead you to take another.


Love. Grief must have its hour and its course. It is not becoming for me to
talk of such matters, nor can my heart relish them at all -- You must excuse
me, and allow me no small space of time to grieve for the best of men -- Sir I
cannot indul^^ your conversation.


C. Flash. (...) ^e the reason why? Not indulge me; but madam I must not be
denied -- I came with all the blanks for marriage settlements in my pocket.


Love. (Throwing aside her veil.) You are an impudent fellow; what? not consult
me first but come with marriage settlements in your pocket; would you give me
no choice, no will in the matter? I say again you are an impudent fellow.


C. Flash. That is almost true; ( Smiling) but I am not properly impudent, I am
only presuming because I have in view so noble a prize.


Love. To think of marriage settlements with a poor broken hearted widow, whose
affections have long since been buried with her husband -- And what proposals
do you think sufficient to engage the heart of such a one. What motives could
remove the sorrows for her lost lover from her min^ -- What charm could give
ease to a broken heart?


C. Flash. First you are to take no care in my family at all -- Next the coach
wish the owner are to be forever at your service to convey you wherever you
please to go -- Ten thousand pounds are to be settled on you during life; and
you must do just as you please with your husband.


Love. You have no thoughts of making such proposals to me -- No you will marry
if ever you do marry, a girl in all the bloom of youth and beauty.


C. Flash. Mere insipidity, rat me, the ripened charms of a widow practiced in
alluring the hearts of men must be infinitely more delightful.


Love. Why captain I do suppose that widows know best how to charm the hearts
of men, but the men don't think so -- I have no thoughts however, that you can
have any idea of preferring me to a girl.


C. Flash. I tell you I bro't the articles ready prepared in my pocket; and I
desire madam, you would give an answer whether I may call on you at your own
proper home, at 10 o'clock this evening.


Love. Sir, can you expect that I should believe you when every body knows,
that you devote your principal attention to Maria Tukely.


C. Flash. Blast my constitution if there is one word of truth in that.


Love. I hoped there was -- She is esteemed a very fine lady, and I believed
you to be a man of merit, so I had the expectation of seeing a lady truly
deserving of my friendship, well settled in life, and happy.


C. Flash. Why, widow, could you suppose me capable of loving such a baby --
She fawns on me just like a little girl on her father. This very day she hung
upon me even to disgust, and I could not get rid of her; but by promising to
take tea with her.


Love. That Is strange! but girls will do so sometimes when their fancies are
excited so as to border on distraction -- I am sorry she has no more discretion.


C. Flash. Well, widow, what say you -- My desire is to call on you, at your
own proper home about 10 o'clock this evening.


Love. Why -- as to that, I am fond of having some person read to me -- if you
bring any good book with you, which might comfort one in affliction, I might
like your company for an hour or two. [Exit Lovecase.]


C Flash. Excellent widow. It works like wax to the sea^ -- Bring good books to
comfort you. I have the good books to comfort a widow. Marriage settlements.
But if she ever hears them read, she may bless her ears for the opportunity.
[Eliza enters.]


SCENE III. -- CAPT. FLASH and ELIZA.
C Flash. Your Servant Miss Eliza you have seen me at (...), where I had the
honor once of dancing with you* Come ^ ^wo are a little acquainted give me that
sweet little hand.


Eliza. I shall not.


C. Flash. Why, what sort of politeness is this?


Eliz. Because you are Captain Flash, and that is reason enough.


C. Flash. And what has Captain Flash done, that a lady cannot even pass an
ordinary compliment with him?


Eliz. Nothing with me nor ever shall: Persons of undoubted veracity have told
me that this same Captain Flash leaves his duty in the a^my, and makes ^t his
whole business to steal the hearts of unguarded ladies, and then sacrifice them
to infamy, or consign them to comfortless solitude. I wish for no acquaintance
with such a man.


C. Flash. Does not a lady of your good sense know that the world commonly
asperses men of merit.


Eliz. I know also that men of real merit can clear themselves of the aspersion
-- will you upon my charge confront Mr. Tukely.


C. Flash. Yes, or any man.


Eliz. I suppose you may challenge him when absent, but not when he is present.
He knows you too well.


C. Flash. He knows me not nor I him.


Eliz. Would you utter a deliberate falsehood? It will not recommend you to me
-- do you not court at once Maria, Tukely^s sister, and her aunt Lovecase the
fat widow -- and how can you say that you do not know him?


C. Flash. It is all (...) from the beginning to the end -- I court Maria that
fond disgusting sl^^* I would as soon court a mess of plumb porridge -- as for
the widow -- did you know ^^ -- she is an intolerable snuff ^aker, and it
sticks in the down on her upper lip; that she looks like a Turk in his
whiskers. Upon my truth she looks like the grand Mogul^ dressed up in
petticoats.


Eliz. To scandalize other ladies, captain, is not the way to find access to ^^
-- It is also said you have designs on Lisetta the little Prude.


C. Flash. That is as great a lie as all the rest. Why, she uses volatiles to
such a decree that she scents of them a mile's distance -- give it all up,
Eliza, it is mere invention, give me that sweet little hand, and take a little
walk with me.


Eliz. I shall not do it.


C. Flash. Then excuse the presumption of a lover driven to despiration by her
who is the object of all his desires.


Eliz. Let me go, Captain.


C. Flash. I cannot quit this inestimable prize.


Eliz. Unhand me, insolent wretch, this instant, or I will call my footmen, and
they shall give you proper dicipline. (He unhands her and she says going out)
There, go now, and herd with your own sort. [Exit Eliza.]


[Tukely enters.] SCENE IV. -- TUKELY and Capt FLASH.
Tuk. WHAT is the matter with you, captain, you look confounded?


C. Flash. Only a little girl here behaved with rather too much prudence and
propriety -- She is a sensible gir1, I wish to marry sometime or other, what if
I follow her, and by means of her relations make honorable proposals in good
earnest. (Follows her out.)


[Two ladies enter on one side -- Tukely steps aside and listens.] SCENE. V --
NARCISSA and PHILENIA.
Nar. MISS Philenia, I am astonished at your confidence -- To contend for your
interest in a man. You might be ashamed.


Phil. You do exactly the same -- I say the truth, if he invited you to Whites
at the Ball, he invited me to Miss Mohairs


Nar. I have a dozen letters of his in the most passionate style, the language
of the heart.


Phil. I have fifteen in such a style as to show him the sincerest of lovers.


Nar. I hope you will not lie, you mistake the man. The true Capt Flash lodges
at M^s. Simpson's in Threadneedle Street.


Phil. Mine are from Capt. Flash of the third regiment, their station,
Gibralter. He is recruiting in this city and lodges at Mrs. Simpsons in
Threadneedle Street.


Nar. The Captain is a man of the strictest truth. He has sworn his love to me
a hundred times on the salvation of his soul.


Phil. He would not deceive me I know, he has sworn his love to me a thousand
times, so what says your madamship to that.


Nar. Some person has imposed on you. Let me see one of your letters, the
handwriting and the seal.


Phil. I shall not betray the letters of my friends -- show one of yours, it
will do as well.


Nar. I know that those he wrote to me are genuine.


Phil. There is no imposition certainly in those which he wrote to me.


Nar. I am sure to confound you now -- I have his picture in miniature set with
diamonds.


Phil. And I have a picture set with diamonds of the true identical Capt. Flash.


Nar. I advise you to desist -- you will become the ridicule of the town.


Phil. You are the ridicule of the town already, you have taken a phantom for a
lover; I am content with the reality.


Tuk. ( stepping forward) Ladies if you will take your station where I will
place you; the whole affair will be explained to your mutual satisfaction.
(Leads them out.)


[Blunt enters with a lady.] Amo. It is a matter very interesting to me. I
desire you will inform me whether Capt. Flash makes love to every lady of his
acquaintance.


Blunt. I believe he does not make love to every lady of his acquaintance.


Amo. Then he does to many.


Blunt. He oftens boasts of his exploits to me.


Amo. Please to inform me then of his whole character and conduct.


Blunt. Let us know how far you have gone with him; it may not be safe to
inform you.


Amo. His addresses have been honorable. I own I have admitted his visits
freely at home, and have been with him in public places, and he has appeared to
me a man of merit.


Blunt. So he has made proposals of marriage, to which you have consented* then
he has absented himself.


Amo. He does not visit me so frequently as he did.


Blunt You should have known his character before you admitted his visits
freely.


Amo. If he be true I ought to have the happiness to know it^ ^f ^e be false I
should be undeceived -- Either way you are inhuman and cruel if you do not
inform me.


[Tukely enters.] Blunt. You would not believe any thing from me; u^^ less it
were agreeable to your wishes -- But here is a gentleman ( He presents her to
Tukely.) who will put you into a situation to inform yourse^^es.


Tuk. ( Leading her out.) Here madam take a station which I shall point out to
you and your affairs will be cleared up in a few moments. [Tukely and Amoret go
out.]


ACT III.
SCENE I -- C. FLASH and LISETTA.
(In this place Flash reenters.) C. Flash. THAT little jewel Eliza has escaped
me. She has too much good sense to be caught with chaff -- I shall marry her if
any of them. But see, are there any more of the quarry? (Peeps in his glass at
the ladies behind the curtain.) Yes my sweet little prude Lisetta, she loves
extreme delicacy and keen scandal. I Will dose her well with both -- my friend
Lisetta. This is a happy day because I meet you. (Addressing himself to Lisetta
as she enters.)


Lis. Sir?


C. Flash. My heart loves virtue and good sense, I am enraptured with the
beauties of Lisetta's mind.


Lis. I cannot endure flattery, Captain -- It is odious as wormwood to the be,
who rambles among the sweetest flowers of the field.


C. Flash. Think not I have any though it of making love to Lisetta -- I know her
averse to love, that mad passion which deprives human beings of reason and
virtue -- Friendship and esteem, are all the affections I could expect to
excite in the most virtuous Lisetta.


Lis. The love of virtue for virtue's sake. I despise any thing that has
connection with interest, or the senses.


C. Flash. I abominate the barbarous custom of marrying. I should be a^^^^ed of
a fa^^ly if I had one -- Let me respect you without the least profit, and serve
you without the least hope of reward.


Liset. How pleasing it is to talk with a man of sense; But you are devoted to
the interest of Philenia.


C. Flash. That is impossible -- It is a fact that she drinks strong waters --
Did you never observe the tip of her nose how red it is? Split me to atoms, if
ever I could bear the smell of brandy.


Liset. But then she sings so sweetly.


C. Flash. Blast my constitution if I think she sings sweetly -- There is a
screech in her voice which resembles the whetting of a saw. It always sets my
teeth on edge to hear her.


Liset. The little Amoret perhaps may please you.


C. Flash. That simple little idiot -- She is the shallowest of all womankind
-- She could not smell a rat if it lay dead before her nose -- What are these
to the pure, the delicate, the divine Lisetta?


Liset. I should admire the man who could love like an angel, and be content
with mere adoration of his mistress.


C. Flash. Then here is the man for you (Laying his hand on his heart.) admit
me tomorrow evening to converse with you at home, at 10 o'clock. You shall see
how we will pass the time in the most distant and enraptured admiration of each
others perfections.


Liset. You may come, but be sure that your mind be pure as moonlight before
you presume to enter my house -- At present I must withdraw. [withdraws.]


SCENE II. -- Capt. FLASH alone.
WELL how many ladies have I on hand. (Takes out a list, and comments upon it.)
There is Maria -- I must spare her, or her brother that fireskull will kill me
-- I Will tell her story however, over a bottle of wine -- The widow, the prude
and Amoret, I mean to sacrifice to the Goddess pleasure, the only Deity, Vanity
excepted, that I adore. Narcissa and Philenia, they must thank themselves for
their folly -- If I once gain liberty of a private interview they will hardly
escape me finally -- They will do to make stories of, to divert my brother
officers on a dull campaign. Eliza is the only one I can think of marrying --
She understands the Trap and avoids it, one might take her and not fear.

SCENE III. -- [BLUNT, TUKELY, and all the LADIES enter at once -- and the
Captain appears extremely confounded -- remains silent some moments -- at last
speaks.]
C. Flash. WHAT all in a company!


Tuk. The Captain used to reconnoitre -- the ladies have been reconnoitring the
Captain.


C. Flash. But what brought you here all together?


Am^. We begin to smell a rat even before he is dead.


Phil. You seem to be dull, captain. How should you like a song that would set
your teeth on edge, or shall we raise your spirits with brandy?


Liset. Volatile spirit might keep him from fainting.


Mar. Sometimes when persons are failing it has served as a good restorative to
give them a mess of plum porridge.


Love. The ladies insult you Captian but never mind it, please to take a little
Spanish snuff out of the grand Mogul's box, it is the best thing in the world
for low-spirits.


C. Flash. Blunt, you rascal -- you have betrayed me.


Blunt I have not.


Tuk. He is harmless -- But I being apprehensive for my Sister, placed the
ladies in the post of observation -- Now you may resent it if you dare.
(Pauses, but C. Flash makes no answer.) Ladies how shall we punish him? shall
we throw the rascal into Rosamond's pond?


Love. No, let me give him his doom -- We will bring his character on the
stage, and expose him to public ridicule -- for the instruction of women, and
the terror of all his kind.


C. Flash. Well Ladies I have as good an opinion of you now, as I ever had --
so good bye. [He goes out -- and all the performers withdraw soon after him.]


The Growth of Rumors. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN ONE ACT.
ABSURDITY OF MAGNIFYING REPORTS.
Next to the folly and wickedness of framing deliberate falsehoods and
propagating them concerning honest people, is the pernicious disposition, which
inclines some persons, if they hear any disagreeable report, to magnify and
spread it. An ill impression is sometimes made in an hour, which it will
require years to efface; and perhaps it can never be effaced -- a good man
"takes not up an ill report against his neighbor."

PERSONS.
MEN.
LONGHEAD -- a man who makes the worst of every thing. CATCHWORD -- a
propagator of idle reports. BREEDBATE -- a lover of scandal. REDFACE -- a
preacher over liquor. CURIOUS -- a busy-body. TELL FAIR -- a popular orator.
GOODMAN -- an honest, cautious citizen. MADAM PIPER -- an aged woman who hears
their Dialogue, and speaks as she is affected by it. -- Madam Piper sits and
works at a distance through the whole Dialogue.
THE GROWTH OF RUMORS.
SCENE I. -- LONGHEAD and CATCHWORD.
Long. DID you hear of the melancholy affair which happened in this Town, this
morning?


Catch. I have heard nothing new of late.


Long. Neighbor Greetwell's family is in the utmost confusion -- Never was a
more tragical scene.


Catch. This is the first lisp I have had of it.


Long. I wish I had never heard it, it really makes me melancholy to think of
it -- Did you know his daughter Eliza?


Catch. Yes, a beautiful and amiable girl.


Long. She is ruined, and I fear the happiness of the whole house is gone
forever.


Catch. You don't say so -- I am frighted: I loved that family about as well as
I loved myself.


M. Piper. That is a tolerable lie to begin with, neighbor Catchword.


Long. She was courted by Mr. Brightman you know -- and it was though it to be a
fine match.


Catch. Have they broken off? Well if they have done it by consent --


M. Piper. You will hardly ever get a woman to do that -- It Is a losing game.


Long. But they did not do it by consent; and it is a melancholy affair indeed.


Catch. People said their love was ardent and sincere -- Why! they were to be
married this evening.


M. Piper. Then I don't believe a word about their breaking off, not I -- Would
they be fools?


Long. Aye but they have, and the bride is all in tears -- and the bridegroom
in the utmost distress and despair.


Catch. Pray tell me on what account.


Long. You know she was to have been married this evening -- what grand
preparations there were for the wedding -- and it was found out this morning,
and not till this morning, that she was desparately in love with another man.


Catch. That was a pity indeed -- But is it fact? Is it fact?


Long. O yes, it must be, Eliza Greetwell was seen to caress with tender
endearments, and with tokens of passionate fondness, another man, who was not
her lover, at least not her intended bridegroom -- So both families of the
bride and bridegroom, are in the utmost distress and confusion.


Catch. It Is a pity -- It Is a pity certainly.


Long. Aye but it is too true. We all thought her a girl of the firmest
principles -- But there is no trusting women now a days.


M. Piper. Any more than men, I suppose.


Long. I could tell you more, but I Am in haste, and bid you adieu. [Exit
Longhead. Breedbate enters.]


SCENE II. -- BREEDBATE and CATCHWORD.
Breed. WELL brother Catchword what news?


Catch. Very surprising -- You have heard how Eliza Greetwell and her spark
have parted. The matter is a^ up about their being married this evening.


Breed. That is curious, they seemed as if they were made on purpose for each
other, and only wanted to be one in interest, as they were one in heart and
soul.


Catch. Alas, how shall men and women put confidence in one another any more?
And it is the women's fault you see -- There is no trusting them.


M. Piper. If I were near you, you wretch, I would box your ^ars well.


Catch. The young bridegroom was much offended at his bride, for giving such
evident preference to another man, the very day she was to be married -- he
forgave her, and would not forsake her: for he is a generous fellow.


M. Piper. Now I would have you laugh at women for telling stories about ghosts
and apparitions -- Yours are not half so probable.


Catch* (...) always was a fine lad truly a fine man. I am sorry, it will
mortify him, as long as he lives. I am very sorry for him. It did not use to be
so when I was young. No man would make a woman half a dozen visits unless he
meant to marry her. And the ladies never admitted more than three visits, to
any gentleman, unless they had a liking to him.


M. Piper. Then I should have turned you out of doors long before I did; and
got more credit by it.


Catch. Aye, but the times are sadly altered now -- I expect one of these days,
husbands and wives will dismiss one another, and say nothing about it.


Breed. I hope not, I am not quite ready to part with mine.


Catch. I shall be melancholy this whole day. But instead of grieving for other
people I must attend to my own affairs. [Exit Catchword.]


SCENE III. -- BREEDBATE and REDFACE.
Breed. WHAT do you think neighbor of Miss Greetwell. Did you ever hear the
like?


Red. I cannot say a word -- I am as dry as the desert of Arabia -- I cannot
say a word till you let me have something to drink. [Breedbate goes out.]


M. Piper. You will make fine work of it I dare say when you have raised your
spirits a little. (Breedbate enters gives him a cup of liquor, he drinks, holds
it, and talks, and drinks, alternately.)


Breed. Well, what do you think of that?


Red. O this is due -- (drinks again) It goes to the very right spot of my
inmost soul -- This is the cordial that keeps men alive -- It does not trip up
one's heels you see, but only makes him che^^y, merry -- Now as to Eliza
Greetwell, what of her. (Taking the posture of attention.)


M. Piper. You Will be just in nice trim to talk about her, when you drink a
little more.


Red. I shall talk the better then.


Breed. Such a thing when I was young would have rung through all New England --
But people make light of these things nowadays.


Red. I dislike these matters very much, but I am apt to think, this affair
will not turn out so bad as expected.


Breed. Why so?


Red. Because Brightman treats the matter very lightly.


Breed. He is a fellow of a fine temper, but he must needs feel very
disagreeably -- He is of a noble temper, can bear any thing. They say he keeps
all his disagreeable feeling^ to himself. ( Redface drinks again.)


M. Piper. Now the poor women are to have another basting I suppose.


Red. That is generous in him, if that be fact -- Yet what reason can we find
that one person should be made unhappy for the sake of another, who does not
deserve it?


Breed. No, I think it f^ll enough, to do it then, when it can no longer be
avoided. For we take them in marriage for better or for worse.


Red. But when people in their courtship quarrel and separate, how can we judge
who is to blame? they will hardly ever tell the facts which relate to the
matter, and who can judge without the facts?


Breed. But it seems Mr. Brightman was not in fault. -- Every body says that he
was attentive and constant, and ardent, and persevering.


M. Piper. Miss Greetwell would be the best judge of that herself.


Red. Alackaday the world grows worse as it grows older -- It did not use to be
so when I was young -- The men were as true as the sun -- and they would not
injure a woman if they knew they might -- The girls actually when I was young,
depended more on their sweethearts honesty, than on their own discretion; but
you see, it is not as it was, when I was young.


M. Piper. Yes, I remember when you was young; it used to rain gingerbread
every night. We planted our potatoes and they produced fat turkies ready
roasted.


Breed. If the men were so honest how were the girls pray?


Red. How were the girls! They were as kind as turtledoves. If you offered to
marry one, she would take you up as quick! and hold you to your promise. There
was no getting rid of her -- for, as I told you before, the young men were
extremely honest.


M. Piper. You do murder truth abominably. The men never were so honest as you
tell of, nor were the women ever such fools.


[Exit Breedbate.] SCENE V. -- REDFACE and CURIOUS.
Red. Well neighbor Curious, what news?


Cur. Only about Mr. Brightman and Miss Greetwell.


Red. That is indeed a curious matter -- I have thought much of it, and cannot
account for it. Yes, it i^ talked of by blacksmiths and barbers, by tradesmen
and merchants -- The physicians are up in arms about it -- The lawyers are
buying up blanks and quills -- The clergy it is expected will not be silent --
We shall have a number of smart sermons on the subject -- and some of the
senators and representatives think it best to bring in a new bill for the
prevention of such evils in time to come.


Cur. ^ut the public in one respect is misinformed -- It was not a proper
disappointment on either part.


Red. How could that be?


Cur. Because they parted in mutual good humor; and agreed to separate.


Red. Who then can say they have done wrong? If parties have associated ever so
long, and agree to separate, who can say they are to blame? It may be said
indeed that so much time has been spent in vain, because it can never be
remembered with pleasure.


Cur. Ah! I hardly know what to think about the sin of it -- But it makes one's
heart ache dreadfully to part with a beloved object. But when one gets a little
weaned by the discovery of new faults, new deformities, etc. the parting is not
so hard -- I tried it (sighing) once myself. -- Every man is his own friend,
and loves to indulge his own humor; but we shall not settle the matter if we
talk ^^ fortnight about it.


Red. That is true; and as I have a customer waiting for me in my shop this
moment, I must go. [Drinks off his liquor, sets down the empty glass and goes
out.]


SCENE VI. -- TELLFAIR and CURIOUS.
Cur. Well, that was a very curious affair about Miss Greetwell and Mr.
Brightman.


Tell. Yes, they had a sharp quarrel; but they were soon reconciled, and were
married with great rejoicings.


Cur. Hah! was that the case? I thought they had agreed to part.


Tell. No -- there was some little squabble, I believe, but it was soon over,
and they were married very honorably, and I am very glad of it, for the
separating of lovers who have long been acquainted, is often attended with very
disagreeable consequences.


Cur. Yes, and I wonder why men in all their wisdom have never found a remedy
for that evil.


Tell. Because they want experience -- For that since I have been honored with
a seat in the legislature, I have thought of bringing in a bill for the
prevention of these evils.


Cur. What pray sir.


Tell. The first provision in the act is -- that no lady, unless she thinks her
suitor an agreeable man, shall give him more than five audiences and an half,
thirty whispers, and fifteen smiles.


Cur. Under what penalty?


Tell. That she should receive no attention from any gentleman for a whole
month.


M. Piper. O, sir, alter that part, by all means, that is intolerably severe.
They Will never bear it.


Cur. What is to be done with the gentlemen?


Tell. It will be enacted, that every gentleman shall at least by the thirty
ninth audience kiss a lady's hand in token of respect and tell her she is
agreeable -- by the fortieth, that she is particularly agreeable -- by the
forty-first that he shall declare his love in a set speech -- by the
forty-second, he shall profess eternal amity to her -- and by the forty-third,
be shall come directly to the point and canvass the subject of marriage.


Cur. And what if she does not proceed thus?


Tell. He shall be liable to all the pains and penalties of a refusal, because
his suit will be out lawed.


M. Piper. I am afraid if liberty were given for every one to delay so long,
the women would be in a worse situation than they are now.


Cur. I don't think I should like, with all sorts of women, to be confined to
these rules.


M. Pip. Your scheme will never hold sir.


Cur. I am of the same opinion.


Tell. well then, we must have all things in courtship and marriage, which
relate to forming the alliance to the parties themselves, as before, if they
are to blame they must bear it themselves -- People are always ungrateful to
their rulers. ( Looks sorry.)


M. Piper. I consent to that.


Cur. And I too.


Tell. Madam Piper you do not feel interested in this matter at this time of
life.


Cur. Did you ever know a woman give up the idea of gallantry while her breath
was in her?


M. Piper. Or a man to part with his vanity till he parted with his last spark
of life.


SCENE VII. -- GOODMAN and TELLFAIR.
Good. WELL neighbor Tellfair what is the news of the day.


Tell. Only that I am healthy, except what is said of Mr. Brightman and his lady.


Good. There was never any difficulty between them.


Tell. Aye but indeed there was.


Good. No there was not.


Tell. There was to be sure. (warmly.)


Good. Certainly there was not, and I can tell you how the whole story took its
rise.


Tell. Then you can tell a wonder, for it is told and believed for a truth through
the whole town -- The town has even been in an uproar about it.


Good. And about nothing -- Mrs. Greetwell, wife to the bride's brother, seeing
the son of her former husband, who was brought from nurse to the wedding, was
overcome by the tenderness of a mother, caught him fondly in her arms and
kissed him.


Tell. And how came the story to get abroad.


Good. Only a child told it at a neighbor's house and made the common mistake
of putting miss for mistress.


Tell. Well I shall never believe such reports again, when told of honest people.


M. Piper. I told you it was not at all probable that they would quarrel when
they were just going to be married. I would not answer for them, months or
years after.


Good. And you may take it for granted that in nine instances out of ten, the
common scandalous stories told about people who in the general course of life
are virtuous and worthy, are totally without foundation.


M. Piper. Well I desire the men will never say any more about women's
tattling; for they have talked this whole day, and set the whole town in an
uproar because a fond mother happened to kiss her own baby.


[All leave the stage.] The Gamester. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
MILDNESS OF TEMPER.
Every human being has some vices. Husbands must expect to find them in their
wives, and wives in their husbands -- parents will find vices in their
children; and children when they grow up will find them in their parents. How
shall we cure, or alleviate those vices in our near relations -- by mildness or
severity? -- is not mildness most likely to gain the heart, and consequently to
give us the greatest influence?

PERSONS.
MEN.
MR. VAN KEPPEL -- a merchant of Amsterdam and a gamester. MR. LEERKINS --
brother to Mrs. Van Keppel.
WOMEN.
MRS. VAN KEPPEL -- wife to Mr. Van Keppel. MADAM LEERKINS -- mother to Mrs. V.
Keppel. MRS. PAULUS -- aunt to Mr. V. Keppel. MISS LEERKINS -- sister to Mrs.
V. Keppel.
The scene of action is supposed to be a merchant's house near the bank at
Amsterdam.

THE GAMESTER.
ACT I.
SCENE. I. -- Madam LEERKINS and Mrs. V. KEPPEL.
M. Leer. YOU see what has been the consequence of your obstinacy. You would
not listen to my advice -- You shall be an example to all daughters who marry
without their parents' consent.


Mrs. Kep. It might have been better for me to have followed your counsel --
Yet I am not absolutely sure of it -- It might have hurt me as much to have
lost the object of my dearest affections, as to have had a dissipated and
inattentive husband.


M. Leer. I cannot say that I am very sorry -- You feel the curse of
disobedience and shall be a warning to others.


Mrs. Kep. I may feel the effect of folly. But how dear Madam can you call it
disobedience? When I was eighteen you told me, I was free.


M. Leer. But you would have Keppel against my advice and consent; and now you
feel the curse of that sin.


Mrs. Kep. The curse of my folly rather. I was free at eighteen and did not
marry till twenty five; If I was free I was not bound, so I cannot see how you
can make either sin or disobedience of it.


M. Leer. You will be unhappy as long as you live.


Mrs. Kep. I greatly fear it, and my sufferings persuade me, that girls would
do well to listen to the advice of their elder relations more than they do --
but either freedom is nothing or we may make use of it in the most interesting
concern -- the choice of a partner for life.


M. Leer. You, I see, can be wicked and justify it too. The curse is likely to
rest upon you.


Mrs. Kep. I am very unhappy, and I wish that you would reflect that you are my
mother, and not increase your daughter's misery -- yet miserable as I am, I am
not beyond hope -- I hope yet to reconcile you to me, and engage my husband to
virtue.


M. Leer. You will have a very hard task to do either one or the other. [Exit
M. Leerkins]


SCENE II. -- Mr. and Mrs. KEPPEL.
( Mrs. Keppel speaks to Mr. Keppel as he is entering.) Mrs. Kep. O I am glad
you are come home. Sit a little with me my dear; and I will get you a
delightful little supper in a few moments. I have sent to the market and have
got the best things for you.


Mr. Kep. I thank you my dear, but I cannot stay. I must go gack to the sign of
the Leopard -- I have lost about seventy pounds, I came back to get more money
that I may play again and recover what I have lost.


Mrs. Kep. I am rather afraid that you will lose the whole. If I dared I would
advise you to leave off gaming; for I am verily afraid it will ruin you.


Mr. Kep. O bravo, fine times indeed, a woman advise her husband, why, think my
girl, you live in Holland. Did you think you lived in the United States of
America? I remember, that, while I was in Massachusetts; if I asked some of the
most respectable men in the state, if they would do this or that, they would
say I will hear what my wife says, or, I will ask my wife. But you live in
Holland my dew.


Mrs. Kep. I wish from what you say, that I lived in Massachusetts. I respect
that people exceedingly. I would then advise you to leave off gaming, for I
verily fear it will ruin you. [Enter Mrs. Paulus.]


Mrs. Kep. A fiddle's end of that. There is not a man in the universe, who can
play against me. [Exit Keppel.]


SCENE III. -- Mad. LEERKINS, Mrs. V. KEPPEL and Mrs. PAULUS.
M. Leer. So your husband is gone off to the tavern again, you are likely to be
miserable enough.


Mrs. Kep. I greatly fear the worst -- But I wish, Madam, that you would not
seek to increase my misery. It is already as great as I can bear.


M. Leer. You see, Mrs. Paulus, what my daughter has bro't upon herself -- and
I cannot pity her so much as I should -- if she had not bro't her mother's
curse upon her by marrying without my consent.


Mrs. Pau. But you surprise me, you did not curse one of your own children!


M. Leer. Yes she disobeyed me, and I cursed her, and the curse has been
fulfilled an^ I never will revoke it.


Mrs. Pau. O madam, I am afraid you are more to blame than she -- I shall now
begin to take her part.


M. Leer. Why, had I not a right to curse her?


Mrs. Pau. Perhaps not -- You had a right to think she was a silly girl. For it
is a great folly in young people to reject that counsel of elder persons which
is the effect of experience, and count it as nothing. But your daughter was
free, and what avails liberty if we cannot use it in that concern which is
dearest to the human heart? So you may say she was silly; and had a right to
think so, and place the less confidence in her on that account. But how she
could be so guilty as to deserve an irrevocable curse I cannot comprehend.


M. Leer. But she ought to have heard to me.


Mrs. Pau. That is very true, and she was a silly girl that she did not. But
perhaps not guilty of any real crime. There are in the human constitution
remarkable and unconquerable attachments and aversions -- The convictions of
the mind will not always bear sway, much less take advice from others -- What
would you do if any person should put a cat under your table or under your
pillow -- What would you say?


M. Leer. O horrible! I cannot bear a cat, I should faint away, or go into fits.


Mrs. Pau. And you love dogs as much as you hate cats. -- I have seen you, when
a girl, carry one in your arms, from your father's house to the school, which
is, at least, a mile. And I believe you always have one with you when you ride
out.


M. Leer. Yes, to keep my feet warm. Trip always lies at my feet and keeps them
warm.


Mrs. Pau. What if your parents had killed your little dog, and had put a cat
in his place, or that instead of warming your feet, you should warm your heart
with a cat.


M. Leer. I could not have borne it, I must have died.


Mrs. Pau. Well, I have seen men whose company I abhorred as much as ever you
did that of a cat; who yet were esteemed by my friends and by the public -- And
I have seen one, else I never would have been married, for whom I had as great
an attachment, as ever you had to Trip -- This was my case I fully own, and
might be that of your daughter. Was she then to be blamed?


M. Leer. You are a strange woman, and truly I do not know what to say to you
-- But Keppel is coming in, I will go out for I cannot bear to see him. [Exit
Mad. Leerkins.]


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- KEPPEL enters with a distracted air.
Mr. Kep. WHAT a wretched man am I? I wish I had hearkened to my wife. I have
not only lost my money but every thing else. I despised the counsel of the most
amiable of women. What a fool!


Mrs. Kep. My dear friend, who has offended you?


Mr. Kep. No one, but myself. I am the greatest fool on earth. I wish I had
followed your advice.


Mrs. Kep. Have you then lost the rest of the money?


Mr. Kep. Yes* every farthing, I never had such ill luck.


Mrs. Kep. Chance governs the game. It was to be expected. I am not
disappointed in the least.


Mr. Kep. I am utterly undone.


Mrs. Kep. No my dear, utterly undone, no; my affection to you is the same as
ever.


Mr. Kep. That is no comfort to me so long as I have made you wretched.


Mrs. Kep. Made me wretched! I value not the loss of our money. It was no great
sum. You may raise twice as much on the mortgage of the house, and regain what
you have lost.


Mr. Kep. The house, my dear friend, is already mortgaged and lost.


Mrs. Kep. There is the shop, my dear, and all the goods in it.


Mr. Kep. They are mortgaged also and all the money raised on them is lost.


Mrs. Kep. The movables, the furniture of the house -- you might raise
something on them.


Mr. Kep. I may as well let you know the worst as not. I have mortgaged all my
household furniture, carriages, horses, etc. indeed every thing; and the money
raised on them is lost.


Mrs. Kep. Well, and what of that? I can work for my living. I care not for it.
But you must be miserable. What, cannot I think of some way? are you sure it
was only ill luck.


Mr. Kep. We may resign ourselves to our fate and die. But I know I can play a
game well.


Mrs. Kep. Then see, I have a little box of jewels given me by my Aunt Van
Rissell; it is worth a large sum -- This you could not mortgage, for it was not
your property.


Mr. Kep. But I shall not touch that. It is enough that I am a fool. I will not
also be a villain, and spend the last part of my wife's property.


Mrs. Kep. But you need have no scruple when I give it to you. ( She goes out
to bring the box.)


[Enter Miss Leerkins] SCENE II. -- Miss LEERKINS and Mr. KEPPEL.
Miss Leer. IT is no matter of my particular concern but I cannot bear your
conduct to my sister


Mr. Kep. If she be contented what is it to you?


Miss. Leer. You treat my sister ill beyond all sufferance. You leave her alone
these long winter evenings, that you may spend your time in taverns, and gaming
houses. The whole care of the family rests on my sister; and you are even a
stranger in your own house.


Mr. Kep. If my wife be satisfied, what business of yours is it; that you
should lecture me on the occasion?


Miss Leer. My sister is indeed a fool. She has not the spirit of a woman of
sense in her, or she would manage otherwise than she does.


Mr. Kep. What would you do were you in her case.?


Miss Leer. Instead of cooking you (...) with all manner of good things, when
you come home from your midnight cabals -- I would lay your whole conduct
before you. I would sing you such a song of your crimes; that you should go to
sleep, if you slept at all, with a sting in your heart.


Mr. Kep. I advise you if you ever do marry to marry some person who never
wishes to sleep, for I am persuaded your tongue must be a mortal enemy to
repose.


Miss Leer. I would not bear with you, as my sister does -- I would not
discover the least degree of good nature toward you -- And I would let you
know that I never would, till such time as you would reform.


Mr. Kep. Supposing you wanted customers in your shop, would you set a dog on
the first person who entered the shop door?


Miss Leer. No, for that would drive them all away.


Mr. Kep You would gain as little by scolding at a husband for staying our late.


Miss Leer. Then you might go and shift for yourself if you pleased. I would
not concern myself for you in the least, and account myself happy that I was
rid of you.


Mr. Kep. If you were fond of me you could not do that.


Miss Leer. Do you think that I should care for such a wretch as you -- why
could I not do that?


Mr. Kep. It would make your heart ache, my dear, and you would not bear it.


Miss Leer. Make my heart ache, a fiddlestick. My heart would never ache for
such a wretch as you -- I almost wish you were my husband that you might see
how I would manage you.


Mr. Kep. I have no thought of wishing you to be my wife at any rate -- And
mind this, that single women always know how to rule their husbands well -- but
they fail a little in two points; either they never get husbands or los^ the
faculty of ruling them the moment they are married.


[Mrs. Keppel enters with the box.] SCENE III. -- Mrs. KEPPEL and Mr. KEPPEL.
Mrs. Kep. HERE my dear take these, and may you be more fortunate than before.


Mr. Kep. No my dear wife -- no, it is yours, do not let me ruin you -- no.


Mrs. Kep. I value it not, take it, and do your best -- I give it you, it is now
yours.


Mr. Kep. The kindest creature that ever lives I believe.


(Goes out with the box.) SCENE IV. -- Miss LEERKINS and Mrs. KEPPEL.
Miss Leer. SISTER I am ashamed of you. You behave out of all sense and reason.


Mrs. Kep. Why so?


Miss Leer. You know that your husband has spent all his own estate and yours,
and he treats you with the most shameful neglect. And yet you place confidence
in him, and have given him the last remains of your fortune. Are you not very
foolish?


Mrs. Kep. Perhaps not, but if I be; how can I help it?


Miss Leer. How can you help it. You are a disgrace to your sex -- There is no
spirit in you; and let him treat you as he will, you are all patience, and dare
not resent it. I Would give him a good lecture upon the subject, such as he never
would wish to hear again.


Mrs. Kep. Then you would never see him again.


Miss Leer. What then, I should esteem it a happy riddance. So much the better.
I would have the whole house to myself and do what I pleased in it -- That
would not fright me at all.


Mrs. Kep. You know nothing about it.


Miss Leer. I know nothing about it -- I know that a bad husband is worse than
none. I will have a good one or none -- What makes you think that I know
nothing about it?


Mrs. Kep. I will not tell you.


Miss Leer. What? that is kind to be sure -- Not tell your sister. But you
shall tell me what is the reason I don't know.


Mrs. Kep. Positively I will not tell you; wait till you have a husband of whom
you are fond -- who yet has some vices, as I suppose they all have, and then
you will know.


Miss Leer. You treat me so ill -- I will not talk with you. (Exit Miss
Leerkins, Mrs. Keppel soon follows her.)


ACT III.
Mr. KEPPEL and Mrs. KEPPEL. (Keppel enters first, walks about disturbed -- she
enters soon after.) Mr. Kep. O My stars -- what a wretch, -- I am -- ruined, --
there is no help for me.


Mrs. Kep. My friend, what is the matter.


(Keppel interrupts her angrily.) Mr. Kep. Let me alone -- I Am ruined.


(Mrs. Keppel looks grieved and speaks tenderly.) Mrs. Kep. Not unless you are
unkind to your wife


(Keppel looks hard at her, is silent, then speaks.) Mr. Kep. O my dear, my
wife -- I will not be unkind; but I am distracted; I am certainly undone, I
have lost all the money I had raised from your box of jewels -- O that I could
die with innocence; then I should be glad to die.


Mrs. Kep. What, die, because you have lost your money: fie my husband, fie
upon it.


Mr. Kep. I have now lost every thing, and have completely ruined you, as well
as myself; we are as poor as the poorest beggars -- My dear, were it not that I
would live as a mere servant to you, I could wish to die.


Mrs. Kep. Do you not recollect that when my mother opposed our marriage you
told me, in one of your ardent raptures, nay you solemnly declared, that you
could be happy even in the meanest cottage, and to live by the hardest labor,
if you could only live with me -- I laid that up in my heart.


Mr. Kep. That was not the effect of rapture. It was my serious sentiment, and
I think so now.


Mrs. Kep. Then we have lost nothing; only leave gaming, and we shall be happy.


Mr. Kep. Leave gaming, I detest it. I perfectly abhor it -- I will bind myself
by the most solemn engagement never to touch a card again.


Mrs. Kep. Can you keep your resolution?


Mr. Kep. I am sure that I can.


Mrs. Kep. Then only quit bad houses and live reputably with me -- I will
maintain you and myself -- I understand many little handy matters -- If my work
sells cheap I will work the more, and I am sure I can maintain us both.


Mr. Kep. Excellent woman -- Your excellence exceeds all the power of language
to express it; I am confounded -- But the idea of your virtues gives me the
keenest pain, while I think I have made you wretched.


( Mr. Leerkins enters with a box, to him Mrs. Keppel speaks.) Mrs. Kep.
Brother, you promised me for the forty pounds I lent you yesterday to let me
have all your winnings at cards for three days. This sir ( introducing her
brother to Mr. Keppel) is my brother, yesterday from the East Indies.


(Mr. Leerkins giving her the box.) Mr. Leer. Here madam is what I have won
this day, and I find I won it of your husband -- But it is now yours. I scorn
to violate my promise -- Here is the whole in mortgages and bank notes. Take
it. (She takes it.)


Mrs. Kep Mr. Keppel this is now mine.


Mr. Kep. Certainly.


Mrs. Kep. Accept the whole then as a present from me, I will not be denied.


Mr. Kep. I am so surprised I can scarcely breathe -- O my excellent wife! --
Have I then escaped the gulf of ruin. I do solemnly protest I will never touch
a card again. For I do verily believe that gaming, drunkeness, and bad company,
have destroyed more men, than the sword, pestilence, and famine. (He takes the
box and they all withdraw.)


The Triumph of Temper. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
KEEP YOUR TEMPER, AND KEEP YOUR HOUSE.
Which ought have the supremacy of a house within doors -- might be a delicate
question to decide between a man, and his wife; but a certain matter of fact
helps us out. Whichsoever of the parties has the best command of temper and
acts most rationally, will, other matters being equal, have the greatest
influence in the affairs of the family.

PERSONS.
MEN.
D^. BIRCH -- a schoolmaster. JOHN SLY -- a peddling bookseller. friends on
equal condition, all new married men.
HORATIO, BERNARDO, MARCELLO,
ROUGHGRAIN -- father of Ketura. ROBERT -- servant of Horatio. WILLIAM --
servant of Bernardo. DUNCAN -- servant of Marcello. HOTGOOSE -- a Tailor.
WOMEN.
KETURA -- wife of Horatio. PORTIA -- wife of Bernardo. JULIA -- wife of
Marcello.
THE TRIUMPH OF TEMPER.
ACT I.
SCENE by way of prologue -- JOHN SLY and Dr. BIRCH.
Sly. SUR your servants -- what, don't you know old John Sly?


Birch. I have not the least acquaintance with you, Sir.


Sly. Why that is dismal strange now -- that folks don't know their old friends
after they have been to college -- did not you kn^w Tom Sly the chimney sweeper
-- Will Sly the Tinker, and Thoph Sly the Scowerer -- up in the other end --
there was a whole lane full of Slys.


Birch. It was of as much consequence to me as if it were full of crows --


Sly. Well sir you know that I pad up and down to sell little books and
pamphlets -- I lost one that I liked grandly -- it used to make me laff. I
think -- I think, sir, 'twas called Turning the Screw, or some such name


Birch. You mean Taming the Shrew -- we have found such a one -- we have
altered its name, we call it the Triumph of Temper -- my scholars have learned
it, and they are to act it this day.


Sly. Will you pay me for it?


Birch. I have (feeling his pockets) had lately right school masters luck not a
penny in my purse; but a scholar when his purse fails must draw upon his genius
-- here Mr. Sly, did you ever see a play acted?


Sly. Never, please your honor.


Birch. How should you like to see one.


Sly. Grandly -- sir I should like it grandly.


Birch. The house is rather full but here set your box down and see how they go
on with it.


Sly. Thank you master, a thousand times -- the gentlefolks there -- will not take
it ^^l --


Birch. No sir, keep your station, and you will not offend any body.


ACT I.
SCENE I. -- HORATIO and BERNARDO.
Ber. WELCOME my friend Horatio -- what are you alive?


Hor. Alive? why not?


Ber. I heard that you had been married.


Hor. What then? Does that kill folks? so have you been married too --


Ber. But I mean on account of the woman you married.


Hor. I think I married a very agreeable one.


Ber. I heard you married Ketura Roughgrain, daughter of old Robert Roughgrain
the Peltmonger.


Hor. True, I married her -- 'twas my choice.


Ber. Did you not know what a perfect tygress she was -- when at school?


Hor. I do not recollect every particular.


Ber. Many a time she has boxed my ears till they were nearly blistered -- at
other times she has attempted to claw my eyes out.


Hor. And served you right too -- however I shall let your own conscience
answer for that.


Ber. Seriously I wonder you had the courage to marry her; for, to speak my
real sentiments, she was a perfect fury.


Hor. You do not act right, my friend Bernardo -- you see I am married -- If
your sentiments made any impression it could only make me discontented with my
wife. But I think she is a fine woman.


Ber. You may think as well of her as you please -- the happier you, the more
you esteem her.


Hor. Will you, with Marcello, and your wives, sup with me this evening -- you
shall see that we are on happy terms with each other. Come early in the
afternoon.


SCENE II. -- HORATIO and KETURA.
[She enters with a riding dress and a whip in her hand -- Horatio looks
surprised.] Hor. What my dear, are you going out?


Ket. Yes, I am. (In a cross accent)


Hor. I had rather you would not go out, we are to receive company this evening.


Ket. I know it, you mean to invite what company you please -- and I must wait
on them even to sink with faintness and fatigue; you will have it so.


Hor. We must receive company sometimes if we mean to keep a house.


Ket. Yes, I know what a scrape I have bro't myself into by being married; to
keep a house, wait upon company and fatigue myself to death and get no thanks
for it -- I have tried it long enough, and I mean to get away.


Her. Stay my dear, we shall be happy.


Ket. So you told me before I was married, and you deserve to be punished for
telling me such lies -- But that is the way of the men.


Hor. We have not been married long enough yet, to form a judgment of it -- We
have been married ( Looking at his watch) only five days, fifteen hours,
fourteen minutes, and five seconds.


Ket. You mean to turn it all into mirth; but you will find it a serious
matter, I assure you.


Hor. Let it be a serious matter then. We have been married five days, fifteen
hours, fourteen minutes, and five seconds -- and till these last seven minutes,
we have been happy. It is about a thousandth part of the time, that we have
been on ill terms -- Never mind it, my dear -- We shall do very well.


Ket. I have tried it long enough.


Hor. No we can have no idea of the marriage state yet -- Had we lived sixty
years together, acquired and expended a large estate, brought up and settled in
li^e, about a dozen children, then we might be said to know something about it.


Ket. If that is all to be done I will hear no more of it -- I Will get away as
fast as I can -- (She appears to be going* he catches her by the arm, saying)
Stay my dear one moment. (She strikes him on the fingers)


Hor. O you jade! my sweet bride I mean -- You Will come back again in the
evening.


Ket. No I shall never darken these doors again -- I am going to my father's
house; from whence I came, and from whence I ought not to have come.


Hor. You will let me come in the evening and wait on you home.


Ket. No I forbid your ever coming after me again.


Hor. Then if you will not live with me I wish you may be happy without me.


Ket. I shall never be happy if you can prevent it.


[Exit Ketura.] Sly. Keen sponk! I vags for that.

HORATIO alone. She is gone, but I shall manage her well enough yet -- It was
happy for me that I was able to keep my temper -- Had I lost the command of
myself I might have ruined all my plan -- But I shall have a good wife of her
yet.


SCENE III. -- ROUGHGRAIN and HORATIO.
Rough. This has been no bad day's work (Casting figures on his hat.) -- 1600
with. of skins at an advance of 2 pence on the pound, is thirteen pounds six
shillings and eight pence -- Not a bad day's work -- How do ye do my son?
(Looks about him) Where is Ketura?


Hor. I thank you sir, we are all well except my wife, who is gone to your
house.


Rough. I though it you were to have company to day.


Hor. Yes. but she is gone home.


Rough. Has she any of her old tricks.


Hor. Old or new ones, they are such as you see. When she is to receive company
she runs home.


Rough She means to come back again soon.


Hor. She says she never will.


Rough Never will. I Will see to that -- You Have bought a wild rabbit and you
shall keep her -- She shall not come home to make such a carnal noise and racket
as she used to do at our house.


Hor. Whatever you do, treat her kindly for my sake -- I will go to your house
in the evening and see if she will not come home.


Sly. I Would see her burnt first.


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- HORATIO, BERNARDO, MARCELLO, PORTIA, JULIA, all enter in
succession.
Hor. YOU are welcome my friends you are heartily welcome -- my wife is gone
out -- But such attendance as we can make with our servants we shall give you
with pleasure.


Ber. We heard sir, on our way, of the elopement of your wife, we began to
congratulate you upon it.


Por. What, are they at separate maintenance already. They ought, in decency,
to have waited till the honey moon was over.


Mar. Our friend Horatio invited us here, I believe, to see a curiosity -- and
his wife, I am confident is the greatest in America, of the kind -- but we are
likely to be deprived of the pleasure of seeing her.


Jul. Well, he was not ignorant of what he had when he took her.


Hor. I shall have a fine wife of her yet.


Jul. Then you will mould dry sand into pie crust, for I should think the order
of nature must be changed before you will see a good wife of her.


Hor. You are extremely severe on my wife -- but she is a woman of excellent
qualities -- and I will have a tender, kind, loving wife of her yet -- I Am a
connoisseur in women.


Por. You have shown it by your choice, as all the world knows.


SCENE II. -- ROBERT, HORATIO, BERNARDO -- the rest standing silent, Robert
comes in all out of breath.
Rob. WELL sir your wife is coming home again.


Hor. I expected it: but how do you know it is true.?


Rob. I followed your directions and stayed about the house to watch her
motions; but kept out of her sight, at last the old gentleman came home.


Hor. What said he to her?


Rob. He was in a perfect rage, when he found she talked of staying, he swore
she should return that minute -- he took your horse with your wife's new
hunting saddle, put them into the stable, and locked them up.


Hor. How could she come home then?


Rob. He took an old horse out of the plough, whose back was sharp as a pike;
and you might have counted his ribs at twenty rods distance -- then mounted
your wife on an old panel that shed feathers -- with a girt of red tape and
the bridle of twenty pieces of sheep's leather -- the crupper, of the straps of
an old knapsack thus he set her out on her journey. And the old horse could not
be got out of a step all the way.


Hor. How did she proceed?


Rob. The dogs barked, the boys halloed, and the feathers flew all the way, and
when the old horse got against the great tavern in the middle of the village,
the horse stopped, and the mob gathered round, and huzza'd, and it was sometime
before we got him started again.


Hor. What became of her after that.


Rob. When we came down the hill by the brook, the old brute stumbled, and
threw your wife off -- and it was a long time before we could pick her up, and
tie up her strings again.


Hor. What became of her then?


Rob. She burst into tears, for every thing plagued her heart out -- and
desired me to go forward and ask you to come, and bring her home.


Hor. Bernardo, your chaise is ready, let me take it, and wait on her
immediately.


Ber. You may take my chaise, but she should di^ in the street before I would
go after her.


Hor. I am not of your mind, I shall bring her home, in the gentlest manner
possible.


Sly. That looks darn'd foolish; but he knows a sheep's-head from a carrot,
I Will lay a mug on it.


SCENE III. -- PORTIA, JULIA, and MARCELLO.
Por. SO he is gone after her; I Am vexed with him that he humors her so.


Jul. She deserves to lie in the street all night -- To abuse so good a husband!


Mar. He may know how to manage her. He had about 150 quarrels with her before
she consented to be married. But he made her consent.


Por. We will withdraw into the opposite room, for if he fondles and caresses
her, when she comes in, I shall lose all patience.


Mar. Best withdraw, and leave them to themselves a little, when they first
come in.


SCENE IV. -- HORATIO and KETURA,
Hor. SEAT yourself, my dearest friend, you must be extremely fatigued.


Ket. Oh! I am just ready to faint.


Hor. Shall I bring you a glass of wine. This is soft, and pleasant, a little
of it will revive you. -- ( Gives her a glass.)


Ket. You are exceeding good to wait on me home, and treat me so kindly.


Hor. I am extremely rejoiced to see you come home again.


Ket. O what a rash girl I was to leave you in so much ill humor!


Hor. Never think of it a moment. If you are come to live with me again, all is
as it should be.


Ket. O sir, you are generous beyond all bounds.


Hor. Very generous to be sure to gain the heart of so fine a woman -- But go
my dear and wait on the company.


Sly. That Is right -- flatter her up -- It works like wool -- She Will melt like
wax by and by.


SCENE V. -- BERNARDO, HORATIO, WILLIAM and KETURA.
Ber. WELL you have brought her home then?


Hor. Yes I knew I had as good a wife as any of you.


[William enters.] Ber. So you have broke my chaise you villain.


Will. Only I was going to the ale house sir.


[Ketura enters.] Ber. And got drunk before you went, and drove my chaise into
a ditch, and broke it.


Ket. Bernardo, there must be no noisy passions in my house. Chide your servant
else where. This house is sacred to peace.


Ber. If one were to see you in this trim only, he would think you were an
angel.


SCENE VI. -- HORATIO and ROBERT.
Hor. ROBERT I understand you have been speaking disrespectful^y (...) my wi^e
-- Tell me your wages, let me pay you, and (...).


Rob. So I beg you would not send me away, to a distance from my wife a^^
children.


Hor. No man shall live with me who abuses my wife -- You have sinned bey^nd
pardon so you must go.


Ket. Spare him for my sake -- He is a good man, do not send him away from his
wife, and children.


Hor. See what a good waman you have offended.


Rob. I ask a thousand pardons, and will serve you to the last moment of my
life.


Hor. Go then to your work, and know that he who insults my wife, more than
insults me.


SCENE VII. -- HORATIO and HOTCOOS^.
Hot. I HAVE bro't the riding coat I was making for your wife.


Hor. (Taking up the coat and looking at it.) It is too broad acros the
shoulders. It is big enough for a Porter.


Hot A woman should have broad shoulders who supers^des her husband. Pardon a
joke sir.


Hor. What pardon a joke, I Will break your back Do you mean to insult my wife.
If I hear such a thing from you again, I Will be measure your back, you cabbage
eater, till you never shall think of joking again while you live. ( Catches his
yard stick from him.)


Ket. ( Interposing) Spare, sir, the good man for my sake. ( She then takes up
the coat and gives direction for altering it.) Here take it in about so much,
and it will do very well.


SCENE VIII. -- KETURA and HORATIO.
Ket. SIT still my dear. I wish to talk with you, we must find some way to
restrain these angry passions.


Hor. He insulted you, had he insulted me, it would not have moved me in the
least.


Ket. But I wish we might agree and make is a habit to live in perfect amity
with each other.


Hor. There is nothing I more ardently desire.


Ket. I wish for it more as I have been erroneous: I need you for my example
and guide.


Hor. You can guide yourself -- I am not afraid to trust your own discretion
for fifty years to come. Do just as you please in every respect.


Ket. I do not choose it. You shall be my friend, protector and guide -- how
happy your goodness makes me.


Hor. What think you now, my bride, cannot persons be happy in the marriage
state?


Ket. O yes, indeed I have enjoyed more happiness, more heartfelt felicity in
one half hour, since I returned to you, than in all the rest of my life, you
shall this moment accept me as a pupil, and teach me how to live.


Hor. I will be your friend unchangeably. But we must see our company.


Sly. Now madam your'e gone for it, after this you may set up your Ebenezer if
you can.


ACT III.
SCENE I. -- MARCELLO, BERNARDO and HORATIO.
Mar. THE ladies wish to be by themselves, what say you my friend to taking a
hand of cards.


Ber. Horatio will not play, his wife will come and whip him if he does,


Hor. Yes, I will -- but a different game from any you imagine. I will bet --
tho I Am an enemy in principle to games of hazard. I will -- bet -- twelve dozen
bottles of the best Madeira wine that upon any trial you please, my wife will
be more obedient to me than either of yours to you.


Mar. I Will stand with twenty four dozen against twelve.


Ber. So will I, for my sweet girl, and you are taken in, old gentleman, you
may depend on it.


Hor. What shall be the proof?


Mar. The ladies are very busy by themselves, and will be loath to come away --
let each send for his wife to come to him immediately.


All. That Is a good proof -- yes -- yes --


Mar. ( To his servant) Duncan, go and tell my wife to come to me immediately.


Ber. ( To his servant) William, tell my wife to come to me immediately.


Hor. ( To his servant) Robert, tell my wife to come to me immediately.


Mar. What says my wife?


Dun. She says she will come presently, as soon as she has played out her hand of
cards.


Ber. And what does my wife say?


Will. She says she is very busy, and she wonders why you cannot have the
complaisance to come to her. [While this is doing Ketura comes behind her
husband, unseen.]


Ket. What would you have of me?


Hor. ( Springing up) My dear, you are indeed come yourself. Sit, my sweet
girl. Well, what do you say now, gentlemen?


Both. You Have won, you have won.


Mar. I wonder my wife would serve me so?


Ber. I Will know the reason, why my wife did not come.


(Rises in a pet.) Hor. Patience gentleman -- No man shall say any ill-natured
thing to a wife in my house -- I should deem it a profanation -- The great
secret of managing a wife is always to treat her kindly; and keep your temper;
then if she be not a perfect fury she will do very much as you please to have
her -- But a man of harsh temper may kill a woman, but he cannot govern her --
You might as well set a blacksmith to making watches.


Ber. Well ladies! Ketura has won the prize on the trial of kindness to her
husband. She came first of the three -- we have lost only twenty four dozen of
Mad^ria each. (The ladies look mortified.)


Hor. Never mind the wine. I Will give twenty four dozen, and we will form
ourselves into a society for promoting matrimonial happiness -- the wine shall
serve us when we meet.


Ber. We all say amen to that. (They assent.)


Hor. Well then, our supper is ready, we will pass the evening in the true
style of festivity and joy.


[Actors go off -- each gentleman leading out his wife.] SCENE by way of
Epilogue.
Birch. A PERSON has put a shilling or two into my hands, I will pay you now
for your pamphlet.


Sly. No matter no, your play has put me into pure good humor -- Nothing at all
master.


Birch. Yes take it, and this too. There Is your pay. (Gives him one piece)
There Is interest for the delay of your money. (Gives him another.)


Sly. Thank you sir a thousand times -- But master, your play makes me think --
master it makes me think. --


Birch. Think of what Mr. Sly?


Sly. My Jane and I had a snapshort this morning and we have not said a good
natured thing to each other all day long -- But I have a great mind, not to go
to a tavern, and swill away alone like a beast -- but to buy something good to
eat with this, (Shows one piece of money) and something good to drink with
this, (Shows the other piece) and go home, and take a sweet little supper with
Jane, and set every thing to rights before we sleep a wink. ( Slings his box
and goes off singing.)

MY Jenny was a pretty maid;
And we did love when we were young --
We wished to wed; the Parson said
The word, and tied us firm and strong.
My Jenny proved a charming wise;
And still is sweet at fifty-five --
She loves me still, which makes me feel
As glad as any man alive.
For love is just like bottled beer,
It Is pleasanter for being old --
And it is like a buttered toast;
It Is much the worse for being cold.
The more we love the more we may,
As turns the wheel of life about; --
This spark of fire, in our cold clay,
Is the last spark that ever goes out.

[Exit Sly and Birch] The Mother of a Family. A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
PATIENCE.
One of the most useful of human virtues is patience. To bear afflictions and
every event which tends to disturb the mind, with calmness, denotes a highly
improved understanding. There is no condition of human life which cherishes
this virtue so much as marriage. It is easy, and promotes the highest degree of
self approbation, to bear distress for the sake of those whom we love.

PERSONS.
MEN.
COL. RIVERS -- suitor to Miss Keensight. GEORGE -- son of Mrs. Goodheart.
PLAINFIELD -- one of Mrs Goodheart's neighbors.
WOMEN.
MRS. GOODHEART -- a farmer's wife with a large family. MISS KEENSIGHT -- her
younger sister, a manhater. LETITIA -- a brother's daughter. LAURA -- Mrs.
Goodhearts eldest daughter, aged 18. SOPHIA -- second daughter, aged 16. NELLY
-- a romp, the third daughter, aged 14. SALLY -- fourth daughter, aged 8.
SOFTLY -- woman assistant to Mrs. Goodheart, in the care of the family.
THE MOTHER OF A FAMILY.
ACT I.
SCENE I -- Col. RIVERS and Miss KEENSIGHT.
Col. Riv. YOU must know, Miss Keensight, that I have long paid my diligent
respects to you.


Keen. If you have been agreeably employed they may still continue.


C. Riv. But I am tired of uncertainties, I wish we could understand one
another.


Keen. Well sir what would you please to have?


C. Riv. Sometime within the limits of duration, I hope you will be mine.


Keen. How yours?


C. Riv. I mean by marriage, I wish not for equivocation.


Keen. We may wait a little longer.


C. Riv. I am tired of waiting and wish to have my fate decided.


Keen. There is no need of that.


C. Riv. I think there is, I will be resolved, and not pay my respects in vain.


Keen. Then withdraw them, if you please.


C. Riv. Why then have you detained me so long?


Keen. It is well enough to have a gentleman to conduct one to balls,
assemblies etc. But as for marriage, I detest it -- It is of all things the
most odious to me.


C. Riv. This is the most generous speech you ever made to me. Now I know what
to depend on. I thank you most heartily and wish you a good evening.


(Exit Col. Rivers.) SCENE II. -- GOODHEARY and KEENSIGHT.
Good. Where is Col. Rivers, does he not stay to tea?


Keen. No, and I hope he never will pass much of his time in this house.


Good And have you taken offense all at once?


Keen. No, I never felt myse^f interested enough, with respect to him, to do
that.


Good. Have you taken a sudden dislike?


Keen. No, for I never liked him or any other man.


Good. But tell me plainly why does he not stay to tea? I hoped for the
pleasure of his company.


Keen. The plain truth must be known, I have given him his final dismission.


Good. You astonish me. What reason had you to discard him? Is he not an
accomplished gentleman? Has he not an excellent moral character? Does be not
make offers of fortune far beyond any just claim of yours?


Keen. More than that, I own that be is one of the most agreeable of men; which
you may think a simple confession.


Good. I should not think that a good reason for dismissing him.


Keen. That was my reason, I found that if I did not dismiss him soon, I never
should.


Good. You are too prudent; and may hereafter repent your discretion.


Keen. My name is Keensight you know.


Good. So was mine once but I changed it for Goodheart; and have ever since
been glad of the exchange -- I found that was the way to be happy.


Keen. You happy! Bless my stars* you happy! I would not live the life you do
for the wealth of the United States, and that is the reason why I will not
marry. I would not marry the finest gentleman who treads this earth.


Good. So you say now, when you may marry if you please; when you cannot marry
you will think otherwise. I have seen maidens of fif^y setting their caps at
young gentlemen of twenty five and rendering themselves perfectly ridiculous.


Keen. That you will never see in me, so you may set your heart at rest.


Good. Why not in you as well as in others, and why should my situation afright
you -- Why do I not appear to be happy?


Keen. Why should I not think you happy? I wonder you do not die outright with
vexation -- You work extremely hard, and have to pay the severest attention
from night to day, and from day to night -- Your children are the most
disorderly crew that ever were hatched, when they are out of humor they are
always a bawling -- There will be half a dozen of them tuning up at once --
They are ever fighting and clawing one another -- When they are in good humor
they play with execessive noise and violence as if the house were going out at
the windows -- Then they are upsetting every thing through the whole house -- They
are ever breaking their own shins or one another noses -- They are ever losing
their hats and their shoes -- One falls down stairs and is taken up half dead
-- One is burnt and another is scalded -- Another cuts his leg, or his hand,
and is bleeding to death. Then you are all in tears -- and --


Good. And can you think of nothing farther? You have not told me half of the
truth yet. I have seen and suffered ten times as much as you have any idea of;
and yet I am not unhappy -- I have a very kind husband.


Keen. O, yes, I suppose that kind husband makes up for all -- He pretends to
be fond of you, and flatters you -- He is cunning enough for himself. You place
entire confidence in him. Were he to tell you that a bedlam was a palace, you
would believe him. After your children had worried you all day, on seeing your
husband come home at night I have seen you shed tears of joy -- and you had to
wait on him two hours. I really felt ashamed for you.


Good. What a simplicity you are sister, with all your boasted sense.


Keen Simplicity I will be then -- your husband by being so obstinate has
brought a lawsuit upon himself, which many people say will ruin him. I expect
in a few days to see you turned out of house and home. I see plainly that all
this is in consequence of your marriage, and if any man ever sees me catched in
that trap he shall bless his eyes for the sight. ( Exit Keensight.)


SCENE III. -- GOODHEART and SOFTLY.
Goodheart alone. O DEAR, I am extremely fatigued But I must attend to the
business of the family. I should like to take some rest for a few moments, but
my children, poor little rog^es, they must be taken care of.


[Enters Miss Softly.] Soft. I am glad to find you at home, Mrs. Goodheart, I
have a little (...) with you.


Good. And I am no less gla^ to see you. I had thought of sending for you.


Softly. I wished to know whether I could live with you -- you need some
person, you are so taken up with the children -- I will do the work of the
family; but I will be treated as a housekeeper, not as a maid.


Good. You shall be treated as a friend. I will give you more than maid's
wages, because being a relation. I hope you will be kind to the children.


Softly Then I will begin as soon as may be -- I am out of business, and am
perfectly tired of idleness.


Good. It is nearly time for tea; go and set the tea table, and get tea soon.


Softly. I will go then in a moment, for I am happy to have something to do
(Softly goes out)


Good. alone. I am glad of this girl's coming; she is good natured, and will
have patience with the children. Very few of the maids we hire have any
discretion to manage the little ones. [Letitia enters.]


SCENE IV. -- GOODHEART and LETITIA.
Good. LETITIA, I am happy to see you; take a seat, my dear.


Let. I have long wished for an opportunity to visit you, and am extremely
gratified that at last I have found one. Where Is Nelly?


Good. She is traipsing about some where. Poor girl -- I wish she had a little
more steadiness.


Let. Does she not go to school?


Good. She is utterly averse to it. She says that she is so big, and so
awkward, that she is ashamed to go.


Let. But it is a great pity; as she is naturally agreeable; her genius is
good, and her natural disposition excellent.


Good. Poor girl, she has no advantages. When she is at home she is always busy
in some family care; and there is always so much music at our house, that one
might as well study in a tavern. [Keensight enters]


Let. I doubt not that she might be persuaded to ^o to school, and were she
once placed there she would make good progress in her learning.


Good. I wish you would try, for she is so awkward now that I am quite ashamed
of her and she is ashamed of herself. Her manners are rough -- her words are
course and her knowledge of grammar is nothing -- her pronunciation is
extremely vulgar -- she writes very ill -- and as to arithmetic and music she
knows nothing of either.


Keen. You ought to say she is a monstrous romp and that she spends half her
time in company with Jack Lounger. She has no idea of a proper choice of
company.


Good. You need not make my girl worse than she is. She is bad enough in her
present state. But it is not so much her fault, as of her situation in life.


Keen O yes, she is a precious child to be sure, and one of the solid comforts
of matrimony, if it were only the mere possibility of having one such child it
would forever deter me from marriage. [Exit Keensight.]


[Laura and Sophia enter.] SCENE V. -- LAURA, SOPHIA, LETITIA and GOODHEART.
Laura. I DESIRE Ma'am that you would let me look of some of your work -- I
wish to imitate it.


Good. I have none here my child -- I will go out and look for some -- But if I
do not find any, Letitia will furnish you.


[Goes out.] Laura. I wish you would let me see yours, I have a great desire to
go to your house, on purpose to see how you work.


Let. I can show you here. (Shows her work.)


Soph. O how beautiful this is. It is elegant. I never saw any thing of the
sort so pretty. I will try to do something like it. We seldom have opportunity
to do any thing elegant -- We have to tend the dairy and make coarse clothes
for the younger children.


Laura. And I will see what I can do.


[Laura goes out suddenly.] SCENE VI. -- SOPHIA, LETITIA and GOODHEART.
Soph. DON'T say any thing to my aunt Keensight about the young gentlemen's
coming here this evening.


Let. Why not to her?


Soph. She says she will drive away the whole tribe of fops from the house
while she stays. She will not have her nieces turn fools, and be married as their
mother was.


Let. Now which had you rather be, such a woman as your mother; or your aunt
Keensight?


Soph. That is easily an^wered -- I know my mother suffers extreme fatigue and
^a^* Yet she is forever pleasant, and good humored My aunt does very little,
but consult her own ease. Yet she f^ets a hundred times to where my ma'am does
on (...). They are sisters.


Let. What can make the difference?


Soph. When ma'am means to divert us, she says it is being married that makes
the difference, and advises us all to be married, that we may be kept in good
humor.


Let. It is likely enough to be a serious truth. People who love only
themselves will always be fretful; but they who feel kind to other persons will
certainly be otherwise.


[Goodheart returns.] Good. I cannot find any work of mine; but Letitia can
answer all your demands. Where is Laura?


Let. She went out sometime ago, and is not returned.


Good. I wonder what makes her stay.


Let. We will go out and see. [All withdraw.]


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- PLAINFIELD and GOODHEART.
Plain. IS not Mr. Goodheart returned?


Good. He has not certainly.


Plain. I hoped to have seen him before his suit should be determined.


Good. Why before that time?


Plain. Because he stands indebted to me for a small sum, and I wish for good
security.


Good. Why for security now, when I have often heard you say his word was
sufficient?


Plain. He will do as well as he can, but he may not be very able when he has
done with his suit.


Good. Why, do you think he will lose?


Plain. I am really afraid he will, I advised him not to go on with it -- but
he never would hear to me -- Let me know when he comes home.


Good. I will.


Plain. Be sure you do it. What a pity it was he did not hear to me. [Exit
Plainfield.]


Good. I am sure I did not desire it, unless you had more sense. [George
enters.]


SCENE II. -- GOODHEART and GEORGE.
Good. WHAT my son have you come home to tarry. Is it vacation?


George. No -- but I am like to get into a b^d scrape at College -- I was in
company with a set of fellows, who did mischief in the night -- and am called
to account.


Good. I am afraid that your father and I are never to have any comfort of you
George -- you are so irregular -- and --


George. Why Ma'am tho I was in their company, when I saw them about to do
mischief, I was gone so quick that I could now bring a man to swear I was in
another place; and I want to know your advice whether I shall bring the man to
swear or not.


Good. Not certainly, unless to swear to the truth. Tho I cannot wish you to be
punished -- Yet I do not wish you to escape by any thing which has even the
appearance of falsehood.


George. But I am certainly innocent.


Good. Let truth have its course then and it will appear -- and you may yet be
a comfort to your mother -- Go and stand trial and tell no lies. (Exit George.)


(Softly enters.) SCENE III. -- SOFTLY, GOODHEART and SALLY.
Softly. Madam, I am very much concerned for Laura -- She has a pain under her
left arm near her heart, very sharp and severe.


Good. And does that alarm you?


(Enter Letitia and Sophia.) Softly. Mr. Woodru^^ had just such a pain about
three hours defore he died of the appolexy. (She rises to go out* and is met by
Sally in haste)


Sally. O dear ma'am, I Am af^aid Billy has broke his arm. He has fallen down
stairs -- and hurt him dreadfully -- He can scarcely move his arm one inch. (
Goodheart goes out and Softly follows her.)


(Keensight returns.) SCENE IV. -- KEENSIGHT, LETITIA and SOPHIA.
Keen. (To Letitia and Sophia) Now girls let me give you one piece of advice.
Above all do you avoid being married. It is the worst of all evils. You see
what a deplorable situation your mother is in. Her eldest son is going to be
expelled from the college -- There is one child dying of the apoplexy. Another
has broke his arm, one girl so awkward and so vicious that she plagues her
heart out. Her husband absent, and must lose his estate before he comes back.
Now young ladies fix the matter in your own minds that you never will be
married. Then let the men coax and teaze, and plead, and flatter, and caress
you ever so much, be steady, let them know you will not, and that is enough.


Let. I am rather too old for counsel. I have made up my mind upon that matter
sometime ago.


Keen. And what do you say Sophia?


Soph. I am fully determined what to do if I have the opportunity of choice.


Keen. And which way are you determined ladies?


Soph. That must remain a secret. If I say I will refuse, that will offend my
mother. If I say I will accept, that will offend you. If I say I will -- not*
at any event, that is insulting the young gentlemen -- (...) I say I will, it
is like setting up myself for sale like a cheap ^r^ic^^ in the market. So I
believe madam it is best for young ladies never to answer that question till it
be suitably proposed.


Keen You are very prudent young ladies, but I understand the matter. It is all
done to vex me, done on purpose I know. [Goodheart returns and seats herself
with a number of papers in her lap.]


SCENE V. -- GOODHEART, SOFTLY, SOPHIA* LETITIA, and KEENSIGHT.
Good. [giving Softly a paper] Here Miss Softly take this and bruise it very
fine -- moisten it with spirits and warm it over the fire, and lay it on a soft
bandage, to put on Billy's arm.


Soft. I will do it immediately.


Good. Stay, take this and dissolve it in warm water -- then put to it half a
glass of wine, a tea spoonful of paregoric -- let it remain in a tea cup till I
come out.


Let. How does uncle Goodheart now? One of our neighbors writ home the other
day to his wife, that he was likely to lose his cause; and if he did it would
ruin him entirely.


Good. I hope not, I am sure: what will become of me and my poor children?


Soph. And did you know ma'am of brother George. It is said he has got into a
very bad scrape at college -- and is in great danger of public punishment.


Good. Oh dear! I though it I had trouble enough before.


[She rises to go out, a great noise is heard, and Softly rushes in.] Soft. Oh
ma'am, see, only see what a piece of work here is. The tea table is turned
over, and every thing is broken to pieces.


Good. There is half the ware we had in the house broken to pieces -- There Is
that beautiful china bowl, which we made punch in, the evening I was married --
and that curious mug, which we used to call the enchanted mug -- with all the
tea furniture. How came every thing on the tea-table?


Soft. I got some drink for Laura in the enchanted mug -- and was going to get
some in the china bowl for the ladies.


Good. How came the table overset?


Soft. The children were not to blame. Nabby climbed the back of a chair; and
was going to fall, Tommy flew to save her, touched the tea table, and overset
it. He is dreadful sorry ma'am.


Good. I could be sorry at another time, but I have so much greater troubles
now. -- Sister come and help me about the children; and Sophia -- you come -- I
will send Nelly to wait on Letitia.


Keen. Little mischievous brats, I am glad I have none of my own to wait on, I
know.


SCENE VI. -- LETITIA and NELLY.
Let. WHAT was the reason, Miss Nelly, that you did not go with us to school*


Nel. Really now what do you think of these times? Every body is going to
school, do you think they gets any good by it?


Let. Your every body is a small number -- There are but thirty persons in the
town, who have any education more than in the common schools, and there are a
thousand inhabitants -- Divide 1000 by 30 and it will give you the proportion.


Nel. I could not do that any more than I could fly.


Let. [Takes a state and makes figures.] See 1000 by 30 quotes 33 -- that is
even more than the number that pay any uncommon attention to learning.


Nel. Why the jingo! I though it it was more. I wondered what we should do for
girls to make butter -- Uncle Tristram says he hates to have girls go to
school, it makes them so darn'd uppish and so deuced proud that they will not work
-- Mawther want's I should go.


Let. I believe your mother is right and your uncle is wrong -- Good scholars
are no more idle at school, than at home.


Nel. But why do you need so much larning; you study religion, do you mean to
preach? No I see the trick, you mean to marry parsons, and make us poor farmers
girls call you madams.


Let. Would it grieve you to marry a person, whose principle, practice, and
profession, all lead him to treat you well.


Nel. No fags! that it woud'n't -- When I hear a clean looking young preacher
hold forth upon love -- I cannot help thinking that he would make a jim
husband. It is fired pretty to be talked to nicely -- But one should not think
so a sabbadays.


Let. You correct your improper thoughts I dare say -- But eloquence is very
pleasing.


Nel. And you study ratterick at school; the art of talking -- now to women it
seems to me quite natural -- You studies Phlosophy natural and mortal.


Let. You mean moral I suppose.


Nel. It it all one to me -- Brother George says Phlosophers used to wear long
beards -- He makes fun of you, and calls you the smooth chin'd Phlosophers.


Let. George shall treat one with more decency than he commonly does, or he
shall one day dread to hear the name of the smooth chin'd Philosophers.


Nel. Sometimes he is rather too jolly with the ladies -- Fawther says it is not
worth while to send him to college to larn mischief -- But don't you think there
are clever men at college?


Let. Yes, many of genuine learning, and refined merit, and some otherwise.


Nel. But there is one of your studies which I see no use for amongst plain
working folks -- must a farmer learn politeness to talk genteelly to his oxen?


Let. He must sometimes talk to his children, his friends, his wife. He says to
his oxen -- Haw and Jee -- and " twig up Whiteface." Would you have him say so
to you?


Nel. No -- I Would make him know with a vengeance that he should talk handsomer to
me.


Let. You would wish to have your husband, if he were a farmer, possess a
tolerable share of politeness -- do you not remember our going up into the
further part of the town -- called mud-puddle corner, to what they called a
frolic?


Nel. A frolic! 'Twas a right down jamm. The fellors were as drunk as
wheelbarrows. The girls were all dashed into nothing and were as dumb and
dismal as all nature. Had I known before how I should have felt I would not have
gone any more than I Would have flewed.


Let. And do you not remember our going to Fairside -- did you not like the
entertainment?


Nel. Yes that was nice at any thing. 'Twas as 'cute as a jewel. They did not
say: came along Nell -- and here it goes Nell -- but shall I have the pleasure
to dance with you Miss Nelly. Shall I help you to a slice of orange, Miss Nelly
-- They would not laugh at, and mortify one, that did not talk so coupee. They
treated me so well that it really made me feel purely.


Let. The men in Fairside are in the same employments as those in mud-puddle
corner. Then education makes an agreeable difference. Did any of the gentlemen
visit you since?


Nel. Yes several times Mr. -- N -- (whispers to Letitia) and he bro't me a
fine pair of verses all writ out in prose.


Let. In prose! you mean in verse. Poems are always written in verse.


Nel. That Is the way I always come off, when I try to talk genteel, sometimes I
think I never will try again.


Let. But were you properly instructed, you might try; and meet with success.


Nel. But don't you think the folks in the right down genteel, nipping way, are
more deceitful than others?


Let. Not always; but some think it genteel to treat people handsomely when
present, and when absent to render them ridiculous.


Nel. Law! mercy on us -- I Will never be genteel then*


Let. But could you gain esteem by a suitable behavior?


Nel. That I should like desperately.


Let. And that is real gentility.


Nel. But how will the young fellows take it if we shine away and don't like
their humdrum ways -- Will Not they be as mad as vengeance -- and ashociate with
the girls who don't go to school?


Let. Let the ill bred women and the ill bred men go together -- if they leave
the well bred men to us we will thank them -- Do you not think I am right my
dear?


Nel. I obsarves since you went to school that you often calls me my dear, and
my friend. Do you really think so, or do you only mean to palaver -- some folks
says it is all a ^^am, and that you mean nothing by it.


Let. I mean what I say, and always shall be really happy to have you for my
friend.


Nel. Well now if I really though it I could get a nice husband I don't know but I
should try to larn -- what likelihoods do you think there is that I shall be
married.


Let. In the country -- it is calculated that of 78 women who live to 18 years,
72 are married under thirty -- then (figures on a state) as 72: 6:^ 12 -- 1 --
twelve for being married to one against it -- well bred women have a fairer
prospect still.


Nel. They told me Arithmetic was a dry study. I am sure it is quite
entertaining -- Ma'am will be glad of it -- I Will go to school with all my heart.


Let. I advise you to maintain that resolution.


Nel. Well now this beats all, that you should tell by arithmetic the
likelihoods of being married -- I Will learn arithmetic, I vum I will.
Good-Nighty.


(Drops a low curtesy and goes out.) Let. Let one, if you be going out, walk
with you.


[Letitia goes out.] ACT III.
SCENE I. -- GOODHEART, NELLY, SALLY and KEENSIGHT.
Good. IT is said that if troubles come fast they will soon be over -- Mine
come fast indeed -- I am determined not to lose patience, for then I shall be
truly miserable.


Nel. (Rushing in) O ma'am I Am willing, I Am willing to go to school.


Good. I am very glad to hear it; I have been very much mortified that you were
so averse to learning -- I hope you will make up lost time -- you shall go to
school next week.


[Sally enters with a basket of fruit.] Sally. See ma'am what beautiful fruit;
I pick out the best for you, because you are so good to me. Are all mothers so
good to their children?


Good. I believe they are generally well disposed.


Sally. Then I guess they are quite happy, for it makes me feel nicely when I
do things that are good.


Good. Then you feel nicely now I believe.


Sally. O yes ma'am -- I am always very glad when I have done any thing to
please you.


Good. You are a very good child my dear.


Sally. I hope I shall make papa say the same when he comes home. I will gather
a fine basket of fruit for him -- William has given me a fine melon -- It is
yellow as gold, I will save that for pa. The men are very good to work for us,
and raise fruit and almost every thing we have.


Good. Yes, and ladies may respect them in a proper manner -- at least they may
respect their own fathers.


Keen. And if your girls don't worship the men I shall think they have not the
least spark of their mother's genius.


Sally. But if pa loved us as much as we do him, would he go away and stay from
us so long?


Good. I do not knew when he will return, nor in what situation of his affairs.
( She covers her face and wipes her eyes.)


SCENE II. -- SOFTLY, GOODHEART and LAURA.
(Softly enters at the beginning of the scene.) Softly. Madam, Billy's arm gets
better very fast, he can move it now very easily -- It is only bruised and will
get well soon, I am glad for the poor child's sake.


Good. You may take off the bandage then and bathe it in spirits and it will
do. ( Laura enters.) Why Laura, my good child, are you come? I was afraid I
never should see you well again.


Laura. Yes ma'am I am quite easy now -- I hurt myself by drinking cold water
-- I dared not to tell while I was ill for fear of increasing your concern --
But I am very sure that I have suffered enough to make me careful for the
future.


Good. I hope you will be, for many persons have died by such imprudence.


Laura. I have just received a letter from George. He is acquitted, and says he
is resolved to live a sober, steady life.


Good. That is great joy to me if he resolves he will do so -- for never was a
person more fixed in his purpose.


Laura. There is a person knocking; shall I go and wait?


Good. Yes. [Exit. Laura.]


[Sophia and Letitia enter showing Sophia's work.] SCENE III. -- SOPHIA,
GOODHEART, LETITIA, and LAURA.
Sop. What do you think of this ma'am?


Good. You did not do this?


Let. Yes, she did ma'am.


Good. It is certainly very elegant.


Soph. It was almost the first work of the kind that I ever did; but I paid
great attention. Here Laura enters with a bundle and letters.


Good. If I know by what means I could reward you for such a piece of work; I
would certainly do it, for it is indeed very fine.


Lau. I will do as good a piece as she has done when I get entirely well, and
then you may reward us both, for here is a letter of my father, which says that
he has got his cause with damages and costs, and uncle Trueman, whose will was
not to be opened till six months after his death, has left us two thousand
pounds. And here is a bundle too.


Good. (Opening,) So here is a letter too, and what a beautiful silk, well I
believe he has met with good success, a fine silk and a great deal of it too.


Lau. There is enough to make you a gown.


Good. There is enough for a number of gowns, But -- ( reading a letter.) --
But haste, get tea, your father writes that he shall be at home on Thursday at
six o'clock, that will be in half an hour. (Looks in her glass.) Bring me a
clean cap, Sophia.


Keen. That is curious, I have not seen you look in your glass till now for
three weeks.


Good. True my husband was gone, and I felt very little ambition to shine, now
he is coming home after so long absence -- I own -- I should be happy to be
agreeable to him.


(Sophia comes, and she puts on her cap) Keen. O yes, and we must all worship
him to please you and we shall have sweets and dears and fond questions till we
be perfectly sick.


Good. Now sister that is quite wrong. We ought to rejoice in mutual good will,
for the sudden happy change in our prospects -- I shall give my sincerest
thanks to heaven -- for our prospects, from the most dark, are al^ered to the
most joyful, in one half hour -- And thus it often is in the affairs of a
family -- and generally, there is an endless variety of events -- and if we
trust divine providence all turns out happily. (Sally runs in and cries out.)


Sally. Pa is coming; Pa is coming.


Good. (Rising suddenly.) I will wait on him myself; no one shall deprive me of
that happiness.


[She flies out in extacy of joy.] Keen. Before I Would be so fond of a man, I Would
live an old maid till I pined all away to breath and bones.


Let. That will no doubt be your fate* Aunt, and to bones without breath you
must pine, madam. But girls I commend your mamma's attention; soft arts and
kind allurements are the only ways for wom^n to carry their points -- They
never get any thing by angry co^^ests.

She who her husband by peverseness pains,
Finds dull neglect and coldness all her gains;
But she who acts the patient, modest part;
Seems to obey; but reigns within his heart;
From all observers merits honest fame;
For every age ^^veres the matron^ name.

[All withdraw.] The Captive. A DRAMATIC PIECE, IN FIVE ACTS.
COMPASSION TO THE MISERABLE.
This may justly be ranked amongst the brightest of human virtues. Nor is it
any part of superstition to believe, that he who is kind to persons really in
distress will be paid in the kindness of Heaven. The liberal soul shall be made
fat, and he that waters shall be watered also himself. -- And when our Savior
describes the kindness of the good Samaritan, he says to each of his auditors
-- go thou, and do likewise.

PERSONS.
MEN.
PHILANDER -- son of Tryphena. ARTAMON -- son of Damartis.
WOMEN.
DAMARTIS -- the woman who buys the captive. TRYPHENA -- the woman who sells
the captive. MELISSA -- the captive. CLIMENE -- a neighbor of Damartis.
PHILOMEDE -- daughter of Tryphena. LEMONE -- Niece of Damartis. LASYRA -- the
other captive living with Tryphena.
SCENE. -- A citizen's house in Elis, a city of Peloponesus, subject to the
Spartans.

THE CAPTIVE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- CLIMENE and DAMARTIS.
Clim. MELANCHOLY, my dear friend, seems to have taken entire possession of you.


Dam. And why not -- I lost my husband in the bloom of life, three of my sons
fell in battle -- and in the last siege of this town I lost my only daughter.


Clim. Why, of all valuable things, did you not secure your daughter! An only
daughter too?


Dam. The town was taken in the night. The inhabitants fled every way -- I
missed my daughter in the crowd, and saw her no more.


Clim. Do you think she was killed?


Dam. I cannot think so -- The learned and polite Athenians our conquerers,
invited all to return to our homes the next morning. No carcases, no stain of
blood, was seen in the streets, no house was damaged, mine was just as I left
it. But my little daughter I saw no more.


Clim. I am very sorry for your distress, and should feel it more if I had
experience.


Dam. Bitter indeed to a mother is the loss of her children -- I often run like
a distracted creature, and search for my little darling through the whole house --
rummage her caskets and boxes. And finding no relief from my pain, throw myself
down on the bed, where ^he little jewel used to lie; and resign myself to all
the agonies of grief.


Clim. Perhaps your daughter may yet be alive.


Dam. I fear that more than her death, that she is alive, and a slave -- Good
heaven!


Clim. You must miss her in your household affairs.


Dam. That I do. One's own children are worth twice as much as strangers. They
feel for the interest of the family. And we are, naturally, inclined to be
pleased with them.


Clim. How can you perform your household work?


Dam. What happens to be done is done, the rest is left undone -- Hired
servants have vexed me to death -- I have none of them*


Clim. But you cannot hold out to do all your necessary work.


Dam. My health by sorrow and extreme labor is on the decline -- I have though it
of purchasing a captive for myself.


Clim. Would you deal in that inhuman traffic.


Dam. Not to make any one miserable but to make one happy -- I would treat her
as mine own child. Then I would pray to the Gods for mine own poor child in
captivity.


Clim. I know a lady who has two very likely captives -- She needs but one, I
will speak to her on your behalf.


[Exit Climene. -- Lemone enters] SCENE II. -- DAMARTIS and LEMONE.
Dam. MY deared Niece, If fortune sent you to me, I am obliged to her.


Lem. It was not fortune but pleasure -- The pleasure of seeing and talking
with you.


Dam. I thank you. Do you know any thing of a captive, which Tryphena has to
sell?


Lem. Yes. But you would not like the reason she has for selling her.


Dam. What is that?


Lem. Tryphena's son is in love with her.


Dam. I will not buy her, I will have none of their base amors at my house.


Lem. He would be angry if you though it him base. He courts her in form like any
fine lady.


Dam. Then I think I would buy her, tho I should ask an abatement in the price.


Lem. Would you run such a risk?


Dam. She might prove to be good for nothing, and she might be an excellent
girl.


Lem. I have heard many house keepers say that girls are good for nothing after
they are courted.


Dam. It is according as their natural temper may be -- It alters them
certainly -- It makes good girls better, and bad girls worse. But my car is
ready, I will go and see the woman who has the captive to sell.


(They both go out.) ACT II.
SCENE I. -- MELISSA and PHILANDER.
Mel. I AM afraid, sir, you mean to deceive me.


Phil. No my girl, no, not for my life, see here. Do not I always treat you
with as much respect as any lady whatever?


Mel. You do, and I wonder how you can.


Phil. It is because I know you to be a fine girl, you was certainly born of
very good parents and your early education was virtuous and genteel -- Can you
remember nothing of your parents?


Mel. Yes, they lived very well -- But they have changed my name so often, and
sold me backward and forward -- that I hardly recollect where they lived.


Phil. No matter, I will leave no means untried to discover them -- Till then,
I will do every thing for you and ask no reward -- only -- Remember that lad
that loves you. ( Exit Philander.)


Mel. What a fine young gentleman -- How kind he is to me, and treats me with
as much respect as if I were a goddess. Now if I were not a captive how happy I
could be.


( Sits down and weeps.) SCENE II -- PHILOMEDE and MELISSA.
Philo. MELISSA what makes you cry?


Mel. Your mother means to sell me, what have I done?


Philo. It is not because she dislikes you.


Mel. Does she know of your brother's kindness to me?


Philo. I believe she understands that matter.


Mel. Then I am undone indeed. I do not wonder she resolves to sell me.


Philo. You are not to blame, you never sought his addresses.


Mel. I never did, but I was born to be wretched. I was taken from my mother in
the night, sold for a slave, have had my name changed a number of times, have
been sold this way and that way. Here your brother, by his kindness, softened
the rigor of my captivity Now I am to be sold, all my hope is lost, my life
ends in wretchedness.


Philo. I do not believe my brother will ever forsake you.


Mel. Then I shall ruin him -- I shall destroy the youth whose happiness should
rather be bought with my life.


Philo. Shall not I then tell him whither you are gone.


Mel. I ought to say no. I ought to say, Philander you must see me no more --
But O Philomede you know nothing what pain this heart has felt. Yes Philomede
tell him where I am to live -- His wisdom may save him, tho my folly would
destroy him. -- But I am called, and must go to your mother.


SCENE III. -- DAMARTIS, TRYPHENA and MELISSA.
Try. ( entering) YOU may stay where you are, Melissa; we may as well do it
here as any where -- this is the girl whom I propose to sell, she is a healthy
strong girl, I believe.


Dam. I am principally concerned to know whether she be a good girl. For I mean
to treat her as if she were mine own daughter.


Mel. I thank you madam.


Dam. What do you ask for her?


Try. She is worth at least twenty five Attic talents.


Dam. I shall not give that for her, for a reason that has been told to me, (
Melissa hides her face) and for which you want to get rid of her -- I will give
you twenty, and no more.


Try. Were it not for the circumstance you mention -- you should not have her
for thirty, and ten more.


Dam. But you must keep your son at home.


Try. I shall find means to do that.


Dam. You may send her this very afternoon, with her little property that must
come with her, and the money shall be ready.


(Exit Damartis, and soon after all.) ACT III.
SCENE I.
( The scene changes to the house of Damartis, the captive enters in her
working dress, and lays down a bundle of clothes.) Mel. ( alone) WHAT a
miserable life is allotted to me -- born to an easy life, but hurled by war
from my peaceful habitation -- I could almost wish eternal perdition' on
tyrants and ambitious men. How many sweet maidens, the hope of prosperous
families, are sold into slavery -- how many widows mourn the loss of their
husbands, cut off, in the very bloom of life. The blood of the finest youth
fattens the fields of Arcadia. As for me, wretched I am, and wretched I must
be. Since I became sensible of the loss of liberty -- every thing looks dark
about me. Earth is a dungeon, and the sky frowns on me from above -- bo't and
sold like a beast -- O wretched, bitter slavery -- Is there no remedy but death
-- the generous Philander only makes me wish to live. But now I lose him -- O
welcome, most welcome would be the sleep of death, to a poor captive who has
lost her liberty -- lost her fortune, lost her poor broken heart and is weary
of the world* -- ( Melissa sits down and covers her face and weeps, and remains
silent for some minutes then starts up suddenly.) -- Captivity itself has some
good in it, it teaches invention -- my new mistress' niece comes to appoint me
my employment. What if I tempt her to let Philander have access to me with the
offer of favoring her on like occasions. ( Lemone enters.)


SCENE II. -- MELISSA and LEMONE.
Mel. ( courtsying) MY sweet lady I was waiting for your orders.


Lem Well I can tell you what will please you, my aunt if you please her, means
to treat you as her own daughter.


Mel. I have been told so a great many times, and had to work extremely hard
after it. --


Lem. You will not be deceived here.


Mel. There was a young gentleman who treated me as a brother at Tryphene's
house -- will he be permitted to see me here?


Lem. I have heard that he was more than a brother to you.


Mel. Perhaps you know what it is -- if you can give him liberty to see me,
perhaps I can requite the favor in kind.


Lem. No, Melissa, I can do nothing in that matter.


Mel. But if I should let him come, would you expose me to the family?


Lem. Perhaps not -- people of our age do not commonly think so bad of those
matters as older people do -- but come with me, I must show you your work in
the family.


( Exeunt omnes,) ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- ARTAMON and DAMARTIS.
Art. MY good madam will grant me one very small favor?


Dam. Not till I know what it is.


Art. That my friend Philander may come to this house.


Dam. He shall not come, I know what he wants, to indulge himself with Melissa.


Art. No madam upon his honor he only wants to speak with you -- he will say
nothing to any other person unless you please.


Dam. He shall never have access to Melissa, I can promise him.


Art. That shall be as you please. [Exit Artamon.]


[Philander enters.] SCENE II. -- PHILANDER and DAMARTIS.
Phil. MADAM, your most obedient servant.


Dam. Sir, I know what makes you so complaisant, you wish to have access to
Melissa. (Coldly)


Phil. You mean to treat her as your own daughter. She is worthy your care.


Dam. Yes, sir, that is my determination.


Phil. And as you would have your daughter treated in captivity -- Your
sentiment is excellent. It is uncommon and generous.


Dam. I think it is not bad.


Phil. And I think it a mean thing for a young fellow to creep into a house
unknown to the owners -- I ask liberty to visit your daughter Melissa -- I
think of her as you do, I wish to treat her in the same style.


Dam. You are a sly rogue -- It is your maxim I believe to court the mother
instead of the daughter -- I will not break my word, you may come.


Phil. Madam I thank you. (Bowing respectfully he withdraws.)


Dam. That wretch! I was predetermined to refuse him, but he was so bold, and
so sly, and so polite -- and I being a woman, how could it be done -- that I
should refuse him.


SCENE III. -- CLIMENE and DAMARTIS.
Clim. YOUR project appears to me quite a wild one.


Dam. So does every thing that is generous to a person of a cold heart.


Clim. Let us then hear the whole of your sweet project.


Dam. Her clothes shall be made just as if she were my own daughter, and she
shall have the same education.


Clim. I fancy the little thing has moved the feelings of your compassion.


Dam. She has, and I am not ashamed of it.


Clim. Our philosophers would laugh at you for such a sentiment.


Dam. I care for our Philosophers in general as I do for a set of old
broomsticks -- They study four or six years in some academy or university, and
come forth with all their paradoxes about sensation and ideal existence --
Liberty and necessity -- But friendship, domestic care, and tenderness of
heart, are to them inexplicable mysteries.


Clim. They would think you mad, in your project concerning this girl.


Dam. Those who expect good things of the Gods must do good things themselves
-- By these very means the hearts of those who have my daughter may be turned
to pity her, and I may discover her yet before I die.


SCENE IV. -- TRYPH^NA, CLIMENE, DAMAKTIS, and MELISSA.
Try. IF my son comes to your house you must send him back again immediately.


Clim. Will you not let him see this lady's daughter? -- She adopts her captive
as her child. I am sure every body will laugh at her.


Try. My son shall not associate with her. He have her for his wife? I Will find
other employment for him, I promise him.


Dam. I shall do what I think reasonable and proper.


Mel. (From behind one edge of the curtain.) That Is right* my new mistress is
better than my old one.


ACT V.
SCENE I. -- DAMARTIS and LEMONE.
Dam. HAVE you dressed her up as my daughter?


Lem. I have, and she looks sweetly. She is a pretty girl, and as genteel as
one of the first rank.


Dam. Introduce her then. (While Lemone is gone out Damartis talks to herself.)
How the conscience feasts itself on good actions -- Never did I take pleasure
in doing a kindness, as I do in relieving the miseries of this girl -- There is
something very interesting in her appearance -- How dreadful it is to think of
Women, born of respectable parents, sold f^^ slaves.


Lem. Here madam is your pennyworth. (Introducing Melissa.) I think you have
good judgment in buying girls -- If I though it you had as good a taste for boys, I
would get you to buy a sweetheart for me.


Dam. O you sweet little nymph, I want to kiss you this minute -- But I will not
be quite a fool -- Come miss, and sit down by me. You seem to look quite
smiling.


Mel. It feels good to be well dressed. I have not had on a good suit of
clothes these six years.


( Some person knocks at the door.) Dam ( To the girls.) There is company,
girls, go and wait on them in.


Dam. Since I concluded to treat this girl as my daughter, fancy is busy to
find a resemblance of her -- She feels to me like my own flesh and blood --
What lively eyes, so much like my husband! Her forehead and eyebrows too are
like his! But alas! it is all a delusion -- Had my daughter been in all G^eece,
by the pain, I have taken, I must have found her.


[Lasyra enters.] SCENE II. -- LASYRA, DAMARTIS, LEMONE, and MELISSA.
Lasyra. So miss you have got to be a fine lady -- you will not speak to a body I
suppose: I wish this lady would buy me too.


Lem. My aunt does not wish for two girls.


Lasyra. When you come from our house you left your key, and a little casket.
Madam do you not think this to be a very curious key? (showing it to Damartis)


Dam. This key? (looking at it) is mine: where did you find it?


Lasyra. It belongs to the little casket she always had -- I bro't the little
casket too, which she left at our house.


Dam. The key is mine certainly, and I suspect you to be my own child, O
heavens!


Mel. Well madam if I be your own child; will you not let Philander come and
see me here.


Dam. O yes, if you be my daughter you shall have a sweetheart and every thing
else, that is good -- But we will be sure of that first; run, and fetch the
casket. ( Lasyra goes and brings the casket in.)


Lasyra. This is that she always had with her.


Dam. This casket is mine certainly -- But my daughter had the scar of a burn
on her left wrist. Let me see. O how my heart beats with anxiety. (Looks at her
wrist). O my soul she is my own child. ( Here the curtains should close.)


Dam. ( Clasping Melissa in her arms.) O my sweet child, let me fold you in my
arms, and be the happiest mother in the whole nation of Sparta.


[All leave the stage.] Ronscevalles. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
SELF GOVERNMENT.
To govern one's temper, inclination, and passions, comprehends almost the
whole substance of virtue. It gives any person great security against the
intrigues of the vicious, and the stratagems of the artful. This self
government chiefly depends on a comparative slighting of temporal concerns,
when set in opposition to the solid recompense of virtue, and the rewards of
another life.

PERSONS.
MEN.
XIMENES -- Regent of Spain. LORENZO -- a courtier. SILVANO -- an officer
express from the camp.
WOMEN.
DONNA CLARA -- aunt and governess to the young Princess. MARIA -- Princess of
Spain. ISABELLA -- rival of Maria, with regard to Alonzo. LOUISA -- a woman of
fashion. MARTINEZ -- a court-spy. FIVE LITTLE GIRLS -- who enter in one scene
only -- The action the drama celebrates is supposed to have taken place on the
day of the famous battle of Ronscevalles.
SCENE -- A pavilion, on a hill near the plain of Ronscevalles.

RONSCEVALLES.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- XIMENES and CLARA.
Xim. DONNA Clara, I esteem it my duty, to warn you of a danger, which
threatens the princess.


Clara. What do you mean in particular? There are a thousand dangers which
threaten young ladies.


Xim. I mean the attention of Alonzo to her. The presumptuous boy is heir to
the Castilian government, only in the third degree.


Clara. I have observed their motions. There is scarcely any thing in this
court which can escape me.


Xim. I do not deny your vigilance; but would, as a faithful servant of the
public, discharge my duty.


Clara. I shall be always guarded, I assure you.


SCENE II. -- DONNA CLARA and MARIA.
Clara. MY good princess, there is a certain point of discretion.


Maria Bless me! My dear governess, have I failed in any point of discretion?


Clara. No, you never have failed, my fear is only that you may fail.


Maria. Have I not always, my dear governess, listened to your advice*?


Clara. It is only -- this. You, if any person, must one day be the first lady
in Spain. Remember that. A word has been dropped about the General's son.


Maria. And can that bear any reference to me?


Clara. I hope not, and it is my duty to tell you, it must not -- Because you
are one day to be the first lady in Spain. You must not consult your own
happiness; but love and hate only as the court directs you -- Alonzo is related
to the government, only in the third degree -- you understand me, I hope.


Maria. Then I must have no affection for him?


Clara. That is it exactly. What a fine princess! How quick and ready you are.
You will remember it.


( Exit Clara) SCENE III. -- MARIA and LOUISA.
Maria. ( Alone.) REMEMBER it! well indeed I may, from the pain it gives me --
They call me princess, but -- in my kindest affections, I must not consult my
own happiness, but merely the interest of the state. Is it so indeed? Then I
had rather be a shepherdess. ( Louisa enters.)


Louisa. My excellent princess, why so sad to day? That mind is too delicate to
bear the pangs of grief.


Maria. I hope I am not more sad than usual.


Louisa. Positively, my dear princess, you are. Would I be sad to make another
happy: what a fortunate boy is my Lord Alonzo.


Maria. Shame on you, Louisa, to talk such nonsense, what is my Lord Alonzo to
me?


Louisa. Nothing as yet, only I suppose you wish he may be.


Maria. Louisa, who has given you power to take such liberties with me? I shall
not be so harsh as to order you out from my presence, but if you proceed, I
shall absent myself, and leave you to your own medications.


Louisa. Nay but my dear princess be not angry. I ask pardon, I only enquire
why you cannot always be light, and easy like me.


Mar. How can I be light and cheerful? This day a battle is determined. In
yonder plain it will be tried, in three hours, or less, whether the Christians
or Moors are to be masters of Spain.


Lou. And what of that? The men love to fight. Let them have enough of it.
Whoever be the conquerers, it concerns not you and me.


Mar. Why not?


Lou. Whoever be the conquerers they will pay attention to the ladies, I
suppose -- Pleasure is my maxim; I live to be happy.


Mar. Can you not feel the loss of your friends? Can you part with your
religion, and become a slave to the slaves of Mahomet?


Lou. Much the same -- Whoever governs, the fate of woman is subordination --
Yet still, had I a lover in the battle, and he led the van, ah! Alonzo.


Mar. Leave me, Louisa, leave me. You are so impertinent that I must desire it.


Lou. As I cannot love, myself, I delight to plague those who do, I know. [Exit
Louisa]


Maria alone. Why all these hints at Alonzo? Have I a tenderness for him? Let
me examine my own heart. It never yet deceived me. I admire his virtues. So
does every one beside. Is the whole nation in love? I think his address is
elegant. So do all others. I rejoice in his successes. They are useful to the
public. His attentions please me. So they please my aunt, old, and grave as she
is. His absence makes me uneasy -- Is this owing to tenderness? No -- He is
valuable to the nation: and it is a pity that so fine a youth should be lost.
So, Maria, this heart is sound yet, and I am glad of that. [Enter Isabella.]


SCENE III. -- ISABELLA and MARIA.
Isa. I AM come to you with a matter, which is very serious. It is spread through
the whole court.


Mar. What affair?


Isa. I am afraid your reputation is ruined forever. I could not have though it
such a story would have spread so much.


Mar. What story?


Isa. I am ashamed to mention it; but perhaps it is the only way to prevent its
spreading.


Mar. Pray, what is it?


Isa. I am ashamed to tell. But they say that you, regardless of the nation's
honor, and interest, as well as your own; have married Alonzo privately;
contrary to the admonitions of your friends, and every principle of right.


Mar. A likely story, I wonder who made it. Have they not something to say
about Alonzo too?


Isa. It is said* and every body believes it, that he is a most debauched
fellow and associates with the vilest women in the Court and Town.


Mar. And nothing more? That is not half scandalous enough Were I at the cost
of a lie, I would tell a big one.


Isa. They say he is the meanest of all cowards: that in the last battle, he
ran away from the head of his division, and hid himself under a baggage cart.


Mar. That is scandalous enough I find the matter to be very serious -- Who do
you think invented these lies?


Isa. That must be a secret* at present: But I am sure it concerns you very
much, to put a stop to them.


Mar. What, in the warmth of your friendship, do you advise me to do?


Isa. Forbid Alonzo your presence entirely. That is the only way to stop every
one's mouth.


Maria. Then he will be wholly at leisure to give his attentions to you. I
thank you madam for your good advice.


Isa. You will do as you please. If you will not take my advice you must abide
the consequence. [Exit Isabella]


[Martinez enters.] SCENE. V. -- MARTINEZ and MARIA.
Mart. YOU did right to affront Isabella. She is the most impertinent girl that
ever existed.


Maria. She has no cause to be offended.


Mart. She means to injure you.


Maria. And I had almost said, who does not?


Mart. You may depend on my secrecy.


Maria. I have no mysteries to trust to you, or any one else.


Mart. Only with regard to my lord Alonzo. That is all, my dear princess.


Maria. Not with regard to him. The public is pleased with him, so are you, and
Isabella, and twenty others, and I among the rest.


Mart. So you are afraid to trust me -- If so I shall attend to other matters.


Maria. ( alone) So here are the pleasures of being a princess. I must love and
hate only for the public good, and give up all idea of my own happiness -- I am
envied by one, rivalled by another -- maligned, and teazed by them all -- yet
never did harm intentionally in my life -- how dearly do they, who govern
nations, pay for their pre-eminence. [Exit Maria.]


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- MARTINEZ and ISABELLA.
Mart. I HAVE done all you desired me?


Isa. And with what success?


Mart. She owned every thing so frankly, that I could discover nothing.


Isa. Do you suppose there is any concern of importance between her, and young
Alonzo.


Mart. I know not: she professed the same regard for him that others had, and
behaved with the utmost composure.


Isa. She is a strange girl.


Mart. And you might say, she is a good girl, she is a person of as delicate a
mind, and as perfect self command, at I ever saw.


Isa. I should like her virtues better if they did not oppose my happiness. And
if I can discover any intrigue of hers; I will improve it to my own advantage.


Mart. In what manner?


Isa. I will inform the court -- Alonzo is only heir in the third degree to the
government. Should I only know that she was attached to him, I could have her
shut up in a convent.


Mart. Then perhaps Alonzo would be banished, and what would you gain by your
intrigue?


Isa. I may have the satisfaction to find that he is not attached to another,
and that he cannot be.


Mart. I should esteem that a very cold comfort.


Isa. Cold as it is, it is the best that I now have -- but I will try this
matter further. [Enter Lorenzo.]


SCENE II. -- ISABELLA and LORENZO.
Isa. AH! Lorenzo -- what news have you?


Lor. The battle is determined, and the troops in great spirits -- young Alonzo
has a great honor conferred on him this day.


Isa. What is that?


Lor. He is to lead the van, as he requested.


Isa. That is a post of honor: but is it not a post of great danger?


Lor. It certainly is, and few envy him his station.


Isa. Be sure to tell Martinez of that; she will tell Maria.


[Isabella goes out.] [Martinez enters.] SCENE III. -- LORENZO and MARTINEZ.
Lor. Martinez, you have heard of young Alonzo.


Mart. What of him?


Lor. He will make Maria's heart ache to day, for he commands the first attack,
and in all probability he must be killed.


Mart. The princess shall know of that, and then we will see how madam will
keep her composure.


Lor. What is the reason that all you ladies seem to be envious of the princess
Maria? Is there no man about the court worthy their notice but Alonzo? (Exit
Lorenzo.)


SCENE IV. -- MARTINEZ and MARIA.
(Maria walks pensive across the stage -- turns, and Martinez pursues her.)
Mart. MOST respectable princess.


Mar. Why, Martinez, do you pursue me every where? Can you not suffer your
respectable princess to enjoy herself one moment.


Mart. If my presence be in the least troublesome I withdraw. [Withdraws
suddenly.]


Maria alone. What is this. Chilly horrors run through my nerves, and veins; and I
am cold as if dipped in the Stygian lake. What is the cause? Only that I have
heared that Alonzo commands the van in this day's battle. His life will be the
forfeit of his bravery -- I have watched my heart that it might not oppose duty
-- The least spot of indiscretion has never tainted my imagination -- Why then
should I dread the fate of Alonzo -- Alas Maria, thou have thy affections too
-- But they are pure, and pure they shall be.


[Enter Isabella.] SCENE V. -- ISABELLA and MARIA.
Isa. (Assuming coolness and composure.) MY princess, the battle is determined
and Alonzo begins the attack.


Mar. That I believe, for you look as pale as a ghost. -- Are you afraid he
will be killed?


Isa. He is very brave.


Mar. He is! O, I though it the last time I saw you that he was a great coward --
But he is truly brave, and he conquers, or falls this day.


Isa. Do you think he will be killed?


Mar. I expect nothing else, I depend on it.


Isa. (Falters and walks trembling away -- then speaks faintly.) Martinez,
bring me a cordial, and some water.


Mar. (Observing her.) So in attempting to catch me you have caught yourself.
But why does the girl delay to relieve her -- I will go myself. [Exit Maria.]


Isa. (Faintly behind the curtain.) Martinez bring me some water.


( Louisa coming to her assistance, brings her back to the stage and seats her,
and offer her a cordial and some water.) SCENE VI. -- LOUISA and ISABELLA.
Lou. Take this, and it will revive your spirits.


Isa. Has any one come from the field of battle? -- Have you heard any thing of
Alonzo?


Lou. Not a word. But suppose he is killed -- There are a thousand other
coxcombs in the world.


Isa. You never lost a friend I suppose.


Lou. I never had one to lose -- All that I care for is to live easy. I never
loved any person in m^ life.


[Martinez enters again] Isa. That is the reason why no one ever l^ved you


Lou. Probably enough; bu^ why should I entangle ^^ with the cares of half the
world. Come cheer up. One party no doubt will win the day -- And they will take
notice of the ladies.


Isa. There needs something more than nonsense to comfort an afflicted heart.


Mart. Come Louisa, lead her to my apartment, and let her take some rest.


Isa. Rest I fear is no more for me.


(Martinez conducts Isabella out, and returns.) SCENE VII. -- MARTINEZ and
MARIA.
Mart. I heard this moment, but I did not tell Isabella, that the Spaniards
have gained the victory, and that Alonzo is killed.


Mar. It is just what I expected.


Mart. Then you never had any partiality for him.


Mar. How do you know that?


Mart. Because the hearing of his death does not disturb you.


Mar. You sharp folks know nothing -- You may tell whom you please that I had.
And now he is dead I will show all the respect to his memory I can. You can
search bad hearts; but you know nothing of good ones. Go and call my little
girls. (Five little girls enter and pay their honors to Maria*) My little
girls, your Lord Alonzo is dead.


A Girl. What not my Lord Alonzo!


Mar. Yes, he was killed in battle this day, while he defended us all, and beat
the Moors. (The little girls put their handkerchiefs to their faces.) Don't cry
my children; it will do no good. Go, and get your little baskets, and gather
red baum, meadow-pinks, marjoram and other sweet flowers -- So when they bring
up the corpse and lay it out in state you shall go with me, and we will dress
the bed with flowers. ( The little girls go out curtsying to Maria)


A Girl. We will do it for we always loved my Lord Alonzo. ( Speaking as they
go out)

Maria alone. Now could I weep. This day proud Spain has lost,
Her se^ate's blossom, and her martial boast;
But why should sorrow fill these melting eyes,
For one whose merit lives beyond the skies.
The hard commands of power, the source of woe,
Barred all our hopes and prospects here below.
By generous death, Alonzo now is free,
And the same fate the heavens design for me.
No joys for me, can wretched Earth supply;
And my heart dies in me, I feel it die. --
I Will meet Alonzo in the realms above;
Where angel-minds are not ashamed to love. --
There shall the generous passion be supplied,
And heaven shall give what envious earth denied.
Meantime with him it soon shall be my doom,
To fill the cold recesses of the tomb.
Nigh his cold corpse shall my cold ashes lie;
Till the last trump shall call us to the sky. --
Nor yet shall envy blast my spotless fame,
Since in the grave, there is neither sin, nor shame.

[Exit Maria.] ACT III.
SCENE I. -- MARTINEZ and ISABELLA.
Mart. NOW Alonzo is gone, Maria and you will contend no more about him.


Isa. But how does she bear it?


Mart. She says she is not uneasy that he is dead -- she never could have
enjoyed his society in this world, she means to enjoy it in heaven.


Isa. A saucy toast; I could tear her eyes out -- I have a great mind to die
first.


Mart. You will not have the courage.


Isa. True, I never could bear to think of any thing but the pleasures of this
world.


Mart. These sublime characters have the advantage of us -- they expect to be
happy in whatever manner they exist. I have though it so much of it that: I am
almost determined to quit dissipation, and be a sober considerate girl.


Isa. So have I, but some amusement has always put it out of my head.


[Clara enters.] SCENE II. -- CLARA and ISABELLA.
Clara. LADIES you know the loss of Spain this day.


Isa. Would you command us in any thing?


Clara. You must assist the mistress of the wardrobe in procuring the necessary
dresses, for the court must all go into mourning. ( Isabella and Martinez go
out.)


SCENE III. -- CLARA and MARIA.
Clara. WHAT have you been doing with the little girls, Maria?


Maria. I sent them into the park to gather flowers to dress the bed of the
deceased young general.


Clara. It is suitable to his merit; no one will blame you now he is dead.


Maria. Blame me or not, I shall do it. Persons in public station cannot honor
their friends while living -- Must they be restrained from it when they are
dead?


Clara. They will not be. But you have a new duty -- To forget Alonzo in less
than a month.


Maria. In less than a month!


Clara. It would be a disgrace to a princess to mourn longer.


Maria. I knew we were restrained in our joy, but I thought we might mourn as
long as we pleased.


Clar. No you must neither love nor hate, laugh not cry, sleep nor wake, eat
nor drink, but for the public good, and by leave of the nation.


Mar. What reward have we for this?


Clara. The trouble it costs them who govern except now and then to be shot at
or pelted -- as they ride the streets -- assaulted by a mob -- libelled in
public bills, or burnt, or hung in effigy.


Mart. Are these the blessed effects of supremacy?


Clara. The precise fate of all the great characters I have heard or read of:
tho some have obtained reputation after death.


Mar. Then I resign the succession.


Clara. Asking your pardon -- that will throw the nation into a quarrel -- it
must not be done.


Mar. I will die then.


Clara. You must not die unless the State pleases.


Maria. I wonder you can be witty upon so dreadful a subject.


Clara. I am as serious as the subject itself. Twenty physicians may be
employed to keep you alive to a certain period -- then you may die by the
public executioner.


Maria. I shall deceive their hopes, I am now threatened with a decline.


Clara. But the Duke of Lemos means to demand you in marriage in a few days.


Maria. The man whom of all beings I most detest -- I trust I shall do as I
please in that matter.


Clara. Nay you must marry him if the court pleases; and love him too, or all
the nation will hate you.


Maria. Now I shall die certainly -- The loss of Alonzo, and the marriage of
the Duke of Lemos will soon bring me to an end.


SCENE III. -- LOUISA, who enters here; CLARA and MARIA.
Lou. There is the strangest story told here that ever was heard -- Alonzo is
not dead. He was wounded, but has recovered his senses and they are bringing
him back in triumph.


Clara. They are indeed! I will know the truth of this affair -- Maria what
will you say now?


Maria. I am petrified with astonishment.


Lou. It is true, an officer reports it who comes express to the court.


Maria. Alonzo had rather have died, than see me married to the Duke of Lemos.


Lou. Now you see that you had better have done as I; lived in dissipation, and
loved no one but yourself,


Maria. No, I had rather suffer every moment of my life, than be of such a
temper. But let us go and enquire.


SCENE IV. -- SILVANO (enters) and CLARA.
Clara. TELL Silvano, how is this affair of the young General's coming to life
again?


Silv. The fact is -- He engaged Abdallah king of the Moors, and was by him
struck down by a blow on the head, and was left on the field -- But after the
battle, when the friends came to view the slain, it was though it he discovered
signs of life. A surgeon opened a vein; he bled freely, and in a few moments
recovered his senses. And they are bringing him back in triumph.


Clara. How came the Spaniards to gain the victory, after the young General was
dead?


Silv. His father, knowing his son was struck down, and supposing him dead,
enraged to the utmost degree, encountered Abdallah, king of the Moors, killed
him; and took Alonzo, his second in command, prisoner This is all I can tell
you, madam, I must inform the rest of the court.


( Exit Silvano.) SCENE V. -- CLARA, ISABELLA, LOUISA, MARIA, and MARTINEZ.
Clara. WHAT Louisa said is the truth. They are bringing him back in triumph.


Maria. Then I must be hurried back to misery again.


Mart. No; the heads of the nation assembled, immediately after the victory,
and the recovery of Alonzo; first agreed to a thanksgiving. Then finding that
the prince of Asturias and Duke of Lemos had been both killed in the battle;
and that Alonzo is heir to the government, it is proposed that he be married to
the princess Maria the evening after the feast.


Isa. Well madam I hope you will be contented with life now. I see you are
gratified in every thing.


Lou. I should wish that I had some affection besides the love of myself, if I
could be so fortunate.


Mar. To receive my honors by the loss of the great heroes of Spain is no great
consolation to me.


Clara. But it is as much your duty to be happy for the nation's sake, as to be
miserable -- Come, my dear girl, it is now your duty to be happy.


Mar. I shall yield to the call of duty. Yet truly I am disappointed to be a
queen on earth: I had much rather be a saint in Heaven.

The blaze of grandeur lasts but for an hour
And danger treads upon the heels of power.
The greatest power involves ^he greatest care;
The highest fall the deepest in despair.
Yet since it is duty's call I bear the sway,
Content to live in sorrow for a day.
The greatest good shall be my greatest aim.
I Will build on justice all my hopes of fame.
Then if grim death my wordly bliss annoy,
I Will gain that heaven I must not yet enjoy.

[Exeunt omnes.] Panthea. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN A SUIT OF SCENES.
THE EXCELLENCE OF MODESTY AND OF VIRTUOUS LOVE.
The ancients wrote that there were two loves. One the son of Jupiter, by the
Goddess of Beauty. This was the cause of modest amors, of love which
terminated happily. He was perfectly harmless; his darts were headed with gold,
and dipped in balm and honey. The other, the son of Erebus, by the Queen of
Night. His darts were headed with lead, and dipped in gall and poison. The moral
of these allegories is very useful to young persons of both sexes.

PERSONS.
MEN.
CYRUS -- General of the Persians. ARASPAS -- a Persian officer. MITHRAS -- a
counselor and secretary. Prisoners taken from the Babylonians.
ABRADATAS -- a Babylonian officer. GADATAS -- a governor of a province.
KADMIEL -- a Jew.
SACAS -- armourer to Cyrus.
WOMEN.
MANDANE -- wife of Cyrus. PANTHEA -- wife of Abradatas. ARZINA -- servant to
Panthea.
SCENE -- The camp of Cyrus on the borders of Babylonia -- immediately after
the first battle with the Babylonians.

PANTHEA.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- CYRUS and MITHRAS.
Cyr. I WILL immediately give orders to the Priests to instute to Eternal
O^omasd^s, the source of light, of being and happiness, a solemn Thanksgiving
for the victory of this day. ( To Mithras who is entering.) Long live my brave
counselor.


Mith. Most excellent Cyrus, live forever. This victory will give splendour to
the Persian Commonwealth, and immortalize your name.


Cyr. I regret this destructive war. But the Babylonians will be content with
nothing but making mankind the slave of their luxury and avarice.


Mith. The sword of Cyrus will bring them to reason.


Cyr. Do not flatter me, Mithras -- Rather freely tell me of my faults, and
point out those vices of which I am in danger.


Mith. It would be a hard task to find out your faults.


Cyr. I do not wish to think myself sure of success. Many causes may ruin a
young man of twenty three at the head of a great army. I tremble when my
friends call me great. What is your opinion, Mithras, of a great man?


Mith. It is not surely he, who eats and drinks and sleeps more than others --
or who lives in idleness on other men's labors.


Cyr. No, such men are rather objects of contempt.


Mith. Nor he, who is learned without usefulness, rich without profit, liberal
without judg^ment, courageous without caution, or witty without prudence.


Cyr. No, reason must govern. The manner and use of every thing must be
considered.


Mith. On these principles might not one describe a great man.


Cyr. He must be a great man who is ever doing the best things in the best
manner.


Mith. There is one point more to be considered.


Cyr. I cannot conceive of it.


Mith. Not conceive of it!


Cyr. No, you must tell me.


Mith. Must he not do all from a sense of duty, from a free choice, and
disposition to do good?


Cyr. My good old friend, you are perfectly right. The will to do good makes a
man resemble the great God -- There is an advantage in age, it brings
experience.


Mith. You will grow old too soon.


Cyr. My worthy friend you shall not go yet.


Mith. Some private affairs call me.


Cyr. Private affairs must submit to the public -- You shall not go, till you
have told me, how I may escape the odium which commonly falls on princes and
rulers of states -- You may tell me briefly, but tell me.


Mith. The first point it to avoid indolence and luxury -- Choose to labor for
others rather than that they should labor for you. And excel all others in
those things in which they most excel.


Cyr. I never could bear to be outdone in any thing. I can live without sleep.
I watched three whole days and nights with my grandfather, when he was sick in
Media. I can endure the want of food -- I have hunted often from break of day
till evening and ate nothing but a piece of dry bread, and a bunch of cresses
pulled out of a brook.


Mith. These are true signs of future greatness. But chastity in love affairs
is very necessary -- If you would be happy you must ^ave but one wife.


Cyr. Why so? Most of our eastern princes have from a hundred to a thousand.


Mith. Yes and that is their ruin -- nature makes for one man only one woman.
The sexes are almost precisely equal in numbers.


Cyr. But might not one man engross more to his own advantage?


Mith. A poor man can maintain but one; and it is still more necessary that a
rich man should have but one.


Cyr. Why so?


Mith. If he have more it will be the interest of each to plunder her husband
the most.


Cyr. Princes regard themselves more than their families.


Mith. It is not good for themselves. Love is most happy, when directed to a
single object -- as a river flowing compact is noble, and dispenses a thousand
blessings; divided, it sinks in mean rivulets, and dirty puddles -- divided
love has ruined most of the princes of the east.


Cyr. I thank you, kind Mithras, attend now your private affairs -- but I shall
often send for you, and you must not be sparing of your advice. [Exit Mithras.]


SCENE II. -- ARASPAS and CYRUS.
Arasp. NOBLE Cyrus, live forever -- I can tell you something which will please
you.


Cyr. Speak then Araspas if you please.


Arasp. I have taken a most beautiful woman. I found her among the slain, on
the field of battle, sitting on the ground, in obstinate silence, and her eyes
streaming with tears. I with another officer raised her by the arms, and bore
her to my tent.


Cyr. Alas! how war tears asunder the dearest bands, and breaks those ties
which are twisted with the fibers of the heart. It is some woman, probably, who
lost her husband in the battle. The story does not please me, but gives me pain.


Arasp. It was her beauty which I expected would please you. Her complexion is
fine; her features soft and regular -- Her eyes are lively blue -- Her brown
hair waves over her neck, which is white as snow. She has a delicate shape and
easy manners; and the finest expression in her countenance -- Her motions are
like those of a goddess, and the graces attend all her steps.


Cyr. Do you think she is handsomer than my wife?


Aras. She is very handsome, and I expected would be an agreeable present to
you.


Cyr. I thank you, I wish but for one woman. But are you not afraid to have her
near you, if she be so beautiful?


Aras. Not I -- You see I am growing old.


Cyr. Keep her then; you are the most proper person -- I do not wish to see her.


Aras. Your temperance, illustrious prince, is astonishing -- May your success
be equal to your virtues.


[Araspas goes out.] SCENE III. -- CYRUS and SACAS.
Cyr. Have you, Sacas, seen the lady taken by Araspas, in this days's battle?


Sacas. I have; every body went to see her.


Cyrus. Is she handsome?


Sacas. Yes indeed -- That she is.


Cyrus. Is she as handsome as your mistress? I mean Mandane my wife.


Sacas. Why -- ay -- as to that -- if she is not, she is the next handsomest
woman in the world.


Cyr. Did you talk with her?


Sacas. Yes, she speaks very good Persian -- She is the wife of Abradatas,
Prince of Shushan, a brave officer: her name is Panthea. She wishes to send to
their army to enquire for her husband. She says she is afraid, living only with
the men -- enemies too -- and that Araspas does not always behave becoming.


Cyr. I will call Araspas to an account, and protect her; but do not bring her
here; I do not wish to see her.


Sacas. What shall I do then?


Cyr. Pitch a tent for her behind the armoury. Let two of our best maids wait
on her. Then enquire for her husband -- if he be killed, is a prisoner, or with
the Babylonians.


Sacas. I shall gladly do it, for I want to see her again.


SCENE IV. -- MITHRAS, CYRUS, SACAS, and KADMIEL.
[Mithras introduces Kadmiel to Cyrus] Mith. Illustrious general -- I have
brought you a curious old man, a captive, who complains of your soldiers -- His
name, he tells me, is Kadmiel.


Cyr Kadmiel, I wish you health and happiness. (Kadmiel keeps his distance.)
Kadmiel, fear not to approach me -- The ^n^^med soldier is my brother. (Gives
Kadmiel his hand.) You were taken in this day^s battle.


Kad. I was.


Cyr. Have my soldiers used you ill?


Kad. They have neither killed nor wounded me.


Cyr. Did they offer you any indecency?


Kad They refused me water to wash; they said it was scarce in the camp. They
offered me vinegar -- But that is not the law.


Cyr. Did they injure you otherwise?


Kad. I told them I was hungry -- They bro't me the legs of fowls dished with
parsley sauce -- My blood ran cold at the sight!


Cyr. And were you hungry too -- strange!


Kad. That was not the worst -- They offered me half of a roast pig, dished
with gravy and sweet herbs. What an abomination!


Sacas. Excuse me Cyrus, this is certainly a mad man.


Cyr. Peace, Sacas, peace. I Will ask your advice when I want it -- Mithras, what
shall I do with this man?


Mith. Let me examine him a little. Kadmiel, what injury was there in offering
you the legs of a fowl dished in butter; or a piece of a roasted pig?


Kad. I have kept the law from my youth. I have never eaten of the sinew that
shrank, of swine's flesh or creeping things, the abomination, or the mouse, or
drank the breath of abomination.


Sacas. (Laughing) If this be not a crazy fellow there never was one.


Cyr. Peace, Sacas, peace, or you shall feel my displeasure. ( Directing his
speech to Kadmiel.) Of what nation are you Kadmiel?


Kad. I am a Hebrew.


Cyr. The same whom we call Jews?


Kad. Yes, the Lord's people.


Mith. As they say. Have they not a most singular law, which forbids the eating
of swine's flesh, commands you to wash often, and so on.


Kad. That is all true.


Cyr. Addressing himself to Kadmiel. Be comforted my old friend. Your religion
makes you singular. I love a man who is firm to his principles of religion --
You are no longer a captive -- You are my friend.


Kad. May I be sure of your protection?


Cyr. You shall have water to wash -- You shall go to the ordinary and prepare
your food in your own way.


(Mithras, Kadmiel and Sacas go out -- Mandane enters.) SCENE V. -- CYRUS and
MANDANE.
Cyr. WHAT my dear wife brought you here so suddenly?


Man. Have you seen the beautiful captive?


Cyr. I have not, nor do I mean to see her.


Man. But you can do as you please in that matter.


Cyr. I trust I shall always do as I ought with regard to my wife -- My vows
are sacred.


Man. It was reported that you had received her with great attention.


Cyr. Be assured I will receive no woman but yourself -- The wife of my choice
is the sole object of my love.


Man. Thanks to my excellent husband -- The great are apt to neglect such
obligations. But why I know not, unless there is more dignity in vice, than in
virtue.


(goes out smiling.) SCENE VI. -- ABRADA^AS (entering) CYRUS.
Abr. Permit the most unfortunate of men to lay himself at your feet.


Cyr. Relate your misfortunes.


Abr. I fled to the army to save my wife, the most beautiful of women, from the
impious views of Belshazzar the Babylonish King -- In the late battle she
followed me, through affection, to the field. Since which time I cannot find her.


Cyr. What would you do here?


Abr. I will unite my forces with yours. My estate shall be my pledge. At the
end of war if I be faithful, they shall be mine. If I be unfaithful they shall
be yours.


Cyr. Well then if I receive you as an ally, I must provide for your comfort --
There is a widow who lives behind the Armory, who lost her husband in the
battle. Your mutual sorrows may console each other. For, regard my words, they
are true, there you will find the beautiful Panthea.


Abr. (In rapturous surprise.) Panthea! O heavens, Panthea! I fly to my
sweetest life, O Panthea! (flies out.)


Sacas. That fellow left your noble presence with very little ceremony


Cyr. I can forgive him, I have a young and handsome wife as well as he.


SCENE VII. -- SACAS, CYRUS and GADATAS.
Sacas. THERE is a sentinel at the door, with a prisoner. Shall I bring him in?


Cyr. Immediately.


Gad. The fame of your clemency, illustrious Cyrus, has reached our ears.


Cyr. May fame never say any thing of me but what is true.


Gad. I come not illustrious Cyrus to aggravate the picture of my injuries -- I
am governor of the fertile province of Gaditana -- The impious Belshazzar has
stolen from me, my most delightful wife, within a year of our marriage -- He
took her by force of arms, and armed men. I followed the ravishers to Babylon,
and petitioned the king to restore her. But he ordered his servants to take,
and abuse me, in the most infamous manner, and then dismiss me -- I live,
Cyrus, for revenge, for justice. And my sword is impatient to employ itself
against the king of Babylon.


Cyr. What kind of man must this Belshazzar be?


Gad. The most voluptuous of men. Wine and women employ him forever, the women
have him as the gates of hell -- He is drunk every evening, and his guards are
drunk quite to the city gates.


Cyr. Stay, you shall serve me -- This Belshazzar is raising recruits for me
last out of his own dominions.


SCENE VIII. -- ABRADATAS, CYRUS and PANTHEA.
Abr. ILLUSTRIOUS Cyrus -- The enemy are in motion -- It is now a good time to
bring off the Su^i^n Charioteers.


Cyr. You shall take the command of the chariots yourself -- I retire to give
other orders. [Cyrus goes out.]


[ Panthea enters, with A^zina] Pan. My noble husband -- What, i^ armor already?


Abr. I am impatient to perform some noble s^^^ice for our deliverer.


Pan. But you may fall in battle.


Abr. True, yet that is no argument against my duty.


Pan. Certainly you are right. Go, and be virtuous -- regard not the tears of
Panthea.


Abr. If anything could make me value life above glory; it must be the
possession of so amiable a woman.


Pan. I shall not detain you from the field of fame -- Go, and if you die, I
will die with you.


Abr. I go without reluctance -- Let the incense of your prayers ascend to the
Gods and I am sure of victory.


[Abradatas goes out.] SCENE IX. -- SACAS and ARZINA.
Sacas. WHAT did Cyrus intend by sending for Araspas?


Arz. To punish him I suppose, for being rude to my mistress.


Sacas. How queer that is, that my master should think of punishing him for
that?


Arz. Why not punish him for that?


Sacas. Because if a woman defends herself, no harm is done -- if she does
otherwise, two cheats make an even bargain.


Arz. Do you mean to abide by that principle?


Sacas. Yes, that I do.


Arz. Very well, abide by it -- But I hear that Araspas has sent for your
pretty sister, as you call her, to come and live with him.


Sacas. A dog -- I Will horsewhip him, he is a vicious old rogue as ever lived.


Arz. What makes you angry?


Sac. A sister is one's own flesh and blood. If she gets disgraced, the infamy
comes to me.


Arz. Suppose he should attempt any thing against her interests?


Sacas. I Will stab him.


Arz Suppose he should utterly ruin the happiness of her life?


Sacas. I Would kill him -- I could not bear it.


Arz O, I thought that two cheats made an even bargain. Upon your own
sentiments you ought to be horsewhipt, stabbed and killed. Well, I suppose it
is no more than you deserve. [Exit Arzina.]


SCENE X. -- CIRUS, (entering) and SACAS
Cyr. Go, Sacas -- Araspas is in waiting -- tell him to come to me now.


Sac. I obey your orders, sire. ( Araspas is brought in.)


Cyr. Well, Araspas, how does your philosophy bear it; you was not afraid to be
with Panthea, tho she was so beautiful?


Aras. O Cyrus, illustrious general, I have been faulty -- but did you know my
case you would pity me. I plainly perceive that I have two souls -- one good,
one bad. When the good soul prevails, then I treat this woman well; when the
bad soul prevails ^hen I use her very ill. Did you know my case you would pity
me.


Cyr. Other men, I believe have as many souls as you. But you must follow t^
dictates of the better soul. All honest people do; and because the bad soul is
apt to be most mischievous when people have least to do, I order you to go on
duty every day for six months together.


Aras. I should suppose that six months hard employ, would make any k^nd of
soul peaceable. ( sorrowfully.)


Cyr. Go then and make the experience. [He goes out.]


SCENE XI. -- MITHRAS, CYRUS and KADMIEL.
Mith. I find my old friend Kadmiel a curious man. He pretends he has a book
which ^old of you, one hundred and seventy years before you was born.


Cyr. Where did you find that, Kadmiel?


Kad. In the writings of Isaiah.


Mith Isaiah, who is Isaiah?


Kad. The greatest of our prophets next to Moses, a man of fortune and family
-- But the best of him was that he was a good man, and a prophet.


Cyr. How could he know any thing of me?


Kad. Aye that is the point -- But he writes thus. ( Shows an old manuscript.)
"Thus says the Lord to Cyrus, to his anointed, to Cyrus -- Whose right hand I
have holden to subdue nations before him, and I will give him the hidden
treasures."


Cyr. Might not this be said of another Cyrus?


Kad. What other has there been. Besides, do not you worship toward the sun,
consider light as the divine presence and darkness as the influence of the
devil?


Mith. Yes, these are parts of the Persian religion.


Kad To these our prophet a^^^des -- That they may respect me more than the
rising of the sun; because there is none beside me -- "I form the light and
create darkness -- I make peace and create evil. I the Lord do all these
things."


Cyr. What says your prophet of me in particular?


Kad. In the name of the Lord he says. Cyrus is my shepherd, he shall perform
all my pleasure; saying to Jerusalem -- Thou shall be built, and to the temple,
Thy foundation shall be laid. Jerusalem was our Capital, destroyed by the
Babylonians, the temple, our chief place of worship.


Cyr. Well, Kadmiel, this is a fair trial of prophesy, to see if it will come
to pass. If I take Babylon, and get the hidden treasures, then I will build
your temple again, and restore your city and nation.


Kad. The Lord of the Hebrews bless and prosper you.


SCENE XII. -- GADATAS (enters with looks of deep sorrow) and CYRUS.
Gad. NEVER did my eyes before see so wretched a sight -- The fair Panthea
followed her husband, at a small distance to the field of battle.


Cyr. Surprising how love will overcome fear.


Gad. Her husband by a preconcerted sign brought off the S^sian charioteers.
The Babylonians irritated at this, poured all their archers upon him -- an
arrow pierced his breast -- Panthea, seeing him wounded, flew through the ranks
and supported him in her arms -- till in another shower of arrows, one pierced
her side -- Both then fell together, and the streams of their blood were
mingled in their f^ll -- The Babylonians by our swordmen were soon dispersed,
and when we came to look for our friends among the slain, we found Abradatas
and Panthea, the husband dead, and the wife just expiring, fast locked in each
others arms, and their bosoms filled with their mingled blood.


Cyr. These then are my orders. Let Abradatas and Panthea be buried on the very
spot where they died -- Let a monument of the most durable marble be erected on
the spot, bearing this inscription, THE MARRIED LOVERS. There (...) to the
latest posterity, (...) the respect which Cyrus, and the Persian Commonwealth,
have for virtuous (...), and the sacred compact of marriage -- and of their
detestation of those unmanly vices which have not only ruined families, but
nations. And for which the vengeance of heaven, now remains, scarcely
suspended, over the devoted city of Babylon.


The Foundling. A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
THE CONTEMPT AND MISERY WHICH FOLLOWS A LIFE OF PLEASURE.
From the scenes of gross voluptuousness nothing is to be expected but misery,
infamy, and baseness -- And the man of pleasure, often less scrupulous than any
honest man should be, sows the seeds of the bitterest remorse, when he imagines
himself gathering the fairest flowers of delight.

PERSONS.
MEN.
FIELDFARE -- a rich man, a man of pleasure. MELVILL -- an honest reputable
farmer. DR. MOORE -- a physician. The Character of Puffpaste cannot be too much
burlesqued every point, except of honest goodnature, which is the only
pleasing quality the character is intended to represent.
PUFFPASTE -- a singular man a baker. YOUNG MELVILL -- son of the farmer. DICK
-- son of Puffpaste. SAM. MOORE -- reputed son of Dr. Moore.
WOMEN.
MADAM MOORE -- wife of Dr. Moore. MRS. PUFFPASTE -- wife of Mr. Puffpaste.
THE FOUNDLING.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- MELVIL and FIELDFARE.
The stage presents the two gentlemen sitting, and a row of boys before them.
Melvil. I DO not know how you relish our domestic scene -- I love to live with
my children.


Field. It is a pleasing sight to see a number of spruce young fellows sitting
together, and the^^ is one of these boys whom I fancy very much.


Mel. People have often smiled when they have seen you give him apples, and
gingerbread.


Field. Is he no^ your son?


Mel. No, nor my wife's son.


Field. You have a very pretty company, and I have though it more of late than I
used to do of the amusement of an agreeable family.


Mel. I have often wondered that a man of your genius should not wish to marry.
You Bachelors form wild ideas of domestic life.


Field. I always though it it a state of confinement.


Mel. It gives just as much sense of confinement as the soul has in being
confined to the body -- or as a man has in having an estate of his own, or
living in a house, or on a farm, of his own.


Field. What is the drift of all that?


Mel. Should you esteem yourself free, because you had nothing to eat at home,
but must buy a meal at an extravagant price, at a tavern? If you had no house,
but must hire a wretched lodging in a garret -- If you had no money but what
you borrowed or stole, kept no table, but dined where you could, or went
without a dinner.


Field. No, but a wretched dependent.


Mel. Yes, such is exactly the freedom which a man enjoys who refuses marriage,
except that it is neither so innocent, nor so reputable.


Field. Then you think the acquisition of valuable property makes no man the
less free.


Mel. Much less does the acquisition of valuable friends. All that liberty is
worth is that we may gain such possessions, and serve them; but the evil of
want of principle, is great. It hurts many persons who ought to be happy.


Field. If women would take care of themselves, no person would hurt them.


Mel. Simplicity will not justify roguery -- Suppose a merchant should take of
a child dollars instead of shillings.


Field. You Will beat me perhaps in the argument, I never was much of a reasoner.


Mel. I never knew a man of pleasure that was.


Field. Let that be as it may -- I seem to like that boy. But that he is not
your son puzzles me.


Mel. He is not my son, nor my wife's son. He was brought up by Dr. Moore, and
is an apprentice to Mr. Puffpaste the baker -- I can enquire concerning him.


SCENE II. -- Dr. MOORE and FIELDFARE.
Field. DOCTOR, your servant, I hope you are well.


Dr. Moore. I thank you and am surprised to see you alive.


Field. Why not alive?


Dr. Moore. Because I know nothing more likely to shorten a man's days, than
such a life as you lead.


Field. Doctors can give advice and physic but take neither of them, themselves
-- But can you tell me who that boy is who is apprentice to Mr. Puffpaste the
baker?


Dr. Moore. I do not know, his birth is a secret to every body but Mrs. Moore.


Field Do you not conjecture whose child he is?


Dr. Moore. All that I know of him is that Mrs. Moore, after an evening visit
brought home a beautiful child in a basket; we bro't him up and bound him out
apprentice to a baker.


Field. Whose child does he pass for in your family?


Dr. Moore. For mine, and were I conscious that he were my son, I have not a
child who would give me more pleasure.


Field. Then he is a likely lad.


Dr. Moore. Very likely?


Field. Does he not, thinking himself your son, complain that you bound him
apprentice to a baker?


Dr. Moore. He said he though it it was odd -- But he quieted his mind in thinking
that he was our own child.


Field. He must be a good tempered boy.


Dr. Moore. He is! The more is the pity, that he cannot have a suitable
education -- and certainly, I think his father, whoever he be, must feel as
much remorse on that account, as for any injury done to another person.


Field. Ah, there is no doubt of that! -- But do you ask Mrs. Moore, perhaps
she may tell -- I will enquire of Mr. Puffpaste; and find out the truth if
possible. [All go out.]


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- YOUNG MELVILL and DICK.
Y. Mel. DICK where is Sam Moore?


Dick. He is gone to get his new skates.


Y. Mel. He will be so proud now, there will be no touching him with a boat
hook.


Dick. Sam is quite ambitious. But he is a good-natured fellow.


Y. Mel. Somehow I feel saucy to day, I suspect I shall affront him.


Dick. What makes you saucy. Have you been drinking hard?


Y. Mel. I don't love rum. But the girls like Sam Moore better than they do me.


Dick. How do you know that they like him better than you?


Y. Mel. Because I walked home with Miss Mincer, because it was dark and
slippery, and you would have been affronted had you been in my place.


Dick. Why affronted?


Y Mel. Because when I was walking, she would say -- shame don't be rough --
Sam Moore would not behave so. Nothing is right, but what is done like Sam
Moore.


Dick. You must not blame girls for being quite nice -- You know if they are
not pretty exact we are very apt to laugh at them when we are alone.


Y. Mel. I do not know that Sam Moore is better than every body else neither.


Dick. Nor are you quite right, you appear to be a little envious.


Y. Mel. He will be here in a minute, and you will see enough of his self
importance. [Enter Sam Moore.]


SCENE II. -- YOUNG MELVILL, DICK and SAM MOORE.
Y. Mel. WILL you go a skating with us to day?


S. Moore Yes, I long to try my new skates -- if they perform as well as they
look I shall go like the wind.


Y. Mel. You always can beat every body -- we shall be nothing to you. I
suppose.


S. Moore. I never said I could beat every body, but if my skates were well
fixed, I believe I should try to beat you.


Y. Mel. I suppose you think you could do as well with me, as with Miss Mincer.


S. Moore. I do not know what you mean by doing well with Miss Mincer. I always
meant to treat her decently.


Y. Mel. Is that the way to make the girls like one. I though it the way was to be
very bold and smart.


S. Moore. It is according as how bold, and how smart you are -- girls of no
delicacy are as mean as the dirt in the streets.


Y. Mel. It is a hard task I believe to please them.


S. Moore. If you think so, you will not please them -- most certainly.


Y. Mel. Tell me then how it is done.


S. Moore. Why if there be any thing kind or good to be done for them, do it
quick and make no excuses -- never do or say what they dislike, or speak bad of
them -- and they will soon find out one that likes them.


Y. Mel. Then you think I don't treat them well I suppose.


S. Moore. I said no such thing, your jealousy must have told you so.


Y. Mel. My jealousy! that is well for you, a poor basket bird.


S. Moore. Who Is a basket bird?


Y. Mel You sir, if you please.


S. Moore. [Seizing him by the shoulders] You villain! I Will tear your heart out.


Dick. You shall not punish him for saying truth.


S. Moore. What do you mean, gentlemen? I was as well born as any of you -- and
whoever maintains the contrary I Will fight him.


Y. Mel. Who was your father, sir?


S. Moore. Dr. Moore, and I am prouder of his blood, than I should be of the
blood of the twelve Caesar's.


Y. Mel. There you are mistaken, sir.


Dick. And who do you think your mother was?


S. Moore. Mrs. Moore -- whom, because she appears so grand, all the people
call Madam Moore. I am prouder to be born of her than to be born of an empress.


Dick. There you are mistaken again.


S. Moore. Who were my parents then?


Y. Mel. No body knows -- you was made a present of to Madam Moore in a basket;
that is fact and disprove it if you can.


S. Moore. Let me alone and I Will whip him well -- I Will teach you to talk of
baskets in presence of gentlemen.


Dick. He has told no more than the truth, you shall not punish him.


S. Moore. You insult me beyond all patience, I will throw off some of my
clothes and then I will whip you both well. [In stripping to fight, Dr. Moore
enters.]


SCENE III. -- Dr. MOORE and S. MOORE.
Dr. Moore. SILENCE! -- Boys what is this rout here? what stripping to fight,
for shame Sam! I could not have ^ho't this of you.


S. Moore. Why sir, any man would fight to be insulted so. He says I am not my
own father's son; and that my mother never bore me -- He lies, I know he does.


Dr. Moore. I should have been more disposed to have laughed at him than to
have beat him for that.


S. Moore. He said it in malice, sir, and it is more than flesh and blood can
bear.


Dr. Moore. He said it in malice! I will enquire into that* Do you stay, the
other young gentlemen will withdraw.


[The other lads withdraw.] SCENE IV. -- DR. MOORE and SAM. MOORE.
Dr. Moore. NOW tell me Samuel, tell me, what has been the cause of this
quarrel.


S. Moore. They began to talk about skating and about Miss Mincer -- They took
offense at what I said -- called me basket bird -- and said that you was not my
father, and that Mrs. Moore was not my mother.


Dr. Moore. Well you must not beat them for that.


S. Moore. It is not true I hope.


[Fieldfare and Melvill enter.] Dr. Moore* Not far from truth. But you must not
be kept ignorant -- You are not my son, nor is my wife your mother -- And I
know not whose child you are.


S. Moore. O my grief -- you not my father, Mrs Moore not my mother -- O my
heart will burst! (Laying both his hands on his bosom.) I shall die, I shall
die.


[Exit Sam. Moore.] SCENE V. -- FIELDFARE, DR. MOORE and MELVILL.
Field. (Looking concerned.) That boy went out in extreme anguish -- I always
fancy he resembles me. I always love to see and observe him -- I feel very much
for him now.


Dr. Moore. He may be very near to you. But I know nothing of the matter


Field. Go after him Doctor, and take care of him; I will pay you well.


Mel. You heart, my friend Fieldfare, is not half hard enough (...) a ^ake --
You ought to be insensible to the groans (...) fathers, the sighs of tender
mothers, the tears and ago^^^s of distresse^ (...) sufferings and cries of
deserted infancy, the undeserved infamy of deserted children -- nay his heart,
that he may not feel remorse, should be harder than the Baltic steel.


Field. Good heavens! what a description! Such a man must be unfit to live.


Mel. A proper rake is I suppose always unfit to live.


[Re-enter Dr. Moore.] Dr. Moore. This lad is dangerously ill -- His symptoms
are very bad -- The fits are violent, and the spasms cen^re about the
pericardium -- I wish you would look out for a good nurse for him


Field. I suspect this lad is my son -- would to heaven I could find out his
mother; she must be the properest nurse for him.


Mel. I cannot tell you. I would not for ten thousand pounds undertake to track
you in all your ways.


Field. That is true, but I have extreme anxiety for this boy -- Should he die,
I find I must suffer extremely -- would to heaven I knew who his mother was.


( He goes out and the others follow him.) ACT III.
SCENE I. -- Mr. and Mrs. PUFFPASTE, (entering together.)
Mr. Puff. CAN you tell, my woman, any thing about this boy. I find there is
likely to be a noise about him.


Mrs. Puff Ye^, I could if I though it it safe and proper.


Mr. Puff. You would not conceal any thing now from old spark* that is as true
as a die -- I will not tell tales; burn my whiskers if I do.


Mrs. Puff. I will tell you if you will undertake to plague Fieldfare a little
-- I Would make him feel with a witness -- He has used the mother of this boy very
ill -- And men who use women so ill ought to suffer.


Mr. Puff. That Is right, I like to see a woman good sponk to stand up for her
sex, burn my whiskers if I think there is a man in a thousand who blames them
for that.


Mrs. Puff. Well I know who she is well enough, you remember that woman in a
Bengal gown who was here yesterday to buy biscuit -- you observed how
melancholy she looked. That was the very woman.


Mr. Puff. Shave me up, if I ever though it of that; I Have got my clue now. I Will
plague him well. ( Exit Mrs. Puffpaste.)


SCENE II. -- Mad. MOORE and PUFFPASTE.
Mad. Moore. MR. PUFFPASTE, has Mr. Fieldfare been enquiring of you about Sam's
mother?


Puff Yes.


M. Moore. Well, tell him not a word -- we will contrive the matter so as to do
her justice yet.


Puff. Madam I do not mean to tell any tales out of council -- but I mean to
give him a hearty sweat -- Trust old Spunky for that.


M. Moore. Swea^ him well with all my heart. If it were in my power I would
sweat such fellows one half of an eternity at least.


Puff. Leave that to me -- I Will plague him well; people say I Am a queer fellow;
but I like the women right well. There Is my wife now, fat, easy, and contented
-- As plump a Joan as there is in town.


M. Moore. She does credit to your good nature Mr. Puffpaste.


Puff. Aye that she does, and I Will keep her yet as fat as buttered bunns, trust
me for that.


SCENE III. -- FIELDFARE (entering) and PUFFPASTE.
Field. WHAT excessive pain it gave me to see this boy sick -- I wonder if I
should feel the same degree of joy on his recovery? It is possible -- this boy
then, if it be in the li^e of possibilities, shall be raised up again -- till I
suspected this boy to be my son, I did not know what feelings my heart was
capable of -- Mr. Puffpaste -- I am on the rack of anxiety till I can discover
the truth concerning this boy.


Puff. Why there it is now -- I Will wager you fifteen to a quarter -- that a
married man can learn more in one year, than a rake can in ten.


Field. Why? you take me up drily -- and what can he learn?


Puff. Why that it is better to do right than to do wrong, by a large slice --
and to be married to a good wife is better than to be single -- that a wise man
is b^tter than a fool -- and to be a father is better than to be nothing.


Field. Don't any man know such things, who has common sense?


Puff. Then you have not common sense, you are ignorant of every notch in the
paste; you don't know a mince pie from a sea biscuit.


Field. Do not I know it is easier to do right than to do wrong?


P^ff. Naw -- that ye dant -- you have been this whole day looking after your
boy, and you don't know you have found him now, s^ttin. Naw you come to me to ask
for your wife -- I Will be buttered if I ever come after you to ask for my wife.
Let a man only use his wife well, and he can find her the darkest ^^ght that
ever was.


Field. Finish, since you have begun. Any man knows that it is better to do right
than to do wrong.


Puff. Na ye don't know it neither. You dined once at a nasty tavern, you said,
and was drea-a-dful sick after it. Keep a table of your own, and then you may
dine nice -- and you will find it better by a large slice.


Field. A fiddles end of your observations. I want to find out Sam's mother,
and set her to nurse him.


Puff. There it is again -- What a carnal fool you are; ask me what you should
know yourself. I know Sam's mother, I believe I do; but I will not tell you
unless I please. Think'd I come to you to ask for my wife? If your wife was
where she should be, you could find her.


Field. I have no wife.


Puff. Burn me if I don't think you lie now, honored sir. Suppose you and I
take a biscuit -- You hold one side and I the other, and we break it right in the
middle -- Don't we hold equal halves? Burn my whiskers if I don't think your
son's mother is your proper wife.


Field. A truce with your nonsense then, and tell me where to find her.


Puff. I should have a great mind to tell you if I thought proper -- No I wont
-- It will get abroad that I told tal^^ -- It will be for her benefit -- Now
I Am a good mind to tell you -- But I may make mistakes -- Now I wont tell you.


Field. Come old friend, tell me without any roundabouts, where she is -- I Am
all impatience to know.


Puff. All impatience. Then I will not tell you -- I long to punish you -- cruel
to your wife -- I saw her the other day -- so thin! -- so pale! -- eyes so red!
-- cries so much! -- Now my wife you see -- folks say I hav'nt half the wit
that you have -- fags, I would't swap heads with you for a pistareen to boot.
See my wife, how fat she is in the face, and as fresh as a four penny cake. A
wise man knows more than a fool. A wife man keeps his wife, and a fool forsakes
her, do you see!


Field. You are the most impertinent rascal that breathes -- There! (shakes his
cane over his head) tell me, or I Will cudg^^ you well, you old shepherd.
[Puffpaste springs across the stage, and stands at the entrance]


Puff. There sir, I can outrun you; or if you do knock my brains out, I Will
never tell you where your wife is, smoke me if I do -- I will not be forced to do
as I please, so good night, sir.


Field. Now I Am as far from my purpose as ever. I have abused the women, and
lost respect among the men -- Old squaretoes, to treat me so -- How low I must
be sunk! How the wretch tormented me! What I feel for this boy! I love him -- I
should have loved his mother. Could I have lost my liberty by living with those
whom I loved -- Could I find her she must be more ugly than sin, or I would
have her -- My son live with old Puffpaste! Sam is made for better things. I Will
find her out yet and do her justice.


SCENE II. -- Dr. MOORE (entering) and FIELDFARE.
Dr. Moore. Your son, sir, is in a fair way of recovery.


Field. He is? I thank you sir -- Never did the speech of man give me such
sincere raptures. I thank you for this happy news.


Dr. Moore. His sickness has brought out the whole secret. The mother, hearing
he was on the point of death, came half distracted to my house --


Field. Let me see her, let me see her; for heaven's sake, let me see her!


Dr. Moore. She will not be seen, unless you first engage to marry her.


Field. What, marry and never see her? She may be the most disagreeable hag in
the world.


Dr. Moore. I am sorry if you have had such connections. But ^he lady
positively will not be seen, unless you will first engage to marry her, and
take her into immediate maintenance.


Field Why so secret about it?


Dr. Moore. She says she has tried your word and she cannot trust you upon
that; then if every body knows what is hitherto a secret, her character is
utterly ruined.


Field. How does she mean to hold me?


Dr. Moore. You must sign a bond to forfeit ten thousand dollars, if after you
have seen her you do not have her. She will also secret her son that you shall
never have him.


Field. I cannot blame her. Yet to what a wretched dilemma I am reduced. She
may be some low dirty slut.


Dr. Moore. True.


Field. Or an abominable scold; and one might as well marry a thunder cloud.


Dr. Moore. Very true.


Field. A notorious liar.


Dr. Moore. Likely enough.


Field. A thief.


Dr. Moore. So much the better, she will steal enough to maintain you both.


Field. She may be bad as -- the furies!


Dr. Moore. I know that.


Field. I am very -- very miserable, and can blame no one but myself.


Dr. Moore. I ask you but this once whether you will sign -- if not I put up my
papers, and you neither see the woman nor the boy forever.


Field. Alas! what shall I do? I may ruin myself at one stroke -- But better
outward misery than inward remorse. Thus we, in our riper years, atone in deep
remorse and anxiety for the follies of youth. Thus I sign perhaps my own death
warrant. (Signs the paper -- rises in agony, and dashes his pen on the floor in
a rage) There, tell me now, have I cut my own throat or not. If I have, let me
lie down and die on the spot. [Throws himself backward into a chair.]


Dr. Moore. Rise sir, and know your destiny -- no sir you are pledged to a very
worthy woman -- the moment a (...)


The Female Gamesters. A DRAMA IN THREE ACTS.
DANGER AND CURE OF VICIOUS HABITS.
EVERY vicious habit subjects the mind to a real slavery. The most sacred
relations of life, with the duties annexed to them, are contravened by a
vicious propension which has once mastered the reasoning faculty -- This in no
instance is more evident than in that of women, otherwise delicate and well
bred -- addicting themselves to GAMING -- Few vicious habits are cured but by
some very powerful cause, such as extreme sickness, or fear of present death --
we should not therefore complain of life on account of frequent dangers and
fears. They are medicines of providence to cure us of our vices.

PERSONS.
MEN.
MR. OMBRE -- a merchant, and a very indulgent husband. SMART -- a high
spirited citizen. ALLWORTHY -- a very methodical, but very genteel man.
WOMEN.
MRS. OMBRE -- a female gamester, conductress of a party. MEACHUM -- a wife in
slavish fear of her husband. SMART -- a high spirited wife, counterpart to her
husband. ALLWORTHY -- a prudent sensible woman. ARTFULL -- a wife who values
herself on her canning. MISS EIGHTEEN -- a proud handsome girl. PINCH'EM -- a
housekeeper to Mrs. Ombre.
SCENE. -- A merchant's house in the city of Bristol in England.

THE FEMALE GAMESTERS.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- Mr. and Mrs. SMART.
Mrs. Smart. WELL, I hope you have no objection to my going to Miss Bridget's
this evening.


Mr. Smart. Certainly I have; and must tell you that you positively must not go.


Mrs. Smart. Very pretty indeed! so as soon as we be married we must be laid
under positive commands.


Mr. Smart. Posi^ive, or not, I mean to be master in my own house, and you go
at your peril.


Mrs. Smart. Lordly indeed, Mr. tyrant -- But why may not one see a little
company?


Mr. Smart. Company is not your only object, it is well known that Miss Bridget
keeps a gaming table for ladies. You might as well be unfaithful to my love as
addicted to gaming.


Mrs. Smart. I guess you will find that I shall go where I please nevertheless.


Mr. Smart. You shall go where I please, so prepare yourself to go in a chaise
with me to Gloucester.


(Exit Mr. Smart.) SCENE II. -- Mrs. SMART and Mrs. ARTFUL.
(Artful enters while Smart is speaking.) Smart. I protest I will not bear this --
To be led by the nose by a husband -- I scorn it.


Art. Can you not flatter him into good humor?


Smart. There never was such an obstinate despot as my husband. There is no
bearing with him.


Art. Poh! The least said is soonest mended: you cannot disgrace your husband
without discracing yourself.


Smart. I wanted to go and see cousin Bridget, but my saucebox says that he has
engaged me, and I must go with him to Gloucester.


Art. And why not? The journey is pleasant, with an agreeable friend too -- I
always delight to ride abroad with my husband.


Smart. But they are to have a card party at Miss Bridget's this evening -- And
my tyrant refuses, and I am determined I will not bear it. (Exit Smart.)


SCENE III. -- ARTFUL and MEACHUM.
Art. (alone) THIS woman is out in her politics, an obstinate husband is never
reclaimed by raving.


(Meachum enters) Meach. 'Happy to meet you, my good friend, I wish to know of
you, how you manage your husband.


Art. Why do you need such counsel -- I though it you and your sweetheart lived in
the promised land of matrimony flowing with honey, and all sweets imaginable.


Meach. We never quarrel, but it is all owing to me. If he frowns upon me I
tremble -- I am afraid of him as of a lion -- He is very sovereign I assure you.


Art. I believe you are a piece of a fool for that.


Meach. How would you prevent it?


Art. Prevent it! a woman may have her due influence with her husband if she
acts right.


Meach. That is just what I wish to know.


Art. For a general rule, never seek any thing but to make your husband happy.


Meach. What shall I gain by that?


Art. When you wish to carry a particular point, you will have great influence.


Meach. And is that alone sufficient?


Art. When he is in good humor never put him out of it.


Meach. But I crossed him a good deal when I was first married to let him know
I would not obey.


Art. There you was not cunning. You put him on his defense, and he was obliged
to carry his point, or be your slave.


Meach Now I wish to go to Bridget's, but he says positively he will not live
with a gamester.


Art. Does that affright you?


Meach. I am but a child to take care of myself: were he to leave me, I should
be the wretchedest woman in the world.


Art. So he has found out that -- But what arts have you ever used with him?


Meach. I was determined once to scold him well; but he always left me to enjoy
my own music.


Art. What did you do then?


Meach. They told me that a husband of feeling could not resist my tears -- I
cried for every thing I wanted, and it answered very well for a while.


Art. But did not last I suppose.


Meach. I sometimes feigned it, and so when I cried for trifles he would not
regard me.


Art. Then you did wrong; you should never cry but in matters of consequence,
as for example, for a new gown, or to go out against your husband's will. There
is great art in crying properly.


Meach. You do nothing but blame me -- But they say your husband indulges his
wife more than any other.


Art. What if he do?


Meach. I wish to go to Bridget's but my husband will not consent; and without
that I might as well die as go.


Art. Tell him he is the best husband in the world, and that you will be the
goodest, and the kindest, and the sweetest, wife to him that ever was, if he
will let you go.


Meach. Will such silly coaxing have any effect?


Art. Try it and see: and remember never to scold at your husband at all; and
never cry, but when there is reason for it -- and not often when there is.
[Exit Artful, and Smart reenters, but Meachum does not see her, because her
face is turned the other way.]


SCENE IV. -- MEACHUM and SMART.
Meachum (with herself.) WELL if coaxing will do I Will coax him to perfection --
I have some talents for that --


Smart (interrupting her.) Coax him. I would choke him first; I suppose you
mean your husband. What brutes these creatures are!


Meach. Yes.


Smart. And do you coax him? I Would let him know I would do as I please.


Meach. And how can you do that?


Smart. I never enquire how I can do it; but do it without enquiring of my
sauce box -- To day he was as high as my lord because I talked of going to the
card-party.


Meach. And how did you get away?


Smart. I told him I would go to the card-party and would not stir to
Gloucester -- And I went out of the room, topping high -- went up stairs -- He
looked very angry and rose to follow me -- I went up stairs very fast -- he
went up a few steps and stopped, then went up again, then stopped; I watched him;
at last he came up slowly, I slipped down another pair of stairs, stepped into the
carriage and drove away.


Meach. And what will be the consequence?


Smart. I care not, he may go to Gloucester on foot or hire a carriage if he
pleases. [Enters Allworthy.]


SCENE V. -- ALLWORTHY, MEACHUM, and SMART.
Allw. Ladies, you seem all to be engaged on some adventure, pray, what is it?


Smart. Yes, Mrs. Allworthy you will go with us to the card-party.


Allw. No* indeed I shall not.


Meach. Why not, madam?


Allw. I will not dissemble my sentiments, I do not think it proper.


Meach. Not think it proper?


Allw. No, I do not for a woman to leave the company of her husband, and the
care of her children; to go to some public house, and pass the evening at cards
-- where, if successful she stays late -- if unfortunate she comes home peevish
-- and the worst company imaginable to her family.


Smart. You are an old fashioned creature.


Allw. Good fashions ought to last forever, and I think it a very good fashion
in a lady to refuse gaming.


Smart. Well that is clever now. You are just like your old grandmother. I
remember how she used to put her spectacles on, and sing it out, Cards and
dice, are the Devil's device. If you would enjoy your day, abstain from play. So
you think too.


Allw. You have given a ridiculous turn to the sentiment. But let me express it
and see if it can be despised. It is dangerous for a woman to be a gamester.
She will lose her character, her husband's affections, and the respect of her
children, and then she cannot be happy.


Smart. You are the most old fashioned creature that ever was, so, I say no
more to you.


[Exeunt Meachum and Smart.] Allworthy alone. If these woman be not rushing on
their own perdition I have no reason -- It is full bad enough for men to game
at public houses, and keep late hours -- If women do the same they appear
divested of the proper delicacy of the sex. [Exit Allworthy.]


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- Mr. and Mrs. ALLWORTHY.
Mr. All. I WAS sorry this moment to meet my friend Smart very angry at his
wife.


Mrs. All. His wife may have given him just provocation. But I observe that in
cases of this kind, you always favor the women.


Mr. All. The cause may be that I have ever been acquainted with women who are
virtuous and reasonable.


Mrs. All. Your extreme complaisance almost makes me suspect you of flattery.


Mr. All. Think, my lovely friend, that when ^ man trusts his honor, his
interest, the keeping of his heart and happiness to a woman, this is something
more than flattery.


Mrs. All. It certainly is, and the surest mark of confidence. I esteem it a
great honor to be entrusted with such a precious charge. But supposing I should
wish to go to the card party?


Mr. All. You may if you think proper -- I leave you to your own reason and
discretion. [Exit with a low bow.]


Mrs. All. One thing I am certain of. No woman can be happier than I, with
respect to her husband.


SCENE II. -- Mis EIGHTEEN and Mrs. ALLWORTHY.
(Eighteen speaks as she enters.) Eight. You say your life has been more
agreeable since you married than before -- Yet I am determined never to be
married.


All. You may alter your resolution.


^igh. No, never, you may depend upon it.


All. Bravely resolved. But such resolutions have often failed.


Eight. Mine shall not -- shall not -- unless I could have such a husband as
yours, I admire him.


All. Why that is frank indeed, to confess a particular regard for my husband.


Eight. I did not say that neither, but it might be the case if it were not a
crime.


All. Worse and worse -- But what qualities have you discovered in my husband,
to attract your notice?


Eight. Because he is always so generously complaisant. My mamma says, that you
behave together not like old married folks, but like a couple just going to be
married.


All. True, I know no difference but on the best side. -- Mr. Allworthy has
ever been more kind and more attentive to me since we were married than before.
The truth is, he always was a proper gentleman.


Eight. It is said that he always lets you do just as you please.


All. He does -- I never knew him, in any case, to give me a direct refusal.


Eight. Would he let you go to the card party?


All. He never forbad it.


Eight. Now I wish to know how a woman can make a complete gentleman so
attached to her.


All. That is needless, as you never intend to be married.


Eight. Why, perhaps I might, could I be as happy as you, and have such a
husband as one chooses.


All. Certainly I would choose only such as I have.


Eight. But how could you make him like you so? that is the thing I want to
know.


All It was not my beauty, certainly.


Eight. No, it is not extreme, but well enough.


All. Nor my gaiety, or frequenting public places.


Eight. No, for people say you go about much more since you married than before.


All. Yes; you see then it was none of these matters.


Eight. Well, you torment me, I want to know what it was.


All. To be serious then, all I know of it is this, that I first considered
whether Mr. Allworthy were a reasonable man. I found that he was -- Then I made
it my constant aim, to perform whatever was agreeable to him, and avoid
whatever was disagreeable to him, both before man age and since.


Eight. But they say a rose is no rose without its thorns -- and that all
sweet, and no sour spoils the appetite.


All. Human life has thorns enough without making any artificial ones -- And is
it not a fact, that both men and women are most attached where they feel most
happy? They are most easy in their minds where they are best treated, and enjoy
the pleasure of self esteem. I consider vice and folly as out of the question.


Eight. But it is not delicate to take such pains to please a man.


All. It is as delicate as to torment him. A dove is at least as delicate a
creature as a snake -- Besides, who needs to know your views, you simple sense?
-- You may find out what a man likes or dislikes, by himself or his neighbors
-- say nothing of your designs, but avoid the offense, and perform what is
agreeable. In that consists the whole secret -- and tho you do it by design, a
man who loves you, will always think you do it from the native goodness of your
heart.


Eight. If that be the way I shall let him pass, I am determined they shall
love me for my beauty and my fine accomplishments: and if ever I be married I
will do as I please, that is positive.


Allw. That is no more than I do, who never was positive about it.


Eight. But I will not have it in that way; and to be sure I will not be
restrained in gaming -- I intend to begin before I am married, so that my
husband shall have no face to find fault with me.


Allw. Husband! Husband! I thought you never meant to be married.


Eight. O I forgot myself; I do not intend to be married -- but I can have a
husband if I please, I would have you to know; so I will dress myself for the
card-party this minute. [Exit Eighteen. -- Mrs. Smart enters again.]


SCENE III. -- SMART and ALLWORTHY.
Smart. SO I am going you see, and my husband, poor to^d, may go to Gloucester
on foot like a saucy wretch; think to restrain me!


Allw. What if he should take a coach and go with some other woman.


Smart. He is too honest for that.


Allw. That is a very curious reason for using him ill. But honesty may
sometimes meet with his match. Nothing is more likely than ill treatment, to
make him seek the graces of another.


Smart. You are a wretch for starting such a thought. Heavens how it pains me
here! ( Laying her fan on her bosom.) I will haste to the card-table and forget
it as fast as I can.


Allw. You will have enough to do to forget it even there.


( All go out] ACT III.
SCENE I. -- Mr. and Mrs. OMBRE.
Mr. Om. HERE my good girl, see how I leave matters. There is money with the
housekeeper to buy provissions for the family, and to purchase you a suit for
your wedding day; I give this to you.


Mrs. Om. I know it, and there is money left here by Mr. Oldfield for you.


Mr. Om. I do not need it, I have enough to answer the demands of the day.


Mrs. Om. I hope you will not forbid me to go to the card-party.


Mr. Om. Forbid you, no, tho I do not love cards -- and should be very well
contented if you did not. It is a very insipid game to me -- but you will be
robbed if it be known that you go -- you have money.


Mrs. Om. That is only to terrify me from going to the party.


Mr. Om. But I will escort you for fear of harm.


Mrs. Om. You may save yourself the trouble: the men are very fond of showing
how necessary they are to the women -- I shall be as well without you.


[Mr. Ombre goes out.] SCENE II. -- Mrs. OMBRE and Miss PINCH'E^.
Om. WHERE is the money which my husband left to buy provisions?


Pinch. It is here; but why does not Mr. Ombre buy provisions himself.


Om. because he trades remote from the market in the further part of the city
-- so he leaves the money with me.


Pinch. I would help myself out of the money very freely -- I should love a
careless husband.


Om. O I shall not forget that, you may depend on it. But how much may we
venture to take?


Pinch. Well if I help you to this money you must keep me safe from harm, for
there is no way but to pinch it out of the family.


Om. It grieves me for the poor children, but then it must be done. It is
genteel you know.


Pinch. Well here are thirty guineas which we may save -- your husband left
sixty to buy flour, but brown bread will do for the children, and it will not
cost more than half so much.


Om. Well, and to make it pass, we will eat the same -- so if Mr. Ombre should
enquire, we can tell him that the children eat as good as we.


Pinch. No madam I am not going to eat brown bread neither -- while I do the
work, I will live upon the best.


Om. Then set brown bread on always for the children, and for me, when my
husband is absent. But there is no other way that a saving can be made?


Pinch. We might mix the strong beer with water half and half, and by that
means raise a considerable ^um.


Om. There is the money which my husband left me to purchase a suit of clothes
to celebrate my wedding day -- I will borrow a suit of your clothes and wear it
that day, my husband will never mind it -- so do you give me what you have
saved at present, it may pay this day's debt -- but there is another thing
which I have thought of.


Pinch. What is that?


Om There is the sum which Mr. Oldfield left for my husband. I will take that
to save the chance of being out of cash by a bad run. I shall win in my turn
enough to make it up. Go, for the present, to the business of the family, and
see what further savings may be made.


[Exit Pinch'em] Om. alone. Now many persons would have made these savings to
increase their own private estate. But I to pay my debts of honor, mine is the
noblest motive. Indeed it went against my conscience a little to shorten the
allowance of my poor children. But what is to be done -- one had better be out
of the world than be singular in good company. [Enters Eighteen, and after her
Mrs. Allworthy.]


SCENE III. -- EIGHTEEN, ALLWORTHY and OMBRE.
Eigh. WELL I am determined to go -- I will not have my husband say after marriage
that I cheated him. I Will bring him up to cards.


All. The husband you are resolved never to have.


Eigh. I will not be insulted any more with that Mrs. Allworthy -- I can have a
husband if I please, but I will not (makes a long pause) unless I please.


All. to Om. Your husband is very kind, he loves not cards; but he never
troubles you about it.


Om. He is very kind and he loves not cards, but who that has learnt the
fashion, ever pretends to care for that -- I shall go, (Exit Ombre.)


SCENE IV. -- ALLWORTHY and EIGHTEEN.
All. NOW my dear girl you are not yet hardened in vice. I advise you not to go
to the card party this evening. It is a dangerous practice.


Eigh. I determine to go, and there is nothing that you can say which will
hinder me. But I am waiting for Miss Idle, as soon as she comes I shall go. But
you may say any thing in the mean time.


All. You are uncommonly generous for a woman who loves cards, and for that
reason I tell you, that if you pursue this practice of gaming you may give up
every prospect of a happy settlement in life.


Eigh. I care not for that: I wonder what makes Miss Idle stay. I will not wait
for her any longer.


( Eighteen goes out) All. alone. What a strange infatuary vice! The most
affectionate pairs are separated, and alienated from each other. Girls give up
the prospects, which are dearest to the youthful heart -- mothers can deprive
their families of their food, and be hard hearted against their own children --
nay can even give up their beloved dress, all for that wretched insipid game of
cards.


SCENE V. -- PINCH'EM running in to ALLWORTHY who remains.
Pinch. O mercy! -- what shall I do? mistress is murdered I believe.


All. What makes you think so?


Pinch. As I came from the Grocer's shop which is at the head of Bembow street,
I saw three very ugly fellows in close conversation at the corner of a coal
house. I got as near to them unseen as possible, and overheard them say that
they knew of a card party at Miss Bridget's, and that, the ladies would have
money; and they meant to way-lay, rob and murder them. Poor mistress, I am
frighted out of my wits, she is gone for it, I believe.


SCENE VI. -- All the ladies rush in with noise and confusion* except Mrs.
OMBRE.
Smart. THERE was the dreadfulest noise of quarrelling in Bembow street; and
they cried out murder, murder! Somebody is killed, I believe.


All I am astonished, as every one must know they had money, that they should
go through Bembow street, as they must know it is famous for robbers.


Smart It was the shortest way to Miss Bridgets, and we were in a hurry to get
there.


All. The love of gaming is even dearer than life.


( Mrs Ombre enters -- They lay hold on her.) Pinch. Are you alive?


Ombre. Yes, I am alive, but had it not been for my kind and generous husband,
I certainly had been murdered -- He knew that I must go through that street, and
tho I perversely refused his protection -- he* expecting the robbers would
assault me, placed himself in a proper situation to defend me.


Smart. 'Twas a great chance that you was attacked near where he was placed.


Om. It was: first two ugly fellows laid hold on me with great knives in their
hands; and a third was coming up with a cutlass. My husband felled one with his
cane and run another through with a sword, he grappled with a third, and left him
helpless, he received five wounds himself but none dangerous.


All. So Mrs. Meachum, you was there.


Meach. By Mrs. Artful's direction, I got leave.


Art. 'Twas I put her in the way of it.


Meach. But I wish I had not gone.


Art. But if no harm is done we may take another course and go yet.


Meach. No, mischief enough has been done already. I saw your husband, Mrs.
Smart, in a hackney coach, with a noted woman going to Gloucester.


Smart. O heavens, my husband -- I shall die -- (She flies off the stage in a
passion.)


Pinch. And the mischief does not end here -- The gentleman who was courting
Miss Eighteen, coming to her house, and learning that she was gone to the
card-party* went and took up her rival, and is gone with her to Bath.


Eight. Confusion seize them -- Oh I Am distracted, oh! --


(Appearing to go off the stage in agony.) Omb. Let us never take a step that
way again. I must have perrished had it not been for my generous husband -- and
shall I employ my time to the utter ruin of his affairs? I had almost ruined
his family before -- his generous kindness saved me. I will abuse it no more.

Thus dangers are the cure of human crimes,
And present death awakens fear, betimes.
Then blame not Providence for human woe,
It is the medicine of our lives below. [All go out.]

Scanderbeg, The Epirots called this remarkable person, Alexander. Among the
Turks he was called Scander-Beg -- that is, "Alexander the Prince" -- But his
true name was George Castriot, and the title he gave himself in his letters,
was, "The Soldier of Jesus Christ" -- For about 30 years he was the champion of
the Christian States against the Turks. Temperate, dextrous, indefatigable and
active, he ever met with success. He was mild in his temper, almost to a fault
-- and three times pardoned his cousin Amesa, a voluptuous youth, the crime of
high treason. He died with glory -- and the Turks wore pieces of his bones, set
in jewels and rings, as amulets against danger. His height of glory was about
1440.
OR THE PRINCE OF EPIRUS. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE -- IN VERSE. IN THREE ACTS.
VOLUPTUOUSNESS DANGEROUS TO YOUTH.

PERSONS.
MEN.
CHRISTIANS. SCANDERBEG -- Prince of Epirus. HELENOR -- a Christian Bishop and
Prophet. AMESA -- his nephew. MORATH -- aged General of the Foot. HAEMON --
General of the Horse.
TURKS. ACHMET -- Vizier of the Turkish army. MUSTAPHA -- Bashaw, second in
command. EFFENDI -- Secretary. HALY -- a spy.

WOMEN.
ZEPHORA -- Eliza's nurse, both having been captives to the Turks. PAULINA -- a
grave lady, captive, and servant to the Vizier.
SCANDERBEG -- OR THE PRINCE OF EPIRUS.
ACT 1.
SCENE I. -- SCANDERBEG and HELENOR.
Scan. HAIL sacred Pastor, may this happy day
Refresh thy soul, and banish grief away.

Hell. Ah no! illustrious prince, high Heaven decreed,
That half my flock, my precious sheep, should bleed.
Heaven was the object of their warm desire,
I bade their zeal to heavenly joys aspire.
Yet half this much loved people now are slain.
Their bones are whitening still on yonder plain.

Scan. Yet Heaven with victory our arms has crowned;
Myriads of Turks have marked their length of ground.
There proudest Bashaws, Beys, and Visiers lie;
Whose haughty souls dared Christian arms defy.

Hell. Whole armies slain, vast armies still arise.
The Turkish empire endless swarms supplies.
Their boundless wealth can ceaseless wars defray;
Their endless troops renew the fatal day.

Scan. The great Eternal Power, who rules the skies,
By his own strength the wrath of man defies;
He gives the victory and vengeance due;
And saves alike by many or by few.
Then I, to save the state, still lift the sword.
No Christian soul shall own a Turkish Lord.

Hell. Heaven bless your hopes, and give your arms success;
May Heaven's high justice give our wrongs redress;
May you adorn the bright triumphal car;
Yet still I weep, and dread destructive war.

Scan. Thine, worthy pastor, are the arts of peace:
The virtues by thy labors shall increase*
My heart impels me to the martial field;
There the proud Turks shall to my Christians yield.
Thine be the milder work, to preach and pray;
But mine the glory of the well fought day.
Go, and for us, thy pious vows be given;
No work succeeds but by the will of heaven.

[Exit Helenor.] SCENE II. -- SCANDERBEG and AMESA.
[Amesa enters unarmed.] Scan. Come thou thus idle, midst dire war's alarms?
Where, cousin, is thy brilliant suit of arms?

Am. Had I but hope, I still might seek the fight,
And thousands see my deeds, and do me right.
Can our whole host, a handful at the best,
O'er-power these mighty conquerers of the East?

Scan. Yet have I seen, when others blood ran cold,
Thee, keen for fight, and as a lion bold,
Seen thee performing deeds, in foremost line,
On which the sun might even be proud to shine.
But love resistless lays thy glories low,
The best or vilest passions, mortals know;
The fair Circassian slave in yonder fields,
Melts thy fond heart, and all thy courage yields.

Am. True; I have seen the fairest female form,
That ever did a hero's bosom warm.
To none of all her sex her beauty yields;
And true, the fair resides in yonder fields.

Scan. Yes she is there, and there you wish to go,
Make peace with Turks, and lay our glories low.
Would sell thy nation, and would wed thy shame,
And bury every spark of honest fame.
Would bed in bagnios with a Turkish slave,
A better bed for thee, would be thy grave.

Am. But have not all the bravest poets sung,
Of love? to tender lays their harps have strung.

Scan. Yes -- sung of Samson's locks, and Helen's shame,
And every son that ever bore a name.
The fruit of lawless love, the boundless crimes,
Of earlier periods, or of later times.

Am. Tell this to our rich dames, who point the dart,
Full proud to fix it in a hero's heart.
(...) object loves,
To virtue like a burning se^aph moves.
All is alive to bless the lovely prize,
And catch the virtues kindling from her eyes.
And such the fair Circassian slave may be:
None bless the sun but who have eyes to see.

Scan. No -- no -- a base born slave for sordid gold,
Bought for some brutal Turk, decayed, and old,
The lothing partner of his sordid bed;
To ignorance and to imposture bred.
I Will hear no more, prepare to tread the plain;
On heaps of dastard Turks, despoiled and slain.
Spring to thine arms, fly swifter than the wind,
This sword is for the knave who stays behind.

( Amesa goes out.) ACT II.
SCENE I. -- HALY, a Turkish spy, enters. HALY and AMESA.
Haly. WHERE is this wretch who longs to sell his soul:
Already listed in the infernal roll
Of traitors? Here Is the poison, precious bane!
That must destroy what virtues yet remain
Lingering in his galled heart. But hush, it is he,
He Is coming -- Now let prosper villainy.
(Steps aside till Amesa enters, then addresses himself to Amesa.) --
Illustrious Hero of the far famed line!
Whose deeds in song, and sculptured marble shine;
Descended from the famed A chillean Boy,
^yrrhus, who laid in dust the towers of Troy.
Why should thou serve a petty tyrant Lord?
Can his bald realm a recompense afford?
My master has the prize that is worth thy toil,
Long treasured riches of imperial spoil.
Beside, the loved Circassian slave is thine,
Whose beauties far the light of heaven outshine.
All these, if you desert the Christian bands;
Shall be delivered safe into your hands.

Am. The gold is nothing -- What is dust to me?
Jewels and vests, mere sordid trumpery.
The fair Circassian maid alone I prize,
Joy of my soul, and comfort of my eyes.
When late in our proud court a captive she
Appeared, a princess fair she seemed to be.
Not one of all our great imperial line
Could young Amesa's captive girl outshine.
The prince, O cruel Lord, forbad my love.
To conquer fate, alas! in vain I strove.
Then, by exchange, my captive maid returned,
To her rough Lord -- My heart her absence mourned.

Haly. Now then young prince the captive maid is thine,
To morrow thou in Turkish gold shall shine.
If thou a chosen band this hour wilt lead;
To bring impaled, the Christian hero's head.
Thou well the hour of safe attack may know,
Wronged in thy love, thou well may be his foe.

[Takes the bribe -- Haly goes out, and Amesa makes his reflections with
himself.] Am. O fatal! fatal power of lawless love!
Naught could his gold, naught could his presents move.
The fair Circassian maid alone I prize;
Joy of my heart, and comfort of my eyes.
For her alas! I to his offers yield.
And now, a blasted villain, take the field.
Sunk, and disgraced, my nation I betray;
Blast all my glories on this fatal day.
Sell all that is dear -- O yet can I return!
And in my soul this torment cease to burn --
Ah no, the flame accursed torments me still.
And scarce the villain quivering on the wheel
Of varied torture, feels such pangs as mine --
Sure fruit of crimes, the meed of ill design --
O had I never been born, or those fair eyes
On this dull earth were never seen to rise.
Heaven, earth, I lose, and vanquish glory's charms;
To sink entranced in fair Fatema's arms.
Yet such my pain, if all the world could see
The vilest wretch on earth -- they would pity me.

[Haly enters again -- Vizier Achmet enters -- with Mustapha as Amesa is
retiring.] SCENE II. -- HALY, VIZIER, and MUSTAPHA.
Vis. THIS then the place must be, from whence we scan
The Christian camp, and learn their mutual plan.

Haly. Amesa told the whole, and you may see,
Well with his words the facts espied agree.
Below yon cliff (points as if observing a camp, looks through a prospect glass)
which threats the arching sky,
Proud of their state, the bold Venetians lie.
Their numbers few, with silver mounted arms,
Each man a hero, fired with glory's charms --
The fierce Hungarians on the left are placed;
Large leathern belts encircling every waist,
Whence hang these heavy swords with which they strike,
And deal out death, to horse, or man, alike,
Next these on either part Epirots lie,
Men who in fight our fiercest troops defy.
All clothed in iron, In the midst they place
Militia of Epirus' hardy race.
Behind the whole the troops reserved recline,
Two aged generals rule that valiant line.

Vis. Speak out, then, warriors, shall we, as they lie,
Attack them, and the force of battle try?

Mus. Illustrious chief, from battle I dissent,
Shame waits the man who is on battle bent:
Never saw I, an army ranged so well,
Both to attack a force, or to repel.

Vis. Base woman hearted Bashaw, can thou fear
A boy scarce reached his twenty second year,
A youth, not half a man, whose face can show
Scarce beard enough to fit him for a beau.
Shall I then tremble at his name, and fly?
Rather would I, with my whole army, die.

Mus. A coward, vizier! say not that again,
Or thou no more shall fill the list of men,
A coward I, who from my youth hate bled,
In battles more than thou have seen, or read.

Vis. Why then deny the christian force to fight,
Or think a boy can put us all to flight?
What will the Ottomans at Pera say*
That Vizier Achmet shunned the glorious day.

Mus. Say what they will. (...) fight w^^h thousands cost;
What will they say when our whole army's lost?
Consider chief, the man whom we oppose,
Not written in the list of common foes.
Descended from a grand heroic race,
Whose deathless deeds song, history, marble, grace.
In all the purest christian morals bred,
No fumes of wine becloud his princely head.
No lawless loves his manly nerves unbrace,
No wanton feats his youthful day disgrace.
Aspasia, mistress of unrivaled charms,
Fires him to virtue, and the deeds of arms.
Heiress of all Epirus, if he gain
The victory, on this tremendous plain.
The chiefs decree to that heroic boy,
T^^ state its lovely heir and every joy.

Vis. Why speak of that? Let them decree again,
I Will not recede an inch from yonder plain.
Mustapha go, and rouse the troops to arms,
Bid martial glory spread her awful charms.
Say not a word of fear, but say aloud,
That all may hear as thunder from a cloud.
"This is the day the christian cross shall fall,
"The Turkish crescent rise and conquer all."

( Effendi enters.) SCENE III. -- VIZIER and EFFENDI.
Vis. What says my secretary? not in fear,
I hope, as Heaven shall hold my safety dear.
Shall I retreat from that soft christian boy,
And not both him and all his slaves destroy?

Eff. Ah if thou can I wish he were destroyed,
But the young prince has all his skill employed,
To range his army in the ^ttest plight,
Either to wait the attack, or meet the fight.
If you attack, they in defense remain,
And force of fire, or thunder might sustain.
Huge cloud capt rocks on either wing arise,
Who hide their summits in the darkened skies.
A deep morass extends along their rear,
And half their flank, and shuts out every fear*
If we attack, they are safe from every blow,
And hurl unpunished death on troops below.
Or if they should the fierce attack approve
The moment when your troops begin to move
In bogs and fens both horse and foot must fall,
Slow they must march, if they can march at all,
Then to this spot if Scanderbeg should come,
Entire defeat and slaughter is your doom.
Your troops incumbered in that marshy ground,
May yield him victory without a wound.
There whatsoever our court of us shall say,
It Is by not fighting that we win the day.

Vis. O wors^ than women, let us leave the field,
Allow that Turks to Christian arms must yield.
He camps with skill -- he will that skill retain,
And he as skilfully can camp again.
Is there no woman here, whom we might try?
She would not fear with Christian arms to vie.
(Calls Paulina to mortify his officers: Paulina enters.) Say dame, what would
you do to check the course
Of Christian bands, and give our arms swift course?

Pau. When all their men are gathered in a band,
Send out your fleetest horse through all the land.
Collect the women, whom each husband leaves,
With all their babes, and sell them all for slaves.
They once dispersed through all the Turkish lands,
With them Epirus, and her glory ends.

Vis. A glorious scheme! Effendi is your man,
Or Mustapha, to execute the plan;
To lead the party, who with dire alarms,
Attacks the babes and wars with woman's charms.
Like wasps disturbed they will fight with tenfold rage,
And every clown will in the war engage.

Pau. No other way can ever be subdued
A nation, which is every year renewed.

Vis. What other way can they their race renew;
Than Turks and other nations all pursue?
Like leaves on trees are all the race of men;
Their generations rise and fall again.
Our Father slept in dust and we survive;
When we shall sleep another group ^^all live.
When we shall gain the victory, we trust,
Whoever is slain will kindly sleep in dust.

Pau. It Is not mere life, but morals form the soul.
The mind will all inferior powers control.
Your women in the haram's walls confined;
Know neither faith nor sanctity of mind --
You keep them slaves, they view you as their foes.
They neither s^^k your bliss, nor your repose.
(...) if they break their bonds, rage unconfined;
Nor dream of sweet constraint within the mind.

Vis. And do not other women do the same?
What that vague sex, but bolts and bars, can tame.

Pau. Nay, from their infancy, each cheerful day,
The Christian boys and girls together play.
Nay even in age mature, the girls are seen
In gayest pastime dancing with the men.
They live and love at large, nor ever find,
Restraint, but which arises in their mind.

Vis. Impossible -- confusion must ensue,
They soon must be a base and filthy crew.
Some sordid end bids you these tales conceive:
And deem'st thou that such tales I can believe?

Pau. Could I mistake, who half my life have been
With Christians, have their manners tried, and seen?
To you, who but as slaves your women deem,
Freedom with purity appears a dream.
Yet with the Christians every pleasing day;
The youth with maidens innocently play.
Some choose their mates and delicately love,
Like the bright Houris -- the Virgins of paradise -- whose delightful
conversation, the virtuous, according to the Koran, enjoy after death.
Houris in the world above.
Such love as by your Koran is expressed;
Among the saints superlatively blessed.
And when they would unite in marriage bands,
The simple vow the parties heart command,
Their sprightly brides retain their freedom still,
See company, when, how and where they will --
The wife and husband mutual cares employ,
Their children are their parents dearest joy;
These bred to virtue flee all vicious sense,
And form the nation's surest, best defense.
And should their army fall a sacrifice,
Another army instantly would rise,
Unless their women be removed away,
In vain their chiefs we fight, their soldiers slay.

Vis. Mere fables these and fond chimera all!
This day decides, the Christians states shall fall.
My chiefs are cowards, but my soldiers feel
A courage, keener than the tempered steel.
Fly hence, Essendi, instant fly amain,
And hear my orders to the distant plain.
Let then the trumpet sound -- To arms, To arms!
Let martial glory spread her dreadful charms.
"This day decrees the Christian states to fall;
"The Turkish Crescent rise, and conquer all."

[Exeunt omnes.] ACT III.
SCENE I. -- MORATH and HAEMON.
Mor. SAD is the difference of youth and age.
When I was busy on life's busy stage,
My place was ever foremost in the van;
Nor deigned to tremble a^ the face of man.

Hae. Our prince indeed is wise; he orders right
Old men in council young men in the fight --
'Twas well for the attack to give command,
Men have more courage moving than to stand.

Mor. Yet still I (...). The younger prince is fled,
His stratagems and active force I dread.

Hae. The prince indeed is fled, but fled alone.
Not even a sentinel his cause would own.
Caught in the toils of vice, he vainly strove
With pains extreme, to conquer traitorous love.
Lost to himself, his nation, and his friends,
In this vile act his race of glory ends.

Mor. Experience ever proves the dreadful truth,
That lawless leve's the certain bane of youth --
While still the heart is pure from wanton stains
The love of virtue and of good remains*
But who to brutal pleasures sinks his soul,
Corrupts its active powers, destroys it whole.
But who comes here -- (Looking out, sees Am^sa coming guarded.) -- Sure, sure
he is taken, see,
O what distressful spectacle to me!
Amesa guarded, and unarmed he stands,
And tears his golden hair with both his hands.

[Amesa enters unarmed -- his hair loose, his eyes dejected, etc.] Am. O worthy
seniors, let me, let me die!
What else but death can bury infamy?
A traitor to my nation I have been --
I Have reached, tho young, the utmost bounds of sin.
Pronounce my sentence, seniors, let me die --
What else but death can bury infamy?
I Have not a prayer to make, a tear to shed;
O let me but be numbered with the dead.

Mor. Unhappy youth! thy sad example proves
The dreadful dangers of unlawful loves.

Am. I Have trod those paths where mercy finds no place.
I Have sinned beyond the reach of human grace.
The sun never shone upon a guiltier head --
Than this which longs to sleep among the dead.
Yet lost to virtue and to sense of shame --
I cannot wrong an honest woman's name.
The fair Circassian still her fame retains;
And pure from me, and all my crimes, remains,
Detests my treason, and abhors my love --
And her contempt, the last of griefs, I prove.
Then let me die -- Perhaps that grace divine,
May pardon sins for sorrows such as mine.
Pronounce my sentence, fix the fatal spot,
Let me as martial rule directs -- be shot.
May your keen soldiers take a careful aim --
And end at once my sorrows, and my shame.

Hae. At once, sad youth, we could the law declare,
The law by right must finish your despair.
But we the fate of battle now expect,
And what the prince our general shall direct.
No witnesses we need, confession ends
The proof, and answers all the law intends.
The prince himself pronounces angry fa^e,
May he be prosperous as he is good and great.

[Guards conduct Amesa away] SCENE III. -- (A single sentinel enters with a
woman prisoner) -- ZEPHORA and MORATH.
Zeph. O where the valiant prince? Heaven be his guide,
The will of Heaven must over his ways preside.
Eternal counsels aim his deeds to bless;
Whatever he attempts will meet success.
What pleasures must his godlike bosom feel,
When I the wondrous secrets shall reveal.
She Is wrongly deemed the fair Cicassian maid,
It Was I who watched her in her infant bed.

Mor. Then tell year wonder -- your assertion prove,
The noble general will reward your love.

Zeph. If yet the glorious chief I cannot find,
I Will keep the secret locked within my mind.
Unless the good Helenor know my face,
And place good faith, in my full ripened days.

Mor. Are priests the only men that women trust?
Can you not think a valiant soldier just!

Zeph. Aye -- yes, but then the priest most suits my mind,
Or else the chief most brave and not less kind.
To him a mystery I shall disclose,
Which shall our joys complete, and end our woes.
But till the prince or sacred priest I find,
I keep the secret locked within my mind.

Mor. Go, c^ntinel, conduct her to the priest,
And be the secret from her soul released.
If from its public fame such blessings flow,
To fill our joys, and banish all our woe.

[Centinel conducts her out] SCENE IV. -- SCANDERB^^ (entering with martal
music.) MORATH and HAEMON.
Scan. The battle's done, the glorious day is ours,
Thank, reverend seniors, to the eternal powers.
O^^ wrongs are all redressed by heaven's decree,
This day the christian lands again are free.
Yet what a field of blood, what waste of men,
May I never look on such a scene again.
Bashaws in heaps there end their martial toil,
And slaughtered Visiers swell the dreadful pile.
Just was our cause, and well our l^bor ends;
Just is the war, which truth and right defends

Mor. I^lustrious chief, to heaven our nation owes,
Victory and safety from our mortal foes,
This glorious day, shall every heart rejoice,
All ranks and ages shall unite their voice,
To praise in raptured strains the eternal name,
And waft thy glory on the wings of fame.

Hae. Now may these eyes contented close in death,
In peace with all the world I yield my breath,
Since heaven from war, shall give our state repose,
And put this glorious end to all our woes.

SCENE III. -- AM^SA reentering guarded, SCANDER^EG an^ HELENOR.
Sc. [Turning to Amesa.] BUT who is this?

Am [Answers without looking up] A villain!

S^an. That is true?
O cousin thou art lost.

Am Death is my due,
O let me as a traitor yield my breath,
The only prize of such a crime is death.
Let death atone at once for all my crimes,
Sad warning to the youth of later times.

Scan. Thou have deserved thy fate, and it must be,
Yet what a blast on my success and me.
Victorious on* the field of fame I stood,
Yet here must bathe me in my kinsman's blood,
Amesa dear to me as vital breath,
Must I pronounce thy sentence, give thee death?
Is this the period of this glorious day?
That very period takes its joys away.
[ Helenor enters, and Scander^eg addresses him.] Illustrious pastor, see thy
friend returns,
Rejoicing, and in midst of joy he mourns.
On yonder plain, where the proud Othmans stood*
There has the Turkish Crescent set in blood.
Peace over the land, shall her sweet branch extend,
And Christian virtues swift from heaven descend,
But this unhappy youth is lost to ^ame,
And sinks, a traitor, to eternal shame

Hell No. Crowns of joy must shine on every head,
Let not a drop of Christian blood be shed.
Thus the good spirit teaches me within,
The extreme of justice is a part of sin.
The Almighty will the chief of sins forgive,
The chief of traitors by his goodness live.
Forgive the youth, with cheerful grace, nor lay
One stain of grief on this important day.

Scan Would I forgive for heaven's sake, and thee?
Yes, blameless priest, thy thoughts with mine agree.
Take then, dear nephew, take my hand and heart,
Again from virtue never may thou part,
This crime has cost thy cousin tears of blood.
The grace of Heaven can change and make thee good.

Am. My crime is infamous, I wish to die.
The cheerful light is painful to my eye.
Fain would I hide in dust from human view,
And take for all my crimes the vengeance due;
Yet since my death so dear a friend might grieve,
With sad reluctance I consent to live.

Hell. Live youth, and let thy better sense be shown,
Let future virtues for thy crimes atone.
And thou, illustrious chief, prepare to hear,
What scenes of glory in our land appear.
This day, by truth* I saw the opening skies,
And heaven's bright visions rushed upon my eyes,
Saw thee, young chief, benignant, good, and great,
With mildest order bless our happy state.
Peace smiled over all the realms, and plenty flowed*
And every soul was smit with LOVE OF GOD.
A course of triumphs over the Turkish bands,
Defends thine own, and all the Christian lands,
For safe by thee, the Christian states remain,
Nor shall the world itself thy fame contain.

Sca. Cease holy pastor, nor thy rank disgrace,
By grossest flattery to thy prince's face.

Hell. It Is true as heaven shall help me, Prince it is true,
Then rose thy fair domestic scenes to view,
I saw thee blessed in love. Thy princess fair,
To make her virtue and thy joys her care,
I saw thy cousin, temperate, good and great,
Bend all his mind to bless his native state,
I saw him meet the fair Circassian bride;
By strongest ties of blood to thee allied,
She, deemed Circassian, on her infant day,
Was from thy native frontier borne away.
Nursed with the Turks, is now a captive here,
Know, prince, she is thy German sister dear,
Whom as a stranger late thou did despise,
In thy own palace meets her brother's eyes.
This silver cup has shown this very day,
Which was with her when captive horn away,
From this same cup, in sign of heavenly grace,
I poured baptismal waters on her face,
And see this mark shall justify my fame,
ELIZA CASTRIOT, see! her Christian Name.

Se^. Great source of bliss! what blessings do (...) shower,
What boundless grace upon this happy hour.
This day to virtue, I have gained my friend,
His glories now commence, his crimes shall end.
This day full victory over the Turkish bands,
Gives smiling peace to all the Christian lands.
This day from heaven, refreshing vision clears,
The brilliant prospect of our future years.
This day my long lost sister I regain,
What lively joy succeeds to anxious pain.
Let now, my friends, loud gratulations rise,
To fill the world, and rend the vaulted skies.
Tumultuous joys I change for softer charms,
And spring exulting to my sister's arms.

The Maid of the Groyes. A DRAMA, IN FIVE ACTS.
A RESPECTABLE CHARACTER IS MORE VALUABLE THAN RICHES.
RICHES only make a person contemptible without virtue and good breeding -- the
man of virtue is infinitely better calculated to make his friends happy than
the man of wealth -- and if a person shall only be firm in the ways of virtue,
there is scarcely an instance in a hundred, in which the event will not be
prosperous -- the arm of providence sustains the heart that is honest -- virtue
can acquire friends, and wealth; but mere wealth can neither procure virtue,
nor friends.

PERSONS.
MEN.
CAPT. BLOOMSGROVE -- an officer of the army of the United States. MR.
TREADWELL -- minister of Bloomsgrove parish. MR. MANLY -- a subaltern, of the
army, engaged in farming. IRONSIDE -- a blacksmith in Bloomsgrove village.
BUTTERFORD -- a feeder of cattle. OF CONNOR -- servant in pay of Manly.
WOMEN.
MRS. IRONSIDE -- wife to Mr. Ironside, aunt to Julie^. JULIET -- daughter of
Capt. Bloomsgrove. MAYFLOWER -- a coquette -- rival of Juliet in pretensions to
beauty.
THE MAID OF THE GROVES.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- MANLY and JULIET.
Man. WHY Miss Bloomsgrove are you so uncommonly pe^sive?


Jul. I should appear very awkward, were I to tell you my dreams.


Man. Your dreams must be elegant as well as your waking ideas -- tell me one
(...) dislike it, never tell me another.


Jul. My imagination last night represented in the most lively manner my father
returning and approving of my whole conduct in his absence.


Man. That vision is my property -- it decides a very important question -- if
you are to be mine -- This heart c^^ never know tranquillity till completely
blessed in your love, or frozen by the blast of despair.


Jul. I can decide on no one's suit till my father returns: you must have
patience or quit your pretensions.


Man. Do you remember your father's looks?


Jul. Very faintly -- when he went into the army I was but four years old --
they say I look very much like my mother -- I cannot remember her.


Man. You are extremely like her, and a fine woman she was.


Jul. I was so pleased with the imaginary sight of my father -- that when the
pleasing vision was fled, I could not refrain from tears -- How happy must
child^en be, who daily see their parents and enjoy their protection.


Man. How did your father appear in your sleep?


Jul. A man of middle size, a plump round face, black eyes, his eyebrows rather
thick -- his look sedate and steady -- and I imagined he showed me a scar on
his right arm.


Man. That was the very look of your father; and he was wounded in the right
arm in the battle of Princeton.


Jul. But it were foolish to place any dependence on dreams.


Man. Dreams are liars -- yet they may tell the truth and tell me, Juliet, who
always tell the truth -- whether I be disagreeable to you -- If I be I will not
trouble you any more with my presence.


Jul. O sir I esteem you virtuous, well bred, and a valuable acquaintance --
and on this account, especially because you always let me be mistress of myself.


Man. He must be detestable who could think of injuring so amiable a person.


Jul. Then you must withdraw -- for if my aunt should see us together, I should
have no peace for one fortnight.


Man. Nothing is so delightful to me as to converse with you, my dear
Bloomsgrove, but if my presence be in the least troublesome, I absent myself in
a moment.


[Manly goes out. -- Mrs. Ironside enters] SCENE II. -- Mrs. IRONSIDE and
JULIET.
(Mrs. Ironside takes up Juliet's work, and looks at it) Mrs. Iron. LET me look
of your work, Jule, see here, you have sewed this on wrong. Pray what have you
been thinking about? about Manly I suppose; have not you been crying and
whimpering about him -- hold up here -- an't your eyes red? -- why no,
tolerably bright, brighter than common I think -- he cannot have been here
surely.


Jul. Why should you think of his being here? you never heard me speak a word
in his favor in my life.


Mrs. Iron. And think the more -- you are not spiteful to him, I know, for he
is always tagging after you.


Jul. Why ma'am I never feel spiteful to any body.


Mrs. Iron Why cannot you find some one to your liking? I only forbid you Manly.


Jul. I cannot determine soon.


Mrs. Iron, I knew it; you have a notion for a man of fine taste and tip^top
breeding -- why cannot they suit you.


Jul. Some are so rough with me that they break my fingers, and pull my dress
all to pieces.


Mrs. Iron. They are not all so rough I hope.


Jul. Some are so officious that they will not let me take care of myself -- I
am always ^n picket guard with them -- they are the most unsufferable coxcombs
in the world.


Mrs. Iron. Some girls like fellows that can talk and rattle away like any
thing.


Jul. Yes the monied blades to be sure -- I like the silent ones best -- I love
to have them sit still and say nothing; then I Am quite happy.


Mrs. Iron. You are peculiar in your notion.


Jul I love propriety, if we cannot act rationally we had better not act at all.


Mrs. Iron. What do you think of Mr. Butterford?


Jul. He is very large, and fat, and rich.


Mrs. Iron. Then you will not like him any better than the rest.


Jul. I never said a word against him. I have admitted his visits, and
certainly would ^o^ betray him -- He shall still be admitted if you desire it.


Mrs. Iron. That Is my good girl now, you will like him I dare say when you are
used to him. He Is grandly rich, and rides the finest horse of any man in town
-- He Is got a coat branfire new on purpose to court you in, he is coming to day:
do you prim up and look smart: he will cut a grand flash I Will warrant you, come,
go to your glass and rig up immediately. (Juliet goes out and Ironside after
her.)


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- Mrs. and Mr. IRONSIDE
Front curtain draws and shows Mr. Ironside at a table with a part of a loaf of
bread and a cheese -- Mr. Ironside is eating -- Mrs. Ironside comes up to the
table. Mrs. Iron. I REALLY think, husband, you have eat enough.


Mr. Iron. Why wife I hope you do not grudge your husband his victuals.


Mrs. Iron. You have been eating this great while and grain, husband, is very
dear.


Mr. Iron. If you could pin^^^ enough ^u^ of me to prevent a general samine it
might be worth your pains.


Mrs. Iron. I know you have eat enough. (She snatches away the bread and
cheese, he catches off one end of the cheese then follows her to the middle of
the avenue, and snatches off a piece of bread and returns eating, to the middle
of the stage.)


Mr. Iron. Rather saucy, fact, but a prudent wife. Rather saucy -- but a very
prudent saving wife (gets away)


(She returns.) Mrs. Iron. Well husband I have been talking to Jule and she
seems quite willing to let Butterford come and see her.


Mr. Iron. I would not let him come, he will eat up some of your bread and cheese.


Mrs. Iron. Jule has so much company that they are likely to eat us out of
house and home. I long to have her married.


Mr. Iron. Let her marry then: I suppose she is willing enough -- I must beat
the anvil and puff the bellows, manage within doors as you will, I cares not.


Mrs. Iron. But Juliet has a great opinion of parson Treadwell, I have a great
mind to get him to advise her to marry Butterford.


Mr. Iron. Much you will get by that: you will have to give him a dinner and break
one of our best jugs of beer, and then he will not give his advice unless he has a
mind to. He is the plaguiest fellow for a parson that ever was -- you cannot
make him do any thing but what is right. He -- e -- e -- m -- h.


SCENE II. -- Mrs. IRONSIDE and JULIET.
Mrs. Iron. from within. RUN, Jule, Mr. Butterford is coming. Put up and look
as smart as you can -- put on your new moroker shoes, and a clean shawl, quick,
quick.


Jul. There is no cause for hurrying. He is so fat and short-breathed, that it
will take him a great while to get to the house -- yet. [She goes out very
deliberately.]


SCENE III. -- BUTTERFORD, Mrs. IRONSIDE and JULIET.
But. [Making a very awkward bow] GOOD evening, Madam, How do ye do?


Mrs. Iron. Well I Am glad to see you -- Why I hardly know how I do do -- but
I Am fain to do whatever I have to do.


But. Where Is Jule, is she to home?


Mrs. Iron. Yes she is stepped out, and will be in, in a minute -- I don't know
what makes her stay. Juley!


Jul. Coming soon ma'am.


But. Well how does Jule do now -- I Am going to make her my offers. Do you
think she will bite sharp. No man can give a better astayte than I. --


Mrs. Iron. You are well in that, Juley!


Jul. Coming ma'am very soon.


Mrs. Iron. She Is not quite dressed I suppose. These girls have a despot notion
of rigging up -- when they are to meet a spark: that is quite natural do you see
-- I told Juley you would got a new suit -- It seemed to make her quite merry. --
Juley!


Jul. Coming soon ma'am.


But. Then she was merry to think I had got these clothes -- I hope that is a
good sign. If I could make Jule have me I should be possed glad -- Then I Would sit
in my great chair and tell her to bring this and carry that -- Then I Would laugh
in my sleeve to see how obedient she would be -- and when she waited on me like a
little spaniel -- and I Would speak sharp and make her tremble and fly -- and a man
would come in and say what a sweet pretty wise you have, Mr. Butterford -- Then
I give him a tuck in the ribs -- Hah! old fellow, why you fool, way could'nt
you get such a wise hoh! hoh! hoh!


Mrs. Iron. Jule!


Jul. (Faintly.) Coming ma'am -- (Mrs. Ironside go^ to the entrance of the
stage -- sees Juliet weeping -- and doubling her fist threatens Juliet.)


Mrs Iron. What! crying again. Wipe up your eyes in one minute, and come here,
or I Will know the reason why.


But. An't she willing to come, or is she only a little dashed about being
courted?


Mrs. Iron, She Will come by and by. (Juliet comes to the entrance of the stage,
attempts to present herself -- bursts forth in tears -- steps back -- wipes her
eyes, and then enters with a very genteel courtely.)


But. ( Nodding his head, still sitting in his chair.) Sarvant Miss Jule. How
do you do? Jule.


Mrs. Iron. ( With a silly affection of cunning.) Well I may as well go away.
Young folks at such times don't want old folks about. [Mrs. Ironside goes out.]


Jul. I am sure ma'am I am very willing you should stay.


SCENE IV. -- BUTTERFORD and JULIET.
(Butterford sitting, hitches his chair toward Juliet, partly backwards.) But.
WELL Jule. I think now we have a fair chance to make a bargain.


Jul. Mrs. Ironside does all the trading in our family -- she has bought in her
stock of butter and cheese -- and


But. Poh, I did not mean so -- you're joking Miss, let us have some fun?
(Slaps her on the shoulder.)


Jul. I do not love fun, it is the mirth of low bred people.


But. Whew, why will not you let me talk with you?


Jul. Yes sir, if you will not say any thing that is improper.


But. Well then, I tell you what miss, I expect you will be a little shy at first
just for the notion on it, tho you will not mean so -- But I tell the right down
truth -- I come on purpose to see if we could not trade and be married; that is
plain downright stuff now.


Jul. Do you expect to conclude so great an affair at once.


But. Why not as well as in a thousand year -- I Am willing to have you, why
shouldn't you be willing to have me?


Jul. I must first know if we be suitable persons to be united -- I must
consult my heart to know if I have a proper regard for you. I must act
seriously: for marriage is one of the most important changes of human life.


But. O you can have no objection -- I have the most money, the most cattle,
the finest horse, and dress most costly of any man in this town, what would you
have more?


Jul. A man may have all these and yet be a very bad husband.


But. But how the duce can that be? money makes the man, girls love rich men,
who can let them have as must money as they can spend.


Jul. If I marry you for your money, I must know whether I may spend it or not
-- If that be the only motive I must spend the whole.


But. You are all upon the joke now -- ( Slaps her on the arm and chucks her
under the chin.) hoh! hoh! hoh!


Jul. Positively, if you will not be decent I will withdraw from the room.


But. How shall I be decent, hoh! hoh! hoh!


Jul. Sit peaceably in your own chair, that will please me most -- then answer
to such questions as I ask you -- or ask me such questions as I can answer with
propriety.


But. (sits confused a few moments, then bursts into a great laugh.) Hoh! hoh!
hoh!


Jul. What makes you so merry sir?


But It Is da^n'd clever, hoh! hoh! hoh!


Jul. What is that which is so clever; will you not let one partake of your
mirth?


But. Fayther's got all the advantage of uncle Sye.


Jul. What advantage has your father got of your uncle?


But. Uncle Sye's land lies on the hill, and fayther's land lies all below.
Uncle Sye carries out all manner of nasty truck on his land for manyure, and
fayther's land gets all the wash of it. So fayther has clean the advantage of
uncle Sye.


Jul. ( with expressions of contempt.) Is that of any consequence to you and me?


But. O yes! Fayther's on his last legs -- He has had another tight snap of the
gout -- I don't know's he will die this whet -- But he cannot stand it long at
this rate -- Then if I have you, and he dies the estayte all comes into my
hands.


Jul. Suppose I should marry you, and you could get money by it, would you not
wish me to die too?


But. Why that must be a m^^er of after consideration.


Jul. I think the whole had better he a matter of after consideration.


But. You will let me come again, will not you?


Jul. I have not the command of the house. My aunt will admit you for she is
fond of you. But you must excuse me for the present I must be left to myself.


[Butterford withdraws clumsily.] Juliet alone. Good heavens! what a husband my
aunt is preparing for me! -- But he is rich -- That is all merit with her -- In
all his conversation not a word of me, nor even of himself -- but of his
wealth. And could even please himself with the prospect of his father's death
-- How much virtue or humanity can he have! -- I Am positive I will not have
him, I will die first. [Juliet goes out]


SCENE I. -- Mrs. IRONSIDE and BUTTERFORD.
(Entering on the opposite side of the stage.) Mrs. Iron. WELL, how do matters
go on? pretty well? or will she ^lab you off by and by?


But. Not very bright, tho she wan't very cross. I wanted to have touzled and
slapt her about a little, but she made me sit plucky still, and was darned tort
upon me now and then.


Mrs. Iron. My niece is very nice in her manners.


But. O she is cute, I know she is cute -- but if I could once get her under my
thumb, I Would make her do more as I would have her, I promise her.


Mrs. Iron. You must give her time to come too, and follow her up smartly.
Girls will often seem quite avarse when they are courted by a little dash or so
-- but when they are really courted tight and hard, they will not forbid the
banns -- that they will not. A woman's a strange fowl, Mr. Butterford; (affects to
look sly) a woman's a strange fowl.


But. Pardon a joke -- If all were like you, I should think she was -- Hoh!
Hoh! Hoh!


[She goes out pouting -- he follows her.] ACT III.
SCENE I. -- Mr. TREADWELL enters and speaks alone.
Tread. I HAVE read of the trial of fire ordial -- A lady whose character was
suspected, walked barefoot among red hot ploughshares, with scarcely room to
set her feet to the ground; and if she burned her feet in the least, it was
concluded that she was guilty. Such is the life of a Minister of a parish.
Manly is a person whom I truly like, tho his estate is but moderate. Butterford
is a proper clown, and a vicious fellow. The families both treat me well. The
blacksmith and his wife are singular, but they are kind to me -- They wish me
to advise Juliet, my amiable pupil, to marry Butterford. Can I in justice do
it? Certainly not. This is an ugly affair -- Let me think -- will not this do?
Mother Ironside loves to talk morals and have all the talk to herself --
Suppose I let her go her own length, till she his confuted herself -- Will any
call that priestcraft? Let then if they will -- Nothing is more honest than to
let those, who are in the wrong, confute themselves.


SCENE II. -- TREADWELL and JULIET.
[Juliet enters with a bundle of Books.] Mr. Tread. Juliet! my good girl, how
ready you always are to meet me.


Juliet. I have read the books you sent me -- They are extremely pleasing, I am
confident I shall be the wiser for them.


Mr. Tread. If they be useful I shall be happy. My pupils always keep their
rank in my affections next to my own children. But there is a particular reason
for my attentions to you.


Jul. I never knew any reason but that you wish to see every person happy.


Tread. There is a very particular reason. Your excellent mother, that bright
example of all the virtues, in the last moments of her life, affectionately
grasped my hand -- ^ am, said she, on the confines of the world of spirits --
My husband must serve the states in this necessary war -- Juliet is left and
extremely exposed -- look after her; direct her; keep her, if possible, from
error and vice. This is my dying request. Could I fail to regard it? This is
the cause of all the attentions which I have given to your affairs.


Jul. My uncle and aunt are very anxious that I should he married. I have had
several offers. I wish to live single till my father comes home, that I may be
disposed according to his pleasure.


Tread. I think it best for you to be married at a proper time. That kind of
life has its thorns and its cares -- but it is better than lonely, dismal
celibacy -- And if you do marry a sensible man, a man of good sound judgment,
all other virtues will follow. You do right not to marry, as you are under age,
till your father returns. It will be a particular pleasure to him to have the
disposal of you himself.


Jul. Your approbation gives me the sincerest pleasure, as it exactly agrees
with my own ideas.


Tread. Proceed my worthy girl in your virtuous course, I will support you to
my utmost ability.


Jul. Will you speak to my uncle and aunt? I am anxious to know how they will
relish your sentiments.


( Juliet goes out and he with her.) ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- IRONSIDE, TREADWELL and Mrs. IRONSIDE.
Mr. Iron. SARVANT sir, I am glad to see you.


Tread. How do you do my friend Ironside. Are you well madam? you are all well
I hope.


Mrs. Iron. Pretty well sir, and we ought to be thankful, we are apt to think
very little of what we enjoy, as you told us that was a fine sarmon, you said
that if we had no more than we desarve, we should have but little.


Mr. Iron. You talk too much, wife -- Mr. Treadwell has been here but a moment
and you are rattling away and one cannot put a word in edgeways.


Mrs. Iron. Do I talk? I will talk -- I can talk better than you any day -- If
we had no more than we desarved we should have but little, yet we are always
craving, tho riches are but vanity, young folks think it is grand to make a
show, but it is all vexation -- Handsome is that handsome does. Let virtue
shine and you will be fine. The best thing in the world is peace of conscience,
and to be rich in good work^ -- An't I right Mr. Treadwell? When we die we
carry nothing away and our works will follow. I want you should give me your
opinion about our Juliet. I think it is high time she was married -- It is
quite a charge to keep her and all her company. Mr. Butterford is rich, and can
maintain her well, and would be glad to have her.


Tread. Yes madam, but riches are but vanity.


Mrs. Iron. But he can maintain her well, and they can make a decent show.


Tread. Very true, but it is all vexation. Let virtue shine and you will be fine
-- Your plain maxims contain excellent truth.


Mrs. Iron. Now she has a notion for Manly, who is not half so rich; tho we
know he is virtuous and industrious and all that.


Tread. And is she not right? The best thing in the world is peace of
conscience, and to be rich in good works -- What signifies it to be always
craving -- When we die we can carry nothing away, but our good works will
follow.


Mrs. Iron. I would not give a farthing for a minister if he could not give
better advice, and such advice as one wants to have. ( She goes out pouting.)


Mr. Iron. Mr. Treadwell has given you no advice but your own, that is fact
wife, say what you will -- I wish you would hear him further, and then you
would not pinch us all so about our victuals.


Tread. There is Manly's servant coming in this moment.


Mr. Iron. Excuse me sir, neighbor Speedwell is at the shop and wants his mare
shod this minute.


( Ironside goes out.) SCENE II. -- TREADWELL and CONNOR.
Tread. CONNOR, is it you, how does your master?


Con. Very well zur, only sick to death of love. Love zur has got the grap of
him -- Bad thing, that love, it has made many a clever fellow's heart ache
before yet, master.


Tread. And who is he in love with?


Con. Oh dear zur, that Julie, all our young fellows have lost their fine
senses at her, they are as thick about her as flies round a flop of molawses --
they will be sipping and tasting you see, if they die for it


Tread. And would he consult me on that m^^ter? Is it any thing about Juliet? I
hope not -- These cases of love are even worse than cases of conscience.


Con. You hit the right nail^maister -- see what a thing it is to be a
minister, we sweak at them when the liquors gets here, ( touching his forehead)
but we cannot be sick, nor well, be in love, nor be married, be christened, nor
die, without a minister -- By my showl were I to grow young again, I Would go to
College whether I could get there or no, and when I was out, the first thing*
I Would do would be to live and die a minister, you see.


Tread. Well, and what does Manly desire of me?


Con. He would have you come till his house -- he wants a -- a -- master's
poorly, it is love, I guess, he is as thin as a shad in reeping time, sir.


Tread. Let him come to my house? I have something, of importance to
communicate to him.


Con. I hope sir, I pray you come, Master's a clever soul, he is quite poorly,
and if he should die with love, it would be a disgrace to him, as long as he
lives. ( Connor goes out.)


SCENE III. -- TREADWELL and JULIET.
T^^ad. MISS Juliet will you come to my house in half an hour, to see the
letters which I have received from your father?


Jul. Were there none for me?


Tread There were not?


Jul. That is very strange. But I should be glad to see the letters which ^y
(...) wrote to you.


[ (...) well goes out, and as Juliet is following, Mayflower enters.] SCENE IV
-- MAYFLOWER and JULIET.
( Mayflower advances slowly and coldly keeps a large distance from Juliet.)
May. SERVANT M^^ Jul^


Jul. Miss May^, my friend, I am happy to see you.


May. I might be happy too if you could clear yourself of the charge of
treachery against me.


Jul. Charge of treachery. When did I ever (...) with any of your affairs more
than you desired me to do?


May. I suppose you mean to make me believe that you know nothing of it.


Jul. It is absolutely true that I know not what you mean.


May. I meant to have asked advice how to proceed with you. But since you are
here I will confront you myself -- and you may answer if you can -- Who wrote
this letter to slander my character?


Jul. Not ^ certainly.


May. How can you deny it -- it is your own signing.


Jul. It is not my hand, I should be ashamed of such a scrawl.


May. I have suffered severely, but Mr. Daffodil, whose attentions I own were
pleasing, has left me with disgust; an^ is gone to the town with Fidelia. If
you have not done it, it i^ beyond my comprehension.


Jul. It was not I however -- but let me think, yes it is the hand writing of
that villain, who writes letters for Butterford -- who is such an ideo^ that he
cannot write himself.


[They go out together.] ACT V.
SCENE I -- MANLY and JULIET.
Scene is changed to the minister's house, the stage represents his study with
chairs, tables, books, manuscripts, etc. etc. Man. MY amiable friend, how happy
to meet you in person, when the mere idea of you ever give me delight.


Jul. Your sentiments Mr. Manly are even (...) obliging -- but to urge a
declaration can only give me pain -- I shall give no one a decided preference
till my father's return, or while the hope of it remains.


Man. Are you not at least my friend?


Jul. Certain I know how to esteem you as a man of merit -- But my
determination is sacred.


Man. You are perfectly reasonable, nor can I deny it, these hours of suspense
are almost insupportable.


SCENE II. -- TREADWELL and JULIET. -- (All the party except Ironside and his
wife.)
Tread. MY amiable pupil almost as dear to me as a daughter -- I have received
a letter, from your father that he shall not soon return. He has received a
letter which states that you died the 12th of July last -- On which he orders
me to sell his estate, and he is about to embark for the East Indies.


Jul. O my worthy good friend -- I was made to be wretched -- I never saw my
mother that I remember -- nor my father since I was a child, except in my
dreams. My relations here would throw me into the arms of a contemptible wr^tch
-- O sir, can you not interpose to save me?


Tread. Amiable girl, I regret your distress. But can I be concerned ^n making,
or breaking of matches -- or incroach on the rights of families, my character
would be lost -- very soon.


Man. Now my beautiful, my charming friend consent to be mine -- I will protect
you tho you may see your father no more -- Let me be father, friend, brother,
and every thing else to you.


Tread. I have sent letters several ways informing that you are still alive --
I may bring him back for I have written to Canton in China -- But after all,
his return is uncertain.


Jul. My heart forbodes that I shall never see him again, my anguish is almost
insupportable, I respect you Mr. Manly. But can I think of any thing that is
pleasant when I must no more see my father -- I live a wretched life with Mrs.
Ironside, confined, and almost starved at times. This last stroke is
Butterford's work. I am confident, he hires a base fellow to write for him. He
forged a letter yesterday to Mr. Daffodil, to slander Miss Mayflower and signed
it with my name to involve me in a quarrel with Miss Mayflower and her family.
He means to get me into his power, I had rather suffer death. He is a dreadful
instance of the power of an unprincipled rich man over the poor -- pity me,
most respected sir, assist a poor girl in extremity.


Tread. Alas! what would the world say of me, should I take yo^ from your
relations and guardian into my own custody. It would give rise to scandal. Many
would resent such an intrusion on the rights of families.


Man. Once more, my dear girl, listen to a faithful friend. I will take you
under my own protection, and defend you with my life


Jul. But can I (...) in such distress, on my father's account -- or can I live
with a bachelor. Should my father return, could I ever look him in the face?


Tread. We are all right and yet are all in extreme distress -- Yet my dear
young friends, let us do nothing wrong -- Here is a trial of our trust in
Divine Providence. Be obstinate. Virtue must triumph, tho we know not how. -- I
will think for you, and do you (approaching Juliet) retire, my good girl, whose
heart is sorely burdened, and pour out your tears to him who numbers the tears
of the afflicted. She is con^ucted by Treadwell to the avenue, and i^ ^oarce
behind the curtain when she exclaims --


Jul. O my father! my father!


C. Bloom. O my daughter -- how like my wife -- a little girl when I left you
-- now a grown woman -- and how beautiful -- my sweet Juliet, alive and well --
and O how much like her mother. ( Manly goes to the curtain, peeps behind the
curtain; sees Capt. Bloomsgrove, and leaps about the stage in a frenzy of joy.)


Man. Her father is come -- Capt. Bloomsgrove is come* as you live it is he, I
know him. The whole company we rushing to the opening of the curtain, out Mr.
Treadwell stays them.


Tread. It Is he; I know him by his voice; but restrain your curiosity -- give a
parent and child a few tender moments at their meeting -- Their transports are
too sacred for common observation. ( Capt. Bloomsgrove appears at the entrance
with his face turned partly back, talking to Juliet.)


C. Blooms. Come my dear, wipe your eyes, and let us see the rest of the
company -- Sweet girl; I left you at four years old, and you are now a grown
woman -- you look just like your mother when I was married.


[Bloomsgrove enters, nobly dressed, and bowing genteelly] Tread. O Captain, my
worthy friend, how happy to see you again.


C. Blooms. Next to my little daughter here you are the dearest person to me on
earth -- and who is this?


Tread. It is miss Mayflower.


C. Blooms She was about three years old -- when I went away, a little proud
Sylph -- I remember how she would ^^per when she was dressed up.


Jul. [Catching Mr. Treadwell's sleeve.] This good man has done a thousand good
things for me, will you not reward him?


C. Blooms. I will find a time for that my dear child. And what friend is this,
Manly? Yes it is Manly; my brave Lieutenant, who selled the Hessian to the
ground -- who wounded me in the battle of Princeton -- He preserved my life. If
there be any thing in this world whereby I can reward him, it must be his.


Jul. He has been generous to me and -- and -- honest.


[Shows confusion.] C. Blooms. I knew him my girl in the army, he is as fine a
soul as lives -- what shall I give you Manly? ( to Manly) Will you take Juliet.


Man. ( bowing respectfully) Will you let me have her?


C. Blooms. Yes if she be willing -- what say you my girl -- she blushes with
eyes partly cast down, looks sideways in her father's face, and remains silent.


C. Blooms. Her tongue says nothing, but her eyes say yes -- take her -- (
Quits her hand, and Manly takes it warmly.)


Manly. Now I Am the happiest man on this earth and the richest -- but I will be
happier in a few days by your assistance. ( To Mr. Treadwell.)


Tread. ( bowing.) Any time when you please, shall I delight to contribute to
your felicity.


C. Blooms. O my friends how sweet is domestic pleasure. Riches, victory, and
glory are nothing in comparison. It is a pleasure which I have not tasted till
now for fourteen years. (Wipes his eyes which flow in tears of joy.)


Tread. Come captain you shall tarry with me this night. Manly after supper
will conduct Juliet home -- and let it be known that you are come -- all her
enemies will be silent now. Miss Mayflower tarry till after supper, and my
girls, shall go home with you -- come be seated -- I will call my wife and
daughters, and while supper is preparing we will have a song. ( or dance) There
is no crime in decent joy. It is practical Thanksgiving to the Author of all
our mercies.


They sit. A song or dance is performed, as the exhibitor pleases. The
Coquette. A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
THE FOLLY OF A CAPRICIOUS TEMPER, AND THE DISADVANTAGE OF COQUETRY TO THE
GENERAL INTERESTS OF WOMEN.
IT is a very good instance of policy in a woman, if she has engaged the
affections of any man, with a view to marriage, to avoid the smallest danger of
losing them. A woman deserted by a man once engaged to her, is subject to many
censures, and dangerous suspicions. Were it not universally known, that there
are women, who use men extremely ill, in consequence of gaining their
affections; the desertion of a woman, after indications of love, would ruin a
man's character. Coquettes injure not themselves only -- but their sex in
general.

PERSONS.
MEN.
MR. BOOTHBY -- an honest householder; Guardian to the two young ladies,
Marcella and Daphne. MR. HENRY MALCOLM -- engaged to Marcella.
WOMEN.
MARCELLA -- promised to Malcolm. DAPHNE -- niece of Mr. Boothby. MRS. MALCOLM
-- Henry Malcolm's mother. MISS SEAFAIR -- common friend to Marcella and
Daphne. LAURELLA -- particular friend to Daphne. NEMESIA -- rival of Marcella.
THE COQUETTE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- BOOTHBY, MARCELLA and DAPHNE.
Booth. MY wards, the time approaches when I must act the part of a father to
you no more. This evening I must give up my charge. Tomorrow morning you will
be at your own disposal -- It was so ordered that I should give up the
guardianship when the youngest was of lawful age.


Daph. I regret indeed that I must be left to myself, your kind care left me
nothing to wish for, but the continuance of it. If we must be left to
ourselves, can we not have some kind of advice from you; some of your maxims
which contain much wisdom in a few words?


Booth. I choose to say but little* Long discourses are not apt to be
remembered -- Let the foundation of your character be plain honesty and good
nature. Depend principally on your virtue for your happiness -- As you both are
sufficiently genteel, affect no uncommon character, but be what nature and
common sense have made you. If you have a good offer, I advise you to marry;
but not suddenly -- let a polite acquaintance with the person whom you are to
marry, remain for some time, that you may acquire the habit of pleasing, and
being pleased with the person who is to be yours for life. Never trifle with a
man who seriously addresses you; but by all means marry a man of sense, and
think of no earthly things so much as pleasing him, so long as you live.


Mar. You need not have told my sister of that -- She never had any company of
the gentlemen.


Booth. My niece, I hope you do not perversely exclude them -- If you do* I
shall almost think you lost to society.


Daph Sir I never affected gallantry. Marcella outshines me so much in that,
that they pass by me, and pay all their attention to her, but perhaps I shall
have my turn, and in the best time too.


Mar. You have a great faculty at hoping, and I advise you, for your comfort,
to keep it up.


Booth. I must retire to my own affairs -- Good bye, my amiable wards. Remember
what I have told you.


[Exit Boothby.] SCENE II. -- MARCELLA and DAPHNE.
Mar. WHAT do you think of the advice the old gentleman has been giving us?


Daph. I cannot perfectly understand it, for want of experience in such matters
-- but as our uncle has experienced all these things himself; and is certainly
a man of sense, and honesty; I am apt to think he has told us right.


Mar. I mean to do as I please. I am glad that tomorrow morning I shall be at
my own disposal -- And as to the gentlemen who pay their addresses to me -- I
mean to trifle with them as much as I please.


Daph. I suppose it, for every person who speaks of it, thinks you treat Mr.
Malcolm in a very absurd manner; for they say he is a gentleman of real merit,
virtuous, honest, polite, and of decent fortune, a man of good sense in every
thing but his attachment to you.


Mar. His attachment to me. I think that this is all that discovers his good
sense! Mark this, that what nature has denied us in courage, and natural
strength she has made up in the power, which she has given us, of affecting the
hearts of men.


Daph. And if we have that power, ought we not to use it to a good purpose?


Mar. That I shall, I promise you. There is nothing which affords me so much
amusement, as to see how I can play with their sensations. When they come
trembling to me to ask for some trifling attention, which I am already more
than willing to grant -- when they hesitate, and stammer, with excessive
anxie^y. To see how elate they will be, when they are successful; how dismal
and forlorn* when they are rejected, it makes me as proud as a queen.


Daph. Possibly one might carry that vanity too far.


Mar. You know nothing of the matter. The men never pay much attention to you.
I consider a suitor as worth nothing, unless you can treat him in as many
different ways, as you can dress a fish; and still find him humble and passive
-- A fish you know may be baked, broiled, roasted, boiled, smoked and dried --
may be dressed with sauce, or without, and every way makes a good dish. So a
lover suitable to my taste, must broil with resentment, must be roasted with
anger, must be baked by the heat of constant affection, must boil with
jealousy, must be smoked with contempt -- and his very marrow must be dried up
with anxious expectation. If I afford him any attention he must be elated to
the highest degree of joy. If I deny him, he must sink into the grave of
disappointment -- Such a man, always passive as the lamb, is the man to my
taste.


Daph. There are other women of the same taste, but they are not always so
happy as to realize their ideas.


[Exit Daphne.] Mar. I shall take care of myself for that*


SCENE III. -- MRS. MALCOLM and BOOTHBY.
Mrs. Mal. I WISH you would interpose your authority in this affair. [Exit
Marcella.]


Booth. When I was young I always did my own work, in respect of the ladies --
I do not love to meddle with that of others.


Mrs. Mal. But as you are guardian to the young lady I can apply to no one else.


Booth. My charge expires this evening, and I have given her my last advice.
But what do you complain of?


Mrs. Mal. She has perfectly bewitched my son. I compare it to nothing but a
serpent's charming a bird -- I have seen a snake raise his neck to a lofty
spire, his seal^^ glisten, and his eyes sparkle. Then he fixes his eyes on some
harmless bird, who appears to be in extreme distress; and to make efforts to
get away; but the more he endeavors to escape, the nearer he gets to the
serpent till he is destroyed.


Booth. Is that the condition of your son?


Mrs. Mal. You may judge, as well as I, of the state of his mind, when I shall
mention a few facts -- He associated himself with her -- and has been
constantly unhappy -- He is agitated to that degree that I fear the loss of his
reason -- Not long since she sent him home, on a rainy evening without a great
coat; tho he met her on appointment. He caught a severe cold, and was confined
a fortnight -- Another time she pretended that she took a new beaver hat from
him, and burnt it -- but she kept it and changed it for an umbrella. She
frequently makes him do the meanest errands for her -- send him all over town,
to buy a pennyworth of needles, half a knot of thread, and half a yard of
tape. Every way she tries to injure him, and make him ridiculous -- by his
attachment to her. A woman who treats a man so deserves to be punished.


Booth. She commonly is. The husband having such no one in his power commonly
pays the old debt, with interest upon interest; but if a young man will be a
fool, he must answer for it himself.


Mrs. Mal. My son Harry is as sensible man as any of his age, and as virtuous.


Booth. I doubt it not. But he would resent it, should I attempt his liberty.
None can free him; but himself.


Mrs Mal. I hoped that you would use your authority in the case. And that you
would endeavor to make her behave better* You ought to consider my extreme
anxie^y for my s^n.


Booth. I pity you, and him sincerely. But a woman who has that preverse temper
is of all beings the hardest to cure: I have given her my last advice; you must
excuse me.


Mrs. Mal. Alas my only remedy is patience; but I do think that a woman who
makes use of the art of charming* to such a purpose, is the most mischievous
serpent in the universe.


Booth. Your own sex too, I am glad I did not say that.


(Both withdraw) ACT II.
SCENE I. -- HENRY MALCOLM and MARCELLA.
Mal. IT gives me great pleasure to see you so well, you look delightful.


Mar. I am very much out of health however, how ca^^ you to think of seeing me
today?


Mal. It was by your appointment; but if you say the word I withdraw; I come to
invite you to Mr. Sprightly's ball -- but if you do not choose to go --


Mar. Who told you that I did not mean to go? I shall dress, but stay, I have
not a pin to dress myself with.


Mal. I will step over the street and get you some at the next shop.


Mar. They have none fit to dress a d^ll with, you must go to Mrs. Mer^ers.


Mal. That is two miles and an half at least* we shall lose the time* perhaps
the others may do for the present.


Mar. That Is like a gentleman to be sure, to make a difficulty of obliging his
lady -- if you will get me pins to dress me, I will go -- otherwise I shall not.


[ Ma^colm goes out.] SCENE II. -- MARCELLA and DAPHNE.
Mar* SO you see, I teach him his duty. A woman who means to have a good
husband, must bring him up to her hand.


Daph. You are not certain of his being your husband. --


Mar. Will he brake his word -- I did not treat him so till I got him fast.


Daph. Perhaps not so fast as you imagine -- If he be a man of honor, your
treatment of him is very improper.


Mar. How do you understand these matters. When did a man ever speak to you --
how would you treat a gentleman?


Daph Common sense tells me I should treat a real gentleman kindly -- if that
be right -- before he is engaged to me -- much more so after, else I should be
guil^y of falsehood. The caprice of Coquettes is well known, which is the very
reason why men do not become infamous by deserting a woman.


Mar. You would be all honey and no vinegar. I love to torment them for
variety's sake -- Let us hear your curious theory of conversation.


Dalph Female honor demands its proper reserve. Yet my promised lover should
certainly have my confidence above any man in the world, he should be my
inviolable friend, and confident -- I would study to please him -- we would
advise and correct each other -- our virtues should be mutual, our joys and
sorrows united; I would mourn his disappointments and encourage his virtues, I
would imitate his virtues, and improve by his learning, I would find an endless
variety of kind offices, and never be forced to torment him for variety's sa^e.


Mar. And for what purpose?


Daph. He should reward me, by being my constant patron, defender and friend,
and by doing every kind office in his power. Previous acquaintance is the
school in which nature trains us up for marriage. It is observed by some
reputable authors, that they who quit this school too soon, are often unhappy;
that they who torment each other will continue to do so after marriage -- they
who act rationally will not alter -- they who deceive in their previous
acquaintance, will after marriage be openly vicious. I have treasured many of
these maxims in my mind -- to me if it ever fall to my lot, I intend it shall
be the school of wisdom -- and prepare my mind for the various duties of
domestic life.


Mar. This is queer stuff -- think to manage love by reason -- do sometime tell
this in the circle of our acquaintance, that we may have an infinite fund of
ridicule and laughter.


SCENE III. -- MALCOLM and DAPHNE.
[As Malcolm enters, Marcella goes out as if by design.] Mal. TELL me, Daphne,
what humor is your sister in now?


Daph. She adheres to her own system -- I do not see that she relents at all.


Mal I procured the pins for her at the next shop -- who had the best, you will
not tell her.


Daph. No, for I do not like her ways.


Mal. I wish she had your ideas of those matters. They are excellent, or that
it had been so ordered that I had been attached to you. But do one thing for
me, and trust me upon my word, for once. Dress yourself for the ball, and trust
me for the event.


Daph. I will. (He withdraws.)


SCENE IV. -- MARCELLA reenters with SEAFAIR and DAPHNE.
Mar. WHAT fools the men are -- I love dearly to plague them -- I have sent my
spark two miles and an half only to get some pins to dress with, and I have
more than a year's stock-by me now,


Sea. My friend Marcella, notwithstanding the keenness of your wit -- I suspect
you are very erroneous on this subject.


Mar* I see you are going into our Daphne's notions, I supposed that no other
person in the world thought as she does.


Daph My sentiment is, that to treat others rationally, is the likeliest way to
be treated well ourselves.


Sea That idea is certainly a just one Why need human beings be ignorant of
their own happiness? I know by happy experiment that the season in which young
persons are acquainted, previously to their marriage, may not only be rendered
very agreeable, but extremely useful.


Mar. There you have it again morals, morals, morals, forever, and upon every
subject. Do give me volatiles for I shall certainly faint.


Sea And why not moral forever? Does not our whole happiness depend on them? To
conduct well and successfully -- i^ certainly the knowledge we most need -- you
have lost time enough in quarrelling with your humble swain, to have made you a
very prudent woman, if you had conducted yourself property.


Mar. Well, what do Malcolm and I fail in? Tell me, perhaps I may reform.


Sea. Instead of quarrelling and uniting, contention and reconciliation again,
which have ^^pt you both uneasy and unhappy for three years past; you might
both have been improving your minds, tempers, and manners, more than in the
best school in America.


Mar. How does that appear?


Sea. A constant tendency to any object, will have its effect in all cases, but
that of impossibility. The desire of pleasing, directed to a constantly
alluring object -- will make a person social, and polite. Hence persons,
attached to virtuous, and sensible partners, almost immediately discover in
their general conversation, a better temper, and a more sociable disposition,
than before.


Mar. What can they find to talk of in so many long interviews?


Sea. You quarrel then, to pass away the time, do you? Are there not other
topics, even if you omit fashions, and the scandal of the day? Human passions,
and human characters, politeness of manners, and principles of humanity. The
polite, and elegant arts; the qualities of books, and friends; and the
interesting views, which piety and morality exhibit -- might claim some
attention. And friends may make any subject interesting by considering it in
the relation which it bears to themselves.


Daph. I have long believed, that two friends may always make each other happy
if they have only the necessaries of life. If happiness comes so cheap, human
beings owe their miseries chiefly to their own follies.


Mar. For heaven's sake away with this dull stuff -- I hope some person will
come in, and give a change to this ridiculous conversation.


Sea. My conversation if it be disagreeable ceases in a moment -- madam I wish
you a good night.


[ Ex^ Daphne and Seafair.] SCENE V. -- MALCOLM, MARCELLA, and DAPHNE.
Mal. Madam I am ready to conduct you to the ball.


Mar. I will be ready in a moment, (she goes out, and comes in again with a
coarse checked apron on.)


Mar. Now sir, I will go with you.


Mal. Will you? but you will not go with that apron.


Mar. Why not -- It is proper to dress according to our company.


Mal. My company, you mean -- well, I do not object; will the company at the
ball think that they are well treated? However that is none of my concern. I
will go with you as you are.


Mar. No, I will not neither, the company will be affronted*


Mal. You may change your dress.


Mar. That is too much trouble.


Mal. Then keep it and go with me.


Mar. I shall be laughed at.


Mal. Then stay if you please -- But I mean to go.^I'll wait on another lady;
and I would pay no more attention to you, but that I do not love to break my
word.


Mar. That Is brave! Let not that be any hindrance.


Mal. Then if you will discharge me, I quit you forever.


[Daphne enters.] Mar. The difficulty is to get rid of you. I have heard you
say so several times before; but you did not keep your resolution. I shall have
you tormenting me again in a few days.


Mal. I was not provided with another lady then; but I am now. Come my sweet
Daphne, you are now the mistress of my heart; will you go with me?


Daph. If my sister refuses; but she shall speak first.


Mar. I will not.


Daph. Then I will.


Mar. What a droll figure you will make. You scarcely ever saw a ball in your
life. I will dress myself this moment, and go with my uncle, that I may be
there to laugh at you. [Exit Marcella.]


Mal. Well now she is gone, why may we not tarry? I have no great desire to go
to the ball; I had much rather remain here with you.


Daph. I certainly have no great desire to dance. It is what I am very little
acquainted with -- But let us go, and see that she is gone. [They wihdraw from
the stage.]


ACT III.
SCENE I -- MALCOLM and LAURELLA.
Mal. MISS Laurella, is Marcella gone to the ball?


Lau. She is going with her uncle -- she thought you and Daphne were gone.


Mal. No, and I believe we shall not go. I had rather remain with Daphne.


Lau. Then Marcella will be extremely disappointed.


Mal. She must thank herself for it; she might have ordered it otherwise.


Lau. I know it; but she thought she had you so secure, that she might treat
^ou any way; and you would not dare to resent it.


Mal. She is not the first woman who has found herself mistaken in such a
matter; and perhaps will not be the last.


Lau. I believe it, and am sensible that the conduct of Marcella was extremely
ungrateful to you.


Mal. She thinks now that I shall return to her, but she will soon perceive her
error.


Lau Yet she was really attached to you, and will severely feel the loss of you*


Mal. Why then did she treat me in that manner?


Lau. Nature made her a coquette, and she could make herself otherwise.


Mal. Is Daphne of the same disposition?


Lau. Certainly she is not. There is so great a difference between them, that I
could hardly suppose them sisters.


Mal. Let who will take Marcella, I have long wished for an opportunity to
break my chain. She has given me a fair one, and hence forward the mild, the
sweet Daphne shall be the object of my attention.


SCENE II. -- DAPHNE, LAURELLA and MALCOLM.
Daph. WHAT has Marcella done with herself?


Lau. She is gone to the ball with her uncle in full expectation of seeing you
there, and laughing at you.


Mal. She is welcome to her all felicity, I have borne her tyranny long enough.


Lau. No body will blame you, I am confident. Every person said you bore with
her too long.


Mal. The point of honor was the thing, I had given my word, she says that need
not hinder me from leaving her, so I have a purlough at all points.


Lau. Certainly you have.


Mal. Many another poor slave has, I dare say, been glad of his dismission, but
I am no sooner free than I am a captive again. I have long noticed your
virtues; and now wish to give my permanent homage to you.


[ Laurella withdraws.) Daph. You must allow me time to consider of that -- but
if I finally conclude to detain you, I shall not keep you in perpetual
torments; as Marcella did.


Mal. My acquaintance with your sister gave me an opportunity to observe your
virtues; and it was the kind relief of my mind, by your gentle and rational
conversation, which made me think of breaking the fetters of the imperious
Coquette.


Daph. Time, and acquaintance, only, can show whether we be suited to each
others manners. But I shall endeavor to conduct myself properly.


SCENE III. -- NEMESIA and MARCELLA.
Nem SOME business with Mr. Boothby occasioned my calling this evening.


Mar. He is in the opposite room.


Nem. Just returned from the ball; you did not tarry so long as you commonly
did with Malcolm.


Mar. I only went to see them a little while.


Nem. It is droll enough. You and Malcolm have had a breaking off this evening;
and he went with your sister Daphne; you may give him up for lost -- the sweet,
and delightful manners of your sister will detain him forever.


Mar. What a blockhead he was to break his word with me? I am pursuaded he
never will prosper.


Nem. After you had released him from it?


Mar. I did it in a pet. I am extremely mortified, and see that you enjoy it --
Enjoy it you may; for I am quite in the humor to punish myself. But that he
should attach himself to that honest, good natured, awkward thing, my sister
Daphne.


Nem. She is no sister of yours -- you was indeed bro't up with her -- but
your parents are unknown to us -- Nor have you any portion out of the estate,
which you have supposed to belong in common, to you* and Daphne -- you have
only L. 120 to purchase furniture for a house. The whole estate is Daphne's --
She being the only child.


Mar. Then I have lost a happy opportunity of establishing myself in life. Was
ever girl so unfortunate? I will ask Mr. Boothby. I do not believe it.


Nem. I thank you for disputing my word, and wish you a good night.


SCENE IV. -- BOOTHBY and MARCELLA.
Mar. I AM most unfortunate, my dear uncle, pray comfort me a little. Is not
Malcolm a villain?


Booth. I cannot blame him -- You treated him very ill; and challenged him to
leave you.


Mar. Nemesia always hates me. She has told me I am not your niece, and that
the whole estate is Daphne's.


Booth. All that is true; but it is a mystery that she should know it -- You
ruined yourself by losing Malcolm. But you would take no advice.


Mar. When I have once caught a man in the toils of love, I must plague him --
It is my nature, and I should do it again if I died for it.


Booth. I believe it, I never knew a woman of that perverse temper to reform --
But they may not begin it, if duly warned -- It is certainly the ruin of the
woman who is so inclined, and a great damage to the interest of the s^x. For
what is the very reason, why a man does not lose his character in deserting a
woman, to whom he stands engaged -- but this; that the caprice of coquettes, is
so generally known.


The Insol^able Question. A DRAMA, OF ONE ACT.
PRUDERY AND FORWARDNESS ARE EQUALLY PERNICIOUS TO WOMEN.
IT is altogether absurd for women to think of captivating the men -- by
throwing themselves forever in their way. This mode of conduct will only create
disgust -- and there is as little of charm or attraction in the behavior of a
Prude.

"The honor of a Prude is rage and storm --
"'It Is ugliness in its most frightful form."
PERSONS.
MEN.
DR. BURGO -- a grave, learned man. MR. DILEMMA -- a S^ph of the college, and a
Pedan^. MR. PALEFACE -- an author. MR. TIPTOE -- a coxcomb. MR. THINKMUCH --
Preceptor of an Academy. MR. DOMORE -- his assistant.
WOMEN.
-- Two young ladies of twenty friends.
LEMIRA LUCINDA
MISS WINDFALL -- a jealous girl, young and gay. MISS BRIDGET CROWBAR -- a
prudish lady. MADAM SENSIBLE -- a Matron.
THE INSOLVABLE QUESTION.
SEEN I. -- LEMIRA and LUCINDA.
Lem. MY dear Lucinda, what a happy girl you are, your company is desired by
all people old and young -- and every person speaks of you with pleasure.


Luc. I am sorry for that, the view of too many will be directed to me -- It
would cost me much trouble -- I ever though it it an unhappiness to be too much the
object of admiration.


Lem. Why, how can any person be loved and admired too much? I should like to
be admired by every body.


Luc. Your ambition then must descend very low sometimes.


Lem. I did not mean exactly so neither. But there is a certain class whom I
should wish to be in raptures with me, whenever they saw me -- I should not
care much about old people.


Luc. There you differ from me -- The sentiments of people who are not of our
own age may be of great use to us. They can give us credit and a good name --
But I doubt whether it is right to seek the particular admiration of many
persons of our own age at once.


Lem. You, it seems, are very scrupulous.


Luc. Were the persons, from whom attention to young ladies might be expected,
distributed among us all, there would scarcely be one apiece -- Were it then
possible, I should suppose it unjust, to engross a number. I had rather enjoy
the beneficial society of one true friend, than be the dupe of twenty
flatterers -- To flatter a lady that is really deserving, is very much like
painting a diamond to make it shine.


Lem. I am not very fond of flattery; but it may do when one can get nothing
else. It is more pleasing to hear good sense, or what we call good sense; but I
had rather men would flatter me than say nothing.


Luc. The whole business is commonly artificial. A man uses flattery as
musicians do the fa, sol, la, me, of their gamut, to put their voices into
tune. When one knows the artifice, it soon becomes tiresome. But tell me, my
friend, if you be so fond of admiration, by what means you have attempted to
secure it.


Lem. I have in various ways tried to accomplish my purpose. They may all be
reduced to one principle -- that of doing things extraordinary But my friends
seem to be growing more and more indifferent to me every day -- I should be
glad, if by conversing with you I could set my ideas right.


Luc. Why so much anxiety on the subject?


Lem. Because you know one wishes to be acceptable, let matters, other wise, be
as they may.


Luc. I am sorry that you have been so much mortified. It must be bitterness to
a woman of spirit. But before I give my sentiments, let me know the method you
have hitherto practiced. The physician always examines his patient, before he
prescribes a cure.


Lem. Well, to make the matter clear, I will introduce to you my illustrious
cousin, Miss Bridget Crowbar.


[Miss Crowbar enters.] SCENE II. -- BRIDGET, LEMIRA and LUCINDA.
Bridge. (ass^on as she enters) I AM really ashamed of the ladies of these times
-- They marry as if they were made ^^ly for the happiness of the men -- I Am out
of all patience.


Lem. No madam, you must not be affronted; they will some of them take notice
of you yet -- The men, I mean.


Bridge. That Is none of my meaning -- I Will have you to know -- modesty wins the
love of all our acquaintance. I love to drive a principle quite to a violent
extreme.


Lem. That I have thought of, and I have been modest: I have been violently
modest, have I not?


Luc. I thought modesty always avoided violence and extremes, and brought every
action to the test of reason and discretion.


Brid. I profess to be the white rose of modesty.


Luc. And beset, I believe, with a double portion of thorns -- You will keep
the men at a distance, I dare say.


Brid. That I will -- I will not be courted but adored -- My lovers shall
worship me at an immense distance.


Luc. How do you think a young lady ought to behave in presence of gentlemen?


Brid. She ought to be as cross as vengeance, and not say a word to them.


Luc. Not if they ask her questions?


Brid. Then she must answer, no -- in a faint mincing voice -- and lisp a
little -- A woman should never say yes to a man -- That Is very immodest.


Luc. Suppose a man should ask her, whether she made a point of being virtuous
-- what? must she say no then?


Brid. There may be extraordinary ^ases; in these one may say yes.


Luc. I take it the most extraordinary question a woman is ever asked is,
whether she will consent to be married -- she must always say yes -- in such a
^ase then.


Brid. You are a wicked creature. I do not know what will become of you -- I
suspect if you were courted you would be married in less than eight years -- It
seems as if modesty was banished from the earth -- I have tried to keep it up.
But all my sex is sunk into degeneracy -- woeful degeneracy.


Luc. Propose yourself then as a pattern to all the world.


Brid. I am lo^h to propose myself as an example -- But I can find no other --
Now I have meant to let the young gentleman see how much I avoided them.


Luc. How did you do this?


Brid. Mr. Tiptoe is coming, I will show how it is done.


SCENE III. -- Mr. TIPTOE (entering) and Miss BRIDGET.
Tip. MADAM your most obedient humble servant.


Brid. (Receding to the farthest part of the stage.) Sir? -- (seats herself
prim and bridles up)


Tip. Madam if my conversation could be though it agreeable (offers to seat himself
by her; she removes, places an empty chair between him and her, with the back
toward him, and draws another chair before her, and says)


Brid. Sir?


Tip. I could wish madam -- (surveys her around -- at last removes the chair at
her side and seats himself by her -- and lean^ toward her -- she takes a large
pin and stabs it into his flesh near his knee.)


Brid. There sir. ( He starts up and exclaims.)


Tip. O you beast -- I meant to say that you was too severe, I ask pardon --
But I shall trouble you with my company no more. ( Rubs the wounded part as he
goes off.)


[Exit Tiptoe.] Brid. (with an air of triumph) There! I have served many a one
so in my life time -- I have shed more blood in my lifetime, than has been
shed in twenty duels, such are told of in our newspapers -- A fellow went to
seat himself by me, the other day; he was intoxicated by my beauty.


Luc. That was extraordinary, what did you do in that case?


Brid. It was a dreadful trial for me. (Whining.) But I overcame. (
Triumphantly.) He spoke, I knit my brow into frowns, he turned to me his face,
I immediately turned mine from him; he came so near to me that I (...) his
breath.


Luc. What did you do then?


Brid. I boxed his cars well: and I have done greater exploits than that.


Luc. What? I am sure I never heard of any more extraordinary.


Brid. One particular piece of conduct I cannot help bragging of a little.


Luc. What is that?


Brid. A few evenings ago, Mr. Complaisant, finding me a mile and half from
home, in a very dark and slippery night, very handsomely (to do the creature
justice) conducted me home.


Luc. I should suppose you would have thanked him for it.


Brid. Fie and I am ashamed of you.


Luc. What did you do?


Brid. What did I do, why when I got home he said I should allow some little
decent complaisance, for waiting on me so carefully.


Luc. You though it it reasonable I suppose.


Brid. Not I -- As he came a little too near me, I put my ten claws right into
his face, I warrant I pealed it well.


Luc. Then you do not wish the men to respect you.


Bridge. Don't I, that I do -- They admire me -- They Will break through every
obstacle and marry me by and by, whether I will or not.


Luc. They will do otherwise than I expect; certainly, if they do as you say.


Brid. I am afraid I shall not convince you, ladies; so I go where my advice is
more desired -- But I can tell you, ladies, that Diana of the Ephesians, who
was worshipped as a goddess, was the perfect tigress of her sex.


Luc. The men, I imagine, are not so fond of worshipping tigresses in these
times.


Bridge. If I take up a principle, I never give it up. What is right will come
to right at last. [Exit Bridget.]


SCENE IV. -- LEMIRA and LUCINDA.
Luc. Now to know how Miss Crowbar's principles relate to success in life; we
must see whether they made her happy.


Lem. They have not, the men hate her beyond all bounds -- Tho she expects that
some one among them will very soon be so enamoured of her superlative
excellence, as to break through all bounds; and insist on marrying her -- But
there is no appearance of it at present.


Luc. What counsel do you propose to take next?


Lem. I am resolved upon nothing -- I just mention Miss Jemima Toogood -- She
advises to the opposite extremes -- to change the tables with the swains, and
pursue them in turn -- If you make direct advances to the men, write letters,
billetdoux etc, unasked -- or let them take a good deal of liberty -- there is
no harm in it; if the interest of virtue be secure -- these are her maxims.


Luc. If the interests of virtue be secure -- That is a great i^ indeed -- now
if this same IF can preserve us from folly, after we have parted with
discretion -- it shall forever after be printed in capitals, I shall never
admit her proposition while I have my senses.


Lem. These ladies are a curious-contrast: their reading is as singular as
their conduct. A book which was owned by Miss Crowbar, represented in the
burlesque, a man who was in pursuit of a prude -- kissing the shadow of her
glove on the wall; while she held her hand near a candle -- Miss Crowbar
gravely observed, that she wondered why that should be though it burlesque, for it
was being quite to^ familiar with the lady; considering he had paid her only
two years attendance; and she banished the book from her library.


Luc. If such was the reading of Miss Bridget, it would be curious to know that
of Miss Toogood.


Lem. It was chiefly of Anecdotes, and SECRET HISTORIES, with a small addition
of very amorous plays -- Her books were all of the cast which melt rather than
warm the heart; and confound rather than enliven the imagination. She is not at
all to my taste; and you need not fear my following her example or advice --
But now it is your turn, you should introduce somebody -- or dismiss our
conference.


Luc. There is a man of my acquaintance in the college, a very good man in the
main -- Indeed he is a little too apt not to hear readily, when one speaks to
him; to talk to ladies with his back turned to them; to pair his nails in
company, or so -- but he is reputed a scholar nevertheless, and is I believe, a
very good man.


Lem. How shall we obtain his opinion?


Luc. He was to have called here to day -- The time is passed that he should
have come -- heigh -- he is knocking now.


SCENE V. -- DILEMMA and LEMIRA.
Dilem. LADIES your servant! your servant!


Lem. Will you please to take a seat?


Dilem. It is as hot as mount Vesuvius to day. You have heard of the volcanoes,
ladies, I suppose -- Virgil describes one in a very grand manner.


Lem. We have heard of volcanoes -- But we were talking of something very
different; of the most pleasing mode of conversation for -- Ladies.


Dilem. How to mix the jucundum cum dulci.


Lem. No it is not about jumping or mull'd cider. Something more curious than
that.


Dilem. Of what the Greeks, to pronounce the finale a broad, kalo cagatha.


Lem. Oh no sir, it is not about kale, nor cabbage slaw; but --


Dilem. I believe I understand you madam -- There is something about it in
Aristotle.


Lem. I did not know that sir.


Dilem. Xenophon abounds with it, more than any other author.


Lem. Sir, (smiling) let me tell you my desire if you please.


Dilem. O yes, madam, with all my heart.


Lem. It is a question of the greatest importance -- And it is this: which is
the greatest disadvantage to a lady -- to be too forward or too prudish.


Dilem. Aye, that is a great matter -- it is a subject not unknown to the
ancients -- much was said of it between the Pithagoreans and Peripatetics --
The Lyceum and Academus were divided about it.


Lem. Well sir, we should be glad to hear you discuss the subject.


Dilem. I must take it up, pro and con, according to mode and form -- We must
handle it in our own way.


Lem. As methodically as you please, if we can only only understand it.


Dilem. For the first general proposition. It is thus -- whether that which is
generally called forwardness in a woman, can ever be for her advantage. Now
upon this question there are thirteen good reasons against it -- and Firstly,
that if a woman be too forward, the men will always hold her in contempt --
Secondly --


Lem. O dear sir, you have said enough on that point -- you may pass to
another. Pray tell us the reasons why a woman should not be a prude.


Dilem. They are reckoned fourteen -- but the thirteen against forwardness, tho
less in number, are thought to be strongest.


Lem. Will you please to recite them?


Dilem. Firstly -- if a woman keep a man at a mile's distance, he never can be
sociable with her --


Lem. O sir! your propositions are quite decisive -- I fancy you are a great
scholar.


Dilem. Why ladies, it has been though it at college, that, tho prudery and
forwardness are opposite causes in the order of nature; yet the effect of them
comes to the same thing in Greek.


SCENE VI. -- Miss WIND^ALL and LEMIRA.
Wind. LADIES you mean me, I know you do?


Lem. Mean you, I did not know that you was within a mile of us.


Wind. It is not true that I held Tom Longshanks a whole evening in my lap.


Lem. I did not say you did.


Wind. And it is as great a lie which was told about me, that I sent a letter
to Joe Moonshine -- with our hearts united, for the first salutation.


Lem. I never said any such word that you or any body else did.


Wind. I Am glad, ladies, if you are clear: but as you was talking about
forwardness among the ladies, I thought you meant me.


Lem. Not I, by any means, if you have any thing of that kind to settle with
your own conscience, you may settle it alone if you please.


Wind. I am obliged to you ladies, but if I did as bad as they tell of me, it
was not so bad as Miss Crowbar; who, when a young gentleman came near, wounded
him so with the points of her scissors, that the blood spouted to a yard's
distance, and they were obliged to send for a surgeon to take care of him.
(Enters Madam Sensible.)


Lem. No, no Miss Windfall, we meant nothing of this kind -- but we were only
enquiring what was the surest method of behaving acceptably; we found that the
forward woman and the prude were equally unsuccessful we wished to know the
right way.


Wind. I believe that madam Sensible can tell you.


SCENE VII. -- Mad. SENSIBLE, LUCINDA and LEMIRA.
Lem. MADAM we have enquired of many sensible persons, how a woman may be
acceptable to the other sex -- She that is too fond of them, in the first
instance, sails, and she that is too shy -- We should wish for your opinion on
just conduct.


M. Sen. I do not imagine myself qualified to decide such important questions.


Luc. O madam, you, if any person can.


Lem. You are the only person in the world; teach me how I may be agreeable.


Sen. I am not a professor of gallantry -- But all the arts which I believe to
be necessary, are comprehended within a very small compass. Young ladies should
have honest hearts, virtuous principles, and should be educated to decent
manners, before they see much company of young gentlemen. These being granted
they need not affect, any extraordinary character. They will please most by
avoiding all affectation, and appearing just what they are -- They are best to
appear what nature, illustrated by a good education, has made them -- They who
are never rude in their behavior, will seldom be treated with rudeness -- women
may even be grateful to men, for their generous attentions, if they converse
with them sensibly, and with proper, and decent manners -- And if men will not
converse in this manner, there is no need of quarrelling with them, or offering
them any personal abuse. The severest and most effectual punistment, is to
leave them to their own society -- These are not artifices, but comprehend the
simple, just conduct, of a virtuous woman -- I would not have any woman affect
the extremes of behavior -- the medium in my opinion is the safest, because it
is the rightest.


Lem. Madam we thank you.


SCENE VIII. -- THINKMUCH and DOMORE (entering hastily.)
Think. WELL, there never was such a wretched author, I believe, as he who
wrote this Dialogue.


Dom. Why the sentiment is bro't to a point and yet there is no change of
fortune or sign of a catastrophe in the piece -- It ends with a tame moral
sentiment -- good enough it is true but no remarkable event to set it off I am
worried prodigiously. I am afraid I shall never make it take. Pray were is the
author of it.


SCENE IX. -- PALEFACE, (Entering) THINKMUCH and DOMORE.
Pale. WHAT is your will gentlemen?


Dom. Only see, what a piece of work you have made -- here my scholars you see
are all at a stand -- cannot move on with the Drama. You have bro't them into
the most shocking hobble -- I expect we shall be obliged to break off short;
and go off the stage with lopt ears -- for there is not a sign of a catastrophe
to the piece -- what put it into your head to leave the Drama without a
catastrope?


Pale. Why, suppose you had played it off without a catastrophe, what ill
consequence would have come of it?


Think. Why the critic^ would maul it unmercifully.


Dom. The people would clamor against it.


Think The democrats will say, it was done on purpose to introduce monarchy.


Dom. The aristocrats, will say 'twas meant against the Federal government.


Think. It will get to the university, and the scholars will declaim against it.


Dom. The Government will rusticate it.


Think. The metaphysicians will say you are non compo^.


Dom. The astronomers will say you are excentric.


Think. The lawyers will say you ought to be nonsuited.


Dom. The physicians will detest it as a pestilence.


Pale. That Is a mistake, pestilence is all in their favor.


Think. The Clergy --


Pale. Hold sir you shall not say a word about the clergy; they have reproaches
enough from other quarters. But here you blame me unmercifully. What? do you
think all subjects can be treated exactly alike -- There is Dr. Burgo, who is
as great a critic as any -- I Will leave it to him, if you dare; to say, whether
I have done right or not.


SCENE X. -- PALEFACE and BURGO.
Pale. SIR I am most unmercifully accused by these people for not giving this
Drama a regular catastrophe -- The subject sir, is whether Prudery or
Forwardness be most prejudicial to women -- I wish you to inform me, whether
this subject be capable of a regular conclusion.


Burgo. Ladies and Gentlemen. It is my opinion that this author is excus^able
-- Solomon himself could not desire acceptability in love matters -- All that
we can say, is, that all affectation, and extremes of character, ought to be
avoided. But which is the most pernicious to women, that which is called
Forwardness or Prudery -- will forever remain an Insolvable Question. Between
these two large extremes -- there is a wide field for the exercise of
discretion -- So pardon neighbor Paleface, let him give his hand to which lady
he pleases, and lead off the stage.


[They lead off.] The Match Dissolved. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
THE MEANNESS OF FORTUNE HUNTING.
THERE can be no greater instance of insincerity; than to pretend love for the
sake of getting money. Consequently there is no character among men, more
properly the object of contempt, than a fortune hunter. Disproportionate
matches, in point of estate, bring insult on the part of the monied party;
contempt and disgust on the other -- And why should not the woman be
contemptible too, who sets her cap at a man of fortune, when once she has
learned to write her name, and is able to buy her a silk gown?

PERSONS.
MEN.
MR. HONEYCOMB -- a good natured householder. MR. SEMIBREVE -- a young music
master.
WOMEN.
TARTANA HONEYCOMB -- wife to Mr. Honeycomb. MARIA -- Mr. Honeycomb's daughter.
AUNT GRISSEL -- an old maid, sister to Mrs. Honeycomb. LEVINA -- a friend and
confident of Maria.
THE MATCH DISSOLVED.
ACT I.
SCENE I -- Mr. HONEYCOMB and TARTANA.
Hon. MY dearest wife, the condition of our marriage has been extremely
pleasing to me; tho it is not wholly without its cares -- I believe there is no
perfectly unmixed happiness in this world.


Tart. I have often told you so, and there are troubles now I find -- cheese
and butter are likely to be very dear, and we have not laid in our win^er's
stock of pickles.


Hon. That is a matter of very small consequence -- but the young man whom we
hired to teach our Maria music, is paying his addresses to her most sincerely.


Tart. A blockhead, a little impudent coxcomb. He court our Maria! It Is
impossible.


Hon. You will find it but too true, I am afraid her affections are so engaged
to him, that I never shall be able to disengage her*


Tart. Do punish him well, husband; I Would be revenged on him, I would break his
back.


Hon. What, break his back for being fond of an agreeable girl -- My own back
on that principle would have been broken before this day.


Tart. But I cannot bear it, that such a fop as he should have our Maria.


Hon. I will prevent it, if possible, without breaking his back, or his head;
but I am very much afraid that the affair is past remedy.


Tart. This comes of her learning music.


Hon. Let us not have any words, my dear, on that matter -- you was as fond of
her learning music as I, but we were both much to blame.


Tart. Why I have always told her she must not pretend to like any of the young
fellows without my leave; and I have never given her any leave about it.


Hon. Girls do not always wait for their mothers leave in those matters. But we
were more to blame than she, to hire him into the house and let him have access
to her at all hours.


Tart. But girls need not throw themselves away neither, if their parents do
give them liberties.


Hon. It is possible they may be affected with kind, and tender attentions as
well as men. I have no disposition to quarrel with her.


Tart. I Would quarrel with him then, and I say again, if I could not make him
leave her otherwise, I Would break his back.


Hon. It is my serious opinion that the parents who take a gay young man into
the family as an instructor to their daughters, are more to blame than their
daughters, if consequences should not be agreeable -- But I shall use my best
endeavor, to remove the evil, and in the easiest manner possible.


SCENE II. -- TARTANA and GRISSEL.
Tart. GRISSEL, do you know any thing of any peculiar friendship between our
Maria, and Mr. Semibreve?


Gris. There is, so far as I can guess, every sign, that she is fond of him. I
said nothing about it because you often blame me, for intermeddling in the
affairs of the family.


Tart. But when you saw any thing likely to take place, which must hurt the
family extremely, you ought to mention it.


Gris. How should I know how it would turn? perhaps you would have said, in one
minute, that I meddled, because I was envious; and the whole family would have
pointed at me because I was the old maid.


Hon. Hem! we may have carried that matter too far.


Gris. I find married people in general have a d^sgust against old maids. But
why should they be treated as the worst of criminals. You never would have
married a man, who was disagreeable to you -- would you? (To Tartana.)


Tart. Most certainly I would not, I should rather have died.


Gris. So I think, and tho you urged me so much to marry Mr. Landworth; he was
so disagreeable to me; that I am persuaded, if I had married him, I should have
died within three months.


Tart. Then I don't know why you should be blamed -- but have you never advised
Maria better?


Gris. Yes, but she never would take any notice of me.


Tart. Then I wish you would talk with her again -- and school her well.


Gris. Why would you not do it yourself?


Tart. Because I am apt to get into a passion, and if I should, and abuse her,
I should be sorry for it afterward.


Gris. Well now, since I know you will approve of it -- I will talk with her
upon the subject -- and I shall give it to her well -- I wish to punish her --
I shall do it with a goodwill -- because she is often vexing me about being an
old maid.


SCENE III. -- GRISSEL and MARIA.
Gris. WELL, Miss, where is your Butterfly? Shall we not expect him fl^ttering
about here to day?


Mar. If you wan't him for your amusement -- perhaps he may be.


Gris. Want him for my amusement! I care not for him the value of his own
fiddlestick; and I wonder you can be fond of such a coxcomb.


Mar. A coxcomb do you call him? Truly he is fond of ornament, which shows him
to be a neat, and cleanly man; and attentive to our sex -- and you know that
kind of attention, is agreeable to all women.


Gris. I wish to know whether you expect to live upon love, and music; without
any solid estate? Fa, sol, la, twedle dum and twedle-dee, must be poor
consolations in an empty house and starving family.


Mar. So you must deal in your dismals. That Is always the way with a woman,
when she is fit for nothing else. -- But I dare say, he will provide for every
thing that is necessary.


Gris. Let him pretend what he will, he never should trouble me with his
addresses.


Mar. He would not, I am confident for they would be to you the greatest
consolation imaginable*


Gris. I Would settle the matter quick. He should not court me long.


Mar. I suppose not, for you would comply so easily, and promptly; that there
would be no occasion for a long courtship.


Gris. No he should not so much as darken my doors.


Mar. No for his presence in your fancy would be much brighter than the day.


Gris You know, you saucy, impudent creature, what I mean, well enough. I mean,
that I would not let him come after me at all.


Mar. No, for you would meet him more than half way -- and follow him to the
ends of the earth.


Gris. You are so saucy, there is no bearing with you: and were it not that it
is a shame for ladies to quarrel; I would give you a good thumping, that I
would.


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- LEVINA and MARIA.
Lev. MY friend, I cannot think it safe to trust to a future maintenance,
unless he is engaged in some business.


Mar. It has often given me the most serious concern -- for I perceive that I
cannot resign him without pain -- yet I have had many serious hours of
reflection, if he does not apply himself to any steady business how we shall be
able to live in any credit, or reputation -- and indeed, how we shall be able
to live at all -- for my fortune is not so great as to last forever, without
any further income.


Lev. How strange we young folks manage between ourselves. The idleness of a
young man, who is agreeable, always gives us great pain -- yet we treat them as
if it were well that they were always idle -- by affecting to be above the
laborious employments of life ourselves.


Mar. And the young gentlemen have the same absurdity in their treatment, of
us. They expect every thing of us, of delicacy and propriety of conduct. And
yet often behave toward us, as if they would have us be the reverse.


Lev. That is very true. But in both cases reason should bear rule, in spite of
custom. And, were I in your case -- I certainly, before I bro't myself into any
engagement -- I would know whether he meant to follow any serious business --
for the mere profession of music, will never support any person with
reputation; unless it brings more profit, than it does among us.


Mar. I am of your opinion, and shall have the discretion to see to that point
myself.


Lev. And, (I must leave you for a moment) I would not pass over that matter
slightily. (Exit Levina.)


SCENE II. -- SEMIBREVE and MARIA.
Sem. MARIA, my dear delight, happy, and cheerful, I hope as you always are.


Mar. You would make me happy were it in the power of complaisance to do it.


Sem. Complaisance, my dear Maria! Is the affection of my heart no more than
complaisance? Is the most refined, most intense and exalted passion, no more
than complaisance? My sweet angel, you undervalue the heart, which is devoted
to you.


Mar. I should be happy to find all your assertions true. But you know, that by
listening to your addresses, I have affronted my relations. And it is necessary
for us, to have something to live upon, in case they should not be kind to us.


Sem. Depend on it, my divine Maria, depend on it, that I shall see to that, I
shall live nobly with you, Maria, depend on it, we shall be happy as possible.


Mar. Women, you may say, are apt to be more anxious than men; but I must own
that I fear the profession of music will not maintain us. I could wish that you
would engage in some other business.


Sem. All in due time, my sweet girl, depend on it, if I marry you, I will
maintain you well, and leave no scheme or business untried, that I may gain a
happy living.


Mar. Well, sir, I wish you will bear it in mind, for it has really given me
uneasiness. For I am sensible of your merit, tho I cannot see how you will
establish a living.


Sem. All in good time, never fear me my sweet girl* you shall find me a man of
the strictest honor.


[Exit Semibreve.] SCENE III. -- LEVINA and MARIA.
Lev. WHAT does he say? will he do as you wish to have him?


Mar. He promises fair and upon the strictest honor what other assurances can I
have from him?


Lev. Nothing; unless he actually engage in business -- but if he promises upon
honor, he must be a perfect villain if he breaks his word.


Maria. I can have no firmer ground of truth.


Lev. True; but I would not be married to him, till he was settled in some good
business.


Mar. I do not intend it, but it will come to much the same thing -- I must
promise in order to secure him -- and if I promise I shall marry him at all
events.


Lev. Heaven direct my good girl, I know not what to advise you to.


SCENE IV. -- HONEYCOME and MARIA.
Hon. WHY my dear girl should you appear to avoid me? I wish to converse with
you, on a subject interesting to both of us.


Mar. If I were sure, I had nothing of severity to fear; you would see no
disposition in me to avoid you.


Hon. Severity, my girl, you have no severity to expect. What made you think of
it? I wish, however, to enquire in a manner, the least disagreeable to you, if
Mr. Semibreve has any prospect of settling in any permanent business.


Mar. I cannot say positively; but I believe he intends it.


Hon. This business, in teaching music, will hardly be sufficient for the
maintenance of a family.


Mar. I suppose it cannot be, but I believe him to be a man of the strictest
honor. He says he means to go into business soon.


Hon. Have you no apprehension, Maria, that he is one of those idle fellows
that cheat girls, who only pretend, to have a regard for you, that he may be
maintained in idleness and dissipation? -- he perhaps imagine ^u have a fortu^e.


Mar. He is always very decent in his conduct to me, and certainly pretends to
be very sincere; whatever his real views may be.


Hon. And you have no suspicions of him?


Mar. Not in the least. I believe him to be a man of the strictest honor.


Hon. If you believe him to be such a man; then you will have no objection to
my bringing him to the test; and it will only set his virtues in the strongest
^ight.


Mar. I would not wish any thing rude, or uncivil to be offered to him.


Hon. No, that is (...) my nature; I will only converse with him concerning you
and let him talk as he pleases -- You know that fr^^ our parlor to my study,
every word which one speaks in the common pitch of conversation, may be heard
distinctly.


Mar. And what, sir, would you propose?


Hon. That you take your place in my study, while I converse with him, and hear
our conversation.


Mar. That I will do most willingly; for I am not in the least apprehensive,
that I shall hear any thing; but that which is most agreeable, and which will
tend to make you and me respect him more than we do.


Hon. You will be ready when he comes.


SCENE V. -- TAR^ANA HONEYCOME and GRISSEL.
Tar. HUSBAND, I am out of my wits about Maria -- I have been thinking of it,
and the more I think, the more I am uneasy. I shall go crazy, if there be not
something done about it.


Gris. I talked with the little jade about it today; and she was so saucy, I
could hardly keep my hands from her. I never had so good an appetite to my
dinner, as I had to give her a beating.


Tar If she would not give him up, I Would turn her out of doors.


Hon. That is, to save her, we must destroy her at once -- Shall we ruin her,
because her affection mortifies us? That Is acting on a selfish motive.


Tar. That Is just like you, you never can resent any thing.


Hon. Never mind it, my wife. If I do not gro^ mistake, they will settle the
matter between themselves yet.


ACT III.
SCENE I. -- HONEYCOMB and SEMIBREVE.
Hon. MR. SEMIBREVE, it has been represented to me; that you have sought an
alliance with our family.


Sem. That is, as things may prove to be. I believe Maria has a regard for me.


Hon. I suspect that she has, and truly, I believe you have taken some pains to
gain her affections.


Sem. It always was my fortune, by some means, or other, to attract the notice
of the ladies. I hope they don't blame me for the manner in which they are
affected, when they see me.


Hon. Perhaps not, but if you be in pursuit of Maria, or (...) you seem rather
to insinuate, she is in pursuit of you; the effect comes to the same thing. You
must have a maintenance, in order to live comfortably together.


Sem. There is no doubt of that.


Hon. Well, it becomes an interesting matter to me; do you intend to pursue any
steady business for the purpose of supporting yourself?


Sem. Sir, I mean to live like a gentleman -- I teach music occasionally -- As
for our maintenance, in case I marry your daughter, I suppose you will give her
enough to maintain us.


Hon. If she marries agreeably to my mind I shall do my best for her.


Sem. You can give her a hansome estate, and permit me to say, sir, you ought
to do it.


Hon. Sir, I hope you do not mean to dispose of my estate, till you have it in
your hands.


Sem. No -- but as I know the hold I have on Maria's affections -- I mean to
have something handsome with her, if I take her.


Hon. Well sir, I suppose I could give her as much as eight hundred pounds --
you know I have many children.


Sem. Eight hundred pounds, sir, I shall not accept. -- I know, you can afford
to give more -- I have no mind to marry without the means of living genteelly.


Hon. You do not however promise to make the best kind of a son in law; but as
I mean to treat my daughter kindly -- and I believe she respects you -- I will
make an effort to give her twelve hundred pounds.


Sem. I know the hold I have on Maria's affections -- you will not wish to
destroy your daughter's happiness -- I shall not accept of twelve hundred.


Hon. I will give you fifteen hundred, rather than hurt my daughter, in the
feelings of her heart -- I have a great aversion to crossing children in their
love -- I am confident that Maria will prove a very kind and industrious wife
-- and with her I will give you fifteen hundred pounds; which is as much as I
can give.


Sem. No sir, I thank you. I shall not accept of any thing less than two
thousand pounds -- which is as little as I can think of taking, and be saddled
with a wife -- tho I believe with a little tutoring, she might be a tolerable
family piece -- tho not a fine woman, by any means.


Hon. What if I tell her what you say of her?


Sem. She never would believe it. She would credit one word of mine more than a
thousand of yours.


Hon. I shall never give you two thousand pounds.


Sem. You are not sure of that; you will be glad to come to my terms yet. If
you do not, you may depend on losing your daughter.


SCENE II. -- HONEYCOMB and MARIA.
Hon. MY dear Maria* your humble servant seems to be a hard man to deal with.


Mar. Dear sir, give yourself no more trouble about him, I detest the coxcomb.


Hon. Will you admit the addresses of Mr. Plaintruth, who has long cherished a
kind regard for you? I recommend him to you, my girl, as a person of approved
worth.


Mar. Dear sir, I have been foolish long enough in following my own inclination
-- I will be governed by your advice. [Enter Tartana]


Hon. Well wife, Maria has given him up.


Tart. You are the strangest man that over was; you will make all women folks
do just as you please.


[ Ex^^ Tartana and Honeycomb.] SCENE III. -- SEMIBREVE and MARIA.
Sem. MY divine Maria -- I shall make the old gentleman deal out freely to us
yet.


Mar. Yes, perhaps I may marry you yet, if any body will give me two thousand
pounds. But I would not for fifteen hundred pounds, tho you might make her with
a little tutoring a tolerable family piece.


Sem. Ha! it seems you have overheard me. I have often heard that people always
get paid for listening.


Mar. Yes, I am well paid for it. I shall get rid of an insufferable coxcomb --
I shall never forgive myself the weakness of having been attached to him. Sir,
instead of giving me any more of your fulsome flattery; get out of the house,
and if you ever come into it again you shall meet with proper correction.


Sem. Oh! blast my ill luck, she is certainly angry, and my game is up. What a
fool I was that I did not accept the fifteen hundred pounds.


The Spring for Flowers. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
YOUTH IS THE SEASON FOR LOVE AND MARRIAGE.
Few of human follies have less excuse to plead, than the neglect of marriage
in youth -- and the consequent anxiety for it, in later life. A quick
sensibility, strength, activity, ambition and power of sustaining family cares
-- ability to govern and educate children -- with freedom from uncouth habits;
and full propension to love; all invite to early marriages. Cold prudence is
all the virtue peculiar to later life; and it is generally left without the
assistance of the other virtues.

PERSONS.
MEN.
MR. ALLWORTHY -- a gentlemen of exce^lent moral^. MR. GOODSORT -- a
methodical, sober bachelor.
WOMEN.
MISS HAWTHORNE -- a single lady of thirty six. MRS. EASY -- a widow. MISS
HAZARD -- a mantua maker. MISS EMILY -- an accomplished young lady. MISS
FORESIGHT -- a cunning maiden of twenty eight. LUCY -- servant to Miss
Hawthorne.
THE SPRING FOR FLOWERS.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- GOODSORT and HAWTHORNE.
Good. MADAM, every thing in life may be transacted acc^rding to rule and
reason; I have a desire to invite you to the state of marriage, and see here, I
have stated my proposals on this paper; that you may consider them at your
le^sure.


Haw. Sir I shall consider them; it would be rude not to do it, considering
your reputable character. But I cannot speedily come to a conclusion.


Good. Take what time you think proper, if you will only give them due
consideration. I shall perhaps see you again in an hour or two. But will not
insist on a hasty determination, -- take what time you please.


SCENE II. -- HAWTHORNE and FORESIGHT.
Haw. NOW from my soul I wish he had less reason, then I could suppose he had
more love -- He is as cool in his courtship as if he were casting up a column
of figures -- He is a worthy man, but after all not at all to my taste.


Fore. Why, Madam you really appear melancholy.


Haw. I am so -- I find I have left my morning's work to do in the afternoon, I
am vexed with myself.


Fore. I do not comprehend your meaning.


Haw. The truth is, when I was young, from twenty to thirty, I had a number of
very good offers for marriage, but full of the love of liberty and dissipation,
I declined them, and now, to conceal nothing from you -- I am heartily sorry
for it.


Fore. Many a woman I suppose has committed the same error -- But for Heaven's
sake don't get into the dumps, your prospects are good yet.


Haw. Why, I am ready to look upon myself as a poor, forsaken creature.


Fore. Poh! There Is Mr. Goodfort, is as fond of you, as he can be of any woman.


Haw. An odd piece of furniture truly.


Fore. Why, what is the matter with him?


Haw. Matter, I am afraid he is all matter and no spirit -- His courtship it as
methodical as a book of accounts -- He comes just so often, stays just so long,
talks just so, and just so much.


Fore. He is an exact gentleman, to be sure.


Haw. Exact! All system, method and order; I do not love to be measured by the
square and compass.


Fore. He is a very virtuous man.


Haw. Yes, I esteem him, and yet after all I don't like him -- He makes love by
calculation, -- besides he is eight years older than I.


Fore. He must be old then, with an emphasis.


Haw. You saucy -- I was going to call names, but to own the truth I am on the
wrong side of thirty five -- But he is eight years older than I.


Fore. Has he not made his proposals?


Haw. Yes, he has made them, on paper as you live; and as formal as any bond or
deed.


Fore. You had better comply with them.


Haw. I mean to, unless I have those which are more pleasing.


Fore. From whom have you any prospect of those which are more agreeable?


Haw. I have had some visits from that elegant pink of all courtesy, Mr.
Allworthy.


Fore. Your hopes are delusive.


Haw He is very complaisant to me.


Fore. He says openly, he only respects your good sense, and hopes to profit by
your experience.


Haw. Experience! a saucy fellow. Experience is the result of age -- Yet tho he
is saucy, he is complaisant and young.


Fore. Too young I should suppose, he is eight years younger than you.


Haw. I do not think that any reasonable objection.


Fore. I suppose not -- But he is very much engaged with Miss Emily Howard.


Haw. There is an easy remedy for that; I could fright her out of that fancy in
five minutes.


Fore. I am not so certain of that -- Those modest girls, when they once get
engaged, are commonly engaged to purpose.


Haw. I can easily fright her out of the project. She is afraid of her own
shadow.


Fore. She may be afraid of a shadow, and have no objection to the substance.


Haw. O I can manage the matter with her. There is Mrs. Easy, -- She had a most
wretched husband, and if she were to talk with Emily about the men, she would
half fright her to death in ten minutes.


Fore. Much I doubt that. But I have no objection to your trying the
experiment. [Exit Foresight]


SCENE II. -- HAWTHORNE and EMILY.
Haw. DO tell me Emily, what is that which worries your mind so, and makes you
so pensive?


Em. Pray be not so teazing; I would not tell my own mother of such a subject.


Haw. Then there is a subject -- you shall tell it me, Emily.


Em. You would only say that I was a foolish girl; and that would mortify me
extremely.


Haw. P^haw! Emily -- you don't lessen my curiosity at all; you know I am a
good friend to you, Emily; you own auht too; you shall tell me.


Em. I am (...) loath to give you pain.


Haw. You give me the more pain by this management -- My curiosity puts me on
the rack -- Tell me, or I shall not enjoy a moment's peace.


Em. I have a right to k^ep some things to myself, and I will not tell you --
your servant madam. [Exit Emily.]


Haw. (alone) She is cunning* and l^es right for herself; but there is one way
which never (...) surprise d^^icate minds: it is almost too wicked. It is to
put them on the rack, in fears for their honor. Emily deserves this punishment
for thinking to outwit my old head. I will accuse her and set her to justifying
herself. [Emily enters.] Emily, my dear, excuse me if I detain you one moment.
You, I understand, have had a quarrel in your family.


Em. That Is a total mistake; I have the full confidence of my parents, and the
happiest harmony with my brothers and sisters.


Haw. Then Miss Fidget was wrong; but Miss Coaxer might be in the right, in
saying that you became melancholy in consequence of being neglected by the
young gentlemen.


Em. I have dismissed three within a month, and I have one now.


Haw. There it is; they are right; you carry on a clandestine correspondence
with him.


Em. Nobody who knows me would suspect me of such a thing. Mr. Allwor^hy never
visited me once, but with the approbation of my parents.


Haw. They like him then.


Em. They treat him respectfully.


Haw. Then the reason must be, that he is not so attentive as --


Em. More attentive than I desire.


Haw. Then he is a perfect libertine, is he?


Em. You astonish me -- What did I say, which should lead you to that? He is a
man of most excellent morals.


Haw. Now, you fancy girl, I have got the secret out of you -- Mr. Allworthy is
very attentive to you, and that grieves you.


Em. You have been successful -- I see you have not lost your faculty to do
misch^ef.


Haw. Mr. Allwor^hy then addresses you -- and you are all in fear lest you
should lose him.


Em. Not in the least, my fears are all the other way, lest I should be
persuaded to detain him.


Haw. Aye, there you are right -- this marrying is a dangerous affair -- By
saying yes, a woman may ruin herself forever. Never think of marrying, Emily --
Never make yourself miserable for any man. Mrs. Easy will soon be here, and she
will tell you all about it.


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- GOOD^ORT and EASY.
Good. MRS. Easy, I wait on you at the request of Miss Hawthorne, desiring that
you would attend her.


Eas. What does she wish of me?


Good She says that she desires you would tell Emily all that is bad about
marriage, and terrify her so, that she may not venture herself into that state
-- She says that she is afraid Emily is about to engage in a very improper
match.


Eas. I can tell her all the bad which I know of it -- But if she will not be
terrified, I cannot help that -- Do you know what Miss Hawthorne means by this?


Good. I do not; but simply to express her desires to you.


SCENE II. -- Miss HAZARD and Mrs. EASY.
Easy. THAT poor old pigeon Miss Hawthorne has commissioned me, to fright Emily
Howard.


Haz. And I am to make a suit of clothes for her; to enable her to catch Mr.
Allworthy.


Easy. She may as well try to catch all the larks that wing the air -- I can
tell her madam ship, that it is not for such old croakers as she, to match with
the fine young gentlemen.


Haz. Somehow, I always feel a disposition to plague old maids, tho I expect to
be one myself.


Easy. Tho I never was one myself; nor ever wished to be -- I think them
excusable when they could not be married reputably.


Haz. But Miss Hawthorne's celibacy is her own fault she owns, and by her own
confession, she is proper prize for ridicule.


SCENE III. -- HAWTHORNE, HAZARD and Mrs. EASY
Haw. HAVE you finished my clothes?


Haz. No, I forgot to ask you the fashion of them.


Haw. The newest fashion -- such as Miss Sprightly's.


Haz. That is almost in the fashion of a young Miss* clothes.


Haw. I would not have you think I am so terribly old neither.


Haz. Why you look very fresh and fair for a woman of your years.


Haw. Of my years you creature you; what do you mean by that?


Haz. Have you forgot how you wished me to tell your fortune.


Haw. No Madam, no -- I have kept my tea cup, prepared in due order for you to
see.


Haz. It ought to have been a cup, taken in the morning fasting -- the lady who
is to have her fortune told, should only drink one cup in the morning and eat
nothing with it -- nor taste any food till four in the afternoon.


Haw. I have prepared it accordingly.


Haz. Let me see it then.


Haw. Pray look out and see if any body be coming in -- I should be very much
ashamed to be caught in telling fortunes.


Haz. Well this is odd. (Looking attentively in the cup.) Here Is a man who
intends to have you. He is about forty four -- a very methodical man. He is
serious -- and will have you. But here is a letter.


Haw. It is a letter, as plain as it can be.


Haz. This is from a man about twenty six or twenty eight -- His name begins
with an A.


Haw. (Looking sly.) Well what do you think of him?


Haz. He does not seem to be quite so fond of you as the other -- See he has a
lady of his heart -- See here -- her name begins with E. -- I suspect it is
Emily Howard.


Haw. (Strikes the cup from her hand.) A fiddlestick. It is the silliest thing
in the world to tell fortunes.


Haz. What I told you madam is true -- I am sorry it has put you out of humor,
and I wish you good night.


SCENE IV. -- EMILY, Mrs. EASY and Miss HAWTHORNE.
Em. MRS. Easy, I am very happy to pay my respects to you.


Easy. Hey! my young lady -- so compliasant to an old creature such as I -- I
thank you Emily.


Haw. This young lady is troubled in her mind -- some people say she is on the
point of being married. Has she not reason to be afraid? Is not that a very
dangerous, and a very important affair?


Easy. Yes, yes, somewhat dangerous and quite important. But a woman can manage
her husband well enough, if she knows how.


Em. Will you excuse me. Mrs. Easy! -- I never wish to take one step in life
but upon sure grounds. Was you happy in your marriage?


Easy. Yes, my dear girl -- I frankly answer yes. Other persons complained of
my husband -- but to me he was truly a kind man -- Yes Emily I can say truly,
that I was happy.


Em. I suppose you are always happy in whatever situation you are.


Easy. Few men are so bad, as not to be good in some respects -- Yes, I was
happy my dear.


Em. Did your husband ever put on high airs of authority?


Easy. Yes.


Em. Did he ever talk with passion, and be saucy to you?


Easy. Yes.


Em. Was he ever cross and ill humored?


Easy. Yes.


Em. Was he ever in a passion with you?


Easy. Yes.


Em. Did he ever leave you, to go into company abroad?


Easy. Yes.


Em. Was he ever suspicious of you?


Easy. Yes.


Em. Was you ever afraid that he might leave you to distress and want?


Easy. Yes.


Em. Had he a great many faults then?


Easy. Yes.


Em. And could you be happy with such a man?


Easy. Yes.


Em. O admiration. Had I such a husband I must die outright -- Do you not
think I should?


Easy. No.


Em. This is quite beyond my comprehension.


Easy. I suppose it -- but all men have their faults. If you cannot be happy
with a man who has faults you can be happy with none.


Em. Then it will be best for me to remain as I am.


Easy. You are a little simplicity, Emily. Tho my husband had so many faults,
and other people said he had more than ever I saw -- Yet when he died I was
very sorry.


Em. Well, Mrs. Easy, will you tell me how one may manage with a husband who
has faults? How shall a woman make her husband treat her with respect?


Easy By never giving him any reason to despise her.


Em. How shall she prevent his leaving her to want and distress.


Easy. By not wantonly spending his estate.


Em. How prevent his being cross and ill humored.


Easy. Set him an example of good humor and pleasantness.


Em If he goes much into company abroad --


Easy. She must cure him by making him happiest at home.


Em. What if he be liable to sudden passions.


Easy. Let him alone till his passion is over.


Em. How shall she prevent his being suspicious of her.?


Easy. By telling him every thing he wants to know.


Em. How shall she prevent his withdrawing his confidence from her?


Easy. By always telling him exact truth.


Em. If he has many faults and she cannot but know it?


Easy. She should count her own, and see if she has not more than he.


Haw. You are a strange woman, Mrs. Easy. The women must all come to you to
learn the matrimonial catechism -- but all this will do me no good.


[Ex Hawthorne and Easy] ACT III.
SCENE I. -- EMILY and ALLWORTHY.
Em. Alone COULD Mrs. Easy be happy with such a husband as she had. And I not
be able to find a blessing with such a man as Mr. Allworthy -- I Will let him
know my sentiments are altered and be will fly to me like a bird.


[Enter Allworthy.] All. Miss Emily, I must know my definitive sentence --
suspense is so uncomfortable to me that I shall not long be able to endure it.


Em. I must then accept your offers, on this supposition -- that we both have
many faults, and each must learn to bear with them.


All. The best footing in the world in point of prudence -- but my affection
will not let me anticipate them on your part.


Em. Well ^ am willing to contrive to be happy with as few faults as possible
on either side.


All. Neither is that condition disagreeable -- I believe we had better say
nothing more against concord, and harmony, but let them take place between us
if they will.


Em. I shall not try to banish them.


[Exit Allworthy] SCENE II. -- HAWTHORNE and EMILY.
Haw. WELL I may now resign myself to despair, unless you will give up your
pretentions.


Em A good friend is a treasure worth keeping. I have no tho'ts of parting with
such a blessing.


SCENE III. -- LUCY and HAWTHORNE.
Lucy. SHALL we set on a supper?


Haw. I am perfectly indifferent about it.


Lucy The ladies will want it; and they all will collect here in a few moments.


Haw. You may do what you please -- I feel very disagreeably.


Lucy. Madam, you are disappointed and cannot conceal it -- but I would take
the methodical gentleman.


Haw. I shall, but to marry when one is not perfectly satisfied with it, is not
the thing -- But one must do it, when they can do nothing better -- I wish I
had not been such a fool when I was young.


SCENE IV. -- HAWTHORNE, and EMILY, and all the ladies present.
Haw. LADIES you are welcome; but pray do not expect me to be very cheerful.


Em. My aunt, I hope will not blame me, for not resigning the best part of my
fortune to her.


Haw. No ladies -- I blame none of you: I have no one to blame but myself. But
let me, like all other criminals, caution you not to do as I have done, youth
is the season of beauty, and of attention from the men -- and I believe if a
woman cannot suit herself with a partner then -- there is very little prospect
that she ever will.


[Exit Hawthorne, and after her all the ladies.] The Discontented Wife. A
DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
THE QUARRELS OF MARRIED PERSONS ARE GENERALLY FRIVOLOUS.
IT is generally very idle for people in the vicinity, to interpose in the
quarrels of married persons. Marriage obliges, and almost necessitates, a man
and his wife, to be of a mind, in things of great consequence -- Their quarrels
arise from some trifles: a mere momentary humor, or accidental word, and
counter passions, have more influence in reconciling them, than their reason.
Hence this important moral arises; that married persons never make complaints
of each other abroad, and that their neighbors interpose in none of their
differences -- lest work be made for repentance.

PERSONS.
MEN.
COL. FORTINBRASS -- officer of the United States army, married in N. York. MR.
WILLIAMSON -- a wealthy citizen and good husband. MR. LEWISTON -- a neighbor,
friend to Mrs. Fortinbrass.
WOMEN.
MRS. FORTINBRASS -- wife to Col Fortinbrass. MRS. WILLIAMSON -- wife to Mr.
Williamson. MRS. LYMAN -- wife of a reputable citizen, friend of Mrs.
Fortinbrass. MRS. DELANO -- formerly rival of Mrs. Fortinbrass.
THE DISCONTENTED WIFE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- Mrs. WILLIAMSON and Mrs. FORTINBRASS.
Mrs. Will. O MY dear Mrs Fortinbrass, I am glad to meet you here -- I am going
to Philadelphia, and wished to see Mrs. Lyman before I went. But I am so happy
as to see you here! I hope you and the Col enjoy good health.


Mrs. Fort. Not very good, indeed I get very little rest anights -- The Col. at
present is from home -- But how sweetly you look, what bright eyes, what rosy
cheeks.


Mrs Will. Thanks to that Great Being who gives health and cheerfulness, I
enjoy both in a great degree -- The peace and satisfaction of my mind have done
me more good than medicine.


Mrs. Fort. And how sweetly dressed too: where did you get this delightful gown?


Mrs. Will. My husband gave it me, it was his own choice.


Mrs. Fort. Your husband gave it to you?


Mrs. Will. Yes. I hope you do not think that I would have accepted it from any
other man.


Mrs. Fort. Then your husband is good to you -- Is he indeed?


Mrs. Will. I am almost angry with you -- What a question! But I pardon you;
for many have prophesied that I should be unhappy in my marriage -- But what
thanks do I owe to Heaven for my husband, whose kindness and virtues exceed my
most romantic expectations.


Mrs. Fort. Well, I believe you are one of the happy few -- I am sick of
marriage -- only see how I look -- this ordinary gown -- But this is nothing
could I enjoy peace at home -- I had better been laid in my grave, than to have
married Col. Fortinbrass.


Mrs. Will. Mrs. Fortinbrass, I am surprised. You unhappy -- and with Col.
Fortinbrass too -- so fine a person, so elegant in his dress and manners --
Fifty girls in this city were ready to die with envy when you married him.


Mrs. Fort. Could I* part with him now, they might have him very cheap.


Mrs. Will. But you surprise me, my dear friend -- What is the matter?


Mrs. Fort. Matter enough, I think; he holds his soldier frolics abroad,
despises my company at home, gets me no new clothes. When I reprove him, he
will either look as surly as a bear, or get his old flax stringed fiddle and
play a tune to my reproof.


Mrs. Will. That vexes you I suppose.


Mrs. Fort. It does mortally, I have though it a number of times that I should have
died with vexation -- But I could only retire, and weep in floods of tears --
But hush, he is coming.


Mrs. Will. I withdraw a moment to talk with Mrs. Lyman. But will see you again
in half an hour.


SCENE II. -- Mrs. FORTINBRASS and Col. FORTINBRASS.
Mrs. Fort. Well sir, you got home very early last night. It was but one of the
clock in the morning.


C. Fort. I hoped, madam, to have met with a kind reception from you. I do not
think it was very late.


Mrs. Fort. But I know it was late -- and it was a pretty fancy indeed, if one
must marry and expect to find a friend in a husband, and have him leave one in
utter contempt, and tarry out late.


[The Colonel takes up an old fiddle and plays.] C. Fort. Tum tum diddle de dum
dum dum.


Mrs. Fort. You pretend to have your soldier frolics -- who knows what you are
about when you are abroad?


C. Fort. Tum dum, etc. (plays)


Mrs. Fort. No woman of spirit can bear such treatment, I protest.


C. Fort. Tum dum diddle, etc. (plays)


Mrs. Fort. You have not bought me a new gown this twelve month.


C. Fort. Tum dum, etc. (continues playing)


Mrs. Fort. I will not bear this treatment -- It is intolerable.


C. Fort. Tum dum diddle, etc. (still continues)


Mrs. Fort. If ever there was a woman so abused by her husband.


C. Fort. Tum dum diddle.


[He pursues her with his music till she is off the stage.] SCENE III. -- Mrs.
FORTINBRASS and Mrs. LYMAN.
Mrs Fort. O MY dear Mrs. Lyman, I am undone -- Never was any person so abused
by her husband. I shall die -- I shall die.


Lym. Fie, fie Mrs. Fortinbrass -- do not disgrace yourself and disgrace your
husband, by these quarrels -- but find means to make yourself and your husband
easy. These proceedings are very dangerous.


Mrs. Fort. I cannot bear it; I must give him my mind, if I die for it.


Lym. You may do it and see what you will get by it -- but I will not stay to
hear you. [Exit Mrs. Lyman.]


SCENE IV. -- COL. FORTINBRASS and Mrs. FORTINBRASS
C. Fort. WELL madam it is really a fine morning today.


Mrs. Fort. So it seems by your music -- you are quite inspired it seems by the
season.


C. Fort. I love to sing when I feel cheerful -- I have very fine success in
fowling.


Mrs. Fort. I saw you have a large bunch of birds strung up by their bills -- I
wonder how you came to kill so many starlings. They are a lean kind of birds,
and of little, or no use.


C. Fort. No not starlings, child. They are thrushes my dear^ delicious as
marrow.


Mrs. Fort. Do you think me such a fool that I do not know a thrush from a
starling.


C. Fort. And do you think me such a sot that I don't know a starling, from a
thrush?


Mrs. Fort. You staid out very late, last night. Your eyes, and senses too,
might be a little hurt.


C. Fort. What an impudent woman you are, to talk thus to your husband.


Mrs. Fort. What an insolent coxcomb you are to treat a woman of spirit, and
good family, in this manner.


C. Fort. (Extremely agitated.) O torment! why did I marry? Can I bear such
impudence.


Mrs. Fort. Yes, you insolent Dutchman -- to behave with no more complaisance
to a woman of spirit and good family. You are not fit for human society -- Go
abroad among the brutes. If you cannot behave yourself with more propriety, get
out of this house, this instant, and as fast as you can. [The Colonel
approaches slowly to the door, turn and speaks to his wife -- looking dejected
the whole time.]


C. Fort. Sylvia farewell -- I have long borne with some ill qualities in you,
on account of some others, which I admired and loved; but this last stroke is
intolerable -- Farewell Sylvia, I shall see you no more. Yet remember this
house was mine -- you have it but by marrying me -- And now you order me from
it. It is very well -- I will go. And you shall have it to yourself.


[Goes out without his hat.] ACT II.
SCENE I. -- Mrs. FOTINBRASS and Mrs. LYMAN (entering here.)
Mrs. Fort. O MY friend, I am the most miserable of women.


Mrs. Lym. What did your husband do, when you ordered him out of the house?


Mrs. Fort. He went softly away -- and I said nothing. It has been three weeks
that we have been much out of humor with each other. Now he has bid me a
solemn farewell. O I am the most miserable of women! Why was I such a fool as
to marry!


Mrs. Lym. Well, and I cannot but think that you are partly to blame too -- I
have no desire to exculpate the colonel -- why should you bluntly contradict
him? That is unpolite to any body. Why insult him with his being a Dutchman*
National reflections always wound deep. You knew that before you married him --
and to order him out of a house which you acquired by marrying with him.


Mrs. Fort. If I have been to blame, I have been to blame. But I will ask your
advice.


Lym. Well madam, I advise you to send a polite message to the Colonel, and
invite him to come home.


Mrs. Fort. So give up my will, and let him gain his point, a grand lesson for
a lady of fashion.


Mrs. Lym. Then get some friend to mention it to him, so as to save your pride
in the case.


Mrs. Fort After all, it will be a kind of submission, and that is a word which
of all words I hate.


Mrs. Lym. It is simply a compliance, and I trust you know what compliance is
-- when you trusted your life, your property, your honor, your happiness with
your husband, nay your very soul -- did you think after that, that you must be
ceremonious?


Mrs. Fort. But in that case there was no impropriety.


Mrs. Lym. Neither is there here. Maids are bound to ceremony. But a married
woman may do whatever she pleases, for the happiness of herself and her husband.


Mrs. Fort. You will not easily pursuade me to give up my will, and
resentments, I assure you.


Mrs. Lym. What then do you mean to do?


Mrs. Fort. To sue for a divorce, or separate maintenance at least.


Mrs. Lym. You may intend to have your own way; but I do not mean to give you
up so -- there is my good friend Mr. Williamson, he says his heart has bled for
you, when he knew the dissensions between you, and your husband.


Mrs. Fort. If that be true it is more then I have done for myself, I assure
you.


Mrs. Lym. Dear Mrs. Fortinbrass, say not that again, if you be insensible to
the better affections of the heart, I shall despair of you entirely.


Mrs. Fort. You, or any one, may say then just what you please.


SCENE III. -- Mr. WILLIAMSON and Mrs. FORTINBRASS.
Mr. Will. LADIES, I respect you all most sincerely; but I mean to pay my
attention particularly to Mrs. Fortinbrass.


Mrs. Fort. Just as you please, Mr. Williamson.


Mr. Will. I mean in regard of your affair with Col. Fortinbrass -- I will not
mortify you afresh by telling the sad story, but if I can be of any service to
you by healing the unhappy wound, and restoring happiness, I shall greatly
rejoice -- will you be so kind as to tell me what your intentions are?


Mrs. Fort. To sue for a divorce or a separate maintenance at least.


Mr. Will. Let me then ask you if you have not unnatural relations who hate you,
and rivals who owe you a mortal grudge, and indeed enemies of various kinds?


Mrs. Fort. Yes, perhaps a hundred, who would rejoice to hear of my death.


Mr. Will. Consider then what you are about to do -- will it not be the greatest
gratification to your enemies, to see you abject, and miserable, worse than a
widow, forsaken of all reputable company, and an object of general contempt --
how will your rivals exult over you? Would you do what would gratify their
malice?


Mrs. Fort No, I would sooner confound them forever.


Mr. Will. Here is one of them coming now. -- She Will torment you, you had better
go out of the way.


Mrs. Fort. No, let her come. I cannot be more miserable than I am.


SCENE III. -- Mrs. DELAND, Mrs. FORTINBRASS and Mr. WILLIAMSON.
Mrs. Del, LADIES most welcome all of you; and in particular Mrs. Fortinbrass.
Well madam how do ye do?


Mrs. Fort. Indifferently madam.


Mrs. Del. Rather indifferently I suppose. The Col. they say has forsaken you.
Well, this is odd that after you took so much pains to have him, you should
lose him so soon.


Mrs. Fort. I expect no mercy from you Mrs. Delano.


Mrs. Del. I love to show mercy as well as other persons, to those who are
proper subjects of it. But that can hardly be said of you -- were I to take
into the account, all the scandalous reports, you spread concerning me -- the
letters you forged -- had the Col. remained with me he might have been a
worthy-man.


Mrs. Fort. You love him now, I know you do? tho you have another husband --
well you may have him, and welcome.


Mrs. Del. No, madam, I am better provided for, and I am afraid he has caught
ill habits by acquaintance -- you wounded me once, very severely, but I am now
cured, and have lived to see justice.


Mr. Will. Forbear, my good lady, forbear, tho your wrongs may have been great.


Mrs. Del. What I said was not out of malice, but to bring this lady to a sense
of her duty -- I will not add affliction to the afflicted; but just mention the
matter and leave this lady to her own reflections.


SCENE IV. -- Mr. WILLIAMSON and Mrs. FORTINBRASS.
Mr. Will. Now Mrs. Fortinbrass -- should you love to gratify this woman too,
who is animated with such keen resentment against you -- please your enemies,
mortify your friends; and make your husband unhappy?


Mrs. Fort. He should have taken care of that himself.


Mr. Will. And what shall be done with your sweet little -- son -- that little
cherub who bears such a lively resemblance of the Colonel. When you shall hear
him sob, and cry; as he undoubtedly will; because papa does not come home --
how will you bear it; Can you endure to see him an orphan, or will you give him
up for ever; to a parent against whom you cherish the most implacable
resentment.


Mrs. Fort. O my heart, my heart.


Mr. Will. While you have been on ill terms, he has not absented himself for
nothing. He has been assembling a regiment, and he is going to the western army.


Mrs. Fort. He may find himself happier there than here.


Mr. Will. It may be, but the probability is that the Indians will take him; and
torture (...) -- fill his flesh full of pine splinters, and set them on fire --
o^ ^ery way to torment him with relentless cruelty -- can you bear this in
respect of him -- who once was the dearest object of your love?


Mrs. Fort. It was his business to have guarded against that; as well as mine.


Mr. Will. Well if you cannot hear any thing you must be left to the
consequences. But he told me he was going to the army in three weeks -- His old
soldiers have all enrolled themselves and the new ones admire him -- The
president of the states has made him a general.


Mrs. Fort (Looking up.) That Is odd that he should be made a general. (Her
countenance alters from the expression of discontent to curiosity.)


SCENE V. -- Mr. LEWISTON, Mrs. FORTINBRASS and Mrs. LYMAN.
Mr. Lew. O MRS. Fortinbrass, this is of all things most extraordinary -- Col.
Fortinbrass is come with his regiment, and in his new uniform of a general. He
resembles with his noble airs, and fine person -- the heroes described in poets
who were though it to be like the Gods.


Mrs. Fort. I think it is odd enough that he should be made a general -- if he
would come home now, and submit and ask pardon --


Mr. Lew. You would not wish for such humiliation in your husband, would you
degrade the man whom you are to love? more than this, if he can find that you
will see him; he will come to see you this very day -- and if he can reconcile
matters at home, he means to resign his commission; if not he means to march in
three days.


Mrs. Lym. Go you wretch, don't go to be obstinate now, you have better clothes
than these; put them on -- and look as handsome as you can -- receive him
genteelly.


Mrs. Fort. I never shall be able to bear him again -- But I want to see how he
looks, since he has been made a general.


Mrs. Lym. Go forward, and one of the ladies shall help you to dress yourself.


Mrs. Fort. I go ladies, to obey you; but it will all be in vain I can never
endure him unless he will make a proper submission. [Snaps her handkerchief as
she goes out.]


ACT III.
SCENE I. -- Mr. LEWISTON and Mrs. WILLIAMSON
Mr. L. WHAT do you think the creature will do?


Mrs. Will. I cannot conjecture.


Mr. L. Nor I; but this I know that persons who have been so long tender to
each other, cannot part very easily.


Mrs. Will. I believe that; and do you think that if married persons should
sometimes hurt each others feelings, that, therefore, they must necessarily be
miserable?


Mr. L. No, not by any means, persons of quick sensibility, and who have not
been used to curbing their passions in their youth -- may live years together
before they will be perfect in matrimonial wisdom.


Mrs. Will There is something in those things similar to what we find in other
parts of nature -- It is as natural for human beings occasionally to be
agitated with passion -- as that there should be unsettled weather in the
months of April and May -- Those sudden gusts which for awhile deform the
beautiful face of nature, are commonly succeeded by the most serene and
delightful weather.


Mr. L. You talk very sensibly but I long to have them meet; and then see how
the creatures behave. Let us step aside when the Colonel comes in.


SCENE II -- Mrs. FORTINBRASS alone.
O alas! never was a person in such confusion bafore -- what a figure he makes
at the head of his regiment -- He looks divinely -- But if I receive him -- I
give all up and shall be ashamed to resent his conduct in time to come -- (Goes
and looks out.) -- But O! how divinely he looks -- what shall I do? I am
ashamed to think how much I may be disposed to receive him. (Looks out.) But I
must bear the test. (Returns and walks agitated across the stage -- Col.
Fortinbrass enters -- she almost falls on her knees before him -- He catches
her and raises her.)


C. Fort. No, my dear girl no -- no humiliations to me -- Stand with me upon
equal and just footing -- The first thing you are to do is to go, and see my
regiment -- and then we will find, if we have not reason still to respect each
other. Tarry till I return. (To the company on the stage.)


SCENE III. -- Mrs. LYMAN and Mrs. WILLIAMSON.
Mrs. Lym. This exceeds all my acquaintance -- I Will never believe a woman
again, who pretends to be affronted with her husband.


Mrs. Will. How did she behave herself?


Mrs. Lym. She fretted all the time we were dressing her -- and protested she
would sue for a divorce, and what not. But she looked out at the window, and
saw her husband at the head of his regiment -- I verily though it she would have
fainted away -- and when she saw him come into her presence -- she was going to
throw herself at his feet -- But he said -- No humiliation, my dear girl -- and
led her out to see his soldiers. But before they got to the door, the tears
gushed from their eyes -- The old veteran who had stood so many battles melted
to the softness of a woman.


Mrs. Will. You had no trouble then to reconcile them.


Mrs. Lym. No, they reconciled one another very successfully -- we shall see
her with a different face soon.


SCENE IV. -- Mrs. WILLIAMSON, Mrs. FORTINBRASS, etc.
Mrs. Will. You may spare your observation; for she is coming now. [Enter Mrs
Fortinbrass.]


Mrs. Lym. Mrs. Fortinbrass, I hope affairs go very well on your part.


Mrs. Fort. I thank you ladies -- I am well at present.


Mrs. Del. How is the Colonel? General I meant to say.


Mrs. Fort. In fine health and spirits, and gives the ladies his hearty
respects.


Mrs. Del. You seem much altered, madam, all at once.


Mrs. Fort. Altered did you say? I know nothing of it, but that I am very happy.


Mrs. Del. But to be sick of marriage.


Mrs. Fort. But to be sick of marriage. Who sick of marriage? Not I -- I ever
considered it as the capital blessing of my life -- when does your sister
intend to be married? -- I should suppose she might know her mind in six o^
seven years.


Mrs. Del. She is in no haste, she has been terrified by your example.


Mrs. Fort. By my example, that is strange -- you know I always respect
matrimony. If that be an obstacle, tell her from me that I would have her think
better of it, better -- I say. --


Mrs. Del. But who said today, that she was sick of marriage?


Mrs. Fort. Not I surely -- I should be ashamed to have said so.


Altogether. Yes, yes, yes, you did this day.


Mrs. Fort. Ladies you must excuse me; I have had ill turns of late, my head is
dizzy sometimes, and I do not appear to myself to be perfectly in my right mind.


Mrs. Del. So it seems that the return of an absent husband, will put a lady
into a right mind.


Mrs. Fort. Yes; and right spirits too -- ladies, I see you are determined to
vex me, but I mean to turn, and defy you.


Mrs Del. Well, how does Mr. Fortinbrass look since he has been made a general?


Mrs. Fort. Excellently madam; I wish your husband could be ma^e a general for
your sake -- I dare say you would think him better for it.


Mrs. Del. It seems too that you are more polite than when you was here before.


Mrs. Fort. We ought always to be improving. And if I make such progress in
half an hour, I shall soon be perfect.


Mrs. Will. Shall we wish her joy, she has a husband now as well as we?


[Enter General Fortinbrass] Genesis Fort. Ladies I wish you all joy -- my house
is again a grateful home -- you shall all sup with me this evening, and I will
send for your husbands -- let us devote the hours to rejoicing -- I mean to
annihilate the contest between me and my wife's relations about certain matters
of property -- and then I doubt not we shall live in peace -- I shall bid abieu
to the pursuit of wealth and the wars -- and shall devote myself to that most
rational and perfect of all enjoyments, the felicity of domestic life.


[All withdraw.] [IF in this Dialogue the Scenes in which Fortinbrass appears,
be left out -- except the last; that being put into the mouth of Mrs.
Fortinbrass, as a message to the ladies -- and if Mr. Williamson's part be put
to Mrs. Williamson, and Mr. Lewiston's part to Mrs. Lewiston, it will be fitted
to young ladies] The Father of a Family. A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
SOCIAL CONFIDENCE IS NECESSARY TO THE HAPPINESS OF FAMILIES.
IT is very pernicious to families, when parents form designs which produce
mistrust among their children -- or children pursue schemes of their own,
without the intelligence of their parents. It is commonmonly the case, that
persons devoted to celibacy, know not the social principles of a family -- and
from that cause become troublesome inmates. Of maidens we say nothing
accusatively -- but if old bachelors say our charge is grievous, let them
marry, and that will confute it -- and let the maids all say -- amen.

PERSONS.
MEN.
MR. ROBERTSON -- the Father of a family. MAJOR ROBERTSON -- an old bachelor.
ALBIN ROBERTSON -- son of Mr. Robertson. AIMWELL -- a brother's son, brought up
with Mr. Robertson.
WOMEN.
CECILIA -- Mr. Robertson's daughter. SOPHIA -- daughter of the widow Clifford.
WIDOW HERBERT -- a woman, who boards Sophia.
SCENE. -- A merchant's house in the city of New Haven.

THE FATHER OF A FAMILY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- The MAYOR and ALBIN.
[The father and Aimwell stand silent.] Maj. I CAN beat you, Albin, two rubbers
out of three all day long.


Alb. Why did you not beat me then just now?


Maj. Because that fellow ( pointing to Aimwell) always looks over my shoulder,
and talks about the game.


Alb. He did the same to me, but it did not disturb me.


Maj. Well, let us take the other rubber now.


Alb. I am almost tired of cards.


Maj. That is, because you have beat, and want to have the credit of it.


Alb. ( to his father) Sir, shall we play here?


Fath. I think you had better defer it -- I do not love to see people play when
they are angry.


SCENE II. -- MAJOR and the FATHER.
Maj. OH dear! this execrable gout is coming on again. I am good for nothing. I
am an old man in the midst of my days.


Fath. When you was about twenty three years old, you used to say, that you
would never marry, because married men would soon grow old -- Now you are half
the time laid up with the gout, while I have no sign of bodily decay -- tho
three years older than you -- have not a gray hair on my head, nor a wrinkle in
my face -- no gout or rheumatism, as you have.


Maj. You need not have any bodily torments -- your children will give you
torment sufficient.


[Albin steals out, watching his father.] Fath. (looking about) Wh^re is my son?


Maj. He stole out, just now, and watched your eyes, that you might not see him.


Fath. He has no reason to be afraid of me.


Maj. He is engaged in some scheme which he knows you will not approve. He has
of late been out much anights.


Fath. ( sighing) That is but too true.


Maj. Why need you trouble yourself about it?


Fath. ( wakling about) O thou too tender heart of a father, can thou not
calm thyself one moment? How anxious I feel! could I only know that he was in
good company, I might then enjoy some comfort -- Brother, you had better go to
bed. [Exit Major.]


SCENE III. -- FATHER and ALBIN.
Fath. HERE I will try to compose myself till my son comes home. [Albin enters
in a stopped hat and speaks, looking at his own toes.]


Alb. So I lost my visit to night because the widow said she had a fainting fit
and was sick -- An't I a fool to love a little puny girl who will faint away,
and be sick, and all that -- She is an exccellent girl however, and that is the
reason why I love her so.


Fath. ( suddenly) Albin!


Alb. ( starting) Sir I did not know you was here.


Fath. Who is that who is so sick?


Alb. I wish sir you would excuse me.


Fath. I shall not, tell me for what purpose you have been abroad so much of
late.


Alb. Sir, I went -- I went sir, to visit, Sophia.


Fath. And who is Sophia?


Alb. Sophia Clifford sir.


Fath. Where does she live?


Alb. At the widow Herbert's.


Fath. A fine place for you to go a courting -- The best furniture in the
house, is an old maple table and a few old chairs bottomed with straw.


Alb. The widow is poor but she is honest, and Sophia is a genteel girl.


Fath. What do you mean to do with her? I will not suffer you to delude her
into vicious ways, or if you mean to amuse her a while and then forsake her --
That would be mean, and cruel.


Alb. O sir, she is a sweet little angel as ever was -- no body can do an
unbecoming thing in her presence. Now, sir; since you know it, I wish you would
go, and see her; and if you talk with her one half hour, and do not approve of
my choice, I shall wonder.


Fath. I will see her that I may understand this affair -- But do not expect
that I will encourage you in any of your foolish ways. ( Exit Albin)


SCENE IV. -- FATHER and WIDOW HERBERT.
Fath. WILL you sit, madam Herbert?


W. Her. Yes sir.


Fath. I want to know something about Sophia* the girl that lives with you. I
have heard of her; but since I have heard of her, I am more at a loss what to
think of her than before.


W. Her. What makes you think of her?


Fath. I am afraid of unwarrantable connections between my son, and her.


W. Her. O, thank you sir, my house is as honest a house as any in this city.


Fath. Be not affronted widow, I am a widower you see -- We will not be upon
ill terms; does my son visit this girl?


W. Her. Yes, sir, often.


Fath. How does ^e past his time with her?


W. Her. Sometimes he talks about common matters, sometimes he reads very
pretty things to her out of books, and one time, but I chid him for that, he
made a pair of verses about Sophia.


Fath. You know how it is, widow, you and I have been courting before now --
Does he ever talk to her, in a manner which you should think l^ly to affect the
heart.


W. Her. I have though it that if I were as young as I once was, and he had ta^ked
(...) I should have been affected -- and I once saw (...), when he seemed to be
very earnest with her, she puts her hands over her eyes, and I saw the tears
slip through between her fingers, and trickle down her arms.


Fath. Do you know any thing of her family?


W. Her. She says she lately lost her father, and I don't say much to her about
her family, for if I do, it makes her cry.


Fath. And do you suppose Sophia to be a good girl?


W. Her. Yes, sir, that I do; she has been with me but six weeks waiting, as
she says, for some money coming to her mother -- And I would keep her if she
never paid a farthing for her board, for she is always so pleasant, and when my
work drives me, she will work upon the hard, coarse cloth, till her fingers
bleed -- I love her, sir, as if she was my own child -- good night sir, I have
no children of my own, but I hope my little Sophia will stay with me and be a
comfort to me.


Fath. Stay widow, a moment; I will walk with you, and talk more about Sophia.


W. Her. O Sir you are very kind to take notice of a poor old widow -- If I had
been young and worth twenty thousand pound, I should not have wondered to have
heard you spoke up. [They withdraw.]


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- ALBIN and AIMWELL.
Alb. IT is all out about my attentions to Sophia.


Aim. I though it it could not be kept a secret long.


Alb. The Major has told all the story to my father.


Aim. There is no keeping a secret in a house where there is an old Bachelor
putting his nose in every man's dish. But I cannot talk of it now. [Exit
Aimwell.]


SCENE II. -- FATHER and ALBIN.
(As the Father is sitting in a chair Albin comes up to his elbow -- speaks
anxiously -- The father answers coldly.) Alb. HAVE you seen her Sir?


Fath. Yes, I have seen her -- what then?


Alb. How do you like her sir?


Fath. Aye that is to the point to be sure.


Alb. Is she not beautiful?


Fath. Yes she is very beautiful.


Alb. Do you believe her sensible?


Fath. Yes I believe she is quite sensible.


Alb. Do you not think she is good tempered?


Fath. Yes, by her looks, she is a good tempered girl.


Alb. Do you not believe she is virtuous?


Fath. Yes I am apt to think she is virtuous.


Alb. Is she not genteel?


Fath. Yes her manners are very genteel.


Alb. How did she converse?


Fath. Finely, indeed very finely.


Alb. Then what objection can you have to my acquaintance with her?


Fath. She is not fit for you.


Alb. Who then is fit for me? beautiful, good tempered, sensible, genteel, and
converses finely; and yet not fit for me. Do sir tell me who is fit for me!


Fath. A lady of fortune, of great relations, who will help you to get places
in the government.


Alb. Then, I suppose, some time or other, you will marry me to some fat,
clumsy, awkward squab of an heiress -- I shall hate her, and kill her with
grief.


Fath. However that may be, my family must not be degraded -- on the pain of my
displeasure, you must quit this girl, and renounce her forever. [Exit Father.]


Alb. I shall be able to renounce my life as soon.


SCENE III. -- MAYOR and ALBIN.
Maj. Your Father would have had me gone to bed, but I did not choose it, so
since I sat up; I though it I would talk with you.


Alb. I do not wish to hear you, you will only torment me.


Maj. Your father will have you talk with me.


Alb. Talk what you please; but I have only one word to say. Sophia shall be
mine.


Maj. A hopeful youth. You are nineteen years old -- What will you do with this
girl?


Alb. Courtship, it is said, is the happiest part of life -- If so, let it
begin early, and last long -- What will I do with this girl? I will marry her,
when it is convenient.


Maj. Your Father will disinherit you. You, your wife, and children must starve.


Alb. I know my Father's temper very well. Were my family in want, and my
little children were to go, and spread out their little hands to him; it would
melt him to pity, and he would relieve them at once.


Maj. Your father is a fool -- He lets his children know that he loves them.
There never was such a match in any family.


Alb Then this will be the first -- it will be a great curiosity


Maj And heiress of nothing.


Alb. Who has taught me to despise all things but virtue?


Maj Poor people always abound in children. If you do marry Sophia* I hope you
will have a dozen.


Alb. Four dozen at least, uncle, if they resemble Sophia.


Maj If you have ^ver so many, you shall never name one af^e^ me.


Alb Not I Your name is Benedict -- I would as soon call one Shara^h, Meshech
and Abednego.


Maj. By heavens! this is insufferable. I had rather you had died -- I had
rather when we stormed Stoney-Point, that one of the enemy had skewered you
with his bayonet, and dropped you in the ditch among the dead. Leave my
presence, you saucebox, in a moment.


SCENE IV. -- FATHER and CECILIA.
Fath. TELL Clairet to bring my supper.


Cec. I will go and get it myself; it will be a pleasure to me. ( Major goes
out)


Fath. What a lovely daughter that is -- I intend she shall be married and live
with me; for I shall never be able to part with her, because she is the very
image of my lost wife.


Cec. Your supper, sir, will be ready in a few moments.


Fath. Stay Cecilia now -- Have you ever thought of that manner of life, which
would be agreeable to you?


Cel. No farther than that it is very agreeable to live with you.


Fath. But you should have a friend to protect you when I am gone.


Cec. I am not in the least anxious about that.


Fath. There is no need of affected modesty -- if you prefer any gentleman, I
shall be happy to complete your felicity.


Cec. (After a long pause.) My brother's situation affrights me.


Fath. Your brother is a fool.


Cec. Perhaps if I speak my mind you will think me no less unreasonable than he!


Fath. If your modesty will not permit you, let me dedeclare for you. The Major
has given me hints about Aimwell.


Cec. (Rising suddenly.) O dear sir, believe not a word he says. He is always
trying to make mischief -- Excuse me sir, I must be absent a moment.


[Goes out weeping, and wiping her eyes.] Fath. How unhappy this is! I have
lost her confidence, certainly; I am afraid I shall never see the happiness of
one of my children. [Exit Father.]


ACT III.
SCENE I. -- MAY^R and AIMWELL.
Maj. AIMWELL, will reward you well, if you do one article of business for me.


Aim. What is it?


Maj. I have got a warrant from Squire Smart to carry Sophia out of town. ^s a
vagrant -- If you will see it executed, I will make my will in your favor.


Aim. I would do it, if I though it it just.


Maj. You will think it just I dare say -- fifteen thousand pounds -- and that
^ine girl, Cecilia, into the bargain -- you must find it to (...) just. But you
will not speak of my project to Al^^^.


Aim. I will not. [Exit Major.]


SCENE II. -- ALBIN and AIMWELL.
Alb. I AM on the verge of distraction and despair -- I will carry Sophia away
to the farms which will soon be mine, in New Jersey.


Aim. What, even if she be not willing?


Alb. I warrant I will make her willing. At any rate she shall go -- I will
assure to myself all that I hold valuable in life.


Aim. You are rushing on your own destruction.


Alb. You are scrupulous beyond measure, and a little piece of a coward -- But
I wish my letters from Danbury would a^tive -- Those might save me the trouble.


[Albin goes out.] SCENE III. -- AIMWELL and CECILIA.
Aim. alone. SEE two men resolved on this poor girl's destruction -- The Major
would carry her out of town as a vagrant, and ruin her character -- Albin would
seize her and run away with her, and ruin her that way -- There is no way to
save her that I can think of; but to put her under Cecilia's protection -- and
then if she proves a bad girl Cecilia will be sub^ected -- I must try to
persuade Cecilia, tho it would be dangerous for her. What strange creatures we
men are; we persuade women to imprudent things, and then blame them for it.
[Cecilia enters.]


Aim My excellent Cecilia, I believe you must give refuge to the unfortunate
Sophia.


Cec. O that must never be done -- She may be a bad girl.


Aim. I believe she is very honest.


Cec. Ah but what proof have you? -- You must not introduce her. (Aimwell goes
out into the street, returns in a moment, introducing Sophia.)


Aim. Here she is -- If you can believe her a bad girl, turn her out in the
street.


Cec. O Aimwell what have you done -- I hope you will own that I have been kind
enough to you now; that by your means I lie at the mercy of all my enemies.


(Exit Aimwell.) SCENE IV. -- SOPHIA and CECILIA.
Soph. MY good lady who ever you are have pity upon me. (Taking her by the
hand.)


Cec. Amiable and unfortunate girl, who are you?


Soph. One of whom you would not have been ashamed in my better days -- But my
father is dead, I came here to receive a sum of money for my mother -- and what
miseries have I not endured. O that I had never seen your brother.


Cec. My brother loves you with the tenderest affection.


Soph. That I believe, and it is the source of my misery -- He contemplates to
run away with me, and that cruel Major, what have I do done to him, that he
should persecute me?


Cec. My heart bleeds for your distress.


Soph. You will not let Albin carry me off, or any of the ugly officers take me.


Cec. No my sweet girl I will not, you have melted my heart within me.


Soph. You are my guardian angel, my generous Cecilia. Your goodness shall be
rewarded, if the prayers of the afflicted have any avail.


Cec. Compose yourself, my dear lady, nothing shall hurt you here.


Soph. I feel a heavy sensation; I am afraid I shall faint.


Cec. No you are only sleepy -- You shall take a little repose in your chair. (
Cecilia lays a pillow in the back of a chair and covers Sophia with a shaw! --
Sophia sleeps covered.)


Soph. Don't let any man come into the room.


Cec. I will not. ( Exit Cecilia)


SCENE V. -- ALBIN alone.
Alb. I Have eluded Cecilia sweetly -- she made fast one door; but forgot there
was another -- Now is the time to carry her off, but I will see her first, and
not carry off a wrong girl for they may mean to cheat me. ( Advances on tiptoe
lifts up the shawl stands and looks with astonishment on Sophia sleeping.) Yes
it is she and how delightful she looks when sleeping -- I am filled with
rapture and astonishment -- can I violate that sweet temple of beauty? (
pauses) Can I resist her reasons, or her entreaties when she shall refuse to go
-- Albin, you have undertaken what you dare not not execute -- ( Sophia moves
as if distressed in sleep and says) "Albin carry me away, no that is not like
Albin." ( Albin starts and runs to the edge of the curtain) Yes it is like
Albin and Albin is a wicked fellow -- O how her presence strikes me with
veneration! I cannot touch her, to do her harm -- Now if she should wake and
catch me here* how angry she would be. But I never shall forget how sweetly she
look^ when asleep. ( Exit softly.)


SCENE VI. -- CECILIA and SOPHIA.
Cec. I AM now glad I received this girl, and I begin to think that happiness
consists in doing good.


Soph. ( waking) My good protectress, how long have I been asleep?


Cec. Not more than fifteen or twenty minutes.


Soph. Has there not been a man in the room?


Cec. Certainly not.


Soph. I though it I heard one step across the floor; but was so overcome with
sleep that I could not move.


Cec. You must have dreamed it; for I locked the door and put the key in my own
pocket.


SCENE VII. -- ALBIN, SOPHIA and CECILIA. Albin runs in and offers to catch
Sophia's hand.
Alb. SOPHIA my life my -- ( she refuses him her hand.)


Soph. Albin, how dare you to come into my presence, after the odious scheme
you had formed?


Alb. How! I do not comprehend this -- perhaps Albin may be capable of his
resentments too.


Soph. You may resent my conduct in what manner you please -- you intended to
have carried me off, whether I would or not.


Alb. But I do not intend it now.


Soph. No matter for that, he who has once formed an ill design against a
woman, should be trusted no more.


Alb. Well, I suppose I have done wrong, but I ask pardon.


Soph. I pardon the past. But I mean to trust you no more -- I forbid you my
presence.


Alb. I must entreat you to revoke the harshness of that sentence. My heart
after admitting you to its affections, can never admit an inferior; and I must
be miserable for life -- I will for the future treat you on the strictest rules
of honor, you may depend on it.


Soph. I have no evidence but your own testimony, and you have always been
unfaithful, so you must depart.


Alb. I have imagined an injury against you, and would you destroy me entirely?
You are more severe, than virtuous.


Cec. Sophia you must pardon my brother. He was driven to the borders of
dsepair -- I risked my honor to save you from odious persecution -- I have
saved you, you must not destroy my brother -- you will make me miserable.


Soph. For your sake I forgive him; you shall be his surety that he will not
attempt the like again.


Alb. I will not even imagine it -- may I presume to take this hand?


Soph. Yes it is yours again, and when I forgive, I do it heartily.


Alb. Sweet Sophia -- every moment I see new cause to admire you.


Cec. Did my Father know your true character -- he could not oppose your
introduction into the family.


(Ex omnes.) ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- FATHER and MAJOR.
Fath. ALAS! what shall I do? My son flies my presence -- Cecilia distrusts me
-- Aimwell is shy of me -- I almost repent my treating my son so severely
respecting Sophia.


Maj. Repent! That is a pretty fancy, and so encourage them in their impudence.


Fath. What would you do were you in my case?


Maj. I would discard that villain of a son, forever -- That little saucy minx
of a daugher -- I Would take away all her fine clothes, confine her to her chamber,
and feed her on water gruel. I Would give that young knave a dressing, whom you
have brought up. They should obey me, or I would make them all skip -- that I
would.


Fath. Your advice does me some good -- It is so absurd it diverts me -- I want
to know what my happiness would be if I had disinherited my son -- starved my
daughter -- and banished the son of my dearest friend, or what would my
neighbors think of me?


Maj. Oh you dread to lose your children, and be though it a cruel father.


Fath. I own it. If my children can live without me, I cannot live without them.


Maj. There it is now. I thought you had been more of a man -- are you not
ashamed? you have no notion of that lively resentment which becomes a Father,
whose authority is insulted.


Fath. First attain the honor of being a father, and then judge of his duties
-- are you not ashamed? You would desolate my house, as effectually as the
plague.


Maj. I suppose I shall see you kissing, and forgiving them all in a few days.


Fath. I hope they will prove themselves innocent; I wish it might be this hour
-- I could not imagine a greater happiness.


Maj. I did not intend to have told you, but I Will ^art your dull blood -- the
knave you bro't up is courting your daughter.


Fath. Not Cecilia, is he?


Maj. Yes! I have catched them several times in such a fondling way as made me
sick, perfectly sick. (He spits.)


Fath. Lover's caresses are apt to be a little ^ickish to an indifferent
observer but more to an envious one -- how is it, brother?


Maj. She has sitten up a great many nights, pretending to work -- but there is
very little work done. What do you think of that, brother?


Fath. It is just as I would have it be. It is the best news I ever heard from
you in my life.


Maj. You will do nothing for the honor of the family -- but I have -- I have
got a warrant, and Aimwell is to execute it -- to take up this girl as a
vagrant, and cart her out of town.


Fath. You have done a base action -- but Aimwell is coming; I will stop the
process this moment. [Exit Maj.]


SCENE II. -- FATHER and AIMWELL.
Fath. AIMWELL, what have you done? To execute a warrant against an innocent
person -- I should have been glad of your fondness for Cecilia, but for this
base action -- I cannot consent.


Aim. Then this warrant will ruin me. The detestable scroll -- [throws it under
his feet] I will kick it to perdition. [kicks it off the stage.]


Fath. Hold -- you have not executed it -- I am glad of that -- give it to me;
I will see what shall be done with it.


Aim. There it is -- I am glad to be rid of it, and will tell the Major you
have got it. [Exit Aimwell.]


SCENE III. -- FATHER, SOPHIA and CECILIA.
Fath. CECILIA, tell Sophia to come to me.


Cec. Sophia sir?


Fath. Yes, you impudent girl, I know you have her here; tell her to come to
me. ( to Sophia) Sophia I have it in my power to treat you with severity, but I
had rather use other methods -- If you will give up my son I will make you a
rich girl.


Soph. I cannot, sir, be guilty of falsehood.


Fath. You ought not to interfere in the rights of my family -- you are
determined to marry my son.


Soph. Not till you consent to it.


Fath. But you will not give him up.


Soph. Because I have promised that I would not.


Fath. Here Sophia, give up my son, and take this. Here is enough to buy you a
first rate husband at Danbury ( puts a purse into her hands, and she lets it
fall.)


Soph. Not for the universe, would I ever give up the man of my choice.


Fath. Then the warrant must have its course.


[Takes the warrant out and appears to be going] Soph. ( catching his arm) O
dear sir, I implore your pity; tho I cannot give up your son -- you know the
tenderness of youthful bosoms -- would you have given up your wife, in all the
bloom of youth? Leave me not to disgrace -- and the odious pursuit of laws --
most humbly do I implore your compassion, but cannot give up my friend.

(Curtains close.) The SONG follows. A proper tune. "If ever a fond inclination,
"Arose in your bosom to rob you of rest --
"Reflect with a little compassion,
"On those soft pains you felt in your breast,
"Where, where, where, where, could I shun him,
"Or would I, how could I, deny his request --
"Kneeling before you,
"Let me implore you,
"O is there no language can move!
"Where, where, where, where, could I shun him,
"For hard is the contest 'twixt duty and love."

ACT V.
SCENE I. -- FATHER, ALBIN and MAYOR.
Fath. NOTHING can compensate a man for the loss of an excellent wife -- since
the death of my dear Cecilia -- happiness has forsaken my house -- I took in my
brother to divert my melancholy -- but be only sows dissension between me and
my children. He has no idea of the family state -- my prudent wife foresaw my
miseries, and advised me, that was all I could hear of her last broken accents,
to marry the "general's sister" -- what general I know not. But could I find
out whom my wife meant, I would marry again, and see if I could not restore
peace to my family. [Albin enters.]


Al. Dear sir, I have a letter, which came by the post this day, and it
concerns you as well as me. Shall I read it?


Fath. By all means. ( Albin reads.)

Danbury Sept. 20 1792. DEAR SIR,
I SEND you the intelligence which you desired me to procure -- by the records
of Danbury church, it appears that John Clifford, was married to Anne
Waterbury, sister of Capt. Waterbury, afterward general -- the 27th of January
1768. Sophia their third child, for they lost their two first -- was baptized
June 4th 1775 -- they are a family not of ample fortune, but decent estate, of
eminent good sense, of the most distinguished virtues -- Sophia sustains an
excellent character, in this place -- If you can obtain her you will be happy.

I am with all imaginable respect, yours, JOSEPH TRUEMAN.
P. S. John Clifford, Sophia's Father, died universally regretted, Sept. 29th
1791 -- the widow who is general Waterbury's sister, is yet alive.





Fath. (^lapping him on the shoulders) Albin my boy? This is excellent -- you
carefully enquired out the character and connections of your virtuous mistress.
Few men have so much prudence at three times your age -- this Anne Waterbury
was my first love, we separated on account of a violent quarrel between our
families; but on a promise that if ever we were at liberty we would meet again
-- so Anne Waterbury that was is now my promised wife.

( Turning to Albin.) So Albin, if you will accept of the widow Clifford for a
mother, Sophia is yours forever; Aimwell is the person I wish Cecilia to marry
-- all comes exactly to rights -- let friendship and love once more reign through
the whole family. (Enter Sophia and Cecilia.)


Maj. So things are come to a fine pass, making love and marrying are become
the general business of the house. This is no place for me, I^ll get away as
fast as I can, I shall be glad to get out of a family where things are carried
contrary to every principle of nature, and common sense. ( Exit Major.)


Fath. Come my children let me indulge my joy; you have behaved well, I
acknowledge it with sincere delight: it is one of the greatest of earthly
blessings to have virtuous children; Aimwell and Cecilia, you need no more fear
my displeasure -- Sophia, you are my daughter now, and dear to my heart -- let
us forget our errors, and partake the delights of virtue -- now are we -- my
children, dearest of my earthly treasures, now are we happily united. And we
will be separated no more, nor shall any sow distrust and jealously between us.

What anxious cares a Father's mind employ;
Yet when those cares succeed how great his joy.

(Father leads -- Albin leads off Sophia -- Aimwell conducts Cecilia -- they
leave the stage in the highest transports of joy.) The Bottle Conjuror. A
DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
DISPLAYING THE WEAKNESS OF THOSE WHO BELIEVE IN FORTUNE TELLERS.
THE rage of curiosity, enquiring into future events, has been a vice of
mankind in every age. There is more wickedness in this vice, than every one is
aware of. It implies impatience, under the present dispensations of Divine
Providence, and distrust for the future -- It often excites delusive hopes --
at other times, fills the mind with needless anguish and terror -- And it
greatly injures society, by supporting a number of idle, unprincipled wretches,
who make a fortune, in earnest, from the purses of the credulous.

PERSONS.
MEN.
SIDROPHEL -- a conjuror, with a bottle. RALPH -- his man, and assistant. A
MILLER -- guilty of bad practices. FARMER -- enquiring after his horse, etc.
FATHER -- enquiring for his children. HOLDFAST -- a Justice of the Peace.
SHERIFF -- ordered by the Justice to take Sidrophel. SUITOR -- to Miss
Firebrand, enquiring his fortune. SLYBOOTS -- country sharper.
WOMEN.
MOTHER -- enquiring for her children. MISS FIREBRAND -- courted by the suitor,
who was consulting the conjuror.
[ IF in this dialogue, the scene of Miss Firebrand and Sidrophel be left out;
and what the Mother says be continued under the name of the Father; it may be
performed by men only.]

THE BOTTLE CONJUROR.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- SIDROPHEL and RALPH.
Sid. I BEGIN to be ashamed of myself that there is so much roguery in the
world, and, as yet, I have had no hand in it.


Ralph. Sir, you seem to be very anxious and pensive -- Have you met with any
thing disagreeable?


Sid. I am in deep speculation on a very important matter -- I wish, like
thousands of my fellows in this world, to get money without earning it. But
hitherto, I can hit on no expedient for the purpose.


Ralph. Sir, I wonder at that very much -- I have though it you had better set up
for a conjuror.


Sid. A conjuror! Who would be fool enough to believe any thing of that.


Ralph. Can you be so ignorant of human kind? Do you not know, that if one man
has courage to cheat, there will be thousands who stand ready to believe?


Sid. I can make no calculations on the stars.


Ralph. That is a matter of no kind of consequence. Other conjurors know as
little of that as you. Only tell something extraordinary -- and you will have
people enough to believe it


Sid. By what means shall I begin the business?


Ralph. Only look here -- Take this bottle and fill it with any kind of liquor
-- and call it Elixir Planetarium -- and give out that he, who tastes this
liquor, immediately becomes sensible of the influence of the planets; and that
you can tell the fortunes of all who apply to you. You will find multitudes
ready to believe you.


Sid. There is sense in what you say -- I will get all matters ready, and do
you spread a number of surprising stories among the people and prepare them for
the sport.,


Ralph. Then you shall let me share half of the money.


Sid. Yes; but do you be filling their minds with strange stories without
delay. [Exit Sidrophel.]


SCENE II. -- RALPH and a FARMER.
Farm. HAVE you seen any thing of a roan mare who strayed away, or was stolen
from my pasture yesterday?


Ralph. What were her marks?


Farm. She had three white feet, trotted very square; and had a blaze in her
forehead.


Ralph. I have not seen such a mare -- but I believe my master can tell you of
her -- He understands such things well.


Farm. They say he understands the art of conjuring; and can find los^ things.


Ralph. He has got the true Elixir Planetarium a liquor which distills from the
moon -- and is squeezed out of the moss which grows on the tops of old "ruined
castles and moss grown steeples." It resembles some of the finer wines -- but
the taste of it is very fine -- And if any one tastes it, it makes him sensible
of the influence of the stars, he can tell peoples fortune's -- declare the
place of lost goods -- and indeed every thing one wants to know.


Farm. And how came your master by this liquor?


Ralph. He has a bottle of it which was owned by Peter the Hermit, who preached
up the Crusades for the recovery of Jerusalem. It descended from him to Dr.
Faustus -- and from him to the famous Radcliffe of London -- and it comes by
inheritance to my master, who is the seventh son of a seventh son.


Farm. That Is very strange I Will say for it. And cannot he tell what has become of
my mare?


Ralph. I am confident he can, for he can tell almost every thing.


Farm. Do you know of particular cases in which he has told the truth?


Ralph. Yes, there was a girl in our neighborhood had a swee^heart, who was
though it to love her, very much. But she said -- Now my market is made -- and ^he
grew sluttish, and careless and fancy. My master told her fortune, that she
would grow careless and he would be sick of her and leave her -- and that she
would be miserable.


Farm. How did the matter end?


Ralph Just as my master told in every particular. You would be surprised to
find how exact he is.


Farm. Why that is good guessing I count -- But one instance not enough.


Ralph. There was a young man, who courted a very industrious girl -- He
disliked her and left her, because she had a hard hand, and the ends of her
fingers were rough by being pricked with a needle; and the mark of a thimble
spoiled the beauty of one of her fingers -- after he had left her he came to
have his fortune told.


Farm. Immediately after leaving this girl?


Ralph. No, but he was then courting another, whose hands were as soft as paste
-- and there was not the least mark of a needle, thimble, or any blemish to be
seen on her hands.


Farm. Could your master tell his fortune?


Ralph. Yes, he told him that he would marry an idle wife who would dissipate
his fortune. And it turned out just so, in every particular.


Farm. There is reason in that -- I guess your master is no common conjuror.


Ralph. He is an extraordinary man -- One more instance I will tell, which must
surprise you -- For, I assure you, that bottle of my master's is brimful of
wisdom -- A young lady of our village trusted a gentleman his mere word for the
security of her reputation -- She came to my master to tell her fortune -- He
told her that the wretch would never marry her, and it turned out just so.


Farm. How under the heavens could he know that?


Ralph. He would know it above the heavens. As Soon as he tastes the Elixir
Planetarium he becomes acquainted with the whole circuit of the stars -- with
all there aspects and influence on the earth -- and I have often heard him say
that if a woman trust her reputation, to the mere word of a man -- eight times
out of twelve she will repent her confidence.


Farm. I long to enquire of him about my roan mare.


Ralph. Then I Will call him immediately.


[Ralph introduces Sidrophel.] SCENE III. -- SIDROPHEL and FARMER.
( The conjuror enters in a great wig, long gown, staff and bottle.) Farm. THEY
say you tell of things lost and stolen. Can you tell me of my roan mare?


Sid. As far as the influence of the planets goes; but we have nothing to do
with the black art.


Farm. I Have lost as good a mare as man could wish to own.


Sid. From whence was your mare taken?


Farm. From my pasture, I saw fresh tracks in the dew, about day light.


Sid. (takes his bottle and looks wise.) I perceive that your horse was taken
out of the pasture just at morning -- And did you search all the public roads?


Farm. Yes, we did, and she could neither be heard, nor seen any where -- There
is no account of her.


Sid. I perceive that your mare has got into some buy place. (looks very wise
and important.)


Farm. That may be.


Sid. Are there not girls in your neighborhood who are courted?


Farm. Yes sir, three, or four.


Sid. And do their suitors live remote from the public road?


Farm. Yes, two or three of them live very remote from public ways.


Sid. Well sir I see how this matter is -- The planet Venus rules in the
evening; that sen^ the young lads in quest of the girls -- In the latter part
of the night the influence of Mercury became predominant -- that planet impels
to thieving -- going h^me the young fellows stole your mare. They have left her
(...) that ^ye place and there you will find her.


Farm. What is to pay sir?


Sid About fifteen shillings, if I ask any thing, or you may give me what you
please.


Farm. There sir, I think is just the money.


Sid Well sir, step into the other room, and take a drink with (...). ((...)
Sidrophel and Farmer.)


( Enter Miss Firebrand.) SCENE IV. -- FIREBRAND and SIDROPHEL.
Fire. I HOPE you will not tell Mr. Small thought about me -- If the stars should
let you know, don't tell him any thing about my being so passionate -- I hope
to manage the matter to my advantage, for he has been pretty attentive to me
and I don't wish him to find it out.


Sid. And have not you other vices too?


Fire. I don't love to get up early in the morning.


Sid. You don't love housework neither.


Fire. There is some truth in that.


Sid. Well if he marries you there is danger, that he will have an idle
passionate wife and a bad economist.


Fire. That he may find out -- Now it is my desire that he may not know of it
-- Could you cast a spell too, to prevent his finding out my being given to
tattling, and injuring people's characters?


Sid Why, I am afraid, there is no art can tame a wanton tongue -- I fear the
power of all the planets would not reach to that.


Fire. O sir, I had no thought that you should confine my tongue, I would not
have you do that for the world -- But prevent the gentleman's hearing any thing
bad of me.


Sid. Well this matter belongs to Mercury, he has influence over all
stratagems. When Mercury rules I Will try what can be done. And the price is just
the same, for preventing a things being known as to discover what is unknown --
I have fifteen shilling's for every trip to the stars.


Fire. Well if you can conceal all my faults, I would not grudge ten times the
money.


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- HOLDFAST and the SHERIFF.
Hold. IT is a grief to me to see how easily human beings are deceived --
Multitudes give money to conjurors, and fortunetellers freely, who would never
give a farthing for any honest purpose.


Sher. Why sir, we must take mankind as we find them, and do them all the good
we can. I know nothing more humane than to bear men's vices if we must, and
cure them if we can.


Hold. But since I am come into office I will turn over a new leaf in this
neighborhood -- The people shall not go after conjurors and witch-men. I Will
prosecute such fellows as vagrants to the utmost rigor of law -- They shall
have something else to do than to show magic lanthorns, and set up conjuring
bottles. Such fools defy the whole commonwealth?


Sher. How much influence they have I cannot say, nor how you will prevent them.


Hol. I Will apprehend this same Sidrophel, by warrant -- when we have him under
authority we'll get the whole matter out of him.


Sher. Sir excuse me, I am apt to be nervous. If I should see a ghost, or a
devil, it would fright me to death.


Hold. Are you a fool? How many ghosts and devils can he cork up in his old
junk? Do you suppose it would hold as many as Mary Magdalen's? You shall serve
the warrant or be broke.


Sher. You may procure me to be broke, but your worship should consider that he
can turn himself into all sorts of shapes -- and if he should turn himself into
a dead horse without a head, stretch his nose out half a yard long, or swell
out his eyes as big as two warming pans, I should be so frighted that I should
not get over it in a mouth; and folks say he can do this, or any thing else.


Hold. For shame to believe such nonsense. Take this warrant, and execute it,
or it will be the worse for you.


[Exit Sheriff.] SCENE II. -- HOLDFAST, followed by FARMER, MILLER, FATHER and
SUITOR, with a mob, armed with clubs.
Hold. WHY do you follow me thus? What Is your will?


Far. Our Bottleman is as good a man as you, Mr Justice. He told me how to find
old Roan. If you offer to meddle with him. I Will burn your house over your head.


Hold. Shame neighbor, how foolishly you talk -- to expose your life for a
wretched juggler. Have you any reason?


Mil. Mr. Justice, you have got to be a great man since you got your
commission. Will you take up our Bottleman? If you do, (shaking his club) I Will
open my mill-dam and drown all your flax.


Fath. I want to know my children's fortunes -- if you take up our bottle
prophet and put him into jail, I Will raise a mob, and give you a new suit of tar
and feathers.


Suit. I want to know if Miss Firebrand will have me -- and if you offer to
take up our Bottleman, I Will way lay you and knock your brains out. You may put
the Doctor, the music master, all into jail, with all the school masters in
town -- you may burn the meetinghouse, and all the school houses in town; but
if you touch our Bottleman you touch my heart's blood.


Hold. Fellow citizens, you are all acting a most unworthy part -- you are
determined I shall not starve for want of business -- I shall enter you on my
books (to the farmer) for threatening to burn my house; you shall be prosecuted
next session -- you, (to the miller) for threatening to break your mill dam and
drown my flax -- you, ( to the father) for threatening to tar and feather me --
you, ( to suitor) for threatening to way lay me, and knock out my brains. You
may depend all of you on being bound over to the next term. [ They all raise
their clubs at once, and cry Down with his worship, down with the Justice The
conjuror enters at that moment. They all turn their attention to him, and the
Justice escapes.]


SCENE III. -- SIDROPHEL, MILLER, FATHER, MOTHER and SUITOR.
Sid. YOU do well, fellow citizens* to consult the stars. They know every thing
that is done in this world.


Mil. I knew a miller sir, that fixed a bag below the box which contains the
meal that is grinding, in such a manner, as to catch meal from the box -- and
he called this practice making presents to his Peggy.


Sid. Well sir, and what is your will?


Mil. I wish to know whether this miller will ever be detected.


Sid. ( tasting his bottle and looking wise) This is a matter of stealing -- it
belongs to Mercury -- yes -- this Mercury tells, that the rogue is yourself.
Going home you will find a man who has Peggy and all the presents you have
given her in the mouth of his bag. [The miller is going away, but he calls
after him.] Stop sir, and pay your fifteen shillings, o^ I will bring you out
in some of your other tricks.


[Miller stops and pays] Fath I have a son; I wish very much to know his
fortune -- Something makes me anxious about him. He is a likely well made
fe^low; and I want to know whether I had best send him to college, and make a
learned man of him.


Sid. How does he like instrustion at home?


Fath He would like it pretty well, I believe, if we could ever get a school
master that was worth the money -- But he is dissatisfied with all we have had
yet -- and indeed according to his account, they were wretched fellows.


Sid. Does he drink hard?


Fath Not very; I never knew him drunk more than four or five times in my life.


Sid How is he with respect to the women?


Fath. Pretty well -- he is often playing with the girls whom I hire to do my
work; but he is rather bashful with your genteel women, your fine ladies.


Sid. ( tasting his bottle) Well, this is a matter of learning -- It depends on
the Sun -- by the the ancients called Apollo, the God of Wisdom. He finds much
fault with his school masters. -- He hates learning then. At College he will kick
up a rumpus and disturb the government. He has been drunk several time -- He
will be a capital hand for high goes. He plays with hired maids, and is abashed
and confounded among modest women -- This is the opinon which I have drawn from
the Sun; that he will be a rake, a dirty low rake.


Fath. ( pays cheerfu^ly) I do not grudge the money -- my wife I hope will be
easy on that score. [Exit Father.]


Moth. Sir, I have two daughters, and of very different manners* I should be
glad to know their fortunes The eldest is given to scandal, and is nice about
her company, to a very great ex^reme -- There are none but ^ip tops that can
speak to her. But I Am a plain woman; she has not birth, and certainly not
fortune nor accomplishments to boast of.


Sid. ( tasting his bottle) Venus has the charge of these matters; and madam
Venus says; the queen of beauty declares; that this daughter of yours must be
an old maid -- for it has lately been ordained, in the court of celestial
beauty, that every girl (now a juster law was never made) that every girl that
is given to scandal and ill nature, and dissimulation, shall be an old maid. --
That the good tempered, tender, agreeable girls, who at the same time are
sociable and discreet, shall marry young, genteel, handsome lads, who will be
fond husbands even to old age.


Moth. Then there will be a reformation among the women soon.


Sid. Certainly, it begins to operate already.


Moth. My other girl is handsome, lively, good tempered, fond of good books,
and good men; neat in her dress, sociable, and tender; yet she is a good
prudent girl -- She has the name of a very prudent girl.


Sid. I predict her fortune will be very good. She will be courted early in
life, marry a likely man who will support her genteelly and live very well.


Moth. Well ( taking money and paying cheerfully) I do not grudge the money,
now I shall know what to do with them.


Suit. Sir, I am courting a maiden lady of fortune, who is past fifty, and --


SCENE IV. -- RALPH, SIDROPHEL and SHERIFF.
Ralph, SIR the sheriff is coming, to serve a warrant on you immediately.


Sid. ( putting on his visor aside) Now let him come if he dares. ( The
conjuror comes forward -- The sheriff comes on with his warrant, is about to
clap Sidrophel on the shoulder when he displays his visor, breathing from his
mouth.)


Sid. Thou enemy of the arts and antichrist of the sciences, avaunt, begone.


Sher. ( in a terrible fright.) O mercy, mercy, mercy on us, O terrible oh,
dreadful oh! ( Flies off the stage and Sidrophel and Ralph pursues him.)


ACT III.
SCENE I -- SLYBOOTS and SIDROPHEL.
[ Slyb^ots enters very deliberately.] Sly. How do you do sir?


Sid. Well, and ^earty what do you want of me sir?


Sly. Nothing very special; but as I was walking with some people across the
plain, with several young ladies -- I tho^ it my duty to call on you, upon some
serious business.


Sid. What do you wish to know sir? whether you shall meet with success with
the ladies. Is that it sir?


Sly. No, sir, by no means, but as I came along I saw your barn and stable all
in a blaze and I knew your best horse to be in the stable.


Sid. You villain why did you not tell me before.; they are all in a blaze
before this time -- Now they are all in ashes before this time -- Run Ralph
run. ( they run out in haste.) ( Holdfast enters.)


SCENE II. -- HOLDFAST and SLYBOOTS.
Hold. WHAT have you done with him?


Sly. We shall now have him fast enough -- for in fact his stable is on fire.


Hold. Here he has left all his tools behind him.


Sly. He has; there is his visor, his bottle, staff and all.


Hold. And this is that which put the Sheriff in such a terrible fright.


Sly. Yes, but is perfectly harmless now -- And here is the bottle -- Let us
taste -- It did not poison him neither will it poison us.


Hold. Let us drink it off -- or take a genteel sip at least. Do you suppose,
we shall understand the stars -- It may make us see stars if it be too strong.


Sly. We will not drink the whole. (Sets the bottle down.) Now let us fill it
with about 150 drops of laudanum and that will give him a decent nap. ( Drops
Laudanum from a vial into the bottle.)


Hold. That will be very dextrous -- Now I trust Mr. Conjuror will find his
match. And we shall accomplish by art, what we could not accomplish by open
means, through the madness of the mob -- But do you stay here, and amuse him when
he returns.


SCENE III. -- SLYBOOTS and SIDROPHEL.
Sly. ( to Sidrophel.) HAVE you lost any valuable property.


Sid. I have not lost any thing of great consequence, tho my stable was indeed
on fire, but in such a manner as easily to be extingushed -- But you did not
help us to put it out.


Sly I have long since much used myself to Philosophy -- and am not moved with
the accidents of this life. But can you tell my fortune?


Sid. Your fortune I suspect is to be hanged, for you are a rogue in grain You
told me my stables were on fire, but never ^ent the least assistance to put it
out. I suspect you set the fire yourself


Sly One who knows the plane's as well as you. should not suspect; he might
know -- Now calculate upon the influence of the planets, and if you can furnish
any proof by means of them, I shall be hanged no doubt: but if you will not
calculate for me, you may go to sleep.


[Exit Slyboots] SCENE IV. -- SUITOR and SIDROPHEL.
Suit. Sir, we we were broken off before, by the cry of the fire -- Tell me
now, sir, what will be the consequence if I marry Miss Firebrand.


Sid. ( tasting his bottle) Why sir, this is the oddest love affair that ever I
had any concern with. Venus has nothing to do with it. The queen of love is
quite out of the question Mercury has a hand in it, as it is a matter of gain.
You will make yourself rich by it -- But then Mars, the fiery planet, has a
hand in it -- There will be wars ( he nods) and fightings between you -- yes,
yes, yes -- you will -- you will quarrel -- yes -- O dear, how sleepy I am -- I
think you will quarrel -- sir --


[He sinks down and is soon fast asleep] SCENE V -- HOLDFAST, SHERIFF, and
assistants; and SLYBOOTS.
Hold. Here he is, Mr. Sheriff; and here is his bottle, and his formidable
visor which affrighted you. How vain all your fears were you may now see.


Sly If he knew the stars could he not have known what we were about to do with
him?


Hold No doubt, and from this you may see how credulous those people are who
believe in people who have a present interest to deceive them.


Sly. Alas, my formidable astronomer, man familiar with the stars, O Lucifer
how art thou fallen -- Up and take a sip of the Elixir Planetarium, and tell us
all t^^t is doing among the stars -- Thou art overcome by ^^yboots -- how weak
is human wisdom.


Hold. Here Mr. Sheriff take this mitt^mus, and for the present commit him to
jail.


The Apparition. A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.
VICE, IN GENERAL, IS THE CAUSE OF SUPERSTITION.
WE say, in general, because sometimes superstition arises from weakness of
mind, or accidental causes. -- But, in general, the mind which is conscious of
guilt, is, by that very sensation, prepared to see ghosts, devils, and furies,
and all the armies of terror. It is probable that Brutus had never seen
Caesar's ghost at Em^^hia, had he not been conscious to himself that he was the
assassin and murderer of Caesar. It is easy to see, from these observations,
how necessary it is, that we keep our minds free from guilt; that we may enjoy
contentment and happiness.

PERSONS.
MEN.
Two young gentlemen of the country.
STREPHON, PHILANDER,
SIMON -- a servant to the 'Squire.
WOMEN.
ROSINA -- a girl extremely fond of amusement^. Her associates.
ALMERIA, RHODA, LEVANIA,
POMPOSA -- house keeper to a wealthy 'Squire. MARTHA -- daughter of the
'Squire, aged 18. SMILINDA -- daughter of the 'Squire, aged 10.
THE APPARITION.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- ROSINA and ALMERIA.
Ros. WELL, you will allow that I contrived the entertainment, we have had this
evening.


Al. Yes.


Ros. Was it not agrreeable?


Al. Yes, while it lasted.


Ros. And it is quite agreeable to think of it, when it is over.


Al. It is common for me to feel dull after a frolic.


Ros. I think girls we have a cheerful prospect. I never saw our young beaux
behave half so well, as they did this evening.


Al. I have often supposed the girls here had a melancholy view of time to come
-- our young sparks were so dull and numpish -- but they shone out this evening
quite plausibly. Yet after all I feel dull and heavy, and heavy I must feel.


Ros. You are a heavy, dumpish, creature, I know; I hope some of the rest of
the girls will come in and relieve me. [Enter Rhoda]


SCENE II. -- RHODA and ROSINA.
(Almeria is pensive through this whole scene.) Ros. WHAT ails Almeria? She is as
dull as a block.


Rho. I am afraid you will not find me any better.


Ros. What ails you? Has the dance tired you out. It never tires me. I could
dance forever.


Rho. It is not the dance that tires me. The reflections of my mind are
disagreeable.


Ros. Now Almeria thinks that we never had so fine a prospect of having a set
of agreeable young gentlemen about us, as at present.


Rho. That prospect gives me very little comfort now.


Ros. Why now?


Rho. Because I fear, if they be worthy of our regards, that we have behaved in
such a manner as to be unworthy of theirs.


Ros. Why unworthy of theirs?


Rho. Because Almeria, Levania, and myself, as well as you, came out this
evening with an express promise to our parents that we would be back again by
ten -- They know not where we are, and even now it is almost two in the morning.


Ros. And why did you not think of that in the time of it?


Rho. The music, the dance, the refreshment, so exhilirated my spirits, that I
found it next to impossible to get away -- and when the time was now elapsed,
the shower detained us; as the time was past I thought we might as well be
killed for a great fault as a small one -- so I concluded to stay.


SCENE III. -- LEVANIA, ALMERIA, ROSINA and RHODA.
(Levania walks silent and sad) Al. DO you not feel very disagreeably, now the
dance is over?


Ros. She expected Mr. Lightfoot would have remained -- Her comfort is departed.


Lev. It would not have been in his power to have afforded me much consolation.


Al. What do you suppose our parents think of us?


Lev. I know not; but must suppose they are very uneasy -- I dare say mine have
not slept a wink this night. -- They are always uneasy, when I stay out late,
and they know not what has become of me.


Al. And what account can we give of ourselves, on our return?


Ros. What account ladies? I wonder you should be puzzled about that. I can
manage that matter very well.


Al. I wonder how?


Ros. I am surprised that you can be so dull -- I can fix the whole business,
as nicely as can be. Only tell them that there has fallen a shower this night,
that it began to rain in the place where we were, at half past nine -- and
never left raining till past two in the morning.


Lev. That I suppose we must tell, or meet with a very disagreeable reception.
Tho I must confess the story is bad enough, take it lie and all.


Alm. That is the most plausible story we can tell, I suppose whether it be
true or not.


Rhod. I shall tell my parents the whole truth, be the consequence what it may
-- I shall have nothing to do with your fictitious stories; for we may depend
on it that the black man will have us, if we tell such abominable lies.


Al. Why Rhoda! what do you mean? You talk enough to fright one.


Rho. I talk just as I think, I assure you.


Lev. There is another thing to think of which is as perplexing as any thing
can be. There has no one invited us to stay here. How shall we get any rest?


Ros. I Will manage that matter too. I will go to the 'Squire's daughter, and see
how we can be accommodated: pick up all your things, and have them ready; and
if we cannot rest here, we will all set out together a little before day, so as
to get home, before the people are up in the morning.


Rho. A pretty figure we shall make, but for that matter, no body will see us.
( Exeunt omnes)


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- STREPHON and PHILANDER.
Stre. NOW let us consider what is to be done with these girls. Will you see
them home?


Phi. Not I, I have tired myself already, with dancing and waiting on the
misses.


Stre. But it would be unpolite to let them go home alone.


Phi. Why, they came out alone; and they may return alone -- No one invited
them here.


Stre. Then I shall not trouble myself with them.


Phi. Nor I, for they stole away from their parents; and if we go home with
them, their parents will believe that we enticed them away, and we shall get a
bad name.


Stre. I am astonished that the girls should not think of that, how they expose
themselves by such things -- I should be afraid to marry such a girl, for fear
she should run away from me.


Phi. I leave them to you. You may be 'squire to them all if you please. ( Exit
Philander)


SCENE III. -- MARTHA and STREPHON.
Mar. ARE all the young ladies gone yet?


Stre. No; Rosina, and they who came with her, are in the ball room now.


Mar. Why have you not the complaisance to wait on them home?


Stre. They stole away from their parents; and now if we wait on them home, it
will be though it that we seduced them away.


Mar. What a reflection for a young man -- had you been sixty years old, I
should not have wondered to hear you make it.


Stre. I am ten times more interested in the virtue of young girls than any man
of sixty -- When I marry I shall wish to have a wife that will not run away.


SCENE II. -- POMPOSA, MARTHA and SMILINDA.
Pom. IS not the company all gone yet? I am tired and wish to go to rest. Have
you asked any of them to tarry here to night?


Mar Not one, I did not know how you would like it, as I understand my Papa
leaves all these things to you in his absence.


Pom. Are they in the back parlour yet?


Mar. No, I believe they are gone into the ball room -- But they cannot go
away, for it is tremendous dark; and the moon does not rise till a quarter past
three -- There has been a shower too! and the roads are all full of water.


Pom. And why did not some of the young gentlmen wait on these girls home?


Mar. Because they knew they run away from their parents; and they were afraid
to go home with them lest it should be though it that they seduced them away.


Pom. That is quite curious -- but a young man of twenty five is always more
rigid in his ideas of women's morals, than a man of sixty five.


Smil. ( starting up and speaking quick) And don't you know the reason of that
ma'am?


Pom. Why what is it?


Smil. The young men suffer by the faults of the girls. The old ones are not
afraid of it.


Mar. That Is a deep observation for you miss; where did you learn all this
wisdom?


Smil. I knew our Pat would start to hear me say so -- But I heard Pa say so
himself once; but Pat don't like to hear of it, I know.


Pom. How came there to be such a collection of young people here to night?


Mar. It was all Rosina's contrivance, she loves frolicks, and is a perfect
witch at intrigue to get young people together in the absence of the elder
ones; that they may take the more liberty together.


Pom. I fear the 'Squire's displeasure -- were this house mi^e I should not
like so much company in my absence.


Mar. He will not like it. He says the amusements of young people should not
exclude the observation of the elder -- Because the observations of the elder
persons inspire the young ones with a sense of decency -- and the aged by
sympathy enjoy over again the delights of youth.


Pom. That I suppose contributed to the happiness of both -- I Have heard him say
that in Switzerland they dance after prayers in the evening, and the elder
people wait on the young ones -- I don't like this creeping into houses, in the
absence of their owners -- A shyness between the elder people, and the younger
ones, denotes vulgarism in manners and a low state of society.


Mar. What will you do with them -- will you turn these four girls out of doors?


Pom. No, give them some buttered rolls and beer, and then put them to bed in
the chamber where the 'Squire commonly sleeps -- So I will go to rest; and you
may go to the ball-room and see how the girls are to be disposed of.


SCENE IV. -- MARTHA, ROSINA, ALMERIA, RHODA, and LEVANIA.
Mar. SINCE the ladies are willing to stay we will lodge them in the haunted
chamber.


Al. The haunted chamber did you say? I should not sleep a wink.


Mar. It is only a notion about its being haunted -- It is as handsome a room
as any in the whole house -- The 'Squire sleeps there when at home -- and his
man George in the little room adjoining -- There are two beds perfectly neat,
and well aired -- just sufficient for you four ladies.


Al. But for heaven's sake don't put us to bed in a haunted chamber.


Mar. Why, I tell you it is nothing but a notion.


Al. How do you know it is nothing but a notion?


Mar. My mother always used to sleep there; she was a Church of England woman,
and always said her prayers by book -- she had a reading desk over the Sofa
against the inner wall, where she used to kneel and say her prayers.


Al. What connection has that with the chamber's being haunted?


Mar. Only since my mother's death a vapory old woman who has lived with us,
says that between daylight and dark, she has seen my mother in that chamber,
reading her prayers, just as if alive.


Al. And did none of the rest of the family see her?


Mar. Never. My Sir. always sleeps there, when at home. My mamma has been dead
about eighteen months -- and my papa says there is no place so pleasant to him,
as where she used to be -- If she comes he says he should be glad to see her --
for as she never did any thing, but good, in her life time -- he cannot think
she would hurt any person now she is dead.


Al. And is not any one of the family afraid to lodge there?


Mar. No, no more than any where else -- It is only by way of joke that we call
it the haunted chamber -- You may stay here Ladies till I get a light -- It
will be perfectly safe for you.


SCENE V. -- ROSINA, RHODA, ALMERIA, LEVANIA.
Ros. WELL what will you do ladies? Will you sleep in the haunted chamber?


Rho. I am not afraid, for I am determined to tell no lies -- What do you say
Almeria? That was a pretty lie you contri^ed to tell your parents when you went
home.


Al. I don't like sleeping in a haunted chamber very well -- we may possibly
get a fright.


Lev. I suspect there may be some truth in the story about the old lady's
appearance. I have heard of a number of such things in my life.


Ros. And so have I; but I never believed them. What is the reason, that people
of the best sense, and best understanding, never see such things? But they are
commonly seen by nervous, hypocondriac, or half crazy persons. I do not say
such things never were; but I believe most stories of that kind are without
foundation.


Al. I do not know what to think of such things; but I know it is natural for
me to be afraid; and I own I do now.


Lev. I wish I never had thought of going from home this evening.


Ros. O, you are a faint hearted creature as ever existed -- You are not
capable of doing any thing that is ingenious -- I am not yet twenty years old
-- and I have contrived up more than a hundred evening parties already -- I
love amusements. Life is insipid without them.


Lev. And so it is a pretty amusement to lodge in a haunted chamber -- I guess
you will meet with something to try your high spirits yet.


Ros. I protest I am not in the least afraid. Let old grand mother come if she
will, and say her prayers -- If she be a good woman -- we shall sleep the safer
for that. Come, come, let us go.


Al. I feel afraid -- I do not wish to go -- I do not love to sleep in a
haunted chamber.


Lev. Nor I, and am willing to own it.


Ros. O for shame girls, what cowards you are, afraid of nothing -- come --
come along, or I will leave you here in the dark. [Exit all the Ladies.]


ACT III.
SCENE I. -- SIMON and SMILINDA.
Sim. WELL Smiley, where is your Doll?


Smil. I have put it where you cannot find it.


Sim. I shall get it yet -- and cut its head off.


Smil. O you cruel, barbarous wretch, to go to murder my poor baby, little
innocent, that never did any harm in its life.


Sim. I set my black cat to day on your white one, and she has stripped her ears
all into fiddlestrings; and one of these days I intend to kill her. (Exit
Simon.)


SCENE II. -- SMILINDA and MARTHA.
Smil. I TELL you what Patty, our Simon is a rogue -- he is always setting his
black cat on my white one; and he says he means to kill my cat.


Mar. He shall not kill your cat. If he does he shall be turned out of doors.


Smil. Then he is always plagning my babies. He says he will get my prettiest
Doll; and cut off its head.


Mar. Simon had better mind his manners, or he will be turned out of his place,
when papa comes home.


Smil. I do think pa will do right to turn him off if he does suffer by it, he
is so forever playing the rogue.


SCENE III. -- ROSINA, and her associates enter, screaming out with a fright.
Ros. O MERCY help us, I never was so frighted in my life -- the chamber is
certainly haunted.


Alm. There are more than a thousand evil spirits in it now.


Lev. And what a shocking noise they made? I never heard any thing before so
terrible. Dear me, what shall I do?


Rho. Did you see that great something all in white -- It was as big as a man.


Ros. And there was something all in black. It seemed to be as big as a horse;
and it had eyes like balls of fire.


Rho. That was old Satan himself, I do believe; I never saw any thing so
dreadful.


Ros. And there were a thousand little white creatures that flew all about the
chamber like lightening -- it was the dreadfullest sight I ever saw -- I never
believed such things before.


Alm. These are serious matters ladies -- and we must think of our bad actions,
and be sorry, else we know not what will become of us. -- I am sorry now,
ladies, that I ever did any thing but what was strictly honest, we had better
own the whole truth, and not tell any lies about our going out, else the black
creature we saw will have us all.


Rho. Yes, you know I told you so -- I believe that it was he whom we saw, that
it was old Satan himself -- and we had better take care of ourselves -- did you
hear what noise he made when he trotted away? He made a noise as loud as a
horse treating on a barn floor.


Ros. O dear! I shall always be afraid to go out a nights after this. (Pomposa
enters.)


Pomp. Ladies how came you to disturb me with your noise? I have to rise early,
and work hard; and I think it unkind, that when you have your lodging given
you, you should disturb the whole family with your noise.


Ros. We could not help it -- you put us to bed in a haunted chamber.


Pomp. But you have not been to bed, you are in your proper dress now -- you
sit up I believe on purpose to make a noise.


Ros. No, Miss Martha gave us a candle, and we attempted to go into the
chamber, and the candle burnt blue and almost went out -- and I was going to
take a pin, and pick open the wick; on a sudden I heard the dreadfullest noise
that ever I heard in my life, and I saw something all in white, nearly as large
as a man, fly off one way; and another all black, which the ladies say looked
as big as a horse, trotted off another way, and made a noise as loud as a horse
stepping on a barn floor. The candle burnt dim and blue, and there was a strong
smell of brimstone, all the while, and no one could know how many white
creatures were seen flying about the chamber like lightning. How came you to
put the ladies to bed in the chamber if you knew it to be haunted?


Pom. I knew nothing of the matter, nor ever believed it to be haunted --
Ladies, are you not deceived?


Rho. The candle burnt very dim and blue, but we could see.


Lev. O yes, we could distinguish objects, and colors: I could see the great
black creature, and the white one, and the smaller ones, all flying about: It
was a dreadful sight.


Alm. I saw them plainly.


Ros. So did I!


Pom. All this is perfectly astonishing to me. I never heard of any such thing
before, much less believed it.


SCENE IV. -- The same Ladies -- SMILINDA enters, crying out.
Smil They shall not kill my cat! They shall not kill my cat! You will not let them kill
my cat, will you?


Mar. Why who is going to kill your cat?


Smil. Simon says he will kill my cat.


Mar. No my dear, he shall not kill her; but why does he say so?


Smil. Why, I took my white cat with all her sweet little white kittens and I
put all nine of them into Pa's bed, you cannot think how pretty they looked all
nine of them together -- Then Simon went and got his great awful black cat, and
shod her feet all round with walnut shells, sticking them on with wax. And then
he sent him right into the chamber amongst my cat and kittens, and at it they
went, fighting, and frighted the ladies almost out of their wits, and now Simon
says he will kill my cat, because she scared the ladies, and his cat scared them
full as much as mine -- For he made an awful noise trotting away on his four
shoes.


Pom. There ladies the matter is all out now -- I advise you to go home and
never steal away from your parents any more, nor frame any lies to excuse the
matter; for a guilty CONSIENCE can turn nutshells into horse shoes, and cats
into devils, and even do stranger things than all that.


[The whole company withdraw.] The Wooden Boy. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE
ACTS.
THE FOLLY OF LOCAL PREJUDICES.
PERHAPS there is not a prejudice in human beings more unfriendly to society
than that which improperly called local prejudice. A remarkable instance of
this we have between cits and clowns -- In the exercise of this prejudice it is
difficult to say which discovers the most impenetrable stupidity. The cits
commonly, however, are most insolent: the clowns have, perhaps, the most
settled malice. Differing districts of the same nation often carry it almost to
open hostility -- How can men so far forget, that they are all of the same
species, and have the same feelings?

PERSONS.
MEN.
MR. FREEMAN, OR JOHN HICKORY, a polite young gentleman, affecting to be a
rustic. JAMES HOTSPUR -- a young satirist. JACK BATTLEDOOR -- a boxer,
affecting to be a high fellow. HARRY PLUME -- a young beau. TALBOT -- a large
good natured boy. MARTIN -- a serious sententious lad. CHRISTOPHER -- a waiter
in a boarding school.
WOMEN.
MYRA -- a miss, favorite of Harry Plume. SISTERS -- of Mr. Freeman who appear
but do not speak.
THE WOODEN BOY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- PLUME and BATTLEDOOR.
Plume. I WONDER what the mavelous cause can be that our young fellows do not
study the art of dress!


Bat. I think the art of boxing of much greater consequence.


Plume. Dress recommends us to the ladies, dear creatures; my heart is charmed
with them; tho people laugh at me, for taking notice of them because I am so
young.


Bat. But you can learn push, parry, quart and tierce, I mean to learn the art
of fencing before I make pretensions to the ladies, and then if a man rivals
me, I Will call him out.


Plume. I guess I Am not far from being a man, for when the miss Linnets sung
last evening -- they are sweet little angels you know -- I felt my heart go pi^
a pat as plain as day light. If I be not pretty near a man, I wonder what in
the name of beauty, that could mean.


Bat. I care not, I love to throw every boy in the school of my age; and beat
every one of my size in boxing -- then, if I like any of the girls, I can
defend myself in possession.


Plume. But to make the girls like you, that is a serious matter, to captive
their little tender souls, then you may keep them forever.


Bat. I would rather undertake to knock down a boy of twice my size, than to
flatter a girl, or even to coax her to walk with me half a mile.


Plume. You and I shall not agree in our notions -- But do you know that we are
to have a new student, in our school, to day?


Bat. I heard of it -- They say his name is John Hickory, and that he comes
from the town of Brushwood, a rare wooden fellow -- I dare say we shall pick
fun out of him. ( Enter Hotspur.)


SCENE II. -- HOTSPUR, PLUME and BATTLEDOOR.
Hot. Well boys, they say we shall have a queer fellow come into school to day
-- We shall have music with him.


Plume. I wonder you should not have the prudence to acquaint yourself with the
sweet little angels, and l^^rn genteel manners, as I do.


Bat. If he comes I guess I shall box him, or at least I shall challenge him to
wrestle with me at the first dash, that is my way.


Hot. I Will try, and see how he will bear a joke. They say he dresses very
queerly, all out of fashion. We shall joke him all to rags.


Plume. I wonder he should not dress himself when he comes to school, because
that is a matter of importance.


Hot. I mean to buy me a jest book, and learn to joke by rule -- It will cost
only one dollar, and wit, you know, is worth every thing.


Plume. Better lay it out in pomatum to keep your hair slick; and give it an
agreeable smell; that will make the young ladies like you.


Hot. When I get all the wit in the world, the ladies will like me for my wit;
and then I shall be as smart as any man.


Bat. I am determined to learn boxing and the back sword; for if you and I
travel together, as we may; when you affront a man with your wit, then I shall
have to fight him.


Plume. Rare work you will make of it, and I shall have to follow you in order to
make peace. So we have business planned out for the rest of our lives.


Bat. We will contrive some way to make fun of neighbor Hickory -- I love to
take a fellow, who cannot say his soul is his own, and give him a hearty sweat.


Plume. Now I had rather please one girl, than plague ten boys, and there is
more amusement in it.


( Exit Plume.) SCENE III -- MARTIN, BATTLEDOOR and HOTSPUR.
Mar. NOTHING gives a greater luster to learning than prudence and good morals.
I cannot join you in afflicting our new companion, it can only render us odious.


Bat. You never had any spirit for fun more than my grandmother -- Always
preaching your grum morals, what do you say Jack, shall we give up to him?


Hot. Not till he has had a spice of my jokes; I mean to try titles with him
for the greatest wit.


Bat. If he can give me a fall, or beat me in boxing, then I Will allow him to be
a good fellow.


Mart. I Am ashamed of you both -- forever in riots and mischief -- a terror to
the neighborhood. You Will sooner be in prison than in Congress, at this rate of
proceeding.


Hot. What a preacher! Let Us collect money to buy him a new black coat -- and
he shall hold forth to the school.


Mart. You will need no preacher. Soon the consequences of your folly will give
you tormenting conviction, very soon.


Bat. Think I Will give back for you -- I Will only go deeper -- I Will get a
blanket, and toss Mr. Wooden head in a blanket. [Exit Martin, and after him the
rest.]


SCENE IV. -- HICKORY (entering) and CHRISTOPHER.
Hick. SIR can you introduce me into the school?


Chris. No! (in a surly tone.)


Hick. Why not? (complaisantly.)


Chris. I have no time to wait on such wooden headed fellows -- You came from
the town of Brushwood -- I must attend to my business.


Hick. Sir it will take you but a moment to introduce me.


Chris. I cannot spend my time to wait on you -- You have no more manners than
a bear -- What sort of people live, where you came from?


Hick. A very rough unsociable people I must say to their dishonor -- They will
refuse to direct a stranger on his way -- ask the town he came from, and tell
him he has no more manners than a bear.


Chris. That is pretty much as they do here.


Hick. Will you please to direct me into the common room?


Chris. You must first cross the yard -- then turn over to the left -- then you
must come to the right again -- then you must go back again to the left -- then
come to the right, and take a winding course up the back stairs into the common
room.


Hick. It is impossible to find the way by these directions. Here, I Will give
you this if you will show me the way.


Chris. I will wait on you sir. (Looks wishfully at the money) But I must ask
leave of absence of the master of the kitchen. [Exit Christopher.]


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- BATTLEDOOR (entering) and HICKORY.
Bat. WELL, Sir what is your name?


Hick. John Hickory sir.


Bat. What town did you come from?


Hick. Brushwood; a very remote part of the state.


Bat. You are the fellow I have been hearing of a number of days past -- they
told me there was a strange, woodenheaded fellow coming from Brushwood, a dark
obscure hole, and that he had no more manners than a bear.


Hick. Well what do you think of him?


Bat. Think of you -- Why as to your own proper self, you look passably well --
But then how you dress, all as far from the fashion as from Nova Scotia to
Georgia -- What do you mean by wearing that old bayonet-hat -- Your coat is
half a yard too short -- oh! fun indeed! this is pretty! what a coat! -- and
then your hair tied up with a leather -- whang -- You like old Jeremy -- fact!
-- Why sir, what sort of people are they at Brushwood?


Hick. They are a very droll people it would make you laugh to see their
manners.


Bat. Why, how are they?


Hick O they are so ridiculous, they say you love fun -- it would make you die
with laughing.


Bat. I long to hear then -- Let us have it.


Hick. The first thing these coarse, rough people do, when they see a stranger
-- is to ask him what is his name -- where he came from -- they tell him he is
a fellow they have heard of before -- that he is a strange wondenheaded fellow,
with no more manners than a bear -- then they examine his person, and tell him
he looks passably, but his dress is out of fashion -- his hat is not right, and
his coat is half a yard too long or too short -- they find fault with the tying
of his hair, and ask what sort of people they were in the town from whence he
came.


Bat. You lie. Those are not the manners of the people at Brushwood.


Hick. They are sir, and you may enquire of any person you please -- They are
the manners of all people who have no sense of propriety.


Bat. Very pretty indeed! and so I have no sense of propriety!


Hick. I have never said that sir.


Bat. But you told the manners of the people of Brushwood, to be just like mine.


Hick. If they be alike, you would not have me tell a lie.


Bat. You are a saucy fellow; and I dare you out to box with me.


Hick. There are two things more which the people at Brushwood, are very apt to
do -- If they do not like what a man says to them, they tell him he lies, and
challenge him to box.


Bat. I will not bear this -- you mean to impose upon me, I know you do -- I Will
knock you down.


SCENE II. -- (Enter TALBOT, BATTLEDOOR and HICKORY.)
Tal. Stop your fire skull; what are you about to do? Fight a scholar before he
enters the school -- And for what? Has he ever injured you? It is not possible.


Bat. He has insulted me, and I will not bear it.


Tal. How insulted you?


Bat. He described the manners of the people of Brushwood to be just like mine.


Tal. What then? one unmannerly fellow is just like another.


Hick. O let him alone if he has a mind to fight, let him fight.


Tal. But he shall use fair play.


Hick. Fighting is fighting after all. I am not much concerned about the manner
of it.


Bat. Yes I suppose in your Town they use the Indian hug, and strike a fellow
after he is down.


Hick. If the business is to be civil, it is best not to fight at all.


Bat. That is because you are a coward. Yes, because you are a coward, I say,
you refuse to fight. ( with vehemence.)


Hick. No s^r, I do not refuse -- but as you are the challenger, you must let
me have the choice of weapons.


Tal. That Is certainly fair -- you can have no objection to that.


Hick. Then when I fight, I always fight with a large lemon in my fist -- look
you here, this is the way I fight, if I fight at all.


Battle. What is that for?


Hick. The business of fighting, you see, is to hurt one another -- if you
bruise any one, the juice gets into the wound, and the smart it intolerable --
and if you strike them in the face, the juice gets into the eyes, and the
anguish is inconceivable. Here sir, ( offers him a couple of lemons) take a
couple and prepare yourself. We must hurt one another very much, before we have
done -- I mean to fight as long as I can move a finger. I hope if I hurt you
ever so much, ( civily) you will not take it ill


Battle. ( looking at the lemons) 'Twould be a pity -- really 'twould be a pity.


Hick. What is a pity?


Bat. To bruise these lemons all up in fighting, it will spoil them entirely.


Hick. Would it not spoil a man's face as much. But that is no matter -- it is
my way of fighting; and I have a right to choose.


Bat. I think I don't want to fight much now.


Hick. That Is because you are a coward.


Bat. Why I think -- I think, I Am dry, and I want a drink of punch -- had we
not better make these lemons into punch, I Am very fond of punch.


Hick. With all my heart; I love punch for that matter, as well as I love
fighting.


Tal. I like it, so lay the lemons aside for a moment and we will have a drink
of punch.


Bat. [clapping Hickory on the shoulder] On my word I ask pardon for being so
rough with you at first. I begin to think you are a clever fellow. There Is
Hotspur a coming -- don't say a word to him, that we have made all up.


SCENE III. -- HOTSPUR, entering -- the others as in the last scene.
Hot. Where Is our new genius -- Well my friend, did you come here to buy wit?


Hick. I have come, I believe, to a bad market, for I do not find you have any
to sell.


Hot. He Is sharp, you see, very sharp. He lives upon razors, don't you think he
does?


Hick. You had better not meddle with me then, for I have just this moment
finished my dinner.


Hot You came from Brushwood, I think, where foxes are plenty.


Hick. Yes sir, and when I dine on razors, I have fox-brains for sauce -- that
makes me very keen, you see.


Hot. And so you mean to deal out your fox-wit by wholesale among us.


Hick. There is no need of that; a very small portion will serve for you.


Hot. I fancy you have been used to fox hunting; do yo mean to pursue it here?


Hick. No, I Am hunting for fools, and have had great luck -- the game is plenty.


Hot. You will find one if you look in the glass.


Hick. Then I will not look, for I am satisfied with what I see already.


Hot. How his wit bites; he stings close; he has been a pepper merchant, you
may depend on it.


Hick. Yes, and have enough of it yet to season a dozen such fellows as you.


Hot. You are a proper blackguard -- I am ashamed to talk with you.


Hick. A cur is always ashamed when he is beat.


Hot I Will be revenged on you for this.


Tal. O shame on you -- You began the attack, and are only angry because yau
are out witted.


Hot. I Will go and call a number of boys, and I Will be revenged on you.


Tal. How common it is for boys, who begin with joking, soon to get angry -- I
thing we may fairly draw the consequence from this; that judgment is much
better than wit.


(Exeunt omnes.) ACT III.
SCENE I. -- BATTLEDOOR and MYRA.
Bat. AH how do ye do, my pretty Miss.


Myr. You are not to be very conversant with me sir, till you behave yourself
better.


Bat. Why, have I done you any harm?


Myr. No, but I am told that you this day contrived to insult a new scholar,
just as he was entering the school.


Bat. That does not concern you that I know of.


Myr. It concerns me to keep such rude, unmannerly wretches at a due distance,
I hope, you will not have admittance, where we dance this evening.


Bat. You are always very particular about your company.


Myr. I wish every girl were as particular, then we should cure you of your
high-goes -- that is to say of your low frolics.


Bat Madam, if you are out of temper, it is not worth my while to stay here? (
Exit Battle.)


SCENE II. -- PLUME (entering) and MYRA.
Plume. YOUR servant Miss -- I am happy in hoping for the pleasure of dancing
with you, this evening.


Myra. Sir if it be agreeable to you, and the company choose partners I have no
objection.


Plume. For one thing Miss you must suffer me to blame you a little gently -- I
saw you walking with Jack Battledoor; he has not the best character in the
school.


Myr. O never fear my growing fond of his company -- he seized my arm, it is
true, but I obliged him soon to quit it -- I do not like him, his manner is
quite too rough.


Plume. Shall I conduct you home.


Myr. You may if it be agreeable -- tho it is but a little way -- it will not
be unpleasant to have company -- yet now I wish you to stay here and prevent
the boys from insulting Mr. Freeman. [Plume takes his leave of Myra very
genteelly -- comes to the middle of the stage and sings.]


SCENE III. -- PLUME and HOTSPUR.
Plume sings. It Is the loveliest season of life,
When the spirits so merrily flow.
Our heart quickly rises with joy,
And is suddenly melted at woe.
Our minds are as simple as doves,
Our hearts yet not hardened with crimes,
Admit the first dartings of love,
And have their sweet meltings betimes.
Why, Myra came tripping to me,
So livelily over the green,
Through all our fair village, than I,
Not a happier lad could be seen.
But when I walked over the green furrow,
Deeply musing on every charm,
I saw my sweet maiden with sorrow,
With another lad, locked in her arm.
Yet surely I welcome the joy,
Although it be mixed with much pain.
The sensible heart, touched with love,
Never wished to be senseless again.

Hot. Well, Harry, wont you join us, we mean to have a high go?


Plume. I am always afraid of you, you carry matters to such a violent extreme.


Hot You are a soft hearted thing, just fit to please the girls; and for
nothing else.


Plume. What mavelous plan have you on foot, that you urge me so much, to
take a part in it?


Hot. We have a scheme to take John Hickory, and toss him in a blanket.


Plume. Have your rough play to yourself, I will have nothing to do with it.


Hot. Go, then, and tie yourself to the girls apron-strings; and let them coax,
and wheedle, and befool you forever.


Plume. I have no taste for such rough play -- It always ends in something
disagreeable. As for my misses, they will soften, and polish my manners; and
teach me to be a gentleman. [Exit Plume.]


SCENE IV. -- HOTSPUR, BATTLEDOOR, (entering here) with other boys and MARTIN.
Hot. COME lads; see John Hickory cut capors in the air -- We mean to toss him
in a blanket.


Mar. You are forever inventing mischief. What has John Hickory done to you,
that you shall bear malice against him?


Hot. He is a new scholar you see.


Mar. The very reason why he should he treated kindly -- If he be not polite at
present it is his unhappiness not his fault.


Hot. We know more than he does.


Mar. Give credit to your knowledge then, and behave yourselves well.


Hot. Wonderfully wise to be sure.


Mar. Ignorant people have some excuse for bad morals -- but to those who
profess to be the knowing ones -- nothing can be more infamous, than to despise
the manners of civil life.


Hot. It always is the custom among scholars to play the rogue.


Mar. For that very reason seminaries of learning become odious. If men
professing learning behave worse than they, who inhabit the woods -- who can
wonder that men hate the idea of a scholar -- by such methods too, they are
bred up to be the pests of human society -- and the more learned the more
pernicious they are.


Hot. But seminaries of learning are the resorts of politeness -- the seats of
the muses.


Mar. They ought to be; but such fellows as you give them the character of the
seats of illiberality, and vice. If we find in colleges and acadamies, the
rough stoic, the contemptuous cynic, the coarsest pedants, and the sons of
riot, and debauchery, who can wonder if the public conceives an aversion to
such societies?


Bat. A fig for your morals -- There are your high fellows in all the
seminaries of learning.


Mar. Yes, a worthy object to be sure. To study one, two* three, or four years,
in some seminary of learning -- to qualify ourselves, to get drunk as brutally
as porters, and grooms -- to introduce ourselves to vicious women, who after
all prefer the assassin and street robber -- and to acquire an aversion to
modest ladies, to be embarrassed, and know not how to speak to them. One need
not reside in a college to learn these things -- They may be learned in
taverns, and gaming houses to perfection.


Bat. Come on, boys -- down with this preacher -- Does he think we came here to
hear sermons of terror? Let us all fall on, have him in the blanket, and give
him a shaking.


Mar. Stand off you villains; if you attack me, I shall defend myself. [Hickory
enters.]


Hot. Well he is a great heavy lubber, we will let him alone; and take Hickory;
he is the very man we want.


Hick. What do you mean, by this rude assault on me?


[Talbot enters] Tal. Silence ye young villains -- Let this young gentleman
alone -- unhand him. There now, be easy; or I will bring every soul o^ you
before the government.


[They desist. -- The rest go out.] SCENE V. -- MARTIN, HOTSPUR, and BATTLEDOOR.
Bat. I SEE we are likely to have no fun to day -- I will go and see some of
the misses -- I do that when I can find nothing better.


Mar What would you have better, than to recommend yourself to the best part of
the human species?


Hot* Why do not our instructors then let the masters and misses perform their
excerc^ses together -- or why in schools where they study together, do they
make them sit in different parts of the house.


Mar. It is to save them the pain of being corrected in the presence of each
other -- to preserve their delicacy, and ^ncrease their mu^ual ^espect -- There
is n^thing which makes the intercours^ of men and women so happy as preserving
mutual respect and esteem.


Bat. On my word, I believe you are right, for I have found when we had been
from the misses all day -- and had a nice genteel dance after school -- it was
the finest pleasure, I ever experienced in my life.


Mar. That Is always the case -- The more decent and proper we are in
conversation with women, the more we enjoy their society, which is in fact, and
truth, the greatest blessing of human life


Bat That Is what I have not though it of so much before -- But there seems to be
good sense and reason in what you say.


SCENE VI. -- TALBOT, (entering) HOTSPUR, BATTLEDOOR, and MARTIN.
Tal. YOUNG men you are very fortunate indeed, that you did not meddle with
Hickory, for he is indeed a very genteel young man -- He lived in Brushwood but
one fortnight -- as he knew you to be saucy, he contrived this way to mortify
you; so he makes you the fools of the play. His real name is Freeman.


Mar. Yes, boys you will be mortified with a witness. -- The wooden boy you
laughed at is rea^ly as genteel a lad as any in the school, and has permission
to invite the young gentlemen and ladies to a dance after school.


Bat. O I shall die to appear before him.


Hot. I must excuse myself -- How he must despise me -- I may as well be
annihilated as to appear before him.


Mar. I have often told you, young gentlemen, that you would bring yourselves
i^o disgrace by such proceedings -- But see, he is coming with his two sisters
-- sweet girls as ever lived. He looks like a Wooden Boy to be sure.


SCENE VII. -- Mr. FREEMAN entering with his two Sisters, richly dressed.
Free. GENTMEMEN, I have the honor to invite you to dance with my sisters, and
a number of the other misses after school; at the house of Mrs. Careful, the
Governess.


Bat. Mr. Freeman I ask a thousand pardons -- if I had but known you I should
not --


Free. No matter, it afforded me some amusement -- no matter.


Hot. If you will only pardon my jokes. I was wrong, perfectly wrong, I confess.


Free. I think sir, your jokes were quite harmless. Gentlemen I shall wait on
you at four. [Exit Freeman.]


(Battledoor and Hotspur walk across the stage, with their heads down.) Hot. My
jokes quite harmless -- That is worse than all the rest -- He must think meanly
of me, and cannot think otherwise. In fact, I feel very small.


Bat. And I too, as small as a mouse -- I wish I had been in France before ever
I heard of the Wooden Boy.

MARTIN Epiloguizes.
We see, in contests of the prize of wit;
The biter often by his own malice bit.
In circles, boasting of politeness, find
Low manners the disgrace of human kind.
Ignorance in colleges may find a place;
And profligacy in a man of grace.
Cits think that Clowns are brutes, and Clowns again,
Esteem poor Cits the dullest sons of men.
The town Belle sneers at every rural lass --
The lass despising madam, lets her pass.
Thus mutual prejudice, and malice reign;
And all the joys of social life profane.
Yet banish prejudice, and love revives,
And social bliss, in fields, or cities, lives.

[All leave the stage.] Bernard of Berlin. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
THE ABSURDITY OF PROFUSENESS.
THERE is in many persons of some plausible qualities, a great vanity of
spending money profusely. It is lavished away on parasites and flatterers, who
give their patron nothing but empty praise. -- And it is commonly the case,
that they who help a man to spend his estate profusely, are the first to desert
him in distress, if not upbraid him with his folly.

PERSONS.
MEN.
BERNARD OF BERLIN -- a man of excessive hospitality. WIDDEL -- his steward.
SCRUTER -- an Attorney. COUNT ANSPACH -- a worthless Nobleman. GOLTZ -- a city
Magistrate. STRASSMUND -- an old Miser. KEENSPRUCK -- an Architect. BRUSCH -- a
Servant. CHRISTIERN -- a Cook. BRYSSEN -- a stranger.
WOMEN.
GERTRUDE -- wife of Bernard. CATHERN -- his daughter.
BERNARD OF BERLIN.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- BRYSSEN and CHRISTIERN.
Brys. WHO lives in this house?


Chris. Nobody lives here.


Brys. Is not the house inhabited?


Chris. Here my master starves, with his wife, and family, and myself. -- We
are starved to death all of us.


Brys. You have no regard to decency, to be starved to death, and yet walking
about and transacting business.


Chris. We are in no danger of being called to an account -- We have no
business to follow, and are grown by starving so thin and so pale, that were we
examined on the qualifications of ghosts, there would not be a wretch of us
all, but would pass muster.


Brys. You have lost your manners as well as your flesh -- Who stays in this
house? I ask again.


Chris Bernard, sir my master Bernard.


Brys. Has he no other name but my master Bernard?


Chris. Why sir there are a number of Bernard's in this town, there is one who
was a man of figure -- Is that the man you want?


Brys. Describe his particular quality or business.


Chris. There are two Bernards noted men in this city. One is a poet and a man
of wit -- He is as social a fellow as eve^ you saw, he would entertain you with his
fine verses.


Brys. The Bernard, I want, is the Bernard who gives such good dinners. I have
heard an ex^ellent character of him -- I am tired, faint, and hungry, coming
off from a journey, and have a better relish for a good sirl^in of beef, than
for the finest verses in the world. Will you tell me at last what your masters'
name is.


Chris. Why sir, he has been so popular in his day, that they called him
Bernard of Berlin -- No man has ever given better dinners -- But he can give
them no more.


Brys. Why, if that be the case, I will dine at the tavern. But, I respect his
memory, and will call and see him after dinner. ( Exit Bryssen -- Bernard
enters.)


SCENE II. -- BERNARD and SCRUTER.
Ber. THERE is a man knocking, introduce him. ( Christiern introduces him.)


Scru. Sir, here is a note which is become due.


Ber. Due to whom? ( Exit Christiern.)


Scru. To a neighbor here in Berlin.


Ber. Go to my steward.


Scru. He has already put me off, from day to day -- The holder of the note
wants the money, and must be paid.


Ber. Persuade him to wait till tomorrow.


Scru. I cannot sir. It must be put in suit.


Ber. Eye, you may ruin a responsible man by sending him at once to prison.
Here take this (gives him money) and ask him to want a month longer, not ruin
me and my whole family.


Scru. You talk enough to break one's heart. ( Chinking the money) I will try
to persuade him. But with a little exertion you can pay this other.


Ber. I cannot answer that neither. Can you nor put it off till next week?


Scru. Perhaps I may by some persuading, for which I ought to be paid. But
here is another.


Ber. O conscience, what? another!


Scru. Yes, another; and he says he must have speedy payment. The sum is less
than either of the others -- I hope you will pay this.


Ber. I cannot pay that nether -- But how came I over head and ears in debt? Is
it possible that my steward has done his duty, Brusch -- Tell Widdel to step
here in a moment.


Scru. Pay this last note by to morrow or it will be put in suit, (Goes out
surlily.)


SCENE III. -- BERNARD and WIDDEL.
[Widdle enters here.] Ber. HOW came my ^state so deranged! Why did you not
tell me of it?


Wid. I did a great many times, but you put me off. -- You told me I was
honest, and that you would look into it another time.


Ber. You must sell off some of my land.


Wid It is all sold, except one little dark spot in the corner of Silesia,
hardly fit for a cobblers stall. This will hardly satisfy your present
creditors; what is to be done for the future I know not.


Ber. But there was not a village from Berlin to Dantzick, that I had not a
farm in, or near it.


Wid. True -- but when it cost you 1000 acres for a feast, or you gave away
10^000 in a breath -- had you possessed all Europe, in one farm, it soon would
have been gone.


Ber. What you say is reasonable.


Wid. If you suspect my honesty, or truth, I Will settle my accounts in presence
of a magistrate -- But I must tell you* that your feasts, revels,
illuminations* balls, and what not, at such an excessive charge, have often
made me retire to a corner and weep.


Ber. Prithee say no more.


Wid. Then, what fellows those were who praised you. -- Count Bernard! the
noble Bernard; and Bernard of Berlin; who had every man's hand, head and heart
at his service -- now your fortune is gone they are as still as flies after a
summer's storm.


Ber. Finish your discourse -- I will apply to my friends -- I have mines in
their hearts, and treasures in their inmost souls -- I can get favors from my
friends as easily as I can speak the word.


Wid. I wish you may find it so.


Ber. Never mind it* Widdel, my wants are my blessings -- You shall see that I
am rich in friends, tho I be low in cash.


Wid. I have the warmest wishes for your success.


Ber. Here* Brusch, come in an instant. Go to Count Anspach; ask him to lend me
200 pounds; to Goltz, and ask him for 150; to S^r^smund, the miser; ask him for
100; to Keenspruck* the architect: ask him to lend me 50. for he has had many a
good job by my means -- I advanced to the city magistrates L 3000 in a time of
difficulty; I shall ask L. 1000 of them*


Wid. I wish you may be succes^ful, but I greatly fear you will not. [Exit
Widdel. -- Gertrude enters.]


SCENE IV. -- GERTRUDE and BERNARD.
Ger. DEAR sir, what are we to dine upon to day?


Ber. Upon victuals, what do you think?


Ger. But the cook says there is not a mouthful of any kind of provisions in
the house.


Ber. We shall have plenty in a few minutes. I have sen^ my servant to borrow
money of my friends.


Ger. If that be the case we may fast and reckon upon fasting -- we will lay i^
up against a fast day comes.


Ber. What, my dear, we will not be uncharitable toward our friends -- They
cannot be so ungenerous as not to relieve our wants.


Ger. Heaven bless your hopes, my husband, and render them successful: but much
I fear, that we must keep lent, for many days to come, in spite of all our
friends.


Ber. O woman -- woman! how suspicious you are -- I wonder you had faith enough
to be married.


Ger. I should not, if I had dreamt of starving in consequence.


Ber. Well, well -- I Will expedite the servants, and get a supply, the moment my
money arrives. [Exit Gertrude.]


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- Anspach enters, then Brusch. -- ANSPACH and BRUSCH.
Brusch. MY master Bernard wishes your health and prosperity.


C. Ans. Here, take a glass of my bell wine, you are welcome above all men --
Here take another glass -- How does that complete gentleman your master do,
whom I love as my life?


Brusch. Very well, as to health, very well indeed.


C. Ans. And what have thou got under thy cloak? Some genteel present from your
master. I dreamt last night he gave me a silver tankard.


Brusch. I have no silver tankard sir, for you.


C. Ans. Something more elegant. Your master shows his genteel taste always in
his presents -- a pair of diamond buckles, perhaps. O, I love him as my life.


Brusch. No sir he is in want: he sends this empty box for you to fi^l. He asks
200 pounds, not doubting but you will supply him.


C. Ans. Ah! not doubting -- Why I told him when I dined with him last, I was
afraid he spent too fast on his capital.


Brusch. And then came to supper to tell him to spend less.


C. Ans. Liberty was always his fault. But you are an arch fellow -- you know
these times.


Brusch. What of the times sir?


C. Ans. That nobody pretends in these times to lend money upon friendship,
without security.


Brusch. My master has lent you three times the sum without security.


C. Ans. Yes, and I took it because I wanted it. But I though it him imprudent,
then.


Brusch. Shall I say that to my master?


C. Ans. No, take this piece; and say I was not at home.


Brusch. Thank you sir, I will not tell a scandalous lie for three shillings.
[Exit C. Anspach. -- Goltz enters]


SCENE II. -- BRUSCH and GOLTZ.
Brusch. ILLUSTRIOUS magistrate, that gentleman, Bernard of Berlin, sends to
know of your health.


Goltz. Ha, has he sent to me, and what has he sent? He is the genteelest man
on earth in sending a present.


Brusch. O sir, he will make no more presents He sends this empty box for you
to fill -- He desires you to lead him 150 pounds.


Goltz. He is only merry, he has ten times that sum to spare!


Brusch. No sir, he is in present want; or he would never have troubled his
friends.


Goltz. Hah! in present want do you say? How then will he be able to pay?


Brusch. He was kind to you, in difficulties; and expected a return.


Goltz. What a perfect fool, and scoundrel I was; that no more than three days
ago, I made a purchase that swept off every stiver of my money.


Brusch. Then you will not ^upply him.


Goltz. Why just before you came in I was going to send to my lord Bernard, to
borrow, which I scarce would have done for the worth of all Germany. Give him
my most sincere respects; tell him my utter inability; and beg him to conceive
in the fairest manner of my intentions.


Brusch. Shall I tell him you will not?


Goltz. No, sir, tell him I cannot, and that it is a mortal affliction to me. (
Exit. Goltz*)


Brusch. ( alone) And is this the return you make for all my master's kind^ess
to you -- Well there remains old Strassmund the miser. I will see what I can do
with him.


( Strassmund enters.) SCENE III. -- BRUSCH and STRASSMUND.
Brusch. MASTER Bernard sends his respects to you sir, and asks the loan of a
hundred pounds.


Strass. How came he to think of me?


Brusch. Why he sent to lord Anspach, and Goltz; but they proved of base
temper; they gave him no relief.


Strass. And so he sends to me the last of all -- I was the first man that
received a present of him; the first who was invited to dinner by him; and now
that he should send to me the last -- I will not lend him a farthing -- I am
downright affronted with him. Exit Strassmund,


Brusch. There is no one who now remains but old Keenspruck the architect --
whom my master took out of prison; and gave him many a fine job -- I will try
him, and then I have executed my master's orders. [Keenspruck enters.]


SCENE IV. -- BRUSCH and KEENSPRUCK.
Brusch. MASTER Bernard sends to you sir, his most sincere respects.


Keen. What job does he want me to do now? I Will not do another so cheap as I
did the last; but I don't perfectly understand you -- I am hard of hearing, you
know. Come close to me now.


Brusch. Master Bernard is in want of cash, which is the worst situation in the
world for building.


Keen. Hah! the situation -- Don't he like the situation of the building. Then
let him build somewhere else. There is room enough in the world to build upon.


Brusch. He does not want to build ^^r. He has built too much already -- He
wants to borrow fifty pounds of you -- and if it please you, I call upon you
for it by his order.


Keen. The order please me? Let him please himself about the order -- If he
does not like the Ionic or Tuscan orders which are very plain^; let him take
the Corinthian, which is very grand.


Brusch. My master does not want to build. He has built too much already. He
wants to borrow money; he has a number of little debts which he wishes to
square off.


Keen. Square roof. It seems he don't like a square roof -- He may have a bevil
if he pleases, or a common pitched roof.


Brusch. It is no such thing -- Sir, my master is a little out of cash at
present -- he wants fifty pounds, if you will do it for him.


Keen. Do it for him, yes if he will pay me well -- But I must have the
dimensions of the building, before I can tell what to charge for it.


Brusch. You know what I mean well enough, you old knave. (In a low voice.)


Keen. Aye, who is a knave? Not I, I hope.


Brusch. Will you come, and dine with my master immediately?


Keen. O yes by all means; the gentleman is very kind -- (Brusch goes out,
Keenspruck looks after him, then walks across the stage and speaks.) Thanks to
my old deaf ear, I have escaped -- He was so anxious and so uneasy: I knew the
dog wanted to borrow money by his phiz.


[Exit, and as soon as he is out Bernard enters, and soon after his daughter.]
SCENE V. -- CATHERN and BERNARD.
Cath. MY mother sends to you to know if you are likely to have any thing for
dinner to day?


Bern. Then tell her not to be anxious; we shall have it soon.


Cath. She seems almost out of patience; and if any company comes in, we have
nothing in the world to set before them.


Ber. I am not anxious about that. If they furnish money, then we can furnish
them a dinner. Or otherwise we make them welcome to the best we have -- If we
have nothing I mean to invite them all to dine.


Cath. O dear sir do not expose us in that manner.


Ber. Yes, by all means, and let them see how ^olks live who live upon nothing.


Cath. O sir, I should be so mortified I should leave the house.


Ber. You must not be affrighted at that; we may all soon he obliged to leave
the house.


[ Ex^ Cathern and Bernard.] ACT III.
SCENE I. -- Bernard enters, then Widdel. BERNARD, WIDDEL and BRUSCH.
Ber. WHAT not one of them lend me a farthing?


Brusch. Not one upon my life.


Ber. Go immediately and invite every one of them to dinner.


Brusch. I could not have though it there had been so much ingratitude in mankind
-- I though it they might have some sense of obligation; but he who is smitten of
the disease of poverty is shunned of the human species.


Wid. I have long known it to be so. The warmest trencher friends, when a man
is in distress, would deny him even the crumbs of charity. [Scruter enters.]


SCENE II. -- SCRUTER and BERNARD.
Scru. (surlily) THE last note I had against you sir is put in suit.


Ber. It is just as agreeable to me as any way -- Let my creditors take all I
possess, if they will be content with that.


Scru. If you remain here in Berlin they will not be content till they have you
in prison. [Exit Scruter.]


[Gertrude enters.] SCENE III. -- GERTRUDE and BERNARD.
Ger MY dear, you must take care of yourself -- I have found out that tomorrow
they mean to put ^^u in jail.


Ber. There is a great favor my dea^* I re^pected they would have done it to
day.


Ger. I tremble for the consequences. We must flee immediately.


Ber. Will you go with me?


Ger. It is my design to live and die with you.


Ber. Let me have my wife; and they may take my fortune* I shall be richer than
they all.


Ger. Sir, you are still a gentleman; and the more is the pity that you will
not have a fortune. [Exit Gertrude.]


SCENE IV. -- ^^^PACH, GOLTZ, STRA^^M^^D, SCRUTER, and K^^^SPRUCK, all come in
together.
C. Ans. I HAVE done myself the honor to wait on you according to your obliging
commands.


Goltz. I thank you for your invitation. You are a complete gentleman, not to
flatter a word.


Strass I am sorry you did not send first to me to borrow money -- I cannot get
it over.


Keen. I love to be invited to dinner* it saves all the expense, and trouble,
you see.


Scru. I suppose your good ear was offered to this invitation -- I w^nder, far
the advantage of it, that I never though it of being deaf of one ear.


Keen You can be deaf of both ears; when you find it to advantage.


Strass Neighbor Bernard you have invited us to dinner, but you show us nothing
of dinner yet -- To be a little free, what are we to have for dinner to day. --
(Bernard goes to a table which is cove^ed with a clean cloth uncovers it, and
discovers the table laid with a ragged table-cloth, broken dishes, knives,
forks, etc and not a mouthful of victuals.)


Ber. Just what you gentleman helped me to -- Had I obtained any thing, you
should have been welcome; but since I obtained nothing you are as welcome.


C. Ans. I think you treat us very scandalously, master Bernard.


Goltz You might be ashamed to treat gentlemen in this manner.


Strass* I shall not consider you after dinner* as I ^ed to do.


Keen. I shall turn a deaf ear as I do on all such occasions. -- They all go
out angrily and hastily -- he hurls the dishes etc. and kicks the table after
them.


Ber. Adieu my dear friends adieu, ^ love you as my eyes love smoke, or as my
mouth warm water* -- You ^^ingy, deceitful, worthless vermin* begone! (After he
has cleared the stage he returns to the middle of the stage -- and speaks.) Now
I could curse these detested Parasites; is there lan^uage strong enough to do
it in -- The sum of all my curses is that they may be as they are -- that is bad
enough.


[Bryssen enters with Bernard's wife and friends.] SCENE V. -- BERNARD and
BRYSSEN.
Ber. HAVE I one friend left?


Brys. Yes, you have one, who knew you not, except in fame, till this day -- I
heard of your affairs, and pity you most sincerely. I live in Silesia near the
little farm which you have left. It is worth near five hundred pounds -- You
may make a safe retreat to this little spot -- where if you cannot live in
splendour -- you may be honest and independent of every man.


Ber. Bernard shall seek Silesia's gr^^es and find,
The fiercest brute more friendly than mankind.
I will go with my wife and daughter. You, Widdel, and Brusch may if you please
go with me -- I have been extremely mortified, and mankind seem excessively
cruel -- But how can I justly blame them for not taking care of me; when it is
evident, that I did not take care of myself?


( All leave the stage.) The Rogue proved honest* A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE
ACTS.
THE EXCELLENCE OF THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF A FREE COMMONWEALTH.
A SENSE of liberty infuses life and activity through a whole commonwealth -- And
not only are particular laws a security to the citizen, but a greater security
arises from the general principle of liberty -- That in every instance will
cause the presumption to be made in favor of the accused citizen; that he is
innocent, and that the sufferings of the innocent will by that means be
prevented -- Happy above all people are they of the United States, if they know
their own good.

PERSONS.
MEN.
ESQUIRE. RIGHTWAYS -- a justice of the peace. MR. JAMISON -- a merchant in
distress. PORTERSON -- a neighbor. NONSUIT -- an attorney. READY-CASH -- a
banker. MC. MULLOCK -- an Irishman.
WOMEN.
MRS. JAMISON -- wife of Mr. Jamison. CLARA JAMISON -- unmarried sister of
Jamison. MRS. ROBERTS -- married sister of Jamison. MISS MUSLIN -- a linen
draper. BETTY -- a laundress.
THE ROGUE PROVED HONEST.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- Mr. JAMISON and CLARA.
Jam. SISTER I wish you to lend your attention to me a moment.


Clara. As long as you please.


Jam. Have you heard any thing bad of me in this neighborhood?


Clara. Certainly your character is given out as extremely bad; and you are
threatened with a prosecution for several very high crimes.


Jam. I hope that gives you no uneasiness.


Clara. It certainly does, and I can scarcely sleep because of it.


Jam. I am sorry if it affects you so disagreeably, it certainly gives me very
little disturbance.


Clara. I am astonished at your calmness; for I am told, there is one
prosecu^ion against you for false coinage, another for highway robbery, and
another for forgery -- They say the proofs are all flagrant against you, and
you cannot escape.


Jam. I defy them all to hurt me; and yet I do not suppose that one of them
owes me any malice. Just so prone are human kind to believe every thing that is
bad concerning a man who falls into distress in his affairs.


Clara. But by what means do you expect to support yourself, when so many false
accusations ga her round? by what means will you be extricated?


Jam I suppose twenty witnesses might be brought who ^^ou^ I swear against me
and yet all be honest and believe they swore to the truth.


Clara. My brother, you don't say so, I almost think you guilty myself how
could it be, unless you have been very wicked* you never can clear yourself of
them; and how do you expect it?


Jam. I have no money to defend myself with* I cannot a^ present procure a
single witness in my favor -- All my dependence is upon the author of all
truth; and the testimony of my own conscience, and they being on my side, are
all the witnesses I need.


Clara. I wish you may find it so, in the conclusion of your affairs -- but I
am on the rack with anxiety day and right on your account.


Jam. Be quiet my sister -- Never believe that he who brings the righteous into
affliction; has not power to bring them out again. (Exit Jamison.)


SCENE II. -- PORTERSON (entering here) and CLARA.
Por. SERVANT, Miss Clara, your servant -- where is your brother?


Clara. He has this moment gone out.


Por. Why miss Clara, there is an old racket in this neighborhood about your
brother, what has he done?


Clara. He has always been an honest man from a child* the kindest brother that
lives to his sisters, the most dutiful son to his parents, whom he his with the
tenderest care supported in their feeble, and decriped state. And now he has
the tears of the poor, since he has fallen into distress, witnessing in his
favor.


Por. Why I was at the alehouse last evening and they called him all the
rascals in the world, I though it if half they said was true, I would not give one
of my old boots for his head.


Clara. They talk frightfully about him I know.


Por. Well and cannot he have them up for it, I Would bring 'em little nobus -- If
they talked so about me.


Clara. He is more anxious, lest he should be prosecuted himself, than how he
shall prosecute others.


Por. Well this is a proper harum scarum world, all things go hoity toity, head
over heels. I have hitherto taught my children to be honest and trust
providence.


Clara. Well, I hope you do not mean to teach them otherwise in time to come.


Port. I have been thinking whether men get any thing by being honest, or
whether some men did not cry up honesty that they might the better cheat their
neighbors -- I have lost many a hundred pounds by being honest, and among great
folks it is a^ (...) of fashion.


Clara. Yes, and perhaps gained thousands by it at other times -- Do you
suppose that you should have been worth what you are if you had not had a
reputation for being honest?


Por. Aye there you have it now, you are a cunning little puss. ( claps her on
the shoulder) I love to hear you talk dearly.


Clara. My clothes don't want brushing sir; or if they do we will not trouble
you to do it, I mean to be honest, tho my brother be ever so unfortunate.


Por But supposing now, just for the notion on'^ that what we call vice had
been called virtue, and what we call virtue had been called vice?


Clar. Supposing what we call white had been called black and what we call
black had been called white -- would it have altered the nature of those colors?


Port. But then would we not have been as much pleased with black, as we are
with white? there, I guess I Have got you now.


Clar. No sir, supposing ratsbane had been called butter, then we might eat it
on bread without harm -- or supposing butter were called ratsbane, then it
would poison us, would it not?


Por. That Is sly now -- and I will own you have got some wit -- but supposing
that no man had any thing of his own but every thing was earned by every body,
and every body had aright to it -- all things in common.


Clar. Why then some would do nothing but live on the earnings of other people,
while only a few would have to maintain all the rest.


Por. Why girl you reason away stoutly now -- can you tell me girl why a woman
is called the weaker vessel -- it is not because she is naturally more shallow
-- that is a little too bad too -- I mean whether she has not naturally less
understanding than a man.


Clar. I suppose sir, that a great iron pot, will bear a stouter blow than a
china bowl, but I do not know that of consequence it is more valuable -- or in
fact worth more.


Por. People will have their different fancies about that -- you know.


Clar. Well sir, from certain circumstances I judge that men are weaker than
women, and have less understanding -- are not all the whims and extravagances
of learning invented by men -- the ideal system -- denial of providence,
atheism, or putting nature instead of God* Mischance agency, skepticism
concerning morals etc. which have deranged society and corrupted mankind. Are
they not all inventions of men? Women in general despise such notions -- and
they refer all their ideas to use and benefit -- they value no learning but
which is profitable -- and refer all study to its moral use. I appeal to facts
for this. Is it any sign of weakness in their understanding?


Por. Why ah -- hem -- ah -- as for that -- hem -- I hardly know what to say.


Clara. However I will be candid -- I will allow men have as much sense as
women -- but I detest all principles that weaken the obligations of morality --
our happiness depends on right conduct, and however calum^iated my brother is,
I would have him be strictly honest -- nor make use of any art or evasion, to
avoid suffering -- He had better follow truth even if he suffers for it.


SCENE III. -- NONSUIT (entering here) and CLARA.
Non. BUT then as to that master you are right; you don't approve that girls
should have much learning, it nonsuits their understanding. [ Exit Po^terson]


Clara. Your understanding (curtsying) was never nonsuited that way.


Non. But then it is my opinion, that women should learn to spin, and knit, to
mend clothes; and darn stockings.


Clara. So it is mine. They ought to learn all those matters -- I will put it
stronger, they ought to be very attentive and diligent in these things -- But
if they have as much learning besides, as they have opportunity to acquire; I
do not suppose it does them any harm.


Non. I think that women have no business with much learning -- they had better
keep to their kniting, patching, and mending, etc. and washing dishes etc.


Clara. Sir, I suppose you do not know it. Such observations hurt the tender
feelings of my sex -- we have as lively a taste for knowledge as you -- It
becomes us as well -- What (...) or has befallen the authoress of the Coquette?
Or did Montague disgrace her self by her Letters? Would not many men be proud
to write ^^ke P^ilenia?


Non. They had better mind their own business.


Clara. How would you like it sir, if the women should say of you that it would
have been better for you, if you had been confined all your days to the spade
and plough, instead of pettifogging and setting neighbors to quarrel -- or what
would some Doctors of Theology say, if we had said concerning them, that it
were well if they had mended shoes instead of making sermons. I respect the
profession of the law too much; and certainly I respect the religious
profession too much, to make any such observations. Yet I do not know but such
observations are altogether as good natured, and as just, as those which are
thrown out by some men against the education of women.


Non. Well, I know this* your brother is a villain, and I intend to prosecute
him to the utmost rigor of the law. I guess his sisters will not get him out of my
hands*


Cla. I do not know that they will, but I guess they will try.


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- NONSUIT and READY-CASH.
Non. WELL Mr. Ready-cash -- what is your complaint against young Jamison.


Ready. Why he passed a number of counterfeited bank notes, here to day.


Non. And do you believe he counterfeited them himself?


Ready. Yes; for they were all altered with a pen, and every body knows that he
is in very low circumstances as to estates -- and there is a great probability
that he did it for his own benefit.


Non. Well, and have you no further evidence against him?


Ready. Yes, he urged me very much to take them, and I thought he appeared very
uneasy because I did not take them readily.


Non. But you took them.


Ready. Yes, I took them, and passed them to his credit* but they are certainly
counterfeits -- I paid him some in hard cash for them.


Non. Well, mind this, if you mean to get recom^ence, you must swear plump^y --
perhaps the Justice will not li^t you much about your oath -- and as you really
believe that he did counterfeit the bills, you may swear plumply


[Exit Ready-cash.] SCENE II. -- NONSUIT and MUSLIN.
Non. WELL, Miss Muslin, I understand you have something against young Jamison
he is an anointed rogue I know.


Mus. Yes, sir, he called upon me the other day with an order in his brother's
name, saying, that his brother had given him power of attorney to draw in his
absence -- he got the goods; now since he is uneasy in his circumstances I felt
concerned about it; and called upon him to show the evidence of his right, and
his power to draw in his brother's name; he could not show any, and pretended
he had lost the paper.


Non. Aye he is rogue enough, but I shall catch him yet, lawyers are the only
men for such matters. These facts you can attest to because you must be sworn
to your deposition.


Mus. Aye, I know that, and I have asserted nothing but what I can prove -- I
observed him well he lookod concerned and uneasy, and he has for these many
days: and I guess by that, he has some schemes on foot which are not right.


Non. Do you know any thing about Jamison's wife.


Mus. Yes, they say she is confederate with him in all his villainies. ( Exit
Muslin.)


SCENE III. -- NONSUIT and Mrs. JAMISON.
Non SO madam, how does Jamison do to day.


Mrs. Jam* He is very well sir -- but none the better for you.


Non. None the better for me? but I intend he shall be -- I intend to cure him
of his vices, and then he will be a better man.


Mrs. Jam. That he will be persecuted by you with all possible malice, I doubt
not; but I believe he will triumph over you all finally.


Non. Why do you think so?


Mrs Jam. Because I believe he is a very honest man, nay I know he is so.


Non. But the proofs against him are very pointed -- Certainly you cannot get
over them.


Mrs. Jam. It is possible to make truth appear what it is -- but you will not
be able to make it appear otherwise by all your craft.


Non. If that be the, case what is all the artifice of our profession good for?


Mrs. Jam. Good for nothing, I suppose -- but when you deal honestly, you, like
all other men, appear respectable -- I hope you will lay that to heart. [Exit
Mrs. Jamison.]


SCENE II. -- NONSUIT and Mc. MULLOCK.
Non. AYE, Mc. Mullock, you are a principal witness against Jamison.


Mc. Yez zur, please your honor -- I swore against him, may't please your honor
with all ray might -- I could not have swore stronger if I had been to die
for it.


Non. Now your oath may be depended on a^ substantial evidence, because you was
an eyewitness.


Mc. O yes, may it please your honor, I was an eyewitness -- for our Nab saw
it with her own eyes; and she told me first of all.


Non. But that will weaken your testimony if you own that Nab saw it; and not
yourself.


Mc. Aye but, Nab sir is my own flesh, and Nab's eyes are my eyes, may please
your honor.


Non. Aye but that will not do -- you cannot swear to that which was seen by
another person.


Mc. I know I can sir -- I can swear to any thing I please -- I Will lay a mug
on it.


Non. I mean you cannot with truth.


Mc. Aye that another matter -- you did not say about my swearing to the truth
-- you only asked me if I could swear.


Non. Well I Have got your deposition -- are you ready to swear to it, be it what
it may?


Mc. O yes I could swear all day, if you will pay me ^^r't -- But a man's a
fool to swear without pay.


Non. Be ready then when you're called.


SCENE V. -- Mrs. ROBERTS and NONSUIT.
Mrs. R. DO you mean to take Mc. Mullock's oath against my brother?


Non. Yes, why not?


Mrs. R. You know he cannot be depended on. He may be an honest man or may not
be; but he is a stranger among us, and we know nothing of his character.


Non. We don't know it is a bad one.


Mrs. R. And we don't know it is a good one.


Non. That Is nothing; if no exception can be made against a witness, his
testimony is good in law.


Mrs. R. I know better -- It is not in all cases; because when a man's
character is unknown there can be no dependence on his veracity.


Non. Do you think you know law better than I?


Mrs. R. I know that is no law which is not agreeable to reason -- and
certainly it is not agreeable to reason to take the oath of a foreigner, an
unknown person, against a citizen of known established good character.


Non. These are fine times indeed; when women must meddle with laws.


ACT III.
SCENE I. -- JUSTICE RIGHTWAYS, NONSUIT, JAMISON, READY-CASH, M^^LIN and Mc.
MULLOCK.
Right. MR. Attorney -- Where are the depositions which have been sworn to?


Non. They are here, the very same, which your worship has perused so
carefully, before you appeared to be satisfied with them.


Right. Why yes -- it appears to me that there is sufficient cause for
committing him -- What have you to say for yourself Jamison? Have you any
objection to the sta^e of ^^e evidence?


Jam. Nothing sir, yet I know my own innocence -- I have two good witnesses on
my side -- My own conscience, and he who gave it me.


Non. What signifies it for him to speak of his witnesses, his conscience, and
all that, when the facts are so plain against him? I move for his commitment.


Ready. I think I have a right to expect he will be committed without delay for
trial.


Mus. I cannot but expect (...) will be? for I am sure, if I lose my debt, he
ought to be punished for it.


Mc. Aye indeed may it please your worship -- if he be not trounced for it, the
next time I go abroad, I shall not dare to stir a foot from home -- I should
expect he would rob me of my money if I had not a farthing in my pocket.


Jam. I beg your worship will let me have one hour's respite; perhaps some
witness may arrive who may make my innocence appear.


Right. Can you specify any one?


Jam. Indeed I cannot sir.


Right. Then I do not se^ any cause for delaying proce^dings -- It may be a
more fetch to gain time to effect a rescue -- or something of that sort -- Make
out his mittimus Mr* Attorney and let the constable take him to prison.


Jam. I see nothing now but I must suffer. It will be the work of providence.
^f I escape -- for if I be committed -- then there is no money nor power among
my friends to procure one witness in my favor -- yet I know myself innocent.


Non. I wish you would make that fellow hold his tongue -- I desire to know
what all this is to the purpose.


Right. Silence, Jamison, silence.


SCENE II. -- Mrs. JAMISON.
Mrs. Jam. PERMIT me Mr. Justice to intercede (...) my husban^ -- You must know
that it must be a terrible event to my family; if he should be taken from it.
What is more distressing than the state of a woman, left with a family of small
children, without a protector? And what would add to my distress is that I have
my husband's father, and mother, aged people to look after, who cannot help
themselves. Tho I cannot at present give any particular reason, yet I beseech
your worship to give my h^sband the respite of one half hour.


Non. They give no reason, they mean to raise a mob and rescue him, or some way
effect his escape.


Ready. I cannot think he ought to be respited.


Mus. I shall not consent to it, Mr. Justice -- and if you respite him, I Will
complain.


Right. Order, I say, order -- I hope you will not interfere in my department -- I
must say, notwithstanding there is no reason given for it specially, that the
respite of half an hour ought to be granted -- No one knows what may come of it
-- Perhaps some person in that time may appear in his favor -- You ought to
esteem yourselves happy to be born in a commonwealth, where the rights of
citizens are held sacred; and where it is so difficult to restrain any one of
his liberty. I grant the privilege to this man now. It is the privilege of you
all* that your liberties are held thus sacred. You ought to love your country
and laws, else you are the most ungrateful people in the world. On this
principle, upon which our whole government rests -- that the liberty of the
citizen is sacred -- I grant this prisoner another half hour for his defense.


SCENE III. -- MISS CLARA, RIGHTWAYS, BETTY, and MUSLIN.
Clara. I COME, oh I am out of breath, oh my brother is nor committed.


Right What Is your will miss?


Clara. Here sir, this I got sworn to before Justice Quicksight, and here is the
girl who will attest it before you to the same purpose -- She saw the instance
in which it is said that Jamison was guilty of robbery -- Was eye witness to
the whole affair, it was mere accident that I found her -- She mentioned
something about a young man's being accused of robbery -- I told her it was my
brother -- She then related the circumstances.


Right. What do you say, Betty Laundress, I think your name is.


Betty. Why, I saw a man go up to Mr. Jamison, hold a pistol to his breast and
demand his money -- Mr. Jamison delivered, but the robber had only turned a
corner not ten yards distance, before the robber's feet slipped, and I saw Mr.
Jamison catch a pistol, which the robber dropped in his fall, and sprang on the
robber, and redemanded the money and got it.


Right. This you can swear to.


Betty. Yes, sir, I saw the whole.


Right. What did you do with the money? just now you complained you had none.


Jam. I bought some medicines for my poor aged father who is very sick.


Betty. There for miss Muslin.


Mus. Betty, hold your tongue about me, or I never will employ you in my
business again.


Betty. I shall not say any harm of you madam.


Right. Say away Betty, you have as good a right to speak as any body.


Betty. I heard master Jamison had got into difficulty -- thought it might do
some good to give his sisters these papers, which I and in the pockets of one
of his waistcoats, which he sent me to wash.


Right. What are they?


Clara. Here sir is the power which my brother, who is gone to the West Indies,
gave to him to transact any matter of trade for him and in his name, see.


Righ. Very good, this is very good, but as to the coinage, how will you clear
yourself of that?


Jam. I know not yet, I know I am innocent.


SCENE IV. -- Mrs. ROBERTS, RIGHTWAYS, CLARA, NONSUIT and JAMISON.
Mrs. R. SIR let me speak a word with the justice.


Right. Speak madam if you please.


Mrs. R. There Squire Firm-trust, and my brother had been playing at whist and
they changed accidentally two papers which had bank notes in them, and my
brother took up a paper in which the notes were all counterfeit. The Squire has
rode 150 miles in ^ days and half, in order to rectify the mistake -- Here the
true notes are for the banker.


Clara. What say you now, Mr. Nonsuit.


Non. This comes of giving girls learning, they take the business of the law
all out of our hands.


Mrs. R. A great evil no doubt to defend the innocent; we have done nothing
these three days but pick up evidence in favor of our brother.


Jam. Heaven bless you my good girls. ( bowing.)


Right. Now learn my friends to revere the ways of providence, which bring
unexpected relief to oppressed innocence, by which honesty is safe, and render
your fervent thanks for your constitution of government, which considers the
liberty of a citizen as his most sacred treasure.


The Little Box. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN THREE ACTS.
MODERATION IS NECESSARY IN POLITICS -- FOR JUSTICE WILL HAVE ITS PROPER TIME.
THERE is the assemblage of all the virtues in a true politician. He is
impartial with regard to parties, and his connections with foreign powers -- He
respects religion and those who administer its ordinances -- He is not moved by
violent attachment or aversion to individuals -- He treats none with contempt;
for they who make no great show in the eyes of the public, may have strong
connections with the essential interests of the State -- He is not bigoted to
his own opinions. -- In one word, no man can be a thorough politician, but an
able, and good man.

PERSONS.
MEN.
TIMOCLES -- Grand Secretary of the State of Syracuse. HAMILCAR -- his rival in
party and politics. HIERO -- an old politician, uncle to Timocles. A SENATOR --
attached to Timocles. A PARASITE -- one who affects the character. HIRAX -- an
augur and a priest. A LAWYER -- wavering between the parties.
WOMEN.
SEBASTE -- Mother to Timocles. GLYCERIE -- Sister to Hamilcar. PHILESIA --
espoused Mistress to Hamilcar.
THE LITTLE BOX.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- HAMILCAR and HIERO.
Ham. PARTY rage is indeed a dreadful passion. -- My whole life has been
devoted to the state. I have equally opposed the influence of Carthage, and
Rome, and have met with no reward but persecution.


Hiero. Timocles is against you, he represents you as a person endeavoring to
overturn the state, and place yourself at the head of affairs.


Ham. What prete^t have they against me?


Hiero. That you are a stranger.


Ham. So much is true, that when my infant mind first knew reflection; it was in
the arms of a Carthaginian, who named me after his general; yet Syracuse, my
native state, was always the object of my love.


Hiero. I wish they who oppose you had half of your zeal for the public good.


Ham. Love for the state is certainly my ruling passion. I love money; but I
have neglected my private fortune for the state. I have often wished to marry
the delicious girl, who has honored me with her affections, but the business of
the state has wholly engrossed my attention.


Hiero. I observed you one day talking to yourself.


Ham. And listened like a rogue I suppose to hear what I said.


Hiero. Yes, and I expected to have heard the name of the fair Philesia -- but
I heard you say, O Syracuse! charming Syracuse, my dear native city. Shall the
Carthaginians insult over thee? Shall the Romans ru^^ thee with a rod of iron?
No I will redeem thy prosperity with all that is dear to me, with the last drop
of my blood.


Ham. Such are my constant thoughts, if I do not always thick publicly -- use
your influence my worthy friend to mitigate the public rage against me, and set
mine actions in a proper light. ( Exit Hamilcar.)


SCENE II. -- TIMOCLES (entering) SENATOR and HIERO.
Tim. GUARD against traitors -- every man in the interest of Carthage is a
traitor. We had better fall into the hands of Rome.


Hiero. I cannot understand your politics; if the state must be subject to
foreign power, it is of little consequence into whose hands she falls.


Tim. So the government must never act with vigor. I should have had Hamilcar's
head before this day, were it not that some are always pretending the benefits
of moderation.


Hiero. And what good from his death will accrue to the public.


Tim. It will be the means of saving the state. He is in the interest of the
farmers, and favors the party of Carthage -- he opposes the land tax and is for
laying heavier duties on impor^ed goods.


Sen. He is a villain. He opposes the senate, and keeps up the low people.


Hiero. He may be honest tho he differ from you.


Tim. I can never believe it. He opposes every measure to ^avor the Romans, and
would make us a colony of Carthage.


Hiero. Would not your measures, for the same reason, make us a colony of Rome
-- I cannot see.


Tim. I can; you never fully considered the business; he shall be impeached,
and his credit forever destroyed in this state.


Sen The laboring people must never get head. It makes them so saucy -- They
are so uppish, that it is time they were taken down a little.


Hiero. They would take you down, if they know what a speech you made against
them.


Sen. Let them find it out if they can -- If they do, a little electioneering
honey will sweeten all again.


Tim. That is as I say. -- Push the matter for the mercantile interest -- Then
see if our bunkers can raise themselves to the highest places in government.


Sen. Don't let that get abroad -- (to Hiero.) Come home with me and I will
show you more of the villainy of Hamilcar.


SCENE III. -- TIMOCLES and PARASITE.
Par. Illustrious Secretary; We hope that your health is as good, as your
merits are great.


Tim. My merits are not of the size which your praises represent them to be --
But I hope my actions have been of some use to the public.


Par. Immense! prodigious! infinite! There is no calculating the benefits of
your administration.


Tim. Why sir, I have been guilty of several errors in government.


Par Not one upon my honor -- Those things which the public has charged on you
as mistakes are the most glorious acts of your official ability.


Tim. There are many who complain of me.


Par. Not a man of any consequence; you possess the hearts of all our people.


Tim. You flatter me, sir.


Par. I flatter -- Your actions are above flattery, your deeds are as great as
your genius is sublime, and that we know is superior to any thing else, done by
man. For since the days of Saturn, since the golden age* there has not been
such an administration as yours.


Tim. I am happy if my conduct meets the public approbation -- then if I push
the affair against Hamilcar, I shall certainly succeed. (Exit Timocles.)


Par. Blast him, a villain, if I do not think that so much praise deserved an
invitation to dine. But one may go hungry forever, for any thing that is to be
expected from his administration. I have a great mind to change sides, and see
whether there be any thing to eat among those in the opposition. ( Exit
Parasite.)


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- HIRAX and TIMOCLES.
Her. MOST noble secretary, I wish your health forever and ever.


Tim. Let us hear the omens of our future prosperity; what are they?


Her. I have attended to the office of augur to day with great care -- I was
never more desirous or more careful to know the will of the Gods.


Tim. What is it then, my reverend priest?


Her. Every thing tells the coalition of parties and the safety of the state --
not human craft but divine providence discovers itself -- the merchants and
ploughmen will soon agree, and there will be rejoicing through all Sicily.


Tim. What are the signs of this.


Her. I saw three hawks pass by a flock of doves in peace -- trees were struck
with lightning, then soft music was heard, and shepherds danced in the shade --
the tigers and the lambs played together -- gamecocks refused to fight and
picked the grain together in peace -- every thing portends peace and harmony.


Tim. Thou art a false prophet -- you have been bribed by the Carthaginians --
This is no time for coalition -- it is time for every man to rise and crush
opposition, and banish every moderate man from the state.


Her. I a false prophet Timocles! was I false when I foretold that you would be
a great man, and throw the state into parties? Nor am I a false prophet now --
when I predict that your measures will turn to peace -- you will be violent,
cruel and revengeful -- but the more violent the sooner your influence ends,
and the state is in peace.


Tim. No man can conduct the measures of government properly, when priests
meddle with every thing -- I wish there were a particular law to punish every
meddler of the sacred order.


Her. When you set new measures on foot, you ask our prayers for success --
that makes us of your party; and if we pray and preach as you would have us;
all is right -- but if we differ from you then we are knaves, and ought to be
hanged -- But as priests are so dependent, if they be dishonest it is because
the people love to have it so, for the maxim is true, like people, like priest.


Tim. Let us hear no more of your false prophecies, but go home, parson, and
kiss your wife, and mind your domestic pleasures. If I find you meddling with
politics again I will commit you to jail.


Her. Do what you will, the counsel of the Gods will take place -- The events
predicted will come, and the more violent you are, the sooner you will bring
them about.


[Hirax goes out.] SCENE II. -- The PARASITE and TIMOCLES.
(Timocles stands at the edge of the curtain at one entrance -- the Parasite
enters at the other, and does not see Timocles.) Par. NOW let my heart be
joyful, my stomach exult, my palate be delighted; and my appetite rejoice.
Never I believe did there exist a man who took more pleasure in eating and
drinking, than myself. And here in this Little Box (looks at it in his hand) is
the resource of eating forever -- Never more shall this body, mine own dear,
dear flesh, know the torture of emptiness, and famine. Never shall these dainty
ribs know the judgment of leanness. This Box supplies me with good eating
forever. The present administration is a dry, lean, administration -- I gave
the prime minister to day a bushel of praise, but he never gave me a mouthful
of dinner. His party must soon fall. A starving government never prospers --
But this Box -- O! this Box, this lovely, sweet Box, (kisses the Box) this is
my farm, my plantation, my trade, my shop, my magazine of riches. Never was man
more lucky than I, to find this Box. It will afford me the means of eating
forever and ever -- This day destruction falls on all sorts of provisions. Woe
to spare-ribs and hams of bacon. Woe to roast pullets, sirloins of beef, and
mince-pies. Woe to gravy sauces, pickles and mangoes. Woe to vegitables, and
eatables of all kinds. -- Hoh! (He sees Timocles and stops short.)


Tim. What, wretch, is this thy tone? This morning the government was perfectly
sublime, now it starves its citizens. Would it could starve you and all your
race to death. Know, if I hear again of your railing against the government, I
will put you in prison, and you shall be hanged. [Timocles goes out.]


SCENE III. -- HIERO and PARASITE.
Par. THAT Blunderbuss is gone. He took fire at what I said and in the spirit
of true party rage threatened all the opposition. But this Box he searc^es not
-- nor dreams that it contains his ^^te.


Hiero. Let me see it. (Takes the Box and examines it attentively.)
Astonishing! Let no man know this mystery till you hear from me -- Good heaven!
the fate of Sicily is certainly contained in this Little Box.


Par. But must I starve, who bear on my shoulders the fate of the whole nation?
I have through the whole city, done errands for some, flattered others, threatend
more, for a man is apt to be cross when he is hungry; and have not broke bread
these fifteen hours. I shall be tired of carrying the weight of the whole
^ation, if I be kept so short.


Hiero. Well sir, come with me -- as far as food will go, I will support the
main pillar of the Commonwealth.


Par. Say what they will, the weight of the public lies on my shoulders.


Hiero. There let it rest for the present, but we shall soon find means to take
it off -- Now let me lead you to my pantry, and leave you there; and let all
kinds of provision surrender to you at discretion.


Par. Illustrious hero! Glorious patriot, I revere thy virtues -- I will always
be of this party in the time to come; for the other is a dry faction, and must
finally starve its supporters.


Hiero. Live here at large -- But excuse me after leading you in -- while I
receive other compny.


[Conducts him out, and returns with Hirax] SCENE IV. -- HIRAX and HIERO.
Her. MY worthy friend, what think you of the present administration?


Hiero. I dare not speak sir, and scarcely dare to think.


Her That is giving a character of them very pointed -- Now I think Timocles
honest, but at the same time a very infatuated man.


Hiero. I perceive it, and know that he may be very much mortified -- But have
you consulted the Omens?


Her. I have with great care.


Hiero. What do they portend?


Her. Peace and harmony to the whole nation. I to^d Timocles of it to day but
he was angry and threatens to imprison me, and hang me.


Hiero. Under what pretense?


Her That one of the religious profession must not med^le with politics.


Hiero. A religious officer is a citizen -- and is never blamed if he favor the
right party -- But they whom priests oppose always dislike it; because the
religious profession carries weight with it.


Her. In a time of peace, and in a government established by the clearest law
-- can it do good to carry matters with such violence?


Hiero. It cannot -- it is like overcharging the Balista -- It hurts the army
that uses it, more than the enemy.


Her. And what do you suppose is the point of prudence for one of the religious
profession in state^matters?


Hiero. Why if he thinks it will do good, let him declare his opinion honestly
-- if he thinks it will not, let him keep the matter to himself.


Her. If any enquire of him the will of the Gods, what must he do?


Hiero. Tell it exactly according to the best of his discernment, whether they
like it or not; for a priest loses all his importance when he becomes a nose of
wax for every man to stretch or shorten at his pleasure.


Her. Happily you agree with me I must go to the augury again, and, depend on
it, I shall declare my real sentiments. [Exit Hirax]


SCENE V. -- TIMOCLES (entering) and HIERO.
Tim. NOW I shall be decisi^e* You will not interfere.


Hiero. I shall make no promises.


Tim. Hamilcar is coming to trial -- he is impeached -- his trial is voted --
the Archon approves it.


Hiero. You do as you please, but I dislike your measures.


Tim. Bold enough in fact.


Hiero. Bold and just. Nothing is more improper for a minister of state than
such fiery proceedings. Politics should have no passions, but be conducted with
a simple view to the public good.


Tim. A citizen should love the state warmly.


Hiero Warmly as you please, but with discretion: he loves not the state who
destroys one half of its people -- Hamilcar opposes you, and defends the
farmers -- are we not all one nation? What benefit is there to show malice, or
favor, either to Carthage, or Rome? A nation should stand on the broad basis of
its own independence, and virtue.


Tim. Hamilcar if he be let alone will destroy the state.


Hiero. That is, he opposes you -- who will speak the things best in the world,
if for speaking, he must lose his head? Men should say and do what they please
within the law; without this there is no liberty.


Tim. He is attached to Carthage.


Hiero. I doubt it. But if he be, you are as much attached to Rome.


Tim. I am determined to humble the landed interest, and get the law passed to
tax corn two sesterces on a bushel enacted -- you had better be quiet, I shall
spare none who oppose me.


Hiero. Then your reign is short I promise you.


Enter Parasite. SCENE VI. -- HIERO and PARASITE.
Par. Well I begin to be confirmed in my principles of government. I have been
for the mercantile interest while they gave me good dinners; but now they give
me none.


Hiero. You seem to have found quite a deliberate reason for deserting them.


Par. Yes, I think for the future I shall be firmly attached to the interest of
the farmers; they raise the grain; there is provision made for bread, pudding
and pye-crust; they raise the grass and from grass comes milk, of which we make
syllabubs, whipped creams, and custards -- beef also is the produce of the farm
-- I determine from this time to attach myself to the interest of the farmers.
And why cannot I do some thing for the public? -- the public say I Am lazy. But
I can carry news from place to place, and tell all the stories of the day; and
when the candidates kiss the freeholders wives with pieces of gold in their
mouths I can make as good a story of it as any man. But my little box, my
precious treasure. What future feasts am I to derive from this little box. (
Parasite goes out.)


ACT III.
SCENE I. -- SEB^STE and TIMOCLES.
Seb. MY son, I must, from the tenderness of a mother's heart, say something
concerning your conduct.


Tim. Women are naturally so timid that they are poor counselors in political
affairs.


Seb. If I know politics less I have more experience of human life, and
manners, than you. I have seen the fall of seven ministers of state, and I have
ever observed it to be in consequence of heat, and violence in their measures.


Tim. They were unskilful as well as violent.


Seb. A ship is never safe with a mad pilot -- I speak in the bitterness of a
mother's heart, I pretend not to dictate measures; but entreat you to consider
whether you be right -- Your ruin, my son, is at hand; for heaven's sake desist
-- I am overwhelmed with grief.


Tim In other matters I could respect you; but here --


Seb. I meddle not with state affairs -- But I have seen so many men ruin
themselves by violent measures that I tremble every moment.


Tim* Leave all those matters to me; I shall manage them successfully. (
Sebaste withdraws.)


SCENE II. -- TIMOCLES and PARASITE.
Tim. I HEAR you have told, through the city, that you have power to bring me down
when ever you please.


Par. If I have said so it is no more than the truth.


Tim. And that I am a niggard, and tho you treated me very politely, that I had
not the complaisance to invite you to dinner.


Par. If I said that too, I said no more than the truth.


Tim. If you said that you are yet not worthy my notice. Where is the wonderful
Box which contains the fa^e of Sicily


Par. I have a Box which contains the fate of Sicily -- Look here, and judge
for you^se^f ( Lawyer enters.)


Tim. A fig! It is nothing but your box of tooth powder, what a miracle! well I
suppose I understand you now -- you say the fate of Sicily depends on this box.
If your teeth be kept clean you will devour all the provisions of the whole
island -- if they fail the island may yet be supplied. ( Parasite pouts his
lips at him) Were it not that I despise you; and think it a disgrace to have
any competition with you; I would make you smart for this, you dotard. (
Parasite is moving away) Take that and begone.


( Kicks him off the stage.) SCENE III. -- HAMILCAR, TIMOCLES, SENATOR, LAWYER,
and HIERO.
( Hamilcar enters guarded by two soldiers; Hiero enters after him.) Ham. YOU
see me now condemned to death, on the impeachment of Timocles -- the witnesses,
lawyers, judges, were all his creatures. Never was a more dangerous precedent.
Yet I choose to die, that all the citizens may see, what a despotic secretary
can do with the most innocent man.


Law. There are certain cases not designed in the ordinary courts; and must
consequently be managed by the prime minister of the time. But I could wish the
mode of these trials were altered, that they might at least have the appearance
of equity -- For next to the substance of justice, the appearance is of
importance.


Ham. I have fought ten times with the Romans in pitched battles; and twenty
times with the Carthaginians. My main principle of politics has been to
equalize the taxes among the citizens. Party zeal now disposes of my life, and
the same fate avails you all, should the current of party turn against you --
all depends on Timocles.


Law. I could not prevent it -- a defense would have been followed by an
impeachment. But it is no uncommon thing for a criminal, to complain of his
accusers.


Sen. Delay not, Timocles, as it belongs to you to read his sentence and order
his execution. Delays may give room to excite the compassion of the people.


Ham. See a grave Senator thirsting for my blood, because Timocles will have it
shed. I only wish that I had died before I saw any thing so shameful, and could
have departed with some pride on account of my nation.


Hiero. My friend Hamilcar is condemned on a trial, short, violent, partial,
and unjust. Let me but know the articles of impeachment.


Tim. ( reads) 1. Being a foreigner he assumed an office. 2. He was under the
influence of Carthage. 3. Was the author of a law to promote confusion.


Hiero I can prove all those articles false.


SCENE III. -- PHILESIA is introduced suddenly, and breaks off the dialogue --
She curtifies to the floor to Timocles.
Phi. ILLUSTRIOUS Secretary, let the prayers of innocence and truth prevail --
Spare a man who possesses a mind rich with all that is honorable, and just.


Tim. Justice must prevail, justice rules all.


Phi. At least indulge to hearts, which have ever cherished virtue, more than
life, the sad consolation, of mingling the tears of their last adieus -- Let
Hamilcar with one keeper only withdraw a moment with me,


Tim. There must not be any delay to the course of justice.


Ham. Excellent woman -- beseech him not, he has a heart insensible to pity --
I d^e with honor, I mean in heart and principle -- we shall meet in the Elysian
fields, and be assured nothing but Elysium itself could compensate the want of
your society -- adieu Philesia, took for a better husband than I could be --
aad may the gods make you happy. (She withdraws with her eyes covered, and
leaning on Hiero, who instantly returns.)


Hiero. I say I can prove every one of these articles to be false, and would
have done it before the court if you had given opportunity -- did he make a law
to promote confusion? It was only to equalize the taxes between the merchants
and the plowmen. May not any man originate a law in an orderly way? You say he
is under the influence of Carthage -- it was but three days ago that he gave
the money he had prepared for his own wedding, in bounties to soldiers to fight
against Carthage -- truly it is capital for a foreigner to assume an offi^e;
but Hamilcar is not a foreigner.


Tim. I say he is a foreigner* and shall be executed immediately. ( Pulls out a
paper and begins to read) The court finding Hamilcar gu^^y -- ( G^ycerie enters
suddenly and seizes his hand which holds the paper.)


Glye. Monster of cruelty desist; it is not enough that every thing is subject
to thy power, must thy malice be satiated with the blood of innocence? He is no
more a foreigner than thyself.


Tim. Guards seize this woman, and keep her at a distance.


Glyc. My brother is innocent, you will not let me tell how.


Tim. Silence woman, or I shall order you to prison immediately.


Ham. Cease my dear sister, it will be of no avail -- let him execute his
bloody work -- be virtuous, my dear sister, and we shall meet in Elysium. [The
soldier holds her arm while she hides her eyes with the other, and leans her
elbow on Hiero's shoulder -- Timocles reads.]


Tim. The court finding Hamilcar guilty of the crimes recorded against him in
this proceedings of this court, do order the execution of the said Hamilcar, to
be first scourged with rods without the walls of the city -- and then be
suspended on the cross -- Go, officers, see this executed immediately.
[Officers march.]


Hiero S^ay rash man!


Tim. Proceed guards, and do your duty.


Par. [rushing in.] Rash man! he is your brother.


Tim. You lie.


Par. I Will prove it on my life.


Tim. Guards, halt, reconduct the prisoner.


[They reconduct him] Hiero. Listen noble secretary to reason -- have a little
patience. Parasite where is your box?


Par. This little box, O my sweet box, many good dinners I shall have by means
of this box.


Hiero Hush your nonsense and open the box.


Par. Take it, and open it yourself.


Hiero. Here, according to the custom of this city, on the birth of a pair of
twins a plate of brass was engraven with their names, and put into a little
box, and given to the nurse in record of their birth* [shows the plate in the
bottom of the box] see here, the figure of two i^ f^ and ^^e^r little hands
cle^ched together, (...) their names below "Timocles* and Erastus" The nurs^
Athea had this, when the city was t^k^n by the Carthaginians, 35 year^ (...),
and it was kept by her.


Par. I was then a prisoner, and the on^y Syra^usian she knew in her captivity
-- I saw her, when she was dying, and she gave the box to me, and it has bro't
me several good dinners, and so --


Tim. How do you know Erastus and Hamilcar to be the same?


Par. When the nurse Althea expected to die; she procured another little plate
to be engraved showing the time when the Carthagenian who took him, charged his
name to Hamilcar calling him after the name of his general -- bu^ how he came
here, I know not.


Ham. I made my escape when the fleet lay at Agrigentum. I swam in the night to
the rock Lebeta, and was received by a shepherd* who afterward conducted me to
this place -- I was so well treated by the shepherd, and farmers, that I have
loved them ever since.


Tim. Do you Parasite remember the birth of the twins; my mother always told me
I was a twin; and that my mate was carried off by the Carthaginians? I am full
of astonishment -- I am petrifyed with surprise. I s^y do you remember the
birth of the twins, and the giving of the box?


Par. I remember it well -- my brother was as grand as Hercules, to think that
he had a pair of such fine boys. He made a great sacrifice to the household
gods, and a great feast -- I remember it -- the mince pies were admirable; the
sausages were delicious, and as for the gravy sauce that did beat all.


Tim. Infamous Parasite -- it is all a cheat, and a lie -- you only mean to
impose on my influence.


Hiero. No, this Parasite, is Parasite no more -- he is your uncle; I, your
father, and he, were brothers of the some father and mother -- he is your
uncle, and a sensible man; he lived at Athens and coming home was afraid of
being too well known, as his principles were so opposi^e to yours, therefore
assumed the ridiculous character of a Parasite -- we all know what he has said
to be true. And here I present you with a sister, your own sister Glycerie.


[Timocles takes her hand and kisses it with affection] Tim. I yield -- I have
been wrong, what wonders there are in divine providence -- I foresee what the
good priest told me of. Coalition of parties, and the tranquillity of the state.
What will be the joy of my mother to discover her children, to see my sister
and both her twin boys. How will she weep for joy, over her long lost children;
and to see my brothe^ married to his dear Philesi^. My first work shall be to
redress the wrongs of all. But let me now, my dear brother, unburden my heart,
and present you to my mother. [Goes out and embraces his brother with one arm,
while his sister hangs on the other.]


Hiero This scene in future times shall grace the stage,
And hold forth useful truths to every age;
That party spirit is the bane of peace;
The root of evil and its vast increase;
That howsoe'er our private tho'ts may jarr;
The public interest is a patriot's care.
Would he not have the public building fall,
One view, one law, one LOVE, must bind us all.

[All go out.] The Inquisitor. A TRAGI-COMIC DIALOGUE, IN FIVE ACTS.
HONESTY WITHOUT LEARNING, IS BETTER THAN LEARNING WITHOUT HONESTY.
THO every rational man must discern the value of learning -- when rightly
used; yet if a man abuses his learning to the injury of his fellow men -- he
degrades himself below the most illiterate person in the world -- The greatest
simplicity of ideas, united with common sense, and fidelity in business, may
make useful men -- The Popes, and Inquisitors, tho ornamented with the highest
polish of learning, excite our odium* while a simple* honest, farmer, mechanic,
or sailor -- may even be an agreeable companion, and useful friend.

PERSONS.
MEN.
CARDINAL BOUHOURS -- grand Inquisitor at Lisbon. PHERON -- prince of Abyssinia
-- prisoner in the Inquisition. FATHER JOSEPH -- a friar. MR. MONROE -- the
English resident. LT. BOWLING -- a sailor, prisoner in the Inquisition,
remarkable for his honesty. A GRENADIER -- a patrole soldier of the
Inquisition. PHYSICIAN -- to the Inquisition.
WOMEN.
ILISSA -- daughter of the prince of Abyssinia. MENDOZA -- sister of the
Inquisitor. MRS. MONROE -- wife of the English resident. MISS MONROE --
daughter of the English resident.
SCENE -- An apartment in the prison of the Inquisition.

THE INQUISITOR.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- INQUISITOR and MONROE.
In. I AM much obliged to you for this honor.


Mon. I should not have troubled your eminence this evening, after the
fatiguing day you have had, were it not on business of importance.


In. The commands of the English shall always meet with ready attention -- They
are powerful by sea; and our nation needs their assistance.


Mon. The court of London enquires after the prince of Abyssinia -- It is said
that he is sent to the Inquisition.


In. The Prince of Abyssinia!


Mon. The Prince of Abyssinia -- a territory twenty times as large as Portugal,
is now confined here.


In. Let that remain a secret, or the demand for his ransom will be enormous --
I though it him a person of rank, but had no idea of his being a prince.


Mon. Let him be treated honorably for England's sake, and the court will
reward you. (Exit Monroe)


SCENE II. -- INQUISITOR, alone.
WHAT evil genius directed me to the office of Inquisitor to reign in this
court of infernal torments? Me, whom nature formed of the softest mould, and
poured the milk of humanity, and the honey of kindness, into all my veins. How
happy was I when in my little retired village -- I exhorted the old men to
contentment* and the young men to matrimony, and felt the consciousness of
doing good -- The church to reward my services, has made me wretched --
Detestable preferments, by which I ratify acts which my soul abhors, and reign
like satan supreme in the ^egions of misery. (Walks backward and forward
disturbed.) But why do I not fly from this detested place? Alas the charming
Ilissa; can any thing be more charming? Hardly can the purest saints in heaven
exceed her in beauty; or in dignity of manners -- I must remain in horrid
office till she can escape with me -- O love! immortal songs have already
celebrated thy power, tho ever have blessed heaven, and have conquered hell --
But this is thy last effort to penetrate the gloom of the inquisition -- I live
only to admire and hope for Ilissa. ( Enter Father Joseph.)

SCENE III. -- INQUISITOR and FATHER JOSEPH.
F. Jo. I ASK pardon of your eminence -- I hope I did not interrupt your
devotions.


In. I had done sir before you came in.


F. Jo. How go the affairs of the faith -- were the prisoners condemned as
usual?


In. Yes. The Consistory ordered punishment as follows -- Four renegado Moors
were sent to the galleys, two Jews to the mines, the English sailor remanded to
prison -- who has been chastized for speaking disrespectfully of St. Dominic.


F. Jo. And what became of that genteel looking man, and his daughter? The
daughter sir is innocence itself.


In. She certainly is, and the father has so much condescension and docility
about him; that we cannot find the shadow of a charge against him.


F. Jo. Then he was dismissed, I suppose.


In. No, it was ordered that he should be retained in prison; and his daughter
kept at the Inquisitor's house -- and that they should not be treated with any
great degree of severity.


F. Jo. That daughter of his is a delicate little piece.


In. Fie, I wonder Father Joseph, you will let your fancy run upon such
subjects -- you should not let vain tho'ts lodge in your mind -- I expect soon
that you will quarrel with your vow of celibacy.


F. J.o I should now if I dared -- But I am all submission to the church -- Yet
I do not see why people should take vows contrary to the order of universal
nature.


In. Silence, Father Joseph, or you will be called to an account -- Let us go
and see what other business must be attended to this night. ( Ex Inquisitor and
F. Joseph.)


ACT II.
SCENE I. -- (The curtain draws and discovers Pheron on a little bed -- Ilissa
sitting by the bed and raising his head on a pillow with her arm.) ILISSA and
PHERON.
Ilissa. MERCY ye kind heavens! grant mercy to poor beings miserable beyond
expression -- Let not my good ^^re lose his reason -- sir, my dear sir, speak,
my dear papa, speak to me, do you know me?


Pher. Know you; yes. You are one of the spirits of the just made perfect --
you are in a state of complete happiness.


Ilissa. Alas! I fear his reason is gone forever -- and what will become of me
-- My dear, most dear father, my life my happiness, pray, dear sir, wake up. Do
you know yourself, who are you?


Pher. A poor creature; but honest -- The devil and the Inquisitor. O, I had a
dreadful struggle, tried above an hour to tie me on a wheel of fire that keeps
rolling, and rolling to all eternity -- But a sweet little angel came and took
me away and laid me in her lap.


Ilissa. Merciful heavens restore him, or let me die with him. (The Doctor
enters.) O dear sir, I am extremely glad to see you,


SCENE II. -- The DOCTOR and ILISSA.
Doctor. And how, my sweet lady, does your father now?


Ilissa. O sir, I cannot tell; he seems to be disordered in his mind.


Doctor. ( examining his patient) Why, truly, madam, his fever is not very high
-- his disorder arises from fatigue and anxiety of mind. I have given him about
30 drops of Laudanum; and that makes him sleepy. He will wake soon; and may be
a little wild at first; but he will soon recover.


Ilissa. He will wake soon! The idea makes my heart spring with joy -- Yet to
what can he awake but to new scenes of miseries. ( Curtain closes and hides the
stage.)


ACT III.
SCENE I. -- PHERON and BOWLING.
( The curtain opens and discovers a sailor, hand cuffed and fettered, lying on
a mattrass. Pheron by a little table reading the Epistles of John.) Pher. HOW
wide from their principles are many who are called Christians! their religion
breathes pure benevolence; and yet they persecute each other -- why am I in
prison? and in danger of severe sufferings -- see, here -- [reads] "whosoever
hates his brother is a murderer -- we ought to lay down our lives for the
brethren. Whosoever shuts the bowels of compassion from his brother in need, how
dwells the love of God in him -- my dear children, let us not love, only in
word and tongue; but in deed and in truth."


Bow. ( starting up.) That Is good doctrine, as true as my christian name --
what book is that?


Pher. The Epistles of John -- it contains many beautiful sentiments.


Bow. What you read, is right up, and right down good -- had some folks minded
that, I should not have been confined here; nor would they have given me such
an infernal toasting.


Pher. Then you have studied the maxims of religion.


Bow. Not much master, I have been rather too busy for that.


Pher. You took so much notice of what I read; that made me ask.


Bow* Yes, my father, who was as good a sailor as ever s^epped between stem and
stern, taught me and my brothers religon.


Pher. I should be glad to hear a sailor's theory of religion.


Bow. This my father used to tell us always, and he told us it on his dying day
-- My boys, perform your duties well in this life, and in the next life you will
be promoted, and put into a good mess.


Pher. Did that have any great effect upon you?


Bow. I never have forgot it; and I dare say I never shall.


Pher. Why did it make so strong an impression?


Bow. 'Twas my own father sir, and would he deceive his sons, as he was just
going out of the world?


Pher. And did it have as great effect on your brothers?


Bow. There were four of us, you see, the four Bowlings, the youngest is now
thirty one years old -- and not one of them has been bro't before the mast yet.


Pher. It is a short and simple religion -- and does it keep you from evil in
general?


Bow. Why sir, I do my duty -- swear but little -- and the bad girls, I never
see them at all.


Pher. And do you forsake the women altogether?


Bow. O no master -- there is black Moll of Wapping that I love as I do my eyes
-- Her skin is not so white nor so smooth as some, but she is a fine vessel for
all that -- she is good spunk -- I pledge you that master.


Pher. If she be fond of you, I hope she does not know, that you are here.


Bow. I hope she does not, poor Moll, 'twould break her heart if she did -- I
was to have gone home at Christmas, and the parson was to have given us the
grand reef that would have made us man and wife, you see.


Pher. O master Bowling that goes near your heart -- come take a glass of my
wine -- and here is a^ health to black Moll, hoping you will get the grand reef
yet.


Bow. O master, (wiping his eyes with his arm) your honor I know is good --
When I think of poor Moll, I have a great stomach to cry -- but I keep it down
-- It shall never be said that Tom Bowling cried for a girl -- tho I have a
stomach for it, and hardly can keep it down.


Pher. With such an honest and humane heart, who put you here, Mr. Bowling?


Bow. The people of this place -- because when they praised St. Dominic -- I
was mad, and tho I do not swear often, I swore them and damned his Saint off
the reel -- for I hate cruelty -- then they sent me here, and gave me an
infernal toasting, such, as when pay-day comes, they will have to take
themselves.


Pher. We often bring ourselves into difficulty by too free use of our tongues
-- but we will say no more of that, we are companions in affliction. Let us be
friends Mr. Bowling; and we may be of use to each other to get out of this
place.


Bow. I hope to see that day -- If I can get aboard my frigate again -- I will
bring her up the Quay, so as to bear on this place, then I Will pour in my
broadside upon them, and dash them all to dust -- Then, I Will tell them that is
Tom Bowling, and get away as fast as I can.


[Enter the English Resident] SCENE II. -- PHERON and MONROE.
Pher. SIR, whoever you are, you come to visit me in a horrid place.


Mon. I bear with me the commands and respect of the English nation.


Pher. Of what extent they may be to me is unknown.


Mon. I can do all the English nation can do -- without interfering in the
government of Portugal -- and I have a personal curiosity to know why you are
here.


Pher. Religion is assigned as the cause, but how I have offended them, I
cannot tell.


Mon. It is presumed that you are the prince and apparent heir of the whole
empire of Abyssinia.


Pher. That is the precise truth. The Abyssinians are a most inoffensive people
-- They are Christians, on the instruction, and principles, of the apostle John.


Mon. Your religion is then, very simple and benevolent.


Pher. Certainly, and our clergy the most prudent in the world -- They hate
sects and parties; and that they may better agree -- they reduce all religion
to two principles -- Belief in the mercy of God, through Christ, for the remission
of sins -- and the sincere pactice of duty -- These two principles make all
their system.


Mon. I admire their prudence -- The way to agree in a system, is, to simplify
it as much as may be. But how did a person of your rank become a traveller?


Pher. I lost my beautiful princess, and melancholy possessed my mind -- I
though it to relieve it by traveling -- My daughter, my only child* refused to be
left alone; so she became the companion of my journies.


Mon It was like traveling w^^h a guardian angel -- No foreign princess was
ever admired, in England, so much as Ilissa.


Pher. She is all I can in fondness wish. She determines to live, and die with
me.


Mon. They have not then determined with respect to you.


Pher. They have not, and very little do I care for myself -- Unhappy victims
are daily committed to the flames -- I tremble for my dear Ilissa -- I am a
sovereign prince -- yet for her sake supplicate a stranger -- If you can
procure our liberty -- when I return to my domain you shall be imperially
rewarded.


Mon. Nor means nor time, shall be lost in helping you -- The whole force of a
powerful nation is at your service.


(Curtain closes, and there is a pause in the action.) ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- ILISSA (entering) and PHERON.
Ilissa. ARE you better sir? Since I went out have you received a visit from
the English resident?


Pher. Yes, I have; and I feel my mind perfectly composed.


Ilissa. Thanks to divine goodness for such a blessing: you owe much to the
skill of the Doctor.


Pher. I owe more to you my dear girl -- Your attention has done me more good
than medicine.


I^issa. I am amply rewarded if I can contribute to the happiness of a father,
who has been always kind as an angel to me.


Pher. Your goodness inspires me with hope. Surely heaven will not suffer such
virtue as thine, to perish in this accursed place.


SCENE II. -- INQUISITOR, (entering in the dress of a layman) PHERON and ILISSA.
In. YOU may wonder that I visit you here.


Pher. I beseech your eminence to tell me why I am confined.


In. I know as little of particulars as you; but you may have expressed some
disrespect of our religion.


Pher. I have kept myself from offense and ever will -- But why should the
harmless Ilissa be deprived of liberty, and live in fear of the severest
tortures? Can she deserve any thing like this?


In. O Illissa, she deserves the esteem of all human kind. Never was there a
more amiable woman.


Pher. Why then must she suffer: instruct me wherein I have offended; and I
will make the most ample amends.


In. Envy at your appearance, illustrious prince, or some slight suspicion, may
have been the reason of your being taken up -- some pretense will be shown --
but I believe you and your daughter to be wholly innocent.


Pher. Protect then, by all motives of benevolence, the oppressed innocence of
my daughter.


In. Sir I will unfold to you the strangest affair that has happened since the
creation -- love has penetrated the dungeons of the inquisition -- the charms
of Ilissa, are the guiding star, which must lead us to liberty.


Pher. I cannot comprehend you, you would add insult to suffering, and set the
honor of my daughter, as the price of liberty.


In. I blame not your apprehensions -- but in me your will find as true, and
tender a lover, as ever was described in Romance. Nothing is more intense, more
elevated, or more pure than my passion for Ilissa.


Pher. Does not your oath of celibacy bar every sentiment of honor?


In. I will renounce the vow, which infringes the order of providence -- the
sin of making, not of breaking it, is what I fear.


Pher. Will not he who breaks one oath break another? My daughter and I, shall
both prefer death to dishonor.


In. There will be no dishonor in the case, I Will turn my estate into money --
hire an English vessel, embark with you and go where you please.


Pher. The plausibility of your proposal interests my confidence -- but why can
you not discharge me whenever you please?


In. You know not the nature of despotism. One tyrant must submit to the
tyranny of many others -- should the least lisp of what we are doing transpire
we are in the flames in less than three days -- But this I will do; I will
deliver you and then I shall claim Ilissa -- by your leave.


Pher. Your proposals are obliging, but I am in your power, you can deceive and
ruin me.


Ilissa. Sire, excuse my speaking -- do any thing that promises you liberty, I
shall secure myself from dishonor -- permit me to call Donna Mendoza, the
Inquisitor's sister.


Pher. Call her if you please.


In. There is great danger that we be betrayed. Who is here? O, the English
sailor -- what a task to me to pronounce sentence on him. This enterprise is so
dangerous that we every moment tread on the brink of our graves -- can this
fellow be trusted?


Pher. Yes, he must partake our deliverance.


In Let me withdraw then, to ripen our plan, and see if there be no spies about.


SCENE III. -- MENDOZA, (entering) ILISSA and PHERON.
Men. YES, my dear Iliss^, I love to speak in presence of your venerable father
-- you may trust my brother -- let me be partaker of your fortune.


Ilissa. I will do any righteous thing for the safety of my venerable father --
but if your brother be honest, how came he to accept this odious office?


Men. He could not ^line it -- the court is odious even to catholics; but none
dares speak one word against it.


Ilissa. Did he never ^ike it?


Men. He never did -- he considered his advancement, as his greatest misfortune.


Ilissa. Custom may have reconciled him to cruelty.


Men. No, since he saw you he has been more averse than ever -- since that time
he cannot bear severity -- your very temper is infused into his heart.


Ilissa. That is very curious.


Men. Yet true, and why should it not be, since love, real and pure, is nothing
but benevolence itself?


Pher. There is no person in whom I so readily place confidence, as a virtuous,
well bred women -- Do you Donna Mendoza verily believe your brother to be
kindly affected toward my daughter?


Men. Never, I believe, was a man more sincerely in love -- she engrosses his
whole mind and heart -- he scarcely eats, or sleeps at all, and thinks and
talks almost wholly of her.


Ilissa. I conjure you Donna Mendoza, by all the rights of a woman, as you are
a woman yourself, that you do not deceive me.


Men. My brother will give you the surest grounds of confidence -- and I risk
my life with you.


Ilissa. I place confidence in you -- a woman must know the miseries of our
sex, when they are deserted in a state of infamy.


Men. Of them, I am sensible, and I detest the Inquisition from my heart.


Pher. I have in all my travels observed that women almost universally hate
cruelty, and she must detest perfidy as it strikes against the dearest
interests of her sex.


Men. My friend, the daughter of the English resident, will further inform you.
( Exit Mendoza)


SCENE IV. -- Miss MONROE, (entering) ILISSA and PHERON.
Miss Mon. MY worthy father has great designs for you, and I am to tell you in
his name.


Ilissa. I faint with expectation. It is like a trial of one's salvation.


Miss Mon. You must all be very still, make no noise to be heard abroad, and
must tell it to none, but the prince, Mr. Bowling, Donna Mendoza, and the
Inquisitor.


Pher. We have the utmost interest to observe your commands.


Miss Mon. You must not name the Resident; he has trusted a soldier with a pass
from the patrole, to bring some passengers on board a frigate -- when that
soldier comes, with a white handkerchief, loose round his neck -- follow him,
immediately, with the utmost silence wherever he leads you.


Pher. We will carefully observe your instructions.


Miss Mon. You must; for the slightest error involves not only you all, but my
father, and his family in ruin.


Ilissa. We have suffered enough to make us careful; but what a dreadful
interval this must be, between love and fear. [Exit Miss Munroe.] [The curtain
closes.]


ACT V.
SCENE I. -- INQUISITOR, BOWLING and PHERON.
The scene opening discovers Bowling asleep on his mattrass -- The Inquisitor
pulls him by the arm. In. HALLO! friend, wake up; I want to speak with you.


Bow. ( starting up suddenly) Avast hauling there, what mean you ragamuffins,
are you come to give me another infernal toasting? Zounds, if my hands were out
of the bilboes, I would send you away with a salt eel for your supper.


Pher. No Mr. Bowling, we are friends. We are come to set you at liberty.


Bow. None of your tricks upon old travelers, we are far enough from that
course -- but you may talk to me gentlemen, if you will be civil.


Pher. We come to bring you the happiest news in the world.


Bow. What? shall I see Moll again! her skin is a little black but her heart is
honest and she speaks what she thinks, just like Tom Bowling.


In. Here Marshal knock off his fetters. ( Marshal knocks them off) Now Mr.
Bowling you are your own man again.


Bow. Well gentlemen, all this is very civil. But is it true; or am I only
dreaming? Am I here, gentlemen, and you there -- sartin?


In. Certain as life, come give us your hand.


Pher. Take a glass of my wine, you will find all true, and that you are now at
liberty.


Bow Set at liberty, that is good -- fact it is true, I am at liberty --
(stepping large) Now I feel grandly; it is almost as good as to eat warm flip
and biscuit, along side of black Moll.


Pher. Mr. Bowling do you think you can command a ship?


Bow. Command a ship. You had better ask whether a fish can swim -- I, my
father, grand father, and great grandfather, to a thousand generations, could
command a ship -- but is that fellow to go with us?


Pher. Yes.


Bow. Then I think I will not go unless he will leave his Toasters behind -- what
say you messmate?


In. Mr. Bowling I am very sorry for all injuries which I was compelled to do
to you, and many others -- and I most frankly ask pardon.


Bow Granted with all my heart, Tom Bowling is none of your stuffy fellows, to
hold spite forever.


Pher. But can you give us any proof that you can manage the affairs of a ship.


Bow. ( pulling out a book) Look, here is the account of our last voyage -- The
captain was out of trim and obliged, to haul up at Greenwich -- so I commanded
-- What think you of the account of expenses?


In. There is one charge against you which strikes my mind, for presents to
Black Moll. Did you give credit for all the presents you sent to your mistress?


Bow. Yes, to half a yard of blue taste -- here is all to a farthing, clean as a
new cable.


In. Surprising! I thank heaven, there is a little honesty remaining among men.


Bow. Among the honest Tars, there is a little honesty yet, a little.


In. Well sir here is a suit of naval uniform: we have engaged a frigate of 36
guns -- your commission will be ready in a few minutes.


Pher. You must land us at the port of Alexandria in Egypt, from whence I shall
proceed up the Nile to my own dominions.


In. Well, are you willing, if I set you at liberty that Ilissa should listen
to my proposals?


Pher. I leave her to herself -- She is grateful as I am myself -- and your
person and accomplishments are very engaging, not to flatter a word -- (To Mr.
Bowling.) -- Upon your courage and honesty now, our success depends.


Bow. As to my courage -- Tom Bowling with a 36 gun frigate, will never turn
tail to any thing that swims the sea -- And for honesty, Tom Bowling makes
conscience of that -- It Is my religion.


In. I though it sailors never troubled themselves about relig^


Bow. Not understand religion? 'Twas taught in England, not roasted into me as
you do here. Do you think that I don't know; that when the grand voyage is
over, and the universe is hauled up to refit; that they who have done their
duties in this world, will be promoted, and sit in the grand cabin -- the
rogues will be put down into the sink? There Is for you.


Pher. Indeed, Cardinal, tho I respect learning very much, I find very little
is necessary to make an honest man.


In. Or a religious man either -- witness Capt. Bowling -- The most useful
truths are always the most simple.


[Enter Mendoza] SCENE II. -- MENDOZA, ILISSA, PHERON, BOWLING and INQUISITOR.
Men. MERCY of heaven save us -- the city is all in an uproar, and the patroles
are moving toward the inquisition.


Ilissa. Heaven forbid it -- but I fear the worst.


Pher. Cruel and unhappy reverse -- Now shall we be more miserable than ever --
It Is my comfort I have not deserved it -- O my poor Ilissa!


Bow. I was always afraid of some trick. There is no trusting these bougers
that roast people for religion.


In. Stand still here, and be as mute as the dead, every one of you -- Conceal
your lights if you can -- I will go and enquire into this business, and be back
in three minutes.


(Exit Inquisitor*) I^issa. This is worse than not to have expected liberty.


Pher. Cruel and unhappy reverse.


Bow. Whist, gentlemen and ladies -- Do you not know that we must not say a
word?


SCENE III. -- INQUISITOR and Mrs. MONROE. (entering.)
In. IT is, my friends, wholly a false alarm. The patroles were only in pursuit
of a gang of thieves. I have the command of all the guards about the
I^qu^sition, and have ordered them not to stir -- As a tok^n of our good
success, I present you with Madam, the wife of the English Resident.


Mrs. Mon. The dispatches were so important, that Mr. Monroe would trust them
to no one but me. They are as follow -- 1st. This contains the value of the
frigate, and the expense of fitting her out -- 2d. Here are instructions to
Capt. Bowling to navigate the ship, and land the passengers at Alexandria in
Egypt. -- 3d. Here Is a commission for Capt. Bowling. You must not open the
papers till you are on board the frigate -- and when the messenger comes, walk
in the utmost silence and order to the quay. I must withdraw immediately, lest
I be seen here, and it cause suspicion.


Bow. Now as soon as we get on board, only let me have a dash at this infernal
place. I Will only throw in about 20 or 30 good thirteen inch bombs, and they will
cut capers in the air.


Pher. No honest captain, let us forgive our enemies -- I have found the
benefit of mild and soft manners even in this place. And in truth, it is to the
sweet temper of Ilissa, that we owe our present liberty.


In. That is a certain truth. The first charm that drew my attention to her
was, that no injuries could ever make her fret. Her soul is too noble to harbor
malice, or even anger -- and this mildness I found to be owing to the most
sublime sentiments of religion -- she showed what it was to be a christian.


SCENE IV. -- A Grenadier enters with a white handkerchief about his neck --
THE WHOLE PARTY.
Gren. NOW, ladies and gentlemen, my orders are to tell you that your
deliverance is certain, and that when you are in the street, you must not say a
word, but follow in silence and order to the quay.


Ilissa. O my papa, what joy I feel -- and yet I hardly dare to breathe.


In. Now my friends. I taste of ^rue joy -- Benevolence has converted me to
truth -- I pray God to pardon the sins of my official conduct; and do you all
pray for my forgiveness. I feel the joy of liberty* and the joy of doing good;
and I can only be happier when I ob^ain the charming Ilissa; and when her sweet
and gentle virtues shall conduct me to heaven.


The Death of Socrates. A DIALOGUE, IN A SUIT OF SCENES.
THE GRANDEUR OF MAN DEPENDS ON HIS RELATION TO GOD.
THE principle of regard to the Deity, ^n the heart of man, resembles the first
moving power in the universe -- Were that power to be deranged, the whole
system would fall into trouble and confusion -- So if you remove a regard to
the will of the Supreme, from the hearts of men, there will be no consistency,
or propriety of conduct, in individuals, or societies.

BOURDALOUE. PERSONS.
MEN.
SOCRATES -- a celebrated Philosopher of Athens, and instructor of a School. --
Scholars of Socrates.
ALCIBIADES, PHOCION, PHILEMON, XENOPHON,
DIONYSIUS -- a Judge of the Areopagus, dissenting from the rest. MARSHAL -- of
the Ar^^pagus. MESSENGER -- from Xantippe to Socrates.
WOMEN.
XANTIPPE -- wife of Socrates. MELICERTA -- his eldest sister.
SCENE. -- The school of Socrates at Athens.

THE DEATH OF SOCRATES.
SCENE I. -- SOCRATES alone.
WHAT is the reason, that at particular times, men cannot bear truth? The first
propagators of new truths are often persecuted -- I am almost ready to believe
with the Jews; that mankind are born ^n a state of depravity -- Little do I
expect to behold the light of another day. A charge of blasphemy is brought
against me in the court of Areopagus -- for teaching that there is but one God.
I can demonstrate this truth But that avails nothing. The court are
superstitious. I expect they will condemn me. But I will have one exercise
more, before my death, to try the genius of some of my best scholars -- and
show the value of learning. My young gentlemen are rather late to school to day.

SCENE II. -- ALCIBIADES (entering) and SOCRATES.
Soc SO, Alcibiades, I did not expect that you would be the first to come to
school to day. I though it you had devoted yourself wholly to the service of the
ladies.


Al. That was what I intended, and had engaged Thais to partake with me the
pleasures of the approaching festivals. But, at the Olympic games, being
careless, and over confident of victory -- I was beaten in the chariot-race by
Pisistratus of Samos. When I returned, in the evening, I meant to excuse the
matter to Thais; but I found myself excluded. And, inquiring the cause, I found
she was entertaining my rival, who had beaten me in the race. -- Disappointed
by the ladies of the earth -- I return the earlier to those celestial beauties,
the muses.


Soc. The falsehood of Thais is indeed inexcusable -- but you ought to know
that the ladies always favor the enterprizing, and those who are fond of glory
-- and naturally despise those, who are indolent, and not desirous of praise.


SCENE III. -- (Enter) PHOCION, PHILEMON and XENOPHON.
Soc. YOUNG Gentlemen, I am happy in your presence. I have though it of a question
on which I desire you, as a trial of genius, to express severally your
opinions. It is this -- What is that, which, all things considered, has the
greatest influence on the concerns and interests of men? An important question
you will say. Will you each favor me with your opinion?


MONEY.
Phoc. I am, at present, pesuaded that it is money. -- Whatever is the object
of purchase, may be procured by money -- Money has an amazing influence in
deciding the opinions of men. Give a man a large sum on one side of a question;
and nothing on the other -- It is a wonder if he does not see all things right
on that side where the money lies. What ^oil^ and fatigues, will not a man
undergo for the sake of money? Money procures trust and favor, preferment and
elegance of life. Money wins the favor of the great; favor which cannot be
purchased by merit. How easily will a rich man, by means of the favors which he
confers on the poor, gain admittance to places of profit, and trust. The poor
man's wisdom, (be he ever so wise,) is despised. But the man who has money has
credit for every human faculty -- He has wit, at least in estimation. His
poorest observations are recommended, his flattest jests are laughed at, and
applauded. The ladies love him, and their hearts own the sovereign power of
gold. Lawyers for gold pervert law -- Priests for gold have perverted religion
-- In fine, What will not money do? It is the God of this world -- In my
opinion money has the geeatest influence on the concerns of men.


PLEASURE.
Al. I CAN by no means agree with the preceding speaker -- My opinion is that
pleasure has the greatest influence over the concerns of men. For what purpose
is money desirable, but that we may thereby procure pleasure -- Money purchases
houses, furniture, fields and gardens; for what end, but that we may take our
pleasure in them. For what end do men ply themselves with strong liquors, but
for the pleasures that are attendant on appetite? Have you never known, how
many votes are gained by certain persons, in our popular elections by
distributing wines and sweet meats among the people? And what is the object of
all learning: and of the curious arts but for the pleasure either of body, or
mind, that they procure? The reputable matron, or honest householder, take
pleasure in a beautiful and well ordered family, and in sincere, and delicious
friendship, of which virtue alone is capable: from a mistaken idea of pleasure
also, some youth of both sexes plunge themselves into the most infamous
excesses, and by their miseries they discover how propense the human heart is
to pleasure, that it will risk any thing for the prospect of it -- In fine all
happiness is pleasure in one sense or another; as the pursuit of all mankind is
happiness, I determine that pleasure is that which has the greatest influence
in all affairs of men.


CIVIL POWER.
Phil. MEN'S opinions are as various as their constitutions. I must dissent
from from both of my friends, who have spoken before me. My opinion is that, of
all things, the civil power has the greatest influence over the concerns of men
-- Who is equal to the chief ruler of any kingdom, who can resist the supreme
authority? It disposes of persons and property, of the lives and virtues of
citizens, which way soever the sovereign power shall turn itself; all must bend
before it -- In a state when the sovereignty is in the people, as it is in our
commonwealth, the voice of the people carries every thing: you may as well put
a stop to the swelling of the ocean, as resist the popular will -- Hence it is
said that the voice of the people is the voice of God, because it comes with
irresistible power: in monarchies tho the sovreignty is supposed to have been
tranferred from the people, to the monarch, and he on account of the dispotic
power he possesses is feared, and honored as the vice-general of God -- The
supreme law is the safety of the state: this respects the whole, and not any
particular member of the commonwealth -- Therefore I say, the civil power, has
the greatest influence on the affairs of men.


WOMEN and TRUTH.
X^n. STILL the mat^er appears undecided -- I am fully of the opinion that the
object of our enquiry is not yet found -- as to matters merely belonging to
this world I affirm in opposition to the opinions already advanced -- that
women have more influence that money, pleasure, or the civil power -- they
compel us to love them, and we cannot help it. We love more than pleasure would
dictate, we behold them with lively admiration, with the most intense respect,
we consider our happiness as involved in theirs. Have you never heard of the
Jewish tradition, that man, when first formed was placed in a garden beautiful
as Elysian fields; yet would not be content without the society of a woman?
Have you not also read in the tradition of ancient Greece -- that Jupiter being
offended with the man, and his wife, for stealing golden apples from the
Hesperian gardens, separated them from each other and placed his eagle between
them, with a thunder bolt in his talons -- The woman being afraid, fled and hid
herself in the groves of Arcadia -- the man watched the eagle for fifteen
successive days and nights, till the eagle fell asleep, through long watching, and
dropped the thunderbolt from his talons -- then flew the man to the groves and
spoke to his wife in the language of love -- Jupiter then declared that he
would suffer their society, since there was no way to prevent it; but to strike
them out of being.

Without saying any thing of the actual truth of these transactions, they prove
that the connection of the sexes on the principles of virtue is natural and
inviolable, and that this has ever been the though it of men -- whatever a man
gains by study or labor, the spoils of war, and the profits of peace -- the
reward of genius, and ways of industry -- are bro't by him, and freely bestowed
on his wife. Happy, if by any means, he make her contented, and share the
blessing of her smile -- That women are slaves to gold, is a slander: we know
them, (...), in contempt of riches, to give their hands and ho^, to men of
genius and merit -- They are more powerful than princes, and kings; for our
fathers have told us how at the court of Persia, the princess Apame being
denied her request by the king -- she took the crown from his head; gave him a
slap on the cheek, and told him he should not have his crown again till he
(...) grant her request -- the king laughing, turned the whole affair into a
just, and granted her desire. But truth is powerful above all things. Money
gotten by falsehood shall never prosper in the hands of its owner -- the
pleasure that is taken in false pursuits is unsatisfying to the mind, and lays
the foundation of the most dreadful remorse. Power founded on falsehood and
perfidy, tumbles violently into ruin -- and even women if they forsake the ways
of virtue, and act not agreeably to truth and reason -- soon sink into contempt
-- truth prevents all wrong, and sits every thing right -- truth therefore is
greater and more influential than all things else, and the prudent man will
always submit to truth.


SCENE IV. -- Enter DIONYSIUS, dissentient Judge of the Areopagus.
Di. I COME sir, from the court of Areopagus to inform you, that the affair is
likely to go against you.


Soc. Why, what pretense can they have to take away the life of a poor old man,
who never had it in his power to do them harm?


Di. Why truly none at all. But there are two thirds of the present court, who
do not know a loaf of bread, from a grindstone, and yet they imagine they
understand every thing. There was ^d Phutatorius -- He spoke an hour and half
by the hour glass, and all his wonderful argument, on the most candid statement
amounted to this: The foul of man is an immaterial substance, beasts are
created with long tails, to brush off flies; therefore Socrates is an enemy to
the state, and deserves to be poisoned.


Soc. A very singular way of reasoning truly.


Di. It makes me angry, I cannot repress my indignation, when the lives of our
worthiest citizens are at the caprice of such nonsense. [Exit Dionysius.]


[Xantippe enters.] SCENE V. -- XANTIPPE and SOCRATES.
Xan. O MY husband, my worthy, good husband, they will put you to death, they
certainly will.


Soc. Patience, my dear, have patience, we must all die sometime or other -- I
am an old man now; it is not strange that I should die.


Xan. But they have no right to put you to death -- they are a of pack
numb-sculls -- they have no more brains than so many seacoots and yet they are
as wicked, as they are silly. You know more than a thousand of them now.


Soc. Aye, yes, I am confident had you been there you would have given them a
lecture.


Xan. I should have been in such a passion, I should have torn their eyes out.


Soc. Yet wife remember this -- they know but little; and I doubt not they
think they are doing right -- as for me, I am not afraid to die -- that great
and good Being, who kept me from harm in this world, can keep me from harm in
another life.


Xan* I am afraid you are the more willing to die, because I have not always
been so prudent, as I should have been.


Soc. Think not of that, my good girl, I have laid nothing up against you.


Xan. But I have laid it up against myself, and now I am going to lose you, I
see I have been to blame.


Soc. It might have been as well if you had though it of it a little sooner -- But
it is a matter of no great consequence -- I shall love you tenderly to my
latest breath -- After my death I hope you will get a better husband.


Xan. I shall never get one (sobs) that will (sobs again) bear with me (sobs
again) as you have done.


[Melicerta enters.] SCENE VII. -- SOCRATES and MELICERTA.
Soc. MY daughter you will receive most unwelcome intelligence concerning your
father.


Mel. My worthy good sire -- I weep not for you: The eternal Being is your
friend: but how wretched must we be to be left destitute of your councils and
protection.


Soc. You are young -- Be virtuous, and you will be protected; or you may die
with honor; which will be full as well -- I am fully convinced that there is
One, eternal, all-wise Being, who governs all things by his providence, that
our souls are immortal -- and that the virtuous will be happy.


Mel. Yet how shall I conduct my life well, in this world, to escape its evils,
if I live here?


Soc. Remember the eternal God -- do what you really think is best -- then
trust him for the consequence. It is an excellent maxim of prudence, for a
woman to marry, if she has a good offer -- but above all trust in God -- and
hope for a better life -- seek it by piety and virtue.


Mel O sir, I wish I could die with you.


Soc Think not of it, wish not for death till God shall send it -- retire from
those scenes of horror. I bless you with my last breath -- retire and resign
yourselves to the Almighty.


SCENE VIII. -- MARSHAL of the Areopagus (entering) and SOCRATES.
Mar. I COME Sir to do my duty. It is painful but I am necessitated -- The
officers of the state you are siensible --


Soc. Must do their duty -- read your tablet if you please.

(He takes out his tablet and reads.) Anytus son of Olympius has said, in the
presence of this court, that Socrates was an enemy of the state, and the
religion thereof, that he has blasphemed the gods, and corrupted the minds of
youth by saying, that idols are cheats, and that there is ^ut one God -- which
assertion this court finding to be true, on evidence, do condemn the said
Socrates, to drink a cup of poison from the hand of his principal accuser,
under the inspection of the Marshal of our court -- that all the enemies of our
state may be destroyed -- and that this sentence be executed within one hour
from the delivery thereof. There sir, you have one half hour to live. ( Enter a
messenger from Xantippe.)


Mess. from Xan. Sir, your wife is full of distress, and sends to you again,
she asks pardon for many passages of her life -- she says she is afraid that
you are so composed, and willing to die, because you are in hopes to get rid of
her by the means; [Socrates covers his face] she wishes alas to know, what
shall be done for the daughters; the sons, except the two engaged in
merchandise, being provided for in the fleet, and the army.


Soc. As for my poor wife, she need not think I wish to leave her -- she has
been something of a clacking hen to be sure, but she has bro't me many
beautiful chickens. I leave her well provided for -- and can testify with my
last breath^ that I sincerely love her -- If she chooses let her marry again --
But, my poor daughters, what will become of them? ( covers his face again.)


Alc. I though it, venerable sir, that you always taught that to weep at the
ordinary calamities of this world -- was beneath a philosopher.


Soc. Yes, my son, except where one's wife or children are concerned, there the
greatest degree of sensibility is justifiable.


Phoc ( Kneeling and laying his hand on Socrates' knee, after the Grecian
manner.) Sir, with your approbation I will take care of your eldest daughter, I
have been desiring the office a long time, nor is she averse to such a measure.


Phil. (kneeling in the same manner.) I desire the like favor in behalf of the
other, venerable sir.


Soc. Kind gentlemen you are welcome to my daughters -- May you be happy with
them -- Now I think I can leave the world in peace. (The young gentlemen arise.)


Mes. Shall I tell your wife to come here and see you, and take a last sad
farewell -- She wishes to die with you, and hopes she shall obtain forgiveness
for those flights of passion, which were too frequent in her, while she lived
with you.


Soc. Let her not come here -- It would kill her to see me thus -- Assure her,
that I think she has been a good girl; and that I shall love her to my latest
breath.


Mes. I shall punctually execute your orders, sir.


Soc. Well now, young gentlemen my worthy pupils, this is my result on our
question, Xenophon judged rightest. Of all things external to men's selves in
this world women have the greatest influence over men's affairs. Men will give
their money freely to their wives, they will sacrifice all other pleasures to
the happiness of living with them. Without women there would be no
commonwealth, consequently no civil power -- but truth has more influence than
women, in fine, women lose their influence at once, when they depart from
virtue and truth, I have always loved truth and endeavored to serve God, and do
good to men, to the utmost of my power. This is my consolation, now I hope I
shall be accepted -- I advise you always, my dear pupils, to do the same, you
will find the comfort of it in life, and in death -- To be stable in our
sentiments and to possess true grandeur of soul, despising mean things and
things unjust, we must lay hold on the arms of him who sustains the pillars of
the universe, or in plain words to believe all he orders for us to be the best.
God is one, his power and presence are every where -- His faithfulness is
steadier than the course of the sun -- His truth is firmer than the rocks of
Atlas -- His power is more irrisistible than the winds or the waves, or the
rapid force of thunder -- His immensity exceeds the space of Heaven -- His
goodness milder than the rays of the morning. These are clear demonstrable
tru^hs -- as the moon derives her light from the sun. The grandeur of man is in
his soul, which derives its qu^lities from its God -- truth is the great
standard of Divine proceedings -- It is the express copy of the Divine will --
be it then the measure of your sentiments, and actions -- it has more power
than all things else, and finally prevails over all: tho error may seem to
conquer in my death, the Athenians shall soon repent of it, and erect Statues
to my memory, and the name of Socrates shall be immortal.


[Socrates is led off by the Marshal, the Scholars follow dejected.]
Constantia. A DRAMATIC DIALOGUE, IN A SUIT OF SCENES.
CHRISTIANITY FAVORABLE TO WOMEN.
HE that loves his wife loves himself.

No characters of men are inserted in this piece, because in the author's
opinion they would not make it any better.

PERSONS.
CONSTANTIA -- Mother of Constantine the Great. EUDOCIA -- her sister, who had
suffered persecution. METRODORA -- a fine lady of the Court, bigoted to
Paganism, and favoring the rival of Constantine. APHRODITE -- a fine lady of
the Court, inclining to Paganism, from the love of dissipation. THALIA -- a
very sensible young lady of the Court, inclined to Christianity. ARPASIA --
sister to Constantine. LAUTERIA -- handmaid of the palace.
SCENE. -- The (...) in the palace of the Caesar's (...) ^ome.

CONSTANTIA.
SCENE I. -- EUDOCIA and CONSTANTIA.
[ Eudocia is represented sit^^^g; Constantia enters, and Eudosia rises to
receive her. Constantia seats herself, and Eudosia looks at her some moments
with concern, and then speaks.] Eud. MY dear sister! why are you so sorrowful
to^y? I always love to see you cheerful. This cloud which seem^ settle^ on your
brow gives me serious concern.


Con. Dear Eudocia, you may imagine, but you cannot fully comprehend the
sensibility of a mother. The condition of marriage commonly increases the
tenderness of the human heart but the parental relation much more. Were you a
mothe^^ you might possibly comprehend my present anguish of heart.


Eu. Tho you have lost your husband, you have every thing else in your
situation to make you happy. He left you seated on the throne of the greatest
empire of the world; caressed and almost adored by the court. You were
exceedingly beloved by your husband while alive, and he has left you in the
height of honor and public esteem.


Con. My husband is gone, and that were enough to make me extremely sorrowful
-- but it is by no means the whole of my p^esent pain. The wives of Emperors
are always to be pi^^ed I have a thousand times, in the midst of the noblest
scenes of magnificence, wished that I had been the wife of some shepherd, or
simple swain, (...) ideas corresponded with mine. Differences of sentiments may
produce much unhappiness between married persons of the best tempers in the
world.


Eu. What difference could there be between your husband and you? He always
treated you with extreme tenderness.


Con. He did -- and he was natural^y kind and generous. He suffered me to do
very much as I pleased. He even permitted me to educate my son according to my
own opinions. He is gone; and tho he was a most pleasing husband* when I think
of him I am ^^lled with ho^or. -- Had he been a Christian, and could I now
believe him to be rejoicing among the Sain^s, I should have great consolation.
But he always worshipped those Gods which are vanity and a ^e.


Eu. But you have a son, accomplished in genius, and in every virtue. If your
sensibility be as great as you affirm, you must have joy of him.


Con. I have a son. He is dearer to me than life. Heaven knows how I love him.
I watched with raptures of tenderness over his infant years. I have often
bedewed his cheeks* with the tears of delight. He grew up before me like a
beautiful plant. His manners corresponded to my wishes. Early I seasoned his
mind with the sublime truths of Christianity. I taught him to adore one
everliving GOD -- the Creator and Preserver of all -- and the Mediator, the
Messenger of God to man -- And that he should love his neighbor as himself.
Strange doctrines to us, till of late. I have endeavored strongly to impress it
upon his mind, that he was born not for himself, but for the world.


Eu. And has not the event fully answered your expectations? Who can be more
virtu^us or more agreeable than the young prince? Extremely agreeable in his
person and equally amiable in his manners -- his genius is brilliant, and his
morals truly sublime. Lost to self indulgence, he flies from public spectacles,
and seenes of wantonness, and public entertainments, to seek the society of the
discreet and virtuous And he abides the company of such ladies alone, as exceed
in honest fame, the Lucretias and Porcias of ancient Rome. Even now he is
composing a system of laws to establish equal rights and liberty among the
people on the benevolent principles of christianity.


Con. I know and feel what you say of him to be true. But this day must decide
his fate to reign or d^e; for his advancement to the imperial throne, or his
execution by torture.


E^ Then I wonder no longer at your extreme concern. But who can oppose so
amiable a prince?


Con There is yet a powerful party in the senate, in ^avor of the ancient
religion, who only want an opportunity to kindle the flames on the altars of
persecution, in which so many christians have smoked as victims to false gods.
If they can g^^ t^ army in their favor, they hope to succeed. M^re^^^^s, my
son's rival, is at their head.


Eu. But by whose influence does this party move; there i^ scarcely a man about
the court, in their favor.


Con. Women have often determined the fate of nations. You know that
enchantress, the beautiful Metrodora, tho she affects so much tenderness for
us; she is deeply engaged in the opposite interest. She is the soul of the
party. Her influence* or m^ne, prevails this day; but she is coming. It is most
for our interest that I should meet her alone. (Eudocia withdraws.)


SCENE II. -- CONSTANTIA and METRODORA.
Met. SUBLIME empress, let me approach you with that humility which becomes
your august presence.


Con. (laying her hand with a forbidding air on Metrodora^ arm.) Metrodora, for
heaven's sake desist; I am a poor weak woman, pained to the heart, and I have
no appetite for flattery, never, since I had the splendid m^sery of being an
empress, did I feel pain as I feel it this moment -- O my son! This day it will
be decreed that he must reig^, or die.


Met Well then since you deny me the pleasure of addressing you as an empress;
let me talk with you as with a friend. My fears for your son are not less than
yours. He is the idol of the court and the favorite of my own heart. But I find
the party in the senate and in the army strong against him, I am afraid there
is no way to support the young prince or even to preserve his life; but one.


Con. And what is that one?


Met. You will accuse me my friend Constantia! I have always wondered that you
and your son, rejecting the religion of your own godlike Romans* should worship
a crucified Jew, an honest man perhaps; but a very unfortunate one. You laugh
at Gentilism, but do you think there is any thing in Gentilism so absurd.


Con. You say we worship a crucified Jew, this is wholly an error. No c^ristian
ever worshipped a crucified Jew; but one God the Creator and Preserver of all
whom the christians call by the endearing name of Father. They reveren^e Jesus
not as a man; but as the word and wisdom of God; and to promote the glory of
the Father; for the word and wisdom of God dwelt in him. The christians adore
not men but God.


Met. And how do you know that the wisdom of God dwelt in him. Can you depend
on witnesses who were dead three thousand years ago, and who if living would be
three thousand miles distance?


Con. Who among us doubt of the main events of the wars of Troy. Or that Eueas
founded the Roman nations? We bel^eve witnesses incomparably more distant and
more remote in time. And this we know is perfectly reasonable -- Yet this is
not my present object, I ask you Metrodora, if you can trust your ear to
discern sounds, your eyes to judge of colors, or your mouth to taste its meat?


Met. Certainly, we should know nothing if we could not trust our senses as
being naturally true.


Con. And your understanding to judge of truth?


Met. Most certainly.


Con. Then I know most certainly that the wisdom of God dwelt in Jesus of
Nazareth, because in opposition to the darkness of the world, ^unk into vice
and superstition, he taught us to adore one God* in whom we live, move, and
have our being; to love him sincerely and obey him from the heart. That we
should love one another and in love serve one another, and that God is most
just, and will reward all human beings according to their works.


Met. According to their works do you say? I should not think that to be a very
comfortable doctrine for you and me.


Con. Besides it teaches us to pursue all things which are excellent. That
wha^soever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, that we should think on those
things. Now I know most certainly that all this is right. Let our priests or
philosophers say what they will, what then shall I do? Shall I believe, or
shall I not bel^eve? -- Indeed I must believe or do violence to my own mind.


Met. And so you will expose yourself and your son to death by this hopeful
system. I am astonished at your obstinacy. I never though it of these things much,
but I know the danger of them. Tell me then wherein our system of religion is
not as good as yours.


Con. Had you though it of the matter at all you must have known; but to deal
plainly with you, your head was always filled with court-intrigues. Your
religion debases the idea of God, and degrades man. Jupiter, whom your poets
style father of Gods and men, is said to have many vices. According to your own
writers he changed himself into a brute, tha^ he might run away with Europa. At
the same time he had, they say, a wife of his own. His wife was a scold, and he
was ill tempered, so they would often quarrel and he would threaten to beat her
-- a fine example this for married persons truly!


Met. Why as to tha^ matter -- but -- but --


Con. But what Metrodora. Your genius cannot answer, subtle as it is -- But, do
you not worship Bacchus by drunkenness? Are not ladies of the highest rank
intoxicated for whole months together? Does not every man of honor and sobriety
fly from a worshipper of Venus as from the plague? Is that religion, which
ruins the morals of the people? Is not ill nature itself adored in D^ana of
Ephesus? Your own favorite, Homer, calls her the tygress of her sex. And in one
word, has not every vice in your system, received the sanction of religion?


Met. I am not well qualified to dispute on these subjects. But by all that is
sacred, have regard to the life of the young prince whom you expose to
immediate death if by your means he retains christ anity.


Con. Deny my words Metrodora, if you can. You are now acting on the vicious
principles of your own worship. You adore Laverna Goddess of deceit. You
pretend concern for me and my son; but you mean to destroy us both -- If your
plans succeed, to morrow we die in torments -- But I hope soon to baffle you,
and all your designs. You have nothing to fear from me. Should I prevail you
still live as ever. But I must see my sister Eudosia this moment -- The young
ladies will wait on you.


[Constantia withdraws.] Met. (alone.) Why, if that be the case, and the matter
goes ill, I will contrive some way to deny the whole affair, and throw the
blame on the senate.


SCENE III. -- THALIA and ARPASIA.
[In the beginning of this scene the young ladies enter and pay their respects
to Metrodora, who pauses a moment, and then withdraws.] Arp. O MY heart! how
much I fear for the fate of my brother.


Tha. I have better hopes than you concerning him. I believe that he will have
success.


Arp. And what reason have you for such a hope?


Tha. I cannot imagine that such virtue should not meet success. Most sincerely
do I wish that he may maintain his principles, nor give up his conscience for
the splendour of a crown.


Arp. I know not what to think. Sometimes my fears for him are so great, that
they almost make me with that he would renounce the cross of the Nazarene^.


Tha. But how can you wish such a thing? You surprise me.


Arp. I never listened to discourses on this subject like my brother. My mother
used to instruct us both. Constantine was always a serious youth. My mother
would read for hours together out of the Bible, as the Christians call their
Sacred Book; and Constantine would devour every word. But my mind was much more
upon balls, assemblies, and other parties of pleasure.


Tha. And did not that mortify the empress?


Arp It did -- and she used weep very often because I gave no better attention.
But it did not seem entertaining to me. Tho I am sure that I love my mother,
and Constantine exceedingly.


Tha. I congratulate you, my Arpasia, on that disposition. The tenderness of
your heart will one day harmonize with the spirit of the gospel.


Arp. Why you surprise me -- I should no more dare to be a Christian, than I
should dare to meet an army in battle. The ^ight of an insect affrights me, how
much more that of flames and of torments.


Tha. But do you not wish your brother to succeed?


Arp. I hardly know what to think. I wish he may succeed as a Christian, or
renounce the Christian faith and be happy.


Tha. I should be very unhappy to have him do that.


Arp. Why, cannot one be happy without being a Christian?


Tha. Not so well as with it I believe. The Christians have a curious system,
let it come from the Jews, or from any other nation. One thing I clearly
perceive that it will be greatly for the interest of our sex to have
Christianity prevail -- It is a matter of great consequence to our sex, to have
it prevail.


Arp. What say you? Can that be?


Tha. Yes I affirm that it will be greatly for the interest of our sex to have
it prevail.


Arp. And why for the interest of our sex?


Tha. No system treats them with so much tenderness and respect.


Arp. How can you make that appear?


Tha. By a fair comparison of facts -- You know that women have been abused in
various parts of the globe. The Christians say this was predicted from the time
that Eve stole the forbidden apples of paradise. Except in Greece, which has
always been the seat of learning and politeness; women have been subjected to
the arbitrary disposal of the men. And even among them they are by no means so
free, as among the Christians.


Arp. Are they more generous in their principles than our noble Romans?


Tha. Certainly, the noblest of our Romans claim the right of arbitrary divorce
and some of our most celebrated characters have alienated their wives to
strangers. In Germany and other nothern nations they are treated as slaves and
subjected to the scource. In Asia they are sold like common animals in the
market. In Africa they are slaves of a most slavish people.


Arp. And how do you know that it is not even so amongst the Christians?


Tha. There are several ladies of my acquaintance who have married Christian
husbands. They appear very happy -- This led me to enquire into their
principles, and customs.


Arp. And did you find any thing worthy of notice?


Tha I sound, what I thought worthy of notice They maintain (...) as a
principle that woman was created from the substance of man* and therefore it
must be unnatural to abuse her. That marriage is no human law, but a divine
ordinance previous to all human laws. That divorce can never be lawful; but in
case of manifest infidelity. -- That by marriage a man becomes one, with his
wife, in heart, mind, and soul.


Arp. That is a very happy doctrine; for there are one half of our Romans who
treat their wives with less complaisance than they would treat strangers.


Tha. That is generally the case with ignorant and foolish people. But the
Christians teach, That he who loves his wife, loves himself; and that he
should no more use her ill, than he would abuse himself. That he should be
willing to expose his life for her sake, even as Christ died for his church.
That he must not give her pain not so much, as by bitter, and reproachful words.


Arp. This certainly deserves our attention -- A revolution in religion will be
for the interest of our sex -- It will be greatly in their favor -- That is
always good which does good -- I will try my influence over some of the young
senators -- But are you fully informed of this matter.


Tha. You may rest assured that I am, I have spared no pains for information.
And I find that the more a christian is attached to his religion the more kind
he is to his wife.


Arp. Then this shall be the ladies' religion -- It will be the happiest of all
events for society, and prove of great advantage to our sex, till the latest
periods of time.


SCENE IV. -- APHRODITE ( enters to) THALIA and ARPASIA.
Aph. LADIES, I am glad to meet you. I hope you will comfort me a little for I
am most seriously out of humor


Arp. Is that the reason that you come to us. When I am out of humor, I
generally tarry at home till I feel better.


Aph. But my mortification is inexpressible. I thought your brother had not
been so much a dunce.


Arp. A dunce, how is my brother a dunce?


Aph. It is said that he openly avows that he is a Christian; that he lives
so^e; and will not accept the empire, unless he can retain his religion.


Arp. And how will tha^ affect you?


Aph. Why then the whole fashion of the court must be altered, and all modes
must receive a new model.


Arp. And if that should be the case, I should suppose that you would only like
it the more. As you are a very fashionable woman, the more new fashions the
better for you.


Aph. But only consider what a dilemma I shall be in. My clothes are all ready
for the dances at the feast of Diana. It cost me thirty thousand Sesterces to
the mantua-makers. Besides the cloth, which was brought from ^a^dis, cost more
than its weight in gold. And now to think that your brother -- I have no
patience with him!


Arp. And what, madam, has he to do with your dress? His attention is, I trust,
engrossed by affairs of mightier consequence.


Aph. If he be advanced to the empire to day and retain his Christian
principles, then the dances of Diana, which are to be held on the Ides of next
month, are to be put by.


Arp. And what if they should be?


Aph. Why do you not see* the whole cost of my dress will be sunk, and I shall
lose the opportunity of engaging the notice of the public.


Arp. And is that all? Must the interests of the Roman empire, coextensive with
half the world, be set aside on account of your dress, and to give you an
opportunity of dancing before a large company?


Aph. I am mortified to death!


Arp. This is extravagance indeed -- Why, my dear Aphrodite. Have you no
reflection? Of what consequence is your dress, or dancing, to the great affairs
of the empire? Thalia has been summing up, together with me, the advantages
which Christianity will bring to our sex -- Speak, Thalia, if you please.


Tha. In our researches we found that of all systems of religion, that of the
Christians is most favorable to our sex, and best adapted to secure the good
treatment of women.


Aph. And what else can it do?


Tha. It teaches the purest principles of virtue, which will secure to them the
most rational and durable esteem. Women who practice the Christian virtues
appear as angels -- Our most worthy empress is an example. Their influence over
the hearts of men is even greater than they themselves conceive. For purity
they are compared to the temples of the Lord. What a sublime quality is this
Christian virtue in our sex?


Aph. That is something it is true; but what will become, in the mean time of
my dress, and the dance?


Arp. Never mind that Aphrodite. It my brother fails he will be executed in the
extremest tortures, and your dance will go on.


Aph. That Is true, so it will.


Arp. And if he succeed there will be great rejoicings on the occasion. Now, to
accommodate you, Aphrodite -- The moment that I hear of it; I will send you a
Christian mantua maker, and you may have your clothes altered. Then be the
first lady who appears at the emperor's inauguration. Come forward in your rich
dress, imported from Sardis, to pay your respects to the new emperor -- This
will secure you favor, make you popular with the new government, your name
shall be founded through the Roman empire.


Aph. Now I do not much care how the matter turns -- why yes, I do, too -- The
admiration of a whole empire is better than that of a ball room -- Yes -- Let
Constantine prevail -- from henceforth I will be a Christian, since that is to
be the prevailing fashion.


SCENE V. -- CONSTANTIA enters with EUDOSIA.
Eu. WELL young ladies, how do you stand affected to the good cause. Are you
willing to be Christians all of you?


All. Yes -- Yes -- Yes -- Madam.


Eu. A noble resolution -- I hope you will have the constancy to maintain it.
The Pagan system i^ the work of the devil. I fell into their hands once, and
they inflicted on me the most infernal tortures. They convinced me the wrong
way, and I have mortally hated them ever since. And I own I should not be sorry
to see the time when I could punish them in turn, and pay the interest on some
old debts.


Con. Cherish not that disposition, my dear sister! It is wrong. I know that
persecuted persons are apt to persecute in turn, from the too common principle
of revenge. But our holy system forbids it.


Eu. What shall we do then, if we get the power into our hands?


Con. Make as many friends as you can, and as few enemies as possible; gain as
many to be Christians as you can, by the clear demonstration of truth, or in
any honest way, gain them to favor your cause. These are the means to gain
favorite points, and it is not amiss to use our policy in doing good.


[ Lauteria enters suddenly, di^tracted with fear.] Lau. O madam, madam, madam,
all is ruined. Constantine's head is not worth so much as my pincushion.
Metrodora carries all before her policy. She has gained the orator, Helvidius,
by the promise of a million of sesterces. Old P^iseus stood out a great while,
but she finally gained him over by promising to marry him.


Tha. May the imperial laurel never wither on your head till that promise be
accomplished.


Lau. The Aventine prefect, the old Treb^lli^s, is faithful to her, only with
the hope of eating at her table. Poor master Constantine, he is gone as sure as
death! [she weeps.]


Con. Ladies lead me away, I fear I shall faint -- O my son! But do not change
your purpose -- If -- If -- if possible I will be with you in a few moments --
if I can get a little composed.


[Constantia withdraws, supported by Arpasia and Aphrodite, who soon return.]
Eu. What pain she feels for her son. Poor woman! I am glad I have no children.
It often gives me extreme pain to observe the agonies which mothers sustain for
their children in distress.


Lau. Yes, yes, madam, but perhaps their joys are as great when their children
are prosperous. Did you never think of that madam?


Eu. Whether I think of it, or not, is not now, the question -- you seem to be
quite at leisure to discuss points of morality -- but are we not all in as
great danger as Constantine.


Lau. O madam to be sure we are, we are all gone sure enough. But it is a
comfort to me that I shall die with my good mistress; I shall be saved if I go
with her, I know I shall. [weeps again.]


Eu. But how do you know these things? From whom do you have your information?


Lau. From one of Metrodora's spies, he has made love to me, and expects that I
will marry him. But I told him positively that I would not have him, unless he
would tell me all I wanted to know. And he positively swore that he told me
all; and told me true.


T^^. I suffer exceedingly for my friends, but I am not in much pa^^ for
myself. I yet have confidence -- Constan^ia^s mind i^ fruitful in resources. If
there ^e any remedy for our affairs she will find it. If she can only command
herself. But I am afraid her tenderness will overcome her.


Arp. I am afraid of that. She always excelled in her tenderness to her
children. An excellent quality at any time, in a woman, and which adds luster
to an imperial crown.


Tha. And why are we all so calm and undisturbed? Arpasia makes her
observations on material virtues quite at her own ease. Are we not all doomed
to tortures and death? Either the Divine Power gives us a presentiment of
unknown good -- else we are flattered by a small gleam of hope in Constantia's
wisdom. But alas! I fear that hope or joy is no more for us in this world.


SCENE VI. -- CONSTANTIA returns.
Con. LADIES you yet may hope; tho all Lauteria's information be true, we are
not ruined, nevertheless: the fatal negligence of some of our own party has
done all this mischief.


Eu. And how do you expect to prevent the evils, which threaten us?


Con. I have done much -- and must still do more. I advised Labienus the old
Prefect to conduct the thundering legion, who are all Christians, into the
avenues, between mount Aventine, and the field of Mars -- and to prevent a
communication, between different bodies, of the Pagan troops.


Eu. And what good purpose does that answer?


Con. Their votes are to be taken for the new Emperor -- he will be able to
take the votes of the Christians first. Then those of the troops on Mount
Aventine, who are mixed, and will look out to see how others votes then those
of the troops in the field of Mars, who if the others have voted in his favor,
will not dare to resist.


Eu. But what will you do with the senate?


Con. Here Lauteria (giving her a letter) carry this to Marcellus. Tell him to
exert himself or we are all lost. He has the best cause, and is at least a
match for Helvidius, as for old Priseus. I have found means to make his bargain
with Metrodora public If he attempts to speak he will be perfectly ridiculous,
so there is yet hope for us, ladies.


Eu. My dear sister, you have acted the part of an able politician and general.


Con. Men indeed pretend to rule the world; and I am very well content that
they should enjoy the name. But women from a sudden effort of dexterity, will
often correct their coarse blunders, and help them out of their mistakes as you
see in this instance.


Arp. You will prove in that way that we had better not have a new emperor, but
make the men of Rome submit themselves to us.


Con. You mistake, my daughter; such offices are unnatural to us -- Our
constitutions are too delicate, and our feelings too tender. I can invent a
thousand plans, but I have not the courage to execute one. I must trust them
all to the men. So my daughter, whether you consider men as goods, or evils,
they are necessary to us -- But if my son shall reign, I will leave the court
and abandon public business forever.


Arp. He will hold the reigns of govenment with discretion. He will endeavor to
establish equal liberty among the people, and exert himself to make them happy.
Despots will think him a fool, but among the wise and prudent his name shall be
blessed forever. O I hope he will succeed.


Con. (looking out at a window.) My dear ladies! The matter will be decided in
five minutes. The ensign is hoisted on the gate before the senate house, and on
the Aventine mount. The whole fate of the christians will be decided in five
minutes. What an interval of anxious suspense. O heaven grant my son may have
success!


(The ladies all cover their faces and sit in deep silence of fear and
expectation.) (At this moment Lauteria enters suddenly wild, and distracted
with joy.) Lau. O my sweet mistress, good news! My dear empress, good news! my
dear young ladies, good news! Constantine is elected. He is sitting in the
Portico, clothed in the imperial purple, and they are going to carry him in
triumph to the capitol. (Eudosia rises suddenly and throws her arms about her
sister; all the ladies enclose her round with congratulation.)


All. O my dear sister!

Our dear empress! At the same time or in quick succession.

Our noble lady!

Dear empress!

O how happy!


Con. (repelling the ladies, and bursting from her sister's embrace.) Excuse
me, dear ladies, exuse me, dear ladies! sister, let me go -- My son is an
emperor, he shall support the christian faith. Let me fly to embrace my son. (
Bursts from them and flies out in an ecstasy of joy.) ( Eudosia and the other
ladies remain.)


Eu. O happy event, happy for our sex, happy to Rome, and happy to the whole
world. The flames are extinguished on the altars of persecution. The church has
prevailed, and idols are no more -- This doubtless is the great event, which
our sacred books have foretold. The kingdoms of the world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ. But let us hasten, to pay our respects to
the new emperor. (All leave the stage.)


Zenobia. A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
ON FUTURE RETRIBUTION.
THERE is, if not a decisive proof, a great probability of future retribution,
or the future judgment of men, according to their deeds; arising from the
instances of the sufferings of the just, and prosperity of the wicked in this
world. -- Consider a man who has amassed L. 300,000, by the ruin of 100
innocent families; that he lives in luxury, while they are perishing for want
-- and then doubt of a future judgment if you can.

BRUYERE. ANECDOTES -- LEADING TO THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE PIECE.
ZENOBIA was Queen of Palmyra -- a woman of high spirit, bordering on pride.
She was a person of most sublime morals, and fond of her husband to enthusiasm
-- yet ever declared her attachment was solely founded on his virtues. She was
remarkable for her maternal affection, and sense of gratitude. Her husband,
perishing in the wars, left her kingdom in a very flourishing condition, which
she greatly strengthened by an alliance with the Arabians and Persians.
Becoming wealthy and prosperous, she declared herself Queen of the East, and
defied the Roman power. The Emperor, after various efforts to gain her to the
interests of Rome, subdued her in war; led her in triumph in golden chains, and
allowed her to reside a^ one of his villas at Tibur in Italy; where soon she
died of grief and mortification. By the general testimony of historians,
AURELIAN had no other cause for making war against her, but her prosperity and
grandeur; and by his conduct to her he brought an indelible stain on his memory.

LONGINUS, her prime minister, was a person no less remarkable. Acquainted with
science in general -- Versed in all the eminent Pagan and Christian writers --
An admirer of Moses and St. Paul. He wrote the famous treatise on the Sublime,
which has ever since his day been the standard of criticism, of which POPE
gives the following character -- Thee, bold Longinus, all the Nine inspire;
And fill the critic with a poet's fire.
An ardent judge, who zealous in his trust,
With warmth gives sentence, yet is always just.
His own example strengthens all his laws;
And is, himself, the great Sublime he draws.


PALMYRA was built by SOLOMON, and by him called Tadmor. It was situated in the
east part of Syria, bordering on Chaldea. Many highways between great and
flourishing states* centered in this city; which caused it to be a place of
great trade. From the fine natural groves around it, preserved for timber, it
was anciently called Tadmor in the Wilderness. The Romans ruined this city in
the year of CHRIST 273 -- Yet certain ruins, supposed to be of ZENO^IA's
palace, to this day, astonish beholders with their magnificence, and are
esteemed among the greatest curiosities in the world.

PERSONS.
MEN.
ROMANS.
AURELIAN -- Emperor of Rome. VENTIDIUS -- a Senator and honest Republican.
GABINIUS -- a Tribune of the army. SEMPRONIUS -- a Senator, and man of bad
principles.
PALMYRENES.
LONGINUS -- Secretary to Queen Zenobia. ZOSIMUS -- a woman-hater, assistant to
Longinus. ODENATHUS -- son of Zenobia.

WOMEN.
ZENOBIA -- Queen of Palmyra. ADMETA -- Sister to the Queen. OLENIA -- her
daughter, very young.
SCENE. -- The room of audience in the palace of Zenobia.

ZENOBIA.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- ZENOBIA and LONGINUS.
Zen. alone. WHAT woes, alas! attend my widowed state,
Sad wife! exposed to all the shasts of fate --
Forever shall these eyes lament the ghost,
Of my dead husband, prematurely lost.
In all the pride of virtue, and of youth,
In all the charms of glory, love, and truth,
He fell, by cursed Aurelian's Roman bands
Who now my cities burn, and waste my lands.
Can ever I with Rome in leagues agree?
Can she deserve such amity from me?
O did my hero live, how soon ^our bands
Should leave in dire defeat, our wasted lands.
A woman's hand is, now, your sole defense,
Precarious force to drive the Romans hence.
Yet still my purpose is as fixed as fate;
The Roman power shall have my endless hate.

[Longinus enters.] Lon. Long live the famed Zenobia. Deign to hear
The affairs of state which claim thy generous care,
Fame flies with every breeze that Roman bands,
Lay waste our villages, and frontier lands.
All parts are filled with terror, and with dread:
Aurelian's self is marching at their head.
Aurelian's fury menaces our doom,
Because Palmyra dares to rival Rome.

Zen. And let him come. All Persia shall arise;
And all Arabia to our succor flies --
In hating Rome all nations shall agree,
Quite from the Persian to the Caspian sea.

Lon. Yet still in wars it is always good to fear,
The favoring Gods, but wake our guardian care,
Rome's towering eagle awes the trembling world,
And often swift vengeance has on nations hurled.

Zen. It awes the world, indeed, but awes not me;
The Romans may be beat as well as we.
Great Crassus fell a prey to Persia's hands:
And great Lacullus fled from Pontic lands --
So many legions Methridates slew,
None told the news, the news by rumor flew.

Lon. Just great Zenobia is thy hate to Rome,
Yet Power Divine must fix events to come,
Unstable is the state of mortal things:
Ki^gs sink to shepherds, shepherds rise to kings.
Tho vast thy treasures, and thy succors strong,
Still victory must to heavenly power belong.

Zen. Thy mind all subjects measures, proves, and tries,
Speak then thy fears; perhaps thy fears are wise.

Lon. "Queen of the east" that title gives offense;
With this proud title, may thou not dispense.
Thou have thyself in robes Imperial dressed;
And set the Roman eagle on thy crest.
If these offend, why lay not these aside?
And let the mildest arts of peace be tried.

Zen. "Queen of the East." Let Romans take offense,
Shall Rome's proud will, of all my powers dispense?
Do Eagles only for the Romans fly?
If Romans bear the eagle, so will I.
Then not of arms or titles speak to me --
Queen of the East I am, and queen will be.

Lon. Present him then, if he from wars will cease,
Thy firm alliance, and the branch of peace,
And if from further wrongs he will refrain;
The wealth he has amassed may be his gain.

Zen. I grant Aurelian, if from war he cease,
My firm alliance, and the branch of peace --
And if his troops from further wrongs refrain,
The wealth they have amassed, may be his gain.
And if, by this, our state may find relief
Write these my orders to the Roman chief.

SCENE II. -- VANTIDIOS (enters as the Queen is seated) and ZENOBIA.
Ven. BY great Aurelian's embassy I come,
And bear the orders of imperial Rome.

Zen. What orders has imperial Rome for me?
Are we not as the Romans great and free?

Ven. Aurelian knows thy worth. The world conveys
Thy fame, and every nation speaks thy praise,
Yet still while others in the arts excel;
In thinking justly, or in living well;
By earth's produce, or navigation thrive;
By eloquence, or manual labors live;
To rule the world the hardy Romans claim:
To rule the world, the Romans boasted fame.

Zen. What right has Rome to universal sway?
May I not rule the world, as well as they?
Yet still declare your mighty chief's commands,
From what pretense he dares lay waste my lands.

Ven. Imperial Rome who bids the world obey;
Cannot endure a rival in her sway;
The Roman Senate sends its high behest,
That thou no more be styled "Queen of the east,"
Nor wear the Roman Eagle on thy crest;
That thou renounce thy league with Persia's bands,
Nor take the tribute of Arabia's lands;
Nor of thy palace raise the lofty dome,
Lest proud Palmyra rival be to Rome.

Zen. What right has Rome, O great Ventidius, say,
To dictate nations great, and free as they?

Ven. To say what right she has, is not for me,
It Is ours to conquer, hers is to decree:
Yet still, great Queen, thy kinder tho'ts to move,
Aurelian thus, by proxy, sends his love.
The godlike portrait of our Hero see,
Fit spouse alone for such a Queen as thee;
The wealth of ten large provinces accrues,
The Emperor, as thy consort, thou may choose.
Unite thy realm with that of peerless Rome,
And raise thy fame for ages yet to come.

Zen. No, I the ten large provinces disdain,
Rome shall not fix the limits of my reign --
Queen of the east, I will extend my bounds,
And fill my treasures from Arabia's grounds.
Shall I my realm unite with that of Rome?
Unnamed, unnoticed, in the time to come --
By second marriage dispossess my son;
And daughter of the realms my hero won --
Children of Odenathus, youthful love --
Pledged at the altar, in Palmyra's grove.
By careless proxy will I be a Queen?
Is not Zenobia worthy to be seen?

Ven. This proud refusal ill becomes thy state,
The arms of Rome will speedy fix thy fate.

Zen. When Romans shall be just they will be my friends.
On the great Gods, not them, my fate depends.

[All withdraw.] ACT II.
SCENE I. -- ZOSIMUS ( entering here) and LONGINUS.
Zos. LONGINUS, I this female rule disdain;
Woman was never made over man to reign;
It Is plain inversion of all nature's laws,
And of weak measures is the endless cause --

Lon. Great Ode^athus' reign in justice stood;
The father of his people, sought their good --
He bad his Queen the sword of power retain,
Till his loved son the age of Empire gain.
To blame Zenobia's rule, no worthy cause
I find, it is well supported by our laws.

Zos. No laws against nature's principles avail.
Women are always proud, and always frail.
That they bold Empire over man should claim,
Sure it is to man an everlasting shame.

Lon. They will, if wise, the government retain,
For wisdom must over brutal valor reign,
But if we wiser, better are, than they,
Superior strength must bear an easy sway.

Zos. O yes, I know where the dispute must end,
With you, who always wast the sex's friend --

Lon. Friend as I am, if we discern in you
A mind more firm, a soul more just and true;
Sublimer science, or sublimer sense --
TO unfold the cause, or trace the consequence
Of all those powers, which sway the mighty state:
Justice be more your love, or wrongs your hate,
Prove yours a better heart, or better head,
Her we dethrone, and place you in her stead.

Zos. Your idol still adore, no more I say,
But that your idol will another day;
Perhaps before the next returning morn,
Provoke your censure, nay, will force your scorn.
You Will see this Queen, tho she her husband mourned,
Tho often with laurels has his tomb adorned;
Admit her husband's murderer to her loves;
And meet Aurelian in the sacred groves --

Lon. Plain truth must speak, let us judge of what we see,
The lovely sex retain esteem with me.
But lo! she comes, with plaintive music, see
The intent of all this solemn pageantry.

SCENE II -- The QUEEN (enters with her sister) ADMETA, ODENATHAS and OLENIA, (
and two ladies dressed in mourning.)
Zen. Thus every eve to the endeared shade,
The solemn offerings of my love be paid.
Since my first love, and last, that fatal day,
Became a mass of cold and lifeless clay;
By these sad rites, I every eve perform,
I Have kept my love, with dear remembrance warm.
( They sing to instrumental music.) THE DIRGE. Tune -- Dispairing Shepherd.
MY soul, at return of each eve,
Shall visit the tomb where he lies.
And the plentiful tribute shall give,
Of sorrow, from these flowing eyes.
'Twas not or thy beauty, or wealth,
Or thy fame, my soft soul did allure.
'Twas thy wisdom that won my fond heart;
And thy virtue that kept it secure.

( Zenobia takes two pictures and compares them.) Zen. Lo here, with bloody
hands Aurelian sues;
With thirst of plunder, and ambitious views;
O tell me, then, my sister and my friend,
Can I from such a Lord as this -- (shows her husband's picture) to that
descend? (shows Aurelian's picture)

Ad. (comparing the pictures) O how unlike thy former noble flame!
To lose thy glory, and to wed thy shame;
Protect my sister, heaven, from such a fate,
And keep her soul as virtuous as it is great.

Oden. (comparing the picture) O madam how unlike my worthy fire!
Can he to great Zenobia's heart aspire;
As well the mountain cedar might be made,
To bear alliance of the weeds they shade.

Olen. ( comparing the picture) As well the creeping bramble as it grows;
Might think to match the lily, or the rose,
As this dull face bereft of virtue's fire,
Might think to bear resemblance of my sire.

Zen. Let never anxious thoughts disturb thy mind;
To such a match I Am not the least inclined.
A second marriage is not always wrong:
But with fixed hatred and aversion strong,
It Is perjury. From Rome my griefs accrue;
I hate the Romans, and Aurelian too.
My once loved husband, took from all to come,
My loves, and bore them to the silent tomb.
SONG. Tune -- The Fly.
( Zenobia takes a cup with bitters infused in wine, drinks, the ladies sing
and drink round after her.) Sisters take the cup of woe;
Bitter draught, yet let it flow.
Be our solemn offerings paid;
TO Odenathus' glorious shade.
Sister take the cup of woe,
Bitter draught yet let it flow.
Thee possessor of my love,
Who alone that flame shall prove,
To my bosom I restore, ( Puts her husband's picture in her bosom.)
None did there repose before.
True to thee, my heart shall be.
None reposed there after thee.

( Gives Aurelian's picture to her sister -- Exit Zenobia.) SCENE III. --
ADMETA, OLENIA and ODENATHAS, ( all enter here.)
Ad. ALAS, this rumor fills my soul with dread,
For Rome has conquered and Palmyra fled.
The shouts of Romans rend the echoing air;
The Palmyrenes in terror and despair,
Seek the protection of their lofty wall,
Or faint with wounds, and with fatigue they fall --

Olen. Thus ends the kingdom of my noble sire --
O might Olenia in its fall expire!
Shall my dear mother bear the the victor's bands?
Olenia live a slave in foreign lands?
My brother from his patent father's throne,
Exiled beneath the Roman slavery, groan?
O grant, kind heaven, to souls oppressed, relief --
And launch thy thunder on the Roman chief.

Oden. Can these events from heaven's high will arise?
Are human actions viewed with equal eyes?
Just was my sire, in every act and deed --
Just was his Queen, who did to him succeed --
To Romans we have nothing done, that is wrong,
We but defend what rights to us belong --
Not even a fair pretense the Romans bear --
It Is all mere rage, and insolence of war --
Is it then, vain, in Power Divine to trust?
Or is it thus that power assists the just?

Adm. Forbear, rash youth, against heaven to repine,
Deep are the counsels of the Eternal mind.
The good shall yet be happy by his will,
And endless life his purposes fulfill --
But much, I fear, a scene of deepest woe,
Awaits us in this span of life below.

( Curtain closes, all withdraw.) ACT III.
SCENE I. -- AURELIAN and ZENOBIA.
[Drums, trumpets, and other martial music, are heard. Aurelian enters with a
number of Romans -- holds a conference with Zenobia.] [The stage may be
arranged as the Exhibitor pleases.] Au. ILLUSTRIOUS Queen, all nations speak
thy same.
What heart reveres not great Zenobia's name?
From Britain^s isle, to fartherest Ganges flood,
From Memphis' walls, to Scythia's boundless wood.
Thy worth, thy greatness, to the world is known;
And what majestic virtue fills thy throne.
See, to thy feet in arms, Aurelian come;
Victorious in the force of mighty Rome.
The noise of war, the rage of sight is still,
The victor comes to learn Zenobia's will.
Not he by careless proxy woos his Queen,
Zenobia, ever worthy to be seen;
Worthy to be admired by human kind.
Noble in person; perfect in her mind.
If thou the limits of thy reign confine,
Ten neighboring provinces shall all be thine.
The Queen of these as of Palmyra be.
And all their tributes shall accrue to thee.
If thou the neighboring provinces esteem,
The Emperor as thy consort thou may deem.
Lo! at thy feet, the bending nations fall,
And Rome's great Emperor adds himself to all.
Unite thy realm with that of peerless Rome;
And raise thy name through every age to come.

Zen. Unrivalled Emperor, whose deeds of war;
Thy valor, and the force of Rome declare.
Whose brave address, and rhetoric might incline,
Perhaps even any woman's heart but mine.
Say, is not Rome an enemy to me?
Does she not send that proud, unjust decree,
That I no more be styled Queen of the East,
Nor wear the Roman eagle on my crest?
That I renounce my league with Persia's bands,
And lose the profits of the Arabian lands?
Nor of my palace rear the lofty dome,
Lest proud Palmyra aim to rival Rome.
Why is Zenobia ordered to obey?
Is not Zenobia great and free as they?

Au. If Rome be rigorous I have glorious cause,
To soften and to mitigate her laws.
Naught in thy favor can the Emperor move,
For just regards, like all subduing love.
The dearest joy which warms the human breast.
Submit to Rome, and leave to me the rest.

Zen. Great was my Hero, glorious in his charms*
Of person, glorious in the deeds of arms.
Yet not his valor or his charms could move.
His wisdom and his virtues won my love.
Had he Adonis' form and grace confessed,
Had he the riches of the boundless East,
With these attempted this one heart to gain,
Without his virtues, he had sued in vain.
Vain are the splendors of love darting eyes,
Vain is the tender eloquence of sighs,
Vain is the enchantment of the wordy tongue,
Which may obscure the right, or paint the wrong;
Vain are the empty glories of a throne.
It Is merit warms my heart, and that alone.
What are thy merits, great Aurelian, say?
Did thou not my best friend my husband slay?
Did thou not burn my cities, waste my lands,
Condemn my citizens to slavery's bands?
For all these injuries must I receive
Thy love, and for Aurelian's glory live?

Au. But if thy heart Aurelian's suit should move,
And thou again shall taste the sweets of love;
Each painful thought, and every mournful trace
Of injury, his goodness shall efface.

Zen. Like the blessed heavens was Odenathus kind.
No power can blot him from my faithful mind.
In all the purity of maiden love,
I met him in Palmyra's sacred grove,
Before the altar, on the fragrant green
Where plighted youth, and promised maids are seen.
That sacred compact by the Gods designed,
There ^de us one, in interest as in mind.
And since his dread decease I still retain,
His living virtues in each pulse and vein.
In painful absence wear the gloomy years;
And every eve bedew his tomb with tears.
The sacred union by the Gods designed,
Can never be dissolved within my mind.
In all the dignity of nuptial love,
I Will meet his spirit in the world above.
Through days eternal shall our loves increase,
United heirs of heaven's unbounded bliss.

Au. Dread are the orders of Imperial Rome.
Resisting nations meet their certain doom.
Even on the summit of a victory won,
Rome visits thee, and would sustain thy crown.
Thy proud refusal is thy certain fate --
Consider this, nor be thou wise too late.

Zen. What can such rude unmanly frenzy move?
Do thou expect to fright me into love?
In my defense all Persia shall arise;
And all Arabia to my succor flies.
All nations against the Romans shall agree,
Quite from the Caspian to the Persian sea.
If not, and by thy sword my armies fall --
Poor are all triumphs on this earthly ball;
Not death affrights, by death our souls arise
To claim dominion in our native skies.

Au. This proud refusal ill becomes thy state;
The arms of Rome will speedy fix thy fate.

Zen. Think not such unheroic threats I fear
Thy further conference I disdain to hear.

[Queen withdraws with Longinus.] SCENE II. -- AURELIAN, SEMPRONIUS, VENTIDIUS
and GABINIUS.
Au. WHAT think ye Romans, of this haughty Dame?
Shall your Aurelian bear the lasting shame,
That this Zenobia should his loves refuse?
And the indulgent care of Rome abuse?
Say shall our arms besiege this lofty wall?
This Queen behold this mighty empire fall?
Or while with shame our panting hearts shall burn,
Despised, repulsed, shall we to Rome return?

Ven. It Is my advice that we to Rome return,
And let our hearts with love of virtue burn.
Is it a crime in women to refuse?
That one poor right we suffer them to use.
If they shall seek us, they must shame defy;
When they shall dare to avoid us, must they die?
Return to Rome, and speak Zenobia's fame;
The senate will respect so great a name.
Then thou, at Rome, forever shall be seen;
The nobler patron of a glorious Queen --
Respect the impartial voice of future fame;
And add new glories to thy rising name.

Au. Say Romans all, and freely speak your mind,
To bold Ventidius are your tho'ts inclined?

Gab. Sure they are not, the policy of Rome --
In ages past, why not in time to come --
Has been to gra^p whatever it could hold --
Subtle in treaties, and in conquest bold --
Romans are freemen, thence they have their fame.
None other must usurp the darling name.
Then let this city be besieged and burned;
The kingdom to a Roman province turned.

Sem. Such is the practice of the Roman state;
By this has Rome become so rich, and great --
Nor need we much for rights of nations care,
The right of nations is the strength of war;
The allies of Rome to her are taught to bow,
Say, is not each a Roman province now?
Why should we vary from the usual way?
Of rich Palmyra lose the destined prey?

Ven. True is the bold effusion of thy tongue,
It Is Roman policy, but it is wrong.
It Is this that fills Rome with intestine jars,
It Is this involves the state in endless wars --
But still as free my purpose I declare,
Nor will the gross unrighteous counsel share --
And future times shall know it, if they can,
That Rome contained at least one honest man.

Au. Thou art too honest. Yet are we secure --
The major vote our counsels shall ensure --
Quick to the field, Ventidius, we repair;
We hope we shall not find the coward there.

[ Ex^ Romans. -- Scene closes.] ACT IV.
SCENE I -- ODENATHUS, ADMETA and OLENIA.
Oden. O MY sweet friends! the happiest news we hear;
The Persian armies on our plains appear.
All Syria's troops, Arabia's forces come!
Soon shall we drive these robbers back to Rome.

Ad. The smallest hope my drooping soul revives;
My heart with dear Zenobia only lives!
Of her distress might some relief arise,
No greater bliss for me beneath the skies.

Oden. It shall I trust, all clad in brilliant arms,
The Persians come and glory's dreadful charms
Inflame their hearts. The Roman cohorts bright
But ra^se them, and inflame them for the fight.
To aid our counsels, and to bring them on;
To join our troops; is great Longinus gone --
That by no spies their plan should be deranged*
His clothes and arms with Zosimus he changed.

Ad. He bears to Rome and women equal hate,
All say he is honest, some may say he is great.
Like some fierce dog let him the state defend.
A fox to us, tho to the state a friend.

[Zosimus enters.] Olen. How leaps my heart with prospect of relief!
What months have I consumed in tears and grief?
Such fate may Romans meet, from Persian bands
As Crassus met in farther Syria's lands --
Soon may my mother's righteous heart overflow,
With joy, as it has long been drowned in woe. [Exit]

SCENE II. -- SEMPRONIUS (enters) and ZOSIMUS.
Sem. FAR famed Longinus, Rome perceives thee wise,
Thy glory fills the earth and mounts the skies --
O can a genius so sublime as thine!
To woman's empire and command resign?
I come, and secrets of our state disclose*
To put an end to sad Palmyra's woes.

Zos. It Is true the Queen and all her sex I hate,
No woman ever yet was wise, or great.

Sem. Then I this mass of solid gold will pay
( He gives the gold to a servant: takes it and bears it away.) If you her
cause, and counsels will betray --
And give the conquest up to mighty Rome,
Which learns to fear, since Persia's troops are come.

Zos. I Will take thy gold -- you know I hate the Queen,
Soon in my deeds my hatred shall be seen --
Yet still one circumstance occurs to thought,
By varying time, which must to light be brought.
The gr^^t Longinus here you do not see;
But only his resemblance pla^ in me --
For purposes of state his ga^^ I wear;
For purposes of state his arms I bear,
This weighty bribe of gold my heart will cheer,
But still the great Longinus is not here --

Sem. Thou pest, thou knave, have I then been deceived?
And Zosimus, that miscreant, has received
Rome's massy gold? yes thou indeed art be,
The meanest thing that is found by land or sea.
For manners vile thou art thy court's disgrace,
And for thy hatred to the beauteous race*
Rome for Longinus any price would pay;
But thou -- two farthings would thy worth out weigh.
Yet still my craft I ply, the scale may change,
I will, if prosperous, feed my keen revenge.

Exit Sempronius. Zos. alone. Thus have I gratified my endless hate,
And led my malice to the Roman state.
A weighty bribe ^and worthy Rome to give,
By which on pleasure Zosimus might live;
Except within thy ill-defended wall --
By Roman vengeance destined soon to fall,
Must Zosimus in sad Palmyra stay?
May he not bear himself and wealth away?
And harmless in some quiet region live --
On all those pleasures which his wealth might give.
No wife, no children, bind me to the state --
Those nauseous names, I hold in mortal hate --
The simple though it of love would make me sick;
What shall I do? Let my resolves be quick --
Then thus they are -- myself I will convey --
And wealth from sad Palmyra, far away --
Some peaceful mansion of the world to find --
Remote from wars, remote from woman kind --
There by myself would on my riches live,
With neither much to buy nor much to give.
There will I dwell in happy sloth and ease,
While all my pleasure is myself to please.

( Exit Zosimus.) ACT V.
SCENE I. -- ODENATIUS, ADMETA and OLENIA.
Ad. WWHAT sad presages damp my soul with fear,
No terms of peace will sad Zenobia hear,
Nor of obedience to the Roman power --
And all depends upon this hateful hour.

Od. I blame her not: would she submit to Rome,
And make us slaves in every age to come?
True on the brink of fate Longinus stands,
A captive taken by the Roman bands.
With him the counsels of our trembling state
Are known to those who bear us endless hate.
Yet in captivity he knows his friends --
Careful for us, he to Zenobia sends --
Never to ^ringe and court the Roman power --
But hold our Empire to the latest hour --

Olen. How could he give such counsel when he sees
Our Empire trembling at the smallest breeze?
Better as suppliants to the Romans fall;
And something save, although we cannot all.

Oden. Yet thus Longinus writes, Let not the queen
Sully her glory by a deed so mean;
As to submit to threatening Roman bands;
Or join in nuptial rites with bloody hands --
The Romans are a crafty, hardy race,
In empire all their wealth and glory place --
While all their mercy is a trick of war,
And their alliance, power to domineer.
Should great Zenobia nuptial rites prepare,
To meet in gentle love this man of war;
Her marriage could no solid rights convey;
Each slight suspicion, sends his wife away.
At Rome -- Each husband of divorce has power,
And can dismiss his wife at any hour.
He counsels Queen Zenobia to beware,
Since Roman love, is part of Roman war.
Nor would he anxious their alliance crave,
It Is but the privilege to be a slave.
Sad is the doom of every hapless state --
Small in extent, but joined with one that is great.
Nothing makes liberty a glorious word --
But independence guarded by the sword.

SCENE II. -- ZENOBIA (entering) ADMETA, OLFNIA and ODENATHUS.
Zen. STILL sorrow must Zenobia's steps pursue,
Fated to taste of griefs, both strange and new.
The wretched Zosimus who meanly ^ed,
To hide in lands remote his sordid head,
Has fallen a victim to the Roman sword.
The Romans who his documents explored;
There found enclosed our golden seal of state,
My secret counsels too, of endless weight;
That seal to my perdition they employ,
And all my plans of sure defense destroy.
Sealed with that stamp they write to Persia's bands,
And troops that come from wild Arabia's lands,
That we renounce our league in time to come,
And join in compact with imperial Rome,
With curses they retire, from yonder plain,
And seek their lands and native homes again.
They leave defenseless sad Palmyra's wall,
By force of Romans destined soon to fall.

Adm. From that vile miscreant all our sorrow flows;
Say what weak counsels could the state expose
To such a wretch of surly cynic mood;
Who hating women, hated all that is good?

Zen. It Was not my counsel, but his sober air,
Imposed on men of merit just and rare.
To him Longinus dared the state to trust;
Longinus always though it him good and just.

Olen. That man will never just or honest prove*
Who curses women and despises love --
Examine all the sex -- 'twill be confessed,
The man who has the tenderest heart is best.

Zen. Be It true or false, all maids will think it true,
Tho to that maxim just regard is due --
Domestic love subdues the seeds of hate;
Who loves his family, will love the state --
But we have lost -- our future fate is known,
To heaven, on whom it must depend alone.

Adm. Then, sister, save the state, regard not me --
Send to Aurelian, to his terms agree --
Tho we our right of government must lose:
Tho humble state, and private life we choose --
To save thy people, sister -- condescend:
Be thy own foe, to be thy people's friend.

Olen. Dear parent, save thyself, regard not me,
Send to Aurelian, to his terms agree.
What tho my right to Empire should be lost;
Tho endless pain and bondage be the cost;
To me, yet dearest parent, save thy life,
And with thy people, end the bloody strife.

Oden. I will not counsel -- let so great a mind
Decree, as it shall find itself inclined.

Zen. Naught it avails -- for universal fame,
That conquest and alliance are the same,
At Rome declares. The Sacred marriage bands,
Give but dominion over unconquered lands.
Nor need the nuptial banquet be our care;
For Roman love is part of Roman war,
By which besieging hearts of tender Queens,
Cold to their persons keep their rich demesnes --
Man is my so; but heaven shall be my friend,
At every step I will on heaven depend.
Influence Divine, and light of truth my guide,
G^ory's my pleasure, virtue is my pride --
Of my first love, the pure, and spotless wife,
I Will close with honest fame a virtuous life --
^er, and children, may it be your fate --
To live far distant from the Roman state --
To fatherest bounds of earth your flight be sped,
To where a Roman foot shall never tread.
Where Roman armies come, the earth's accursed.
Kings, Queens, must bleed, and cities lie in dust --
Then think not I will their alliance crave --
Shall your Zenobia be a Roman slave?
Shall I espouse the man who caused our woes?
Who causeless ruin on our city throws?
Who our fair villages with fury burns?
Who all our pleasant fields to deserts turns?
Receive his ruthless hands imbathed in slaughter,
While my pale husband's ghost comes bleeding after?

Admeta, Odenathus and Olenia, betake themselves to flight -- martial music and
shouts are approaching. SCENE III. -- AURELIAN, ZENOBIA, LONGINUS, SEMPRONIUS,
GABINIUS, and VENTIDIUS.
[ Shouts are heard "Palmyra is ours" -- with martial music, Aurelian enters in
triumph, with the Roman officers -- with Longinus a prisoner.] Au. AT length, O
Romans, victory crowns our arms,
Pleasure invites, and glory spreads her charms.
Let all our troops through the vast town with care
Collect the riches; but the persons spare.

Zen. O wondrous clemency, their lives to give!
While still you take the wealth on which they live.
B^tter to leave them to the Roman sword,
Which might a sure and speedy death afford,
Than rob them of their food, and leave to pine,
And sick with lingering torments life resign.

Au. Ambitious Qu^en, your pride is now no more,
Soon our high court your conduct must explore.
Romans be sea^ed -- (Roman officers seat themselves, -- Aurelian showing
Zenobia) See this haughty dame,
Against mighty Rome her enemies inflame,
Ha^h formed a mighty league with Persia's bands,
And grasped the tributes of the eastern lands.
Has of her palace raised the lofty dome --
And bad the proud Palmyra rival Rome,
Has the indulgent care of Rome refused,
Her Emperor insulted and abused.

Zen. Of one famed spouse the pure and spotless wife,
I lived in humble peace a virtuous life --
My grandeur was not built on others woe --
My state enlarged as virtue made it grow.
The Romans make their leagues with whom they will:
I but my pleasure in my league fulfill --
My honest citizens, to virtue born,
In Roman fields never touch a blade of corn --
I to my bounds my soldiers did confine,
Aurelian, can the like be said of thine?
Is it a crime that I preserve my love?
To meet my husband in the realms above,
Through days eternal that our love increase,
United heirs, of heaven's unbounded bliss?
And since thou have preferred a deed so mean --
To bring the patron of a noble Queen --
Know for the wealth of worlds I would not be
Content to hold connubial rights with thee.
In virtue I have lived, in glory I
With all my nuptial purity will die --
Not long in this vile world my soul shall stay,
To worlds celestial soon shall wing its way.
And bowing only to the Almighty seat,
Shall lay my matchless sorrows at his feet.

Au. This slave was envoy to the Persian bands, pointing to Longinus.
And to the chiefs of wild Arabia's lands;
Against Rome he bro't the nations to agree;
Quite from the Persian to the Caspian sea --
Which league, unbroken, ere the present hour,
Had bro't defeat on all the Roman power --
Speak Romans then, your sentences declare
By Roman custom -- and the rights of war --

Sem. Then I condemn.

Gab. And I --

Ven. But I acquit.
To punish innocence was never fit.
No cause, or ground, in justice, have I seen --
To hurl destruction on this virtuous Queen.

Au. Their condemnation you by right of war,
By office I, their sentence now declare --
Then hear Longinus -- this your fate must be
To feed the ravens on the accursed tree --
Zenobia, you a prisoner judged for life,
Who might have been the Roman Emperor's wife --
Nor is there aught unusual in your doom.
Such is the fate of all the foes of Rome.
Yet some distinction for a Queen remains;
You, soldiers, bind the Queen in golden chains,
To grace my triumph -- Then what shouts shall rise;
Aurelian's name shall thunder to the skies;
In Rome, when at the Capitol, is seen --
In chains of gold, the famous Eastern queen.

Lon. Ye heavens! Injustice now has reached its height.
No place is found for virtue, or for right --
That I was faithful -- was my only crime,
To her whose fame shall fill the extent of time.
Willing I perish with our nation's laws,
Content to die in such a glorious cause;
Nations afar and distant times shall hear,
Longinus was to great Zenobia dear --
By this my name all glorious shall descend,
To realms where Roman arms shall not extend.
Nor think that all thy deeds, unjust* and mean --
Can to destruction sink this noble Queen --
Soon shall my spirit on her steps arise,
To happy recompense above the skies;
And since in power divine she dared to trust,
Applauding spirits of the good, and just,
Through heaven's high arch shall sound Zenobia's name,
Whilst thou shall sink to everlasting shame.

Zen. To the Supreme, not thee -- shall I submit --
And bring my matchless wrongs before his seat --
Why turn'st thou pale, at so remote a fear?
Why tremble -- Know, Zenobia meets thee there!

[Queen is carried off -- Ex Aurelian and soldiers except Ventidius.] Ven.
alone. What strange events roll over this earthly ball
Alternate states and empires rise and fall!
The wrong may prosper -- Vice triumphant rides
Over ^ecks of nations, and an empire guides --
Lo here, this Queen, her Orphans, and her state,
Unjustly, victims of Aurelian's hate --
That then is true, which Christian sages say.
That heaven has, in reserve, a GLORIOUS DAY
To bring forth all the deeds of men to light --
And every one as he deserves, requite --
To laws of heaven's high JUSTICE then resigned,
No wrongful deed shall ever stain my mind;
And hence it shall be known, in years to come --
Our honest man -- Ventidius, lived in Rome.

[Exit Ventidius.] The Orphan of China. A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
VIRTUE IS THE ONLY SURE BASIS OF LIBERTY.
It is reported of the Empire of China, by historians, that it has three times
been conquered by foreign powers; yet has retained its own laws. Tho historians
know little, positively, of the nature of its government, and what they have
written concerning it, may have little fact to support it; yet if it be true,
that its institutions have stood the shock of so many conquests, the
presumption is, that they are excellent.

PERSONS.
MEN.
TARTARS.
GENGIS KHAN -- Emperor and General of the Tartars. OCTAR -- his ^i^-de camp.
ALICON -- Lieut. General, and a factious demagogue.
CHINESE.
ZAMTI -- Mandarin, chief of the order, and tutor to the Orphan. CONFU -- an
aged Counselor. PARDO -- a Senator. ZEPHOR -- a youth to whom Semira had been
promised. ORPHAN -- Son of the Emperor of China, and Emperor-elect. SON -- of
the Mandarin, of the same age with the Orphan.

WOMEN.
MANDANE -- wife of Zamti. SEMIRA -- daughter of Zamti.
SCENE. -- The palace of Zamti. The action is supposed to begin when the
Emperor is seen from the palace to fall, and the standards of the Tartars to be
planted on the walls.

THE ORPHAN OF CHINA.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- ZAMTI and CONFU.
Zam. THIS moment, from above, destruction pours,
On ancient Cathay's time enduring towers.
The foes already mount the broken wall;
Proud Pekin nods, and totters to her fall.
In her vast compass, every sex, and age,
Wives, husbands, children, sires, await the rage,
Of conquering savages of Tartar's wood;
Inured to cruelty; and bathed in blood.
No arm resists; no fortress can defend:
But in one vast destruction, all must end.

Con. If such the sovreign will, submit we must;
Our people slaughtered: cities laid in dust;
Our daughters, sons, to die unearthed, unmourned:
Our lovely wives to brutal strangers turned.
Such is the vengeance of the power divine;
Such his chastisement, of his people's sin.

Zam. Just is the wrath of heaven, when human crimes
Awake his vengeance, in these worst of times.
However we sin, however break his laws,
Each adverse fortune has its proper cause.
Say by whose fault our troops have lost the field?
Why China's heroes to base Tartars yield?
Has some cursed traitor, for vile hoards of gold,
His state, his freedom, his religion sold?
Or cowardice, or cold remission, lost
The important day, while empires pay the cost.

Con. A powerful faction long has vexed the state --
The dark cabal has parcelled out to slaves,
Rich parasites, and hungry crafty knaves.
Each post and place of profit and of trust,
Merit in darkness now is left to rust.
That the loud demagogue in evil hour,
May glut his vengence by the force of power.
This is a common ill, which freedom draws,
A bad effect* yet from a noble cause.
A raw unskillful youth your armies led:
They saw the foes, they trembled, and they f^ed:
Such chiefs our people sought* with frantic rage,
Their tears shall mourn the fault through every age.

Zam. This arm is ^ow too old for deeds of fame.
Nor can your Zamti boast a warrin^^s (...).
Yet now full sooner would I yield my breath,
More gladly tread the darksome vale of death,
Than see my nation's woes* O much loved friend,
Must then this day all China's glories end?
Must I no more my friends, my people, see,
And with glad transports say -- That they are free?

Con. Small is the prospect now, of good to come;
Black fate impends and ruin is our doom.
Yet China has been conquered, yet is free;
And that which once has been, again may be.
FORCE may the fate of single battles sway;
WISDOM will bear the final palm away.
Twice have barbarian's victors in the field,
To China's virtuous laws been taught to yield.
So some small prospect gleams upon my sight,
Of hopes which glimmer through the clouds of night.

Zam. Yet much I fear that all your hopes are vain,
Already, now, I see my people slain.
I see our domes in spiry flames arise,
Staining with awful light the sanguine skies.
The Orphan's shrieks, I hear the widow's tear:
Her loud laments, the trembling maidens ^ear,
Expressed in shrieks to pierce the flint-formed heart,
And fixed in lover's breast, war's deadly dart.
Each sight of woe now saddens to my eye,
And with the rest, would Zamti choose to die.

Con. Yet to the last we'll hold our nation's fate;
The loss of freedom cannot be too late --
Nor yield our laws for fear of threatened death,
But keep them sacred to the latest breath.
Our chief, our Emperor, was doomed to fall,
When first barbarians mou^^^^ on (...) ^all.
There while he calls his people to the fight,
To wield their weapons in their nation's right --
The father of his people at their head,
Full glorious to rep^se in honor's bed.
His Orphan Son long trusted to your care;
The blossom of his glories young and fair.
Let him your care, and all your tho'ts engage,
To save him harmless from the victor's rage.
What tho our proud metropolis be hurled,
To boundless ruin, which once awed the world -- *
Yet still the nation with its freeborn bands,
May save the Empire from barbarian hands.
They Will hear the illustrious orphan is alive,
That fame shall all their fainting hopes revive.
And to our troops who still our cause defend,
The precious hopes of empire we will send.
They Will see his orphan face, regard his s^re,
And thurst of glory shall their bosoms fire.
The bold Core^ans still maintain the field,
And meditate to make proud Tartars yield.

Zam. Thy words kind Confu how they wake my soul.
New tho'ts new projects in my bosom roll.
Already I imagine deeds sublime.
Shall China fall one moment ere her time?
No -- if one hair's breadth from the brink of fate,
We'll hold it fast; and still maintain the state.
While law remains your Zamti must be free,
And if our laws must die they die with me.

SCENE II. -- Enter ZAMTI and GENGIS.
(Gengis and Octar enter with drums, trumpets, etc.) Zam. Come then O Gengis,
strike the fatal blow,
I would not perish by a meaner foe.

Genesis No Zamti, I resign a victor's rage.
Respect thy wisdom, and thy reverend age.
China is mine. I^ve won it by my sword,
Nor will I yield it to another Lord.
Renounce thy simple laws, submit to me,
And Zamti may be happy, yet, and free.
Such love as to a fire a son can give;
Ge^gis shall cher^sh for you, while you live.
You shall my riches and my counsel share,
And of my glories you the some shall bear.
When I have cities won, and conquest made,
All this was Zamti's counsel, 'twill be said.
Your name for wisdom, mine for deeds sublime,
Shall sail with glory down the stream of time.

Zam. Will thou O Gengis bid the Chinese live*
Can thou new breath to slaughtered heroes ^ve?
Restore again the horrid waste of war,
And China's freedom make thy constant ^are
And own the Orphan, China's lawful heir?
Then Zamti might to thee his counsels give,
Then Zamti think it not a shame to live.

Genesis Illustrious Mandarin, tho thy worth is known;
Where is the Prince who yields a conquered throne?
The Orphan heir must die -- If he shall live,
Nothing to Gengis can possession give.
The people still will love the infant son
Of their late lord, who all their hearts had won.
New tumults, new seditions, will be bred,
Till their loved chief is placed at their head.
The Orphan then must die. I mourn his fate;
Yet still it is just -- we thus secure the state.

Zam. On weak foundations, empires always stood,
Who laid their cornerstone in death and blood?

Genesis Nay more, when once to aid my nation's claim,
Ambassador to China's court I came,
By name of Temugin, I vainly strove,
To gain thy lovely daughter's grace and love --
But now as China's conqueror I stand,
And sweet Semira as my wife demand.
She must submit; and thou must give consent --
Naught else all China's ruin can prevent.

Zam. When once was Temugin thy humble name,
Thou virtuous wast, but thou have lost all shame.
The imperial crown devoted to thy head,
Has rendered thee to sense and virtue dead.
Shall I betray my Orphan charge to death,
Or wrong the maid who drew from me her breath?
Force dear Semira soft as gentle doves,
From the kind bosom of the youth she loves?
Rather demand my life -- I Am old but brave;
Will Zamti live to crouch, and be a slave?

Con. Forbear, O virtuous sage, the excess of ire,
Let prudent counsels milder words inspire,
And thou, great Gengis, whose extended sway
A hundred nations willingly obey,
Hear me a moment; take the voice of fame;
Let future nations speak with love thy name.
Force not the sage to yield the prince to death,
With solemn oaths who kept his infant breath.
If Zamti could his Orphan charge betray,
Say would he keep his oath, to own thy sway?
And he the curse of heaven must always dread,
Who'd force his daughter to a loathed bed --
Of genuine marriage love's the only cause:
It Is nature's voice; and sanctioned by our laws.
Let not the Sire provoke the angry fates;
Or force his daughter to a match she hates.

Genesis What Is all this plea of law and right to me?
Did ever laws with conquering force agree?
I am your master now. It Is my demand.
Grant it, or feel my vengeance' rigid hand.
Be the young heir delivered to our will.
It Is ours; our captive; to preserve or kill --
And let the maid, adorned with heavenly charms,
Prepare to grace her conquering hero's arms.
But if you dare my order disobey;
Vengeance is mine; and I shall give it way --
Keen as the hounds, who scent their destined prey,
Stand in the slips, in act to spring away.
My troops their places on your walls maintain,
My orders scarce their vengeance can restrain.
I give the word, myriads on myriads fall;
And wide destruction fills your spacious wall.
No tender cares in soldiers' bosoms rest,
For trembling maids, or infants at the breast:
All fall in countless heaps; and ruin meets,
Wi^h slaughter, through your long, capacious streets.
No sense of kindness will restrain their rage,
Without respect to rank, or sex, or age.
Your countless people one destruction waits;
Till streams of blood shall flow from all your gates.
Then you; your domes; the thundering flame shall rise,
Till low in dust the vanquished city lies.
Weigh well your state nor dare to disobey
Lest I, incensed, should give to vengeance way.
[Ex. Gengis and Octar. -- Zamti and Pardo follow with anxiety.]
ACT II.
SCENE I. -- CONFU, PARDO and ZAMTI. (All entering here)
Par. JOY to my friends, my dear copatriots joy;
Let though it of conquest now your minds employ.
The succors are arrived -- and Corea's lands
Pour hardy millions of their rustic bands.
Where yonder turret lifts its head on high,
'Bove the vast temple to the midway sky;
Ascending there, I took the boundless view,
Till the green earth commixed with heavenly blue.
All to the west I saw in martial charms,
Millions of rusti^ heroes rush to arms:
All clad in terror their grim front appears;
And Tartar bands confess their savage fears.
From the vast wall they call their bands away;
And form them in the field in close array:
Soon shall we see the blaze of battle burn;
And China may be victor in her turn.

Con. Then send the Orphan by approved hands,
And lodge him safe with the Core^an bands.
His well known face shall animate their host;
And China shall the hour of conquest boast.

Par. Illustrious Confu, Heaven has made thee wise.
The hour of danger human wisdom tries.
Had once thy counsel met with willing ears,
China had known a length of prosperous years.
But dark cabals, but formed to vex the state,
Each clamorous patriot aiming to be great;
Without all right, their own self will the cause;
Made all our officers, and made the laws;
Inflamed the mob, with jealousies and fears;
And bold contempt of all that truth reveres;
Condemned the just, and set the knave on high,
And he who spoke the truth must speak and die.
Then boys were senators, and courts were filled,
With men, in justice, right and law unskilled.
Ambitious sons who would commissions bear,
First got them sealed, then learned the art of war.
'Twas not the arm of Gengis victory won,
For China was by China's self undone.

Zam. I cannot, patriots, yield to your commands,
Nor send the Orphan to the Corean bands.
That same raw chief to scenes of battle new;
That the Chinese leads the Coreans too.
Their wide tumultuous force the battle tries;
Meeting their fate the hapless orphan dies.
Our patriots then, dispirited and lost,
Become the victims of the Tartar host.

Par. Just is thy reason, much approved sage;
Wisdom is servant to thy reverend age.

Con. My first well seeming purpose I withdraw,
And rest our fate upon the truth and law.
Far mightier than a^ms the truth is known;
Arms may distroy but truth supports a throne.

Zam. Then thus I counsel -- Firm let us remain --
Firm to the truth nor shrink at death or pain.
The power of heaven in all its boundless might,
Can never change the wrong and make it right.
Yet heaven can change the heart of kings at will,
And make their rage his purposes fulfill.
Rivers of water flow with mighty force,
Yet wind and turn in their majestic course:
So heaven can change the imperial mind at will,
And make its rage his purposes fulfill.
The imperial power by conscious virtue led,
In paths of justice may be taught to tread.

Par. Then let our hope, the Orphan, be retained,
Semira's modest virtue be unstained;
Nor let us yield the truth in all we say;
Nor spend one breath to flatter lawless sway;
Nor yield a law to Gengis 'till we die,
And our vast city in one ruin lie.
The Coreans now may conquer -- victory's given,
Not by mere force, but by the will of heaven.
Or if they fail, yet we, determined, try
The force of truth, and virtue, till we die.

SCENE II. -- GENGIS and OCTAR.
(As Gengis advances -- they slowly recede) Genesis WHAT means this tumult on the
subject plain?
Does conquered China rise in arms again?
Why have our troops forsook the vanquished wall,
And subject Pekin breathes, nor fears her fall.
Has some persidious chief our cause betrayed?
Or have my firm commands been disobeyed?

Oct. No, all obedience, sire, is firm and true,
The Tartar nation loves and trusts in you --
But from her northern hive Corea pours
Her troops like drops of rain, in summer showers.
All clad in steel, and horrid to the ^ight,
They clam^^ on, and hurry to the fight,
Foreseeing this, the prudent Alicon,
From all the walls the separate troops has drawn;
And ranged them in the field in firm array,
And waits your orders for the important day.

Con. Coreans? must they come, a dastard band?
Are there no graves in all Corea's land?
That they their fortune must in battle try,
And by the hands of valiant Tartars die?
Ah! must I never from the battle cease,
Or slay mankind to keep mankind in peace?
One war I wage, and ere that war is done,
It Is that same war that brings another on.
It Is still my doom to fight and to destroy,
Encounter every ill, and feel no joy.
From early youth I Have heard dire war's alarm,
From early youth, have marched in cumbrous arms.
Sweet love's delight and calm domestic peace,
I never knew; my labors never cease.
Yet must we try the field of blood amain,
And drive these Coreans to their farms again.

Oct. Yet Alicon enquires, by what array,
Your wisdom dictates, he may win the day,
Sudden attack to drive the foes to flight,
Or just maneuvers and a standing fight.
All may depend upon this single hour,
And Gengis' victor now, may fight no more.

Genesis Firm let the troops be held in bright array,
Not from the strictest rules of ^ight, to stray.
In open field -- let all inclosure^ ^ound,
That shield a foe, be levelled with the ground.
Then wait their first attack upon the plain,
And let them waste their barbarous force in vain.
Let all our squadrons firmly keep their ground,
While fierce barbarian bands enclose them round,
Within the compass of the level plain.
Then suddenly display their warlike train
From both their wings in order just and true,
And cut the wild barbarian horde in two.
Then turn their flank, and pour upon their rear,
And with loud shouts increase their savage fear.
Then shall the Coreans, by fierce Tartars driven,
Disperse to all the madding winds of heaven.
But first proclaim the reign of Gengis here,
To strike the adjoining nations round with fear.

Oct. Hear all ye tribes and nations from the east,
To where the sun flames in the distant west.
And ere he close the living eyes of day,
Shed over the world a mild and placid ray.
Know ye that Gengis, whose extended reign,
A hundred nations willingly maintain,
Has conquered China's force in open field,
And made that ancient, haughty Empire yield.
Let all to Gengis yield obedience due;
His laws receive with hearts sincere and true.
What nation shall his law and will oppose,
That nation shall be counted as his foes.
That nation must prepare for bloody fight.
By force alone must prove their martial right.
But if the nations round from wars shall cease,
And China yield to Gengis, rule in peace;
Content with fortune, Gengis will remain,
Nor more shall thunder on the martial plain.
Gengis with pleasure shall dismiss his sword,
If conquering China own him lawful lord.

(Ex^ Gengis and Octar.) ACT III.
SCENE I. -- ZAMTI, PARDO, CONFU, ORPHAN, and the SON.
(Zamti enters with his associates, bringing in the Orphan and his own Son.)
Zam. HERE, fathers, here, the hope of China see,
Entrusted by a solemn ^^th to me.
I swore by the great light which rules the day,
And over the universe extends his sway;
The noblest lessons of our laws to give,
And save his person harmless while I live.
Can I resign him to the savage lord?
Break my great oath, and give him to the sword?

Par. Bear witness now Heavens great eternal fire,
O will thou see our Orphan hope empire?
O thou bright image of the man beloved,
Who can behold thee and remain unmoved?
How noble was the sire! and yet how mild;
He loved his people as he loved his child.
Denying food and drink, and sleep, and rest,
'Twas his prime joy to see his people blessed.
The tenderest mother amongst the tender fair,
Never watched her infant with a kinder care,
Than he his people. When they sunk in woe,
How did his tears in kind condolence flow.
And when they prospered, how! with heart elate;
'Twas his great joy to see a joyous state
How this sweet picture now incites desire.
Is not the son the image of the sire?
O might he live to rule a virtuous state,
And like his sire be generous, good, and great.

Con Then let him live in vengeance' utmost spite,
In doing wrong we never find the right.
In spite of Gengis' threats preserve our joy,
It Is thine O heaven to save, or to destroy.
In virtue's cause the rage of death defy,
And if we (...) ^n doing good we die.

Za^. (...) my charge, the state's, the people's joy;
(...) I gave the virtuous boy.
Words, which if fixed within thy virtuous mind,
Thou will to good and virtue be inclined.

Orph. First to heaven's awful Lord, with reverence bow;
The next great duty to the state we owe.
To parents next and friends we owe respect;
Nor neighbor, nor our kindred, should neglect;
Content with what we have, in virtue live;
And count it joy to see our neighbors thrive.
Nor be elated in the day of power;
Nor envy others in the adverse hour.
Respect the truth; respect our neighbor's right;
Restrain the rage of malice, and of spite,
Keep all our sensual passions on the rein,
And even our love to law and rule restrain.
In doing this, we never from good shall cease;
In doing this, shall live and die in peace.

Zam. But how must he who rules over other men,
His innocence and dignity maintain?

Orph. Who rules over other men himself must keep;
Renounce his food, his ease, his drink and sleep.
Safe from false gains, must keep his pious hands;
And bind his passions fast in virtue's bands.
All others must outwork, and all excel,
In gentle manners, and in doing well.
The softest kindness should pervade his breast;
And guide his daily toils, and nightly rest,
To make his people happy, for the great,
By greater sufferings only, prove their state.
It Is by good deeds to eminence we soar;
And he who governs states must serve them more.

Zam. And now, my son, whose life my name sustains,
Who bear my blood, renewed in all thy veins,
Say, of the pious precepts lately gained,
And printed on thy mind have thou retained.

Son. The earth, sea, heaven, and stars in heaven that shine,
Are all the workmanship of Power Divine.
These, in their blessed returns of night and day,
The glories of their heavenly Lord display.
All which in heavenly space and order shine,
Proclaim the glories of the Power Divine.
It Is his Almighty Power resistless re^gns*
In earth, in air, in ocean's liquid plains.
His are the fowls, which wing the vernal breeze,
His are the scaly millions of the seas.
His are the blossoms of the lovely spring,
His fruits delightful, later seasons bring,
His are the lowing herd of vast increase.
His the mild flocks who bear the silky fleece,
The human race with godlike reason blessed,
With heavenly spirits, of hi^ works the best:
All in just place and the best order rise,
Depending on the Power, who rules the skies,
And but for him the universe might roll,
A barren waste, nor feed one living soul.

Zam. Heaven says that some must rule, and some obey,
Thy life must measure on the private way,
Say then -- the duties of the private life,
What virtues give it blessings pure and rife.

Son. Let thee nor malice, wrath* nor envy, move,
But like thyself thy friend, thy neighbor, love*
Know then thy neighbor is akin to thee,
And but a brother in the next degree;
Support thy parents in the eve of life;
Protect thy children dear, and bless thy wife.
From all immodest words and deeds refrain,
Thy own desires from all excess restrain;
Seek all the means of knowledge thou can find,
And use thy brilliant powers to serve mankind;
The lust of useless gain of power despise,
Nor look on others goods with eager eyes;
Obey the public will, revere the laws,
And lend thine arm to aid the public cause.

(Hearing martial music, they all recede, but Zamti.) ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- OCTAR, GENGIS and ALICON.
Oct. NOW Zamti hear, the victory sounds again,
Will thou thy stubborn purpose still retain?
The power of Gengis human force defies,
Submit to heaven's appointment, and be wise.

(Zamti withdraws.) Genesis What news, O General from the bloody field?
Does Corea to the force of Tartars yield?
The Coreans late so ardent for the ^ight,
Have sunk in heaps and sleep in endless night.
The deed is now complete, the work is done,
From hostile bands these Trophies we have won.
All China now is ours -- her people now
To Gengis must with meek submission bow;
Who dares resist, who wills an arm to prove,
The ruthless sword of Alicon shall prove.
Say shall your soldiers not in Pekin's spoils,
Receive the just reward of all their toils?
Now shall the blood of vanquished China flow,
And her ^ad city lie in ruins low:
Or do thou mean to cease the bloody strife,
And give the slaves a mean and sordid life;
To toil and suffer to support thy state;
To feel that Gengis is, and will be great?

(Gengis whispers to Octar.) Oct. The general's voice is still to sheathe the
sword,
And wait till China own her lawful Lord.
If they the Orphan to our justice give,
And fair Semira Gengis ^ve receive;
If this be done, then bloody wars shall cease,
And China's cities hear the voice of peace.
When first great Gengis rode the martial car,
Semira's love inspired the deeds of war.
His proffered love proud Zamti had refused,
Despised his person and his youth abused.
Fired with the affront, he drew the mar^ial sword,
Semira now, and China, know their Lord.
She must submit, and own her Gengis' sway*
And fill the glories of his nuptial day.

Al. Has then the blood of Tartars flowed in vain;
Those hardy heirs of toil, of sweat and pain?
Have thy whole nights in heavy armor stood,
And trod the sultry fields in dust and blood?
Shall they be cheated now of China's spoils,
The recompense of all her warlike toils?
Whole hosts must fight to gain a woman's charms,
And yield the prize of war to Gengis' arms?
O wondrous warrior, famed above the skies;
Lo a soft girl, of all thy deeds the prize.
A woman's smile to thee is heavenly bliss,
And thou would give up empires for a kiss.
Come, then, soft shepherd, learn to sigh and whine,
Turn pale, and for the love of woman pine.
Art thou to tell thy tale of love afraid?
Or have sweet verses to her eyebrows made?
Has she a fine black eye or pretty hand,
Or smallest foot that is found in China's land?
No more thy veteran soldiers are thy care;
Thou robb'st of them the rights and spoils of war.
And China now must rest from hostile arms,
Lest some rude stroke should hurt Semira's charms.

Genesis Thou base-born savage, kindred to the bear;
Is blood and slaughter then, thy only care?
Dare thou blaspheme the sacred name of love,
Nor human miseries can thy pity move?
Does victory then this impudence afford,
And A^icon insult his lawful Lord?
Go, Octar, call the guards; this traitor seize,
Bind fast his hands, and bind his stubborn knees.
Then shut him close in prison, till the day,
The mutineer his perfect life shall pay.

( Guards ca^^ him off. The moment the Tartars recede, the Chinese come on.)
SCENE II. -- PARDO, CONFU, ZEPHOR and ZAMTI.
Par. NOW is the measure of our woes complete,
Corea flies in capital defeat.
Nor part, nor vestige, of their strength remains,
But their dead corpses heaped on yonder plains.
Now give your counsel, be your wisdom nigh,
Yield we his terms, or must prepare to die.

Zam. Yield we his terms? no, I his terms disdain,
Shall I betray the Orphan to be slain?
Or force Semira, soft as gentle doves,
From the kind bosom of the youth she loves?
Compel her to a tyrant's bated bed,
Sure of all crimes, such crimes as these I dread.

Zep. The sweet Semira, more than woman fair,
My foul's delight, my bosom's constant care.
Naught that I know, naught that I hear, or see,
Can ever I esteem or love, like thee.
Yet would I for the state, for China's good,
Yield her, but first would yield my vital blood;
For never living can I deem those charms,
The lawful prize of any Tartar's arms.

Con. Why did not then for hapless China's good,
In fields of glory offer up thy blood?

Zep. In the first fight I looked for Gengis' crest,
And knew Semira's charms had fired his breast --
That edged my sword. I fought him through the plain,
And wished to meet him, but I wished in vain.
Nor did I cease, nor leave the bloody field,
'Till orders from our chief had bid us yield.
-- Each avenue of death disposed to try,
Eager I fought with them and fought to die.
In fierce despair attacked a hardy band,
And hoped to fall by some heroic hand.
I fought incessant, till compelled to yield,
'Till sunk with toil, I fainted on the field.
Then as if Tartars meant I should survive,
They seized my arms, and left me still alive.
The laws of heaven I dare not to defy,
Or else by Zephor's hand would Zephor die.
To Gengis free, the captive maid would live,
If China might from thence her peace receive,
But who, alive, can patient see the charms,
The sweets he dotes on, fill a rival's arms?
If on this earth there be a human woe,
That bears resemblance of the pains below,
Where in the burning pit, all potent ire
Inflicts the pains of unextinguished fire.
Sure, it is the pain of him who sees the charms,
The sweets he^dotes on, fill a rival's arms.

Zam. Forbear O generous youth, my son, forbear;
Repress the ravings of thy sad despair.
The laws of China favor lawful love;
Naught can my wish or my intentions move.
Semira holds thee dear -- your hearts agree;
Thine is the maid, by right, and thine shall be.

[Exit Zephor.] SCENE III. -- OCTAR, GENGIS, ALICON and ZAMTI.
Oct. O SIRE, your troops all in confusion rise,
And with loud shouts insult the rending skies.
Tartars against Tartars a^m in frantic mood,
And brothers swords are seeking brothers blood.

Genesis I beard the fray -- part to my orders true,
Keep firm their faith and yield obedience due,
Part rage with thirst of plunder and of gore,
And would swift ruin on the city pour --
Would raze it to the ground -- when that is done,
We lose the prize which by our arms have won,
Thus blinded by the smoke of passion's fire,
Fools lose by rage whatever they acquire.

Oct. Their rage is fierce as the tempestuous seas,
O sire I fear how you the storm appease.

Genesis I pledge to Alicon in secret way,
To pardon him, if he appease the fray.
He just the talents has to rule a crowd.
He Is fierce, and daring, insolent and loud;
He knows the feelings of the noisy throng;
Is full of motives to their bosoms strong.
He feels just what they love and what they hate,
Full of himself, his promises are great.
And if he fail, then he can swear again,
And wholly cast the blame on other men;
He will appease them, soon he will be here,
His daring soul, more than the crowd I fear.

( Alicon enters.) Al. So then you send for me to appease the throng,
I knew you could not reign without me long.

Genesis I neither your advice nor conference crave,
Go still the mob; and then my pardon have.

Al. Dogs such as they such men as you may bite,
But dare not bark, if I appear in sight.
Often with soft promises I soothe their breast,
Affect to grieve at all their woes expressed.
Nor would I cease to tell them every day,
If I were emperor I Would raise their pay.
Often swear I love them, dearly; and with tears,
That they will be oppressed declare my fears.
Who would a mob to his ambition bend,
By turns must be their tyrant or their friend.
What I Have engaged for pardon I Will perform;
And trust me I shall soon dispel the storm.

[Exit Alicon.] Oct. O what a life must those poor beings live,
Who on the affections of a tyrant thrive.
Or who to lend a mob, and keep them still,
Is any thing and every thing at will.
Sure then some good firm laws to end all strife,
Which all agree to form the happiest life.

Genesis That is a truth, I clearly can discern,
But it is a truth which Tartars yet must learn.
Now I must learn how other fates prepare,
To end with glory this tremendous war. (Zamti enters.)
Zamti, at last, thy final will declare*
Shall I this glorious city waste, or spare?
Shall I the Chinese love and seek their good,
Or leave it waste and sunk in dust and blood.
This time I ask thee; this the last must be,
Their ruin or their safety now decree.

Zam. Hear me again, O conquering Gengis, hear,
And know the truth -- Thou will the truth revere.
The Chinese Empire, long, long years has stood,
Since first the earth, emerged from Fohi's flood,
Saw the new seasons roll. Trees, fruits, and grain,
Spring from the soil, and clothe the earth again.
View then this empire well; it is vast and great,
A hundred cantons form one mighty state.
In these the people by their unbribed vote,
To various offices their friends promote.
If justly they, these offices fulfill,
To general power they climb the ascending hill.
Each state three chiefs designs for general laws,
These in the nations court, the general cause.
Support -- the votes of these one chief may choose,
Who keeps the laws and power supreme may use.
If he rule well and never the state aggrieves,
We choose the son while yet the father lives.
Then if the father sins, he is out of place,
And loses empire for himself and race.
Those, who a place in government supply,
Must swear to keep the laws until they die.
Religion, interest, and the ties of blood;
Keep firm the state and make our rulers good.

Genesis Talk not of laws, nor ancient whims recite,
My arm is law, my sword shall do me right.
Against my decree, dare not to speak a word,
But give the orphan to my rightful sword.
Let sweet Semira nuptial rites prepare,
And meet in gentle love the man of war.

Zam. I challenge thy decree. I Will speak my word.
I will not give the orphan to thy sword;
Nor shall Semira nuptial rites prepare
To meet in love the man of blood and war.
But fair Semira sweet as blooming flowers,
With him she loves shall pass her tender hours.

Genesis Submit, or tortures I for thee prepare,
Will rack thy bones and all thy sinews tear.
I Will burn thy flesh, with slow consuming fire,
Till in excess of torments thou expire.

Zam. Thy words, thy sword, thy tortures, I defy;
I know what is right; and for the right will die.

Genesis Quick bind his hand -- (They bind him, and fasten him to the floor.) Now
slave I Will let the know,
What more than man a conqueror can do.
Here bound and helpless, impious prisoner, stay,
While to the women's rooms I find my way.
The orphan prince I shall enquire with speed,
On my sword's point his forfeit heart shall bleed,
Then I by force shall seize Semira's charms,
The glorious trophy of my conquering arms.
Swift to my tent the captive maid convey,
And bid prepare the sacred nuptial day.
Follow me, Octar. ( Ex. Gengis and Octar.)

Zam. Can this poor arm or fight or injure thee,
Then why this impious outrage done to me?

SCENE IV. -- ZEPHOR, ZAMTI the ORPHAN and the SON.
Zeph. O SIRE, forgive the anxious cares of love;
Did Gengis, threats thy former counsels move?
Will thou then yield to him the beauteous prize,
Long the delight of these desiring eyes?
O were I on the field, with Coreans slain,
Far happier fate than thus to live in pain!
O let me ask which way thy though it conclude;
If I must yield her for the nation's good?
Be such thy counsel, I submit, and die;
Yet sure I cannot, while I live, comply.

Zam. Believe me, Zephor, I respect thee still;
I shall not yield Semira to his will.
Nor will she hear him; or his loves receive:
She Is my own child; you may her vows believe.

Zep. But why these fetters on your aged hands?
O speak the meaning of these shameful bands.

Son. O Sir pray tell -- what will the Tartars do?
Are they about to kill the Chinese now?
My dear papa, what mean these cruel bands?
Don't now these ugly fetters hurt your hands?

Orph. My good instructor -- O, it gives me pain
To see thee thus; yet thou do not complain.
Is It thus the savages their captives keep,
Bound for the slaughter, even as harmless sheep?

Zam. It Is heaven alone that knows what they intend;
But heaven my Orphan, and my son, defend.
It Is ours to seek the right, and heaven to trust,
By ways unseen who rescues often the just.
But my heart bleeds, it shudders at the view!
My son, ah must be die! the Orphan too?
Can the JUST ONE permit the attrocious deed?
On his sword's point those little hearts should bleed?
O could your Zamti weep his life away;
Nor see the deeds of this tremendous day.

Or. O Sir be calm, heaven may preserve us still;
Nor give us to the savage Tartar's will.
Or else, as thou have said, our spirits save,
And give us better life beyond the grave.

Zam. Come then O Zephor take my last commands;
Haste ere I fall, by cruel Tartar's hands.
I cannot bear to see these victims slain;
Nor can I help these bands my arms restrain.
Conduct them to my wife -- Go, my sweet joys;
Withdraw, while yet a word my soul employs
With Zephor. -- [The boys withdraw.]
Go Zephor, go and place them with my wife;
With strictest charge to guard the Orphan's life.
Conjure her, by the vows, our youth has made;
By sacred marriage, and the nuptial bed;
By the blessed raptures of our happiest days;
By noblest virtues, and sublimest praise,
Of virtuous women. -- Let my prudent wife
Preserve by every means the Orphan's life:
Or hide him; or contrive to send away
To some retreat; we'll find another day
To bring him forth, or if no means avail,
Rather than China's sacred laws should fail;
As private love should yield to public good,
Give up my son, heir of my vital blood.
If China must receive a Tartar Lord,
Give up my son a victim to the sword.
The Orphan saved perhaps another day,
The Tartars for their crimes in blood shall pay.
O, what, have I commanded? What a deed!
O my heart bleeds, -- it is right -- then let it bleed.

(Attempts to cover his face.) SCENE V. -- CONFU, PARDO and ZEPHOR.
Con. HOW desolate the good old man appears;
It Is one half century, at least, of years,
Since thou have wept. O thou most worthy Sire!
Do then thy last and faintest hopes expire?

Par. Grief now has seized his voice, and made him dumb.
Or faints he with the weight of woes to come?
Then let him weep till he has wept his fill;
Tears give relief and then the heart is still.

Zeph. Then must he weep, and yield his vital breath;
There is no hope for us except in death.
The Tartar Lords resolve the prince shall die,
And our fair city all in ruins lie.

SCENE VI. -- GENGIS, OCTAR, SEMIRA and MANDANE.
Gengis with Octar enters -- Mandane and Semira stop the door of the Nursery
with their bodies, their arms interlocked -- Back curtain opens and reveals the
scene. Genesis DAMSELS remove and give my vengeance way.

Man. We will not move nor ever own thy sway.
Is this thy decency, imperious Lord,
Against maids and tender babes to lift thy sword?
That thou with such did wage inglorious war,
Shall future history the fact declare?

Genesis Speak not, but give me place imperious dame.

Sem. O Gengis, victor, clothed with endless shame,
Will thou then shed thy courted mistress' blood?
And thy love present is a murderous sword?
We shall not move, we death and you defy,
Sooner than yield our charge we both shall die.
If blood delight thee it shall freely flow:
Strike me and I shall bless thee for the blow.
Before I love thee, every drop I Will shed;
And deem my grave far sweeter than thy bed.
Think not that with a wolf my love I Will share,
Or Value the caresses of a bear.
Thou have been brute too long. Thy conduct scan,
Withdraw, reflect; and learn to be a man:
So shall thy virtue and thy deeds sublime,
Descend with glory down the stream of time.

(They withdraw ashamed.) ACT V.
SCENE I. -- ZEPHOR only speaking.
Zeph. O SIRES, new prospects open to my view*
Strange is my story, yet exact and true.
The lovely boys I to your wife conveyed,
And to Semira, heaven befriended maid;
The lovely boys, received their soft embrace,
And female kisses warmed each shining face.
When lo! with sudden insult and surprise,
Gengis appeared with fury in his eyes;
Demands the precious orphan to be slain;
The dames refuse, and he demands again.
Their female hearts for virtue only feel,
Nor dread the terrors of the glittering steel.
Refused again what they denied before,
And with their persons closed the nursery door.
Locked arm in arm, they braved the threatened death,
And sooner vowed to yield their vital breath,
Than yield the precious infant to be slain,
Or, with their blood betrayed, their honor stain.
They with their bosoms shielded China's joy;
Their lives defended safe the lovely boy.
The savage bandits saw no place to wound,
But through the ladies bosoms could be found.
Their keen reproof, while justice gave it force,
Restrained the cruel murderers in their course,
They stared in fixed amaze, their blushes rise,
Tears forced from iron hearts, poured from their eyes.
Blanked, and disarmed, at the affecting view,
With sighs of reverence silently withdrew.

SCENE II. -- ALI^ON, GENGIS and ZAMTI with the whole party.
Ali. THE mob is stilled again, your orders reign,
But may I never meet such wolves again.
I Have been a demagogue, a score of years,
And never spoke but to attending ears.
But fierce with thirst of blood, and lust of prey,
As deaf as warring winds and waters they,
Never heard a word -- with souls of rage and dread,
A hundred faulchions glittering over my head,
And one descending in the furious strife,
Cleft deep my head yet still stopped short of life,
As well it might: of life I might despair,
Had the soft brain the fear of life been there.
But who has that will dread the mobbish race,
And never wish to look them in the face.
My speech I then desisted, with design,
And better arguments occurred to mind.
The pike and sword conviction might impart,
And rightly managed reach the hardest heart.
Part of the Tartars in the rout I saw;
Part sober were and steady to the law.
The scale was doubtful, which had gained the most,
Nor could a single inch of time be lost.
The Chinese late we routed on the plain,
And had disarmed, I quickly armed again,
Affirming, for their safety this would serve,
And might their city and their lives preserve.
Now Chinese, Tartars, lately mortal foes,
Moved in accord the riots to oppose,
And of their chiefs but two alone were slain,
The rest dispersed and left a peaceful plain.

Genesis Hear now ye Tartars, all ye Chinese hear;
Weigh well the truth ye will the truth revere.
It Is not in force of arms nor fields of blood,
That nations ever find their real good.
From conquered nations who would profit find,
Must learn to cherish and protect mankind.
We have the Chinese in the battle slain --
A herd of lions might a troop of men --
Yet still, the conquerors, riot, noise and strife,
Are chief attendants of the Tartar life.
But with the Chinese, to their latest breath,
They love their laws, they love them still in death.
The softer sex, inspired with love of right,
Dread not the conqueror, recent from the fight,
Tho martial terrors may mere conquest gain:
Those laws are best which form the best of men.
The fires of glory now inflame my soul,
Pervade my bosom and possess it whole.
Shall I, who beat the Chinese on the field,
In deeds of virtue to the Chinese yield?
No, no -- with heroes I Will record my fame,
And make a bright example of my name.
Unbind that virtuous sage; you all are free; (they unbind Zamti.)
Tartars and Chinese are alike to me.
Both nations into concert I will draw,
To taste the sweets of liberty and law.
While yet the Orphan is of tender age,
In all the cares of state I shall engage.
His safety, even as mine, shall be my care,
And name him at my death my lawful heir.
Nor will I break the sacred bands of love,
Nor, by my crimes, heaven's dreaded vengeance mo^
But let Semira, maid of heavenly charms,
Live in her own beloved Zephor's arms.
This day, of all my life the most desired,
Has all my soul with thirst of glory fired.
What neither arms nor force of man could do,
Your virtues, Chinese, have defended you.
They have overcome the conqueror; I resign,
All but the power to call such people mine.
What tho I shall remain your chi^^^n name,
Your laws and liberties are still the same*
Justice alone shall reign; and wars shall cease;
And thou, too murderous blade, must rest in peace* (Putting up his sword.)
Hear O ye nations! distant ages see! (Raising his hand unarmed.)
IT IS VIRTUE ONLY MAKES A PEOPLE FREE.

SINGLE PIECES.

Preface TO THE SINGLE PIECES.
THE Editor of this work, having always found it to be one of the most
difficult things attending an exhibition, to obtain suitable occasional pieces;
whether for the introduction, intermediate speech, or conclusion; thought it
best to insert in his book a number of these kinds -- Indeed he publishes all
that he can collect, at present, of those which he has used.

It is as much impossible to avoid a sameness in the introductory and
concluding pieces, as in ordination or election sermons, or commencement
orations -- the intermediates are not liable to this inconvenience. They may be
varied without end -- but only one or two of the prologues, or epilogues are
used in a year, the sameness may only appear as they stand in the book, and not
in the public use of them.

He has also though it proper to publish the names of the students to whom single
pieces have been assigned, because it would be doing them honor, as none can
perform them but such as are, in many respects, good scholars -- and none but
those of unblemished moral character can have them. The insertion of their
names does homage to their genius, improvements, and virtue; and may give them
a degree of celebrity, which one day or another may be of use to them. It may
also excite ambition of succeeding students, whose performances may be
published in a second volume.

There will be a seeming inequality among the pieces here given -- but both
single and dramatic compositions appear differently, publicly performed, from
what they do when read in silence -- If any do not strike the reader much in
private, let him consider, that public representation is the only test of their
merit.

The Editor has taken great gains, and even gained the assistance of ladies of
learning and approved character, to clear his pieces of all offensive words and
passages -- yet if one word or passage of this kind shall remain after all, he
disavows it -- and desires every one who shall make use of his book; to render
delicate any passage that offends, as in so doing he will fulfill the intention
of the publisher.

Section I. PROLOGUES; or Introductory Pieces.
PROLOGUE to the EXHIBITION in the LIBERAL SCHOOL, Sept. 27, 1793; at the end
of the LADIES' TERM.
Spoken by Miss SUSANNA HOAR.
AS when the new fledged birds who wish to fly,
And soar on liberal pinions through the sky;
With trembling wings, and anxious throbbing breast,
Stand trembling on the margin of their nest.
So we this hour, with timorous souls, essay
Our modest share of learning to display.
Candor we ask -- shall we not candor share?
Who will deny it to the young, the fair?
To the Committee of Visitation.
Ye faithful guardians of our common weal,
You hear our plea; your generou^ hearts can feel.
Could you a timorous daughter's soul dismay;
And send her trembling from your stage away?
What tender feelings early youth inspire.
To please and be approved, what just desire.
What heaven born movements animate our frame.
Our joy in well-earned praise, our dread of shame.
Full well ye know -- Bring then the prospect near --
Consult your hearts -- and we have naught to fear.
O let not frowns one generous face deform --
These tender plants would p^rish by a storm,
To the Parents and Guardians of the Ladies.
Lo! here our si^es, our worthy dames arise;
How shall we meet those venerable eyes?
Which kindly on our infant faces shone --
Who made our joys and sorrows all their own.
We love -- we fear -- we wish to be approved --
Yes, you will smile on those you always loved.
Kindness your words, kindness your deeds expressed;
Kindness will not forsake a parent's breast.
Think not that vanity directs our aim;
That hither to display ourselves we came.
The total object of our little show,
Is that you see, what you have a right to know;
While we indulgent parents bounty share;
If we have answered to a parent's c^re.
From the first moment, that we knew the light,
Our joy has been to dwell beneath your sight.
On you, our second providence, we hung,
Obeyed the word ere parted from your tongue.
Still may we have the happiness to please,
Still may you glory in a race like these. i. e. the young ladies.

Still we, while from your care our virtues rise,
Revere you next to Him who rules the skies.
THE SALUTATORY ADDRESS, in the LIBERAL SCHOOL in LINCOLN, before the Visiting
Committee, at the EXHIBITION, March 25, 1795.
By MR. JAMES FARRAR.
MR. WILIAM WHEELER, Jan. 31st. 1798.
THO it would not become us to approach you, with that extreme timidity, which
is so graceful in the ^^fter sex; and with which they have submitted their
first public Essays in Learning to your inspection* yet we cannot, unmoved,
reflect on the estimation in which you are held by the public -- and the powers
of observation, of which, by frequent visitations of this kind, you must be
possessed -- Your presence, that of our worthy fathers, and matrons, and the
sight of your amiable attendants* the young ladies of the assembly, make a deep
impr^ssion on (...) hearts, filling us with the most intense and sincere
respect.

We are encouraged by your well known ^a^dor. It is pleasing to us, to think
that in (...) assembly are our parents, our guardians, our brethren, our
sisters, and our friends -- We have assembled every relation, which is dear to
the human heart. It is no vain presumption, which urges us to appear in this
place. It is our desire to give you some specimens of those instructions which
we have lately received, and we hope to convince you, that we have not wasted
our opportunities, and our time. We hope then that you will give us a candid
hearing; and that you will not forget, on this occasion those maxims of
kindness, on which you have founded the other actions of your lives.

Venerable Matrons and Fathers of families -- You will here receive our dutiful
acknowledgements, for that provision, which is made by your generosity, for
opening to our minds the treasures of knowledge -- Were we capable of the odius
vice of ingratitude, we must detest ourselves -- We cannot have derived, from
you, hearts, that are so degenerate. Nor have we so little profited by our
studies. No, Sires, we reflect on you at one and the same time with love, with
reverence, and joy -- we hope in some degree, to represent the virtues of our
ancestors -- But the idea of another part of the assembly, lies very deep in
our hearts, and to them, by your permission, we will address ourselves.

YOUNG LADIES!

The decorum of your sex will not permit you to direct an adress to us
collectively in any public place. Happy are we, that we are not restrained by
any such decorum from addressing you -- The more public our respects are to
you, the more fond we are of showing them -- Perhaps we may a little regret,
that our example in point of learning, and virtues, is not more brilliant; but
be assured Ladies, if you will lead in any worthy cause, we shall be happy to
follow you. May your smiles this day be the pure emanations of your usual
candor and good will Quick as electric influence, the marks of your approbation
will affect every heart with the most lively joy; but we deprecate your frowns,
they will blast all our hopes in a moment -- We trust, you are never severe but
by the commands of virtue -- As our present request opposes no principles of
delicacy, we trust it will be granted -- You will hear us with candor, and will
encourage us in every worthy pursuit.

Venerable Matrons and Sires -- Let not the ardor of our address to those
amiable Beings seem irreverent or disrespectful to you. You cannot easily blame
our emotions -- You have loved them; and you know they deserved it -- They have
doubtless, caused you many a delightful hour -- But perhaps the remaining part
of their life is more interesting to us than to you. It will add to the
felicity of virtue to travel her ^aths, in the most delightful company.

BRETHREN AND FRIENDS OF THIS ASSEMBLY,

We ask your patience, and every kind allowance which the interesting nature of
this sce^e, and of the attempt itself* seem to demand -- If you favor our
humble endeavors and by your favor they prove successful -- you may reflect
hereafter, that you have given proper encouragement to youthful enterprise, to
learning, and to virtue -- And we are well assured that such a reflection will
give you pleasure.

THE RESTORATION OF ABDERA. A POEM, Spoken by way of PROLOGUE, to the
EXHIBITION, Sept. 26. 1794. At the end of the SUMMER TERM.
By Miss SUSANNA UNDERWOOD.
IN ancient Greece, so much in story famed,
A ruinous city stood, Abdera named.
Its people, most degenerate and base,
Were though it a scandal to the human race.
For murders, poisons; and all deeds of spite.
One could not walk by day -- 'twas worse by night.
Great Sophocles, skilled in poetic art,
To warm the fancy, and to mend the heart;
Saw his vile citizens with keenest grief,
Determined on a sudden, sure relief.
High in the public forum of the town,
With lyre in hand, and poet's laurel crown,
He stood; while near him crowds impatient move,
And sung in verse divine the POWER OF LOVE.
He sung its tender influence on the heart,
The soft infection of the gentle dart;
Its power to change the fiercest human breast;
Forming a man, where first he found a beast;
How the rough warrior leaves the fields of death,
Rejects the laurel, for the myrtle wreath;
To ravished sceptres and false glory blind,
Adopts a mate, and edifies mankind.
The fine poetic through the assembly ran,
The magic power, was caught from man to man.
Soft gentle sighs were breathed from hearts sincere;
On every cheek was seen the tender tear.
The poet ceased. All to their homes returned,
Yet in their breasts still love impatient burned.
Till Hymen came to vanquish all their cares,
And bind the gentle, softened race, in pairs.
As from soft showers expands the blooming rose,
Thus fair Abdera from her ruin shows.
How changed, how bright, the gladsome city shone!
Murders and deeds of malice all were flown.
Poisons no more conveyed the secret death,
And useless daggers rusted in the sheath.
To deeds malicious, not a heart could move;
For how should malice dwell with gentle love?
Often in the street were seen the sportive throng,
The wedding feast was ranged, the birthday song
Was heard melodious. All the arts revive;
Those arts by which a family might thrive.
Dire wars no more were heard. 'Twas all their care,
To cheer a wife, a family to rear.
Wealth with vast stores on industry awaits;
And swarms of people pour from all her states.
Abdera, famed to earth's remotest ends,
To distant climes her colonies extends.
Her offspring, who to farthest regions rove,
Spread wide the blessings of the arts, and love.
Such our brave fathers, who from distant lands,
Avoiding persecution's iron bands,
To fair Columbia's distant plains repair,
While human happiness was all their care.
First 'twas their view that virtues plant their breast,
Next, each shares equal freedom with the rest.
Then to bind f^st the sacred bands of love;
And teach the passion^, by just laws, to move.
Whence faithful husbands, and chaste* wi^es (...),
And well known infants glad the parent's eyes,
Whence beauty's blossoms open to the day,
Whence the strong youth who fates of nation's sway.
While all the arts, whence men their fortunes share,
In full, and splendid majesty appear.
To west, departing from the rising morn,
No happy lands the spacious globe adorn.
Where fuller blossoms of fair science rise,
Or sweeter female forms delight our eyes,
Or bolder youth bright freedom's cause to own,
And dash the frowning tyrant from his throne?
So falls each public foe beneath their stroke,
As the fierce thunder fells the mountain oak --
Thus love and arts proceeding hand in hand,
Form the vast glories of our native land --
Yet, pardon, Sophocles our bard excels,
Presents the real fact, not simply tells --
Not mere poetic sounds enchant the ear,
Ambitious he presents the REAL FAIR --
VIRTUE arrayed in BEAUTY'S form you see,
(Of these The (...) ^^tes.
I speak dear sires regard not me)
Here daughters, sisters, a sweet social band,
Present, all anxious, and your love demand --
Your candor here, your generous souls display,
Nor let these tender bosoms feel dismay.
The committee.
Ye worthy sires, who public trust sustain,
Providing common good with anxious pain --
Ye reverend dames, who know a mother's cares
Hushed our weak cries, and dried our infant tears,
Let wonted kindness fill a parent's breast,
While filial bosoms on your goodness rest --
If ever on you the light of knowledge shone,
If wisdom's reign, and virtue's cause, you own --
If joy can touch the husband or the wife,
To see their graces rise in second life:
If thus you whisper in a daughter's praise,
"How like the maid who blessed my youthful days,
"O how like her, my joy in every stage,
"From sprightly youth, to sober tho'tful age.
"How much like her, my comfort every day,
"Till earth receive the ^ma^ed clay,"
Such praise we hope for, parents must be good,
Must love pure hearts of sympathetic blood --
To be by you beloved, to you allied,
Our greatest joy, O it is our greatest pride!
Although we love, yet still our fears remain,
The conscious blood flows rapid in each vein --
Cherish our hearts, sustain us by your smile --
The smiles of parents shall our fears beguile.
The rich may shine -- the great will have their due,
But it is our glory to be loved by you.
N.B. With the alteration of a few phrases, or leaving out some particular
lines, this piece may be spoken by a gentleman.
THE SALUTATORY ADDRESS, In the EXHIBITION, March 27, 1796.
By MR. SAMUEL HOAR.
MOST RESPECTABLE LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
IF we do not address you at this time, with extreme timidity, if we do not
discover that anxiety, which your respectability appears sufficient to inspire
-- it is not from any want of respect to you. But it is owing to that perfect
liberality and candor with which you have favored our performances in time
past, we have hearts full of sentiments toward you, such as become the most
favored children -- but we do not fear, that on any trifling fault you will
manifest the expressions of anger or contempt. Yet your sentiments are by no
means indifferent to us -- It is one of the greatest pleasures of our life to
merit your approbation. Our youthful hearts are elate with the prospect, that
by means of your kind parental care, (Heaven forbid that we ever should abuse
it,) we shall so conduct ourselves, as to increase your happiness -- that we
not only have your approbation in these exercises, but that you may highly
enjoy our behavior in all the scenes of life.

Life indeed is sweet, and it is pleasant to the eyes to behold the sun, and
survey the various beauties of nature -- hence we freely own that the debt, due
to a parent, for mere existence, and early nutrition, is more than any child
can pay -- But, how immense is the obligation to parents -- who take all
imaginable pains to make their children happy -- who afford them the most
rational pleasures; and the most sublime enjoyments of life -- Compare my
worthy seniors, and most respected ladies, the girl who is the mere child of
simplicity -- of unformed sentiments and manners, with one who has been favored
with a good education -- compare such an one with those, who lately, in this
place, displayed a variety of brilliant performances -- Who completely
sustained the most amiable and polite characters -- who fastened your
attention, and left you no power to recall it, and gave you the graces and the
morals united in the most charming alliance -- make the comparison -- then let
any one, if he can, deny the advantages of education.

At present indulge us, worthy parents, to speak to those who are delightful to
us -- This evening we are deprived of your most pleasing company and assistance
in our performances, yet still you are near to our hearts and live in them --
your presence excites our lively ambition -- we shall read the expression of
your countenances and the language of your eyes with modest fear of being
unacceptable; and with lively joy, if we discern your approbation.

Happy are they, and the happiest of human kind -- who unite the love of virtue
and goodness with their mutual affections; and form a lasting alliance -- to
know this we need only consider the respectable lives of the matron^ in this
assembly -- their full praise we leave to their husbands, tho as children, with
promptest hearts, we rise up and call them blessed: their various duties
discharged with so much fidelity and attention -- cannot but be attended with
the most delightful reflections.

Now parents, brethren, sisters and friends, favor us with your usual candor,
politeness and attention -- and we will not only endeavor to escape your
censure, but we shall (for our ambition is great) even hope to gain your
approbation.

PROLOGUE, to the LADIES' EXHIBITION, Sept. 28th, 1795.
By Miss ELIZABETH HAGAR, of Weston.
IN human hearts, where soft affections move,
The first* the tenderest, is a parent's love;
How anxious for the son or daughter dear,
That they in merit's brilliant rank appear.
The hour that is passing now! on this alone
Depend our greatest pleasures; and your own.
No hope of vast applause now swells our mind,
Or praises scarce the lot of human kind.
To minds parental we would only prove
That we are worthy of your care and love.
If censure you suspend; and frowns forego,
The greatest present bliss our hearts can know.
Mothers of the students and Proprietors' wires.
Ladies, our worthy dames, we must revere
Your virtues. You first wiped the infant tear
From tender cheeks; and with the fondest care,
Nourished the human blossom young and fair.
Without your care, have perished, sure it must --
Without your care have mixed with lifeless dust.
Without your care this sweet parterre The students, 33 young ladies, dressed
in uniform, and ornamented with wreaths of flowers.
so gay.
Whose beauties add fresh luster to this day,
Without your care had joyless lain, and dead,
In the cold common earth, on which we tread.
Tell then those Proprietors, and fathers of students.
hearts who own your gentle sway;
Whom if you might command, you still obey;
That from the candor, and applauses due,
Our virtues rise, and we shall be like you.
This happy prospect, will their bosoms fire --
Better, they nor imagine, nor desire.
Yes, worthy fires, who female merit own,
And in your hearts have fixed your lasting throne --
As the Great Sire, when he creation viewed;
Had joy in all his works, for all was good.
Thus you parental blessedness shall prove,
When growing virtues shine in those you love.
Happy when you the blooming daughters see
Late in your arms or playing at your knee,
Mature in age, display their graces fair,
Responsive to a parent's love and care.
Then sweet remembrance shall your souls employ,
Of the first hour you knew a parent's joy.
Still happier you the ripened race survey,
With minds as clear as light, and forms as bright as day.
The wolf, relentless savage of the wood,
Pursues the lamb, and drinks her harmless blood.
The hawk descending from the storms above,
May truss in harpy claws the trembling dove.
Monsters in every kind, with horrid joy,
The sweet defenseless innocent destroy.
But man, to whom a generous soul was given --
Who wears sweet majesty and looks at heaven.
Ah! lives there one, who with capricious deed
Would wound those hearts where youth and softness bleed;
Where each attractive grace, and fenceless charm,
Seeks the protection of a stronger arm?
Thus modest, humble, trembling with surprise,
The female band first meets your judging eyes --
Now to their deeds your prompt attention lend,
Each parent, brother, sister, lover, friend --
If you approve, their growing virtues rise,
"Sweet to the world, and grateful to the skies."
ADDRESS OF SALUTATION, At the EXHIBITION, January, 1796.
By MR. ELEAZAR BROOKS.
MOST RESPECTABLE LADIES, etc.
IT is with the sincerest gratitude to our worthy parents; that we now present
ourselves in this place -- This was the first time that the Gentlemen and
Ladies were allowed to exhibit together.
Nothing could afford greater satisfaction to the young gentlemen of this
society, than the confidence reposed in us by the parents of those amiable
beings who are now permitted to unite their studious excercises with ours -- We
realize, most intensely, this delicate trust -- and we pledge ourselves to you
that we will not abuse it -- We cannot wonder at the precaution, with which you
granted this indulgence -- It is certainly right to be careful of riches, whose
value cannot be estimated -- and which once lost can never be recovered -- We
shall convince you that you may safely trust with us what is most valuable to
you -- It would be just, should we be forever unhappy, if we deceive you --
Neither shall the amiable manners of our young ladies, be in the least impaired
by their associating with us -- nor their minds be perverted by the exercises
of this place -- Our object is, not to present to you dry precepts; but living
images of virtue -- to show you its effects, in real life. Will the behavior of
our young ladies disgust you if they behave, as discreet, virtuous, and polite
ladies do in the course of a profitable life? If they do, then virtue itself is
disgusting.

Or if we in any instance represent vice, it shall bear its characteristic
marks of odium, and there shall be no danger of its being imitated -- we shall
endeavor to abstain from every thing, which may offend the nicest delicacy, or
the purest virtue -- however we entreat all reasonable candor -- we ask that we
may not be judged by harsher maxims, than are generally adopted by persons of a
just sense of piety, virtue, and good breeding -- we must still represent human
beings and human passions. Some of the characters we represent must appear
subject to the common f^ibles of human nature -- but we trust that if nothing
is spoken which wounds the ear of modesty -- if no action be shown which
offends the zealous votaries of virtue -- if the pieces shall each contain
traits of the most useful moral and religious instruction -- besides many just
and instructive representations of human nature and the passion; if the fair
blossoms of beauty be not sullied by any thing that is rude and unbecoming; but
preserve their perfect sweetness; after exhibiting innumerable charms of
personal elegance, of genius, learning, and graceful motion -- if these things
shall be as we trust we can show you the fact -- we ^ave the ambitious hope,
that we shall not only escape censure -- but even secure your servent
approbation.

PROLOGUE, to the YOUNG LADIES' EXHIBITION, Oct. 5th. 1796.
By Miss SUSANNA STEARNS, about 1^ years old.
MY gentle Sires now shall a little maid,
Tho much indulged, yet more than half afraid,
Approach your presence. Let her modest prayer
Now reach your hearts, and find indulgence there:
Let me with all this timorous, lovely band
Your wonted candor, and regard demand.
Cherished by you, we show in virtue's line
How heaven has blessed your generous design,
While you the means of learning shall impart,
A thousand virtues fill the female heart.
Where knowledge shall disclose her plenteous store,
There, lovely woman stoops to vice no more.
If hireling actresses their scenes have shamed;
And woman's virtue is by them defamed.
What Is that to us; who neither say nor do,
What might offend the purest souls like you --
If frowning critics would our souls affright,
And say we boldly rush upon your sight,
Nay, but we follow honor's, duty's, call,
And, not invited, should not come at all.
For us the kindest cares when parents show,
Past every doubt; they have a right to know,
If all their kindest, worthiest deeds are vain --
Or they a parent's just applause may gain.
To virtue only we attention claim,
Our stage is but the path to honest fame.
Attention then we ask, if that we gain,
The liveliest pleasure pays our studious pain --
Not eager censure then shall find a place,
Nor blush of shame shall stain the fairest face;
If every word, which shall our though it display,
Be soft as dews of heaven, and pure as they.
On your kind hearts our hopes securely rest,
Soft pity always fills a mother's breast --
Your female hearts our maiden terrors know,
And share a daughter's bliss, or daughter's woe.
Your gentle smiles will our young hearts assure,
That they the terrors of their task endure.
Your countenance shall smooth the critic's frown,
Till just success the lovely band shall crown.
Your hearts shall throb with pleasures sweet and new,
To see your virtues rise again to view.
And the fair daughter of a beauteous wife,
Shall make each husband bless the nuptial life.
For purposes like these, we step to view,
In fame unblemished and to virtue true.
Our thanks shall reach the power that rules the skies,
Who blessed our youth with parents, good and wise.
Who rear their offspring with the kindest care,
Nor cast their blossoms to the desert air.
To shower his blessings on each parent head,
To HIM each morning earnest prayer is made,
Whose goodness vast the universe surrounds;
Exalts in every place and knows no bounds.
If Heaven shall love you; but as much as we,
How honored and how happy you shall be.
PROLOGUE, to the WINTER EXHIBITION, 1797.
By MR. JOSEPH RUSSELL, of Weston.
PERMIT me, with that modesty which becomes a youth, to state the plan of our
present Exhibition -- We do not expert to excel, in the art of speaking, those
who have made it their business and profession -- Nor is the mere entertainment
of the audience, our principal object. Those persons mistake us extremely who
think we mean to be imitators of a theater -- Indeed we speak and have dramatic
pieces; so they have on the theater. On the theater also men walk and breathe.
But is it a ^^ime to walk or breathe, because actors and actresses breathe and
walk, as well as others -- No, nor is it a crime to speak a piece in dramatic
form if the object be good -- The object of a theater is amusement; that of a
school should always be instruction. All our performances are intended to
illustrate certain important principles of morality; and to show what virtue is
my means of living examples -- While we are doing this, we hope to make some
progress in the art of speaking -- Of this we readily allow there is great
necessity.

Did you here behold a set of actors who profess to entertain the public, you
might have both right and cause for criticism; but here you have a set of
modest timid scholars who have passed but little time in the pursuits of
learning -- Yet they are willing to perform as well as they can; that their
friends may be able to discern whether they have, or have not, improved their
means and advantages.

Bearing this in mind, you will make great allowance for the extreme youth and
inexperience of the students. Our pieces at this time, are not the most
diverting; but such as best illustrate the moral sentiments which we would
impress upon the young mind, and which may give a proper direction to the
movements of the youthful heart.

We are encouraged in our arduous enterprise by considering the characters of
which this audience is composed. Those respectable ladies whom we call by the
endeared name of mother, will have no disposition to damp our spirits, or fully
our performances: kindness is the ruling passions of your hearts, and the same
tender affection will befriend us here; which bore with the patience of the
saints, the cares which attended our infancy and the petulance and follies of
our childhood -- You will now look with charity on the imperfect performances
of our youth, you will be exceedingly pleased if we do well; and this
encourages the attempt -- Not that we can recompense you for your goodness --
That must he left to Him, whose goodness is absolutely without bounds.

Deign, venerable fathers, to soften for a moment the gravity of age; and
unbend the awful brow of parental authority, that you smile on the children of
your care -- If you set the example to all the people of this assembly of
keeping us in spirit and encouraging our endeavors, we hope to perform
something that will please you.

INTRODUCTORY SPEECH, at the SPRING EXHIBITION, March 25th, 1797.
By MR. NATHAN MERIAM.
NO person can reasonably wonder that we should be intimidated by your
presence. If you find us fearful and disconcerted in coming before persons of
so august an appearance, we trust you will not blame us -- We are as you see,
many of us young scholars, young indeed to pretend to give an exhibition to
such an assembly -- You will find many things in our performances which will
need excuse, some perhaps which you can only pardon; and yet we hope you will
find some that will please you.

We doubt not, venerable fathers, of your affection -- You naturally wish to
find us doing right -- The care which you have shown that your children be
educated in a manner becoming to themselves and useful to society, is a pledge
of your kind regards to us this moment.

There is a pleasure in this idea, that we have an opportunity to recommend
ourselves to you; and this pleasure in good degree takes away the sense of
fear. How happy shall we be, to hear you say hereafter, that your children are
less a burden than a pleasure to you; and that you have been the happier, by
such blessings -- as many would willingly refuse.

And surely we must not forget those who are as much interested in our being,
and happiness, as you -- You, virtuous and amiable ladies, are extremely dear
to us -- and you command the sublime respect of all who are knowing to your
virtues -- We have a great resource for courage -- We are assured that you will
not blame any thing which you can excuse -- the maternal heart will never
change -- We shall find you benevolent, ready to extenuate our failures, and to
magnify our merits -- We hope for the happiness of being agreeable to you.

You will not oblige us to forget those who are the pride and ornament of your
respectable families and of this seminary of learning -- Such as you ever have
been and ever will be the delight of human kind. Never shall your praises be
passed over in silence. Never shall your smiles or tokens of complacency be
despised, till time shall be no more -- Beauty united with virtue such as you
possess; and are determined you always will possess; will have its influence
till the universe shall die -- Order must cease in creation; and all sense of
excellence be lost, among intelligent beings; before the beauty, and virtues of
such as you, shall cease to he admired; or any of your brilliant and useful
qualities be forgotten. I am sensible I speak with ardor -- Yet ardor becomes a
youth in addressing himself to you. It is even more decent than the cold
correctness of a philosopher -- but not the most correct or coldest philosopher
can blame our lively emotions in addressing ourselves to you. To objects, to
persons, so worthy of the most interesting regards of human kind.

My fellow students, we are young, unpractised scholars -- but let us have
courage. These persons come to see us with the most benevolent designs -- They
wish to see us perform well -- They will I trust do nothing which shall prevent
it -- They will regard us with the most friendly countenances -- And let us
beseech you -- our friends of the assembly; that if you shall hear any thing
which* shall displease you; that you would repress, for the moment, all visible
tokens of dislike -- and till you have seen the whole of the exercises,
occasional tokens of contempt shown in an audience, damp the firmest performer;
and put out of countenance all who come after him; your candor and politeness
will induce you to refrain. Then, with all our hearts, we will use our utmost
endeavor to please you.

PROLOGUE, To the LADIES EXHIBITION, October 5, 1797.
By Miss RUTH FLYNT.
AS when the plant which own^ the sun her fire,
Low-brooding turns to catch parental fire,
Rejoicing in his smiles. The Lord of day
Revives the blossoms with his genial ray.
Thus tho our hearts be chilled with modest fear,
Less timorous in your presence we appear
Than any else; your goodness has been tried,
Hence in that virtue filial hearts confide,
It Is yours to cheer the tender female heart --
It Is yours the means of knowledge to impart,
To fill with virtuous sentiments the mind;
And raise the intellect to joys refined.
The generous purpose we have seen complete,
When virtue made the female heart her seat.
Illustrious sires, for you is endless praise
Reserved and blessings crown your happy days.
If heaven's eternal promise do not fail,
Or aught the prayers of youthful hearts avail,
To deeds of goodness heaven rewards assigns,
Then read your title here in Showing thirty six ladies, in uniform, elegantly
dressed.
fairest lines,
These fragrant blossoms fairest of the fair,
Witness to heaven your kind parental care.
For you each morn shall maiden prayers be sped,
All their kind wishes throng to crown your head*
Nor ^less maternal majesty we pray,
To aid the efforts of this arduous day --
Ladies to you we humble suppliants bend,
And in each mother hope to find a friend.
Your sex to harshness ever is a foe;
And kindest loves maternal bosoms know.
A million times your fond surrounding arms,
Reserved our infancy from threatening harms;
In riper years the same maternal will,
Preserves ou^ health and fame, preserves it still.
Full happy shall we be that praise to claim,
That we have never caused you pain or shame,
And happier still to meet your kindly smile,
The sense of maiden terrors to beguile --
With pleasing acts the expecting eye to cheer,
And kindle joy in hearts to us so dear --
My loved companions of the studious hour,
Let here sweet hope exert her kindest power.
Not here a crowd of frowning censors meet,
The effect of female genius to defeat;
Nor we ourselves to barbarous clowns expose,
To women, and to virtue equal foes --
Nor do we shameless dare to meet a crowd,
With action violent and voices loud.
But in this circle of our kindest friends,
Our hopes begin, and our ambition ends --
We hope to prove, that every one may see;
That well our deeds with their best views agree.
That what they give to us, is lasting gain,
Nor time nor riches have been spent in vain,
That each kind husband and each virtuous wife,
May find in us the bliss of later life --
Kind friends if now our well meant plan succeed,
And in your looks a just applause we read --
If beauty ever sheds a kindly ray,
If virtue over the soul bea^s pleasing sway,
They may be seen, and known, another day --
But if you nor respect our sex nor age,
And frowns unkindly drive us from the stage --
To modest secrecy, we swift shall flee --
Nor mo^e ourselves, or actions here you will see.
Beauty will never shine for eyes profane;
And if you seek her, you must sue in vain --
That power which sinners treats with just neglect,
Is gracious still, to those who him respect.
The sweetest grace to purest souls is given,
And woman blesses like indulgent heaven.
Section II. INTERMEDIATES.
AN APOLOGY FOR STUDIOUS LADIES, At the LADIES' EXHIBITION Sept. 27. 1793.
By Miss ANNA HARRINGTON.
RESPECTABLE GENTLEMEN, Addressed to the visitors of the school.

IT is not unknown to you, how much wit has been scattered on the subject of
the loquacity of women -- and how much satire expended in ridiculing ladies who
have a taste for learning -- but if an eminent faculty of speech be possessed
by women, for once let it be employed to a good purpose -- let us plead the
cause of a sex, who by nature are too feeble to employ force; and by principle
too virtuous to use fraud, to accomplish their designs. My apology is for those
young ladies, who wish to excel in endowments of the mind -- will it be thought
a crime, or a breach of modesty to enquire; why such an attempt should be
liable to censure -- especially as it cannot arise from malice to any person
whatever -- if we be exposed to at least an equal share of the miseries of
life, ought we to be separated from its most sublime, and most constant
delights? Does not the condition of a lady require, as much as any, the
delightful amusement of elegant essays, of poetry and music? Has she no need of
that firmness of mind which philosophy inspires? Would not the sublime
consolations of religion greatly increase her happiness? But these are enjoyed
in their full force only by an enlightened mind -- In a rural retirement, a
solitary dwelling, and silence all around her, her most agreeable friends being
abroad on business, to have these ideas crowd upon the mind, with which she has
been inspired by the fine arts, by philosophy and religion, must assuredly be a
great consolation.

But it is said, that it will make all our women dissipated and idle -- how
does this apear? Do men who have wives well educated in point of learning
prosper in their affairs less than others -- ask those gentlemen of this
assemdly whose wives have been the best educated, whether they find them to be
less attentive to domestic concerns, or worse economists than the others -- May
not more women be trusted with knowledge, as well as these. Or is there any
fear that women shall gain too much influence; and become mistressess of the
world in spite of man? When we shall quit our domestic employments, put on
offensive armor, and become fond of the art of war, then such an event may be
feared; and not till then -- Power derived from force is denied to women by the
God of Nature.

The graces, the virtues, the art of pleasing, are the only ways by which women
can influence the minds and actions of men -- the fear of those who hold
learning to be d^^gerou^ to ladies amounts to this -- that they are afraid that
they shall be too much attracted; that their reason will force them to approve
of the conduct of the ladies, and that they shall be attached to the ladies,
even against their own inclination. If the ladies then wish to indulge a stroke
of policy let it be this: to gain the approbation of those who censure us; and
to make even satirists confess, that we act with propriety -- this is perfectly
consistent with our principles -- and there is nothing more conducive to this
purpose than the information, which the arts afford -- we may safely acquire as
much knowledge, as our situation in life will admit, opposing to the geniuses
of the age, who ridicule the studies of women, the sentiment of Cicero; While
other pursuits suit not to all ages, and stations; that of learning agrees to
all. It strengthens the minds of youth, and gives joy in old age -- It adorns
prosperity, and comforts us in affliction -- at home it is delightful, and it
is a help to business abroad -- it attends us in our travels, and is the joy of
our rural retirements -- and tho we ourselves were incapable of the arts, we
should still admire them, and be captivated with their charms, when we beheld
them in others.

INTERMEDIATE, at the LADIES' EXHIBITION, Sept. 1794. Spoken by a miss of 12
years old.
By Miss SUSANNA STEARNS.
WHAT! then, I see your eyes are turned on me --
And you may wonder well, at what you see.
What means this little fairy -- Has she to do
A dialogue, or make a speech that is new?
Fine times indeed when such are bro't to view.
I come indeed to speak; but what to say,
Aye there is the task -- Suppose I talk away
Of marriage, husbands, wives, the virtuous joy
Of hopeful families, which their minds employ --
Indeed dear Sirs -- it is all beyond my line --
But if I talk it answers my design.
Suppose I act the cautious maid; I Will say
The men are dangerous -- better keep away
From such associates -- you may harm receive
They Are serpents all and thou the tempted Eve.
On this by rote I any thing can say;
And can believe it too -- as much as they --
Indeed I am a prudent mistress quite,
For if I think on it, I Will do what is right.
Be prudent grand ma'am says, should be my song,
And if I think on it I shall not do wrong.
And that is a maxim which I cannot doubt on
It Is always good to keep one's thoughts about one.
Or if I act the prude -- Then I can feign,
Nip up, and mince like the parson's daughter Jane.
Then I Will pretend I never can abide,
A whining lover canting at my side --
Can turn my nose up, if a swain goes by,
Yet when he is past can cast an anxious eye.
Or be a lady quite in love; and then
Nothing's so dear as that sweet gentleman --
O happy me! my fortune could I try,
With such a lovely swain to live, and die --
Ah me, I feel the force of Cupid's dart --
The charming shepherd! O! I Have lost my heart.
My Papa frowns -- What lost your heart, my dear?
O no, dear sir, here it is, I feel it here.
Now for a change, like lady Smart I Will be --
There Is not a swain that is good enough for me.
I Will dance, dress fine, and all must please me still,
In every thing I mean to have my will;
And if I wed I Will manage to perfection --
Besure I Will keep my husband in subjection.
But to be married, that is an arduous thing,
Unless I take what happy chance may bring,
What shall I do? It must be bro't about.
So take some cross old widower with the gout.
These instances, to this conclusion bring,
That I, indeed, am fit for any thing --
The fact perhaps may be, that I can do
What I am bid -- yet what is false, or true,
I little know -- But here I know my mind;
My heart in your respect is well inclined --
My generous sires, and worthy dames receive,
Respect sincere, and let me take my lea^e.
THE BENEFITS OF LEARNING ARE ABSOLUTE. The INTERMEDIATE SPEECH at the
GENTLEMEN'S EXHIBITION, March 25th, 1795.
By MR. CHARLES WHEELER.
IT becomes my duty now to present myself before you; and perhaps I cannot do
it better than to show the merits of learning -- This subject has been
variously treated by others; but I propose to myself a track, new and untrodden
before. My design is not to prove that learning is a benefit, but that it is
necessary -- I shall not pretend to show that we can do very well with it; but
we cannot do without it -- whatever a man learns is a part of learning -- And I
leave you to judge whether a man can render himself conspicuous or useful
without learning any thing -- For he who learns one thing, to say that what
another learns is useless -- is judging out of his line, and is, probaby,
judging wrong.

There are two means by which men become conspicuous in the world: one is by
gifts of nature, and the other by suitable education -- mere natural qualities
without education, have indeed an intrinsic value, but like a diamond, rude
from the mine, are rough and unpleasing, while education without natural
powers, is weak and ineffectual -- but when to good natural qualities there
succeeds a good and proper education, that presents human nature in its
brightest glory.

Alas, what is man, divested of the sciences and all those arts for which
learning is necessary -- a stupid staring, uncouth animal, centred in himself
and selfish gratifications. Say that he can neither write, nor read, that he
knows nothing of numbers, and that he cannot speak without offending the hea^er
-- divest him also of the mechanic arts; for they originate in philosophy, and
skill in husbandry, for that also is a branch of learning -- what is he? a mere
savage, a kind of brute, a little handsomer indeed, than his brother bears in
the woods -- but as much without morals, as much a prey to his passions; what
would distinguish him chiefly from them, is, that he is capable of improvement.

Surely then, the consequence is obtained by clear reasoning that he ought to
be improved; and the benefit of making progress is as easily discernible -- if
one degree of knowledge (supposing a man's heart innocent) makes him better,
another makes him better still; and so on to infinity.

What is the reason, that we are so unfeeling to each others rights, and so
often injure each other in society -- it is because we are deficient in two
points of learning -- 1st we have never learned to govern ourselves -- next
because we have never been taught to respect one another. There is not a single
virtue, but must first be known before it can be practiced -- nor a single vice
which we shall avoid unless we know how it is done.

It is a very great error in any person to suppose, that the gratifications of
mere corporeal senses are superior to the pleasures of the mind and imagination
-- that they exceed the sublime delights of intense friendship, of sincere and
virtuous love, the noble flights of the imagination, the pleasure of useful
knowledge, and the heartfelt whispers of an approving conscience -- yet this
error, is common to men in a rude uncultivated state, the gross indulgence of
appetite, and the unbounded rage of their passions, being almost the only
delights of which they form any idea.

But, if the ardor for knowledge which at present exists in our nation shall
continue -- we hope soon to see the day, when it shall be rare to see a youth
deliver himself up to riot, and inebriation -- when the instance shall be still
rarer, that under the color of love and good will -- he shall introduce vice
and contamination into a once innocent and happy family, and when to get an
office, in order, to betray the public, shall be utterly unknown -- we hope
that education shall have such force, that the objects of desire, shall be
perfectly innocent and harmless enjoyments -- that the intention of wealth
shall be usefulness; when love shall bless the object of its flame; and
ambition shall aim at the good of a nation, and at mankind.

THE BARBARITY OF SATIRES ON WOMEN. INTERMEDIATE of the YOUNG LADIES'
EXHIBITION, Oct. 6. 1796.
By Mis: HANNAH JONES, of Concord.
LET me, kind sires, your candid ear obtain,
Perhaps a theme may your attention gain,
Two often lamented, by the generous fair,
Too often which fills her with corroding care.
On wedlock's fearful verge the maid who stands,
When every soothing strain her soul demands,
Too often meets the rough satiric page,
Where man has written with envenomed rage,
Harshest invectives on the tender fair,
Designed the object of his generous care.
The promised maiden reads with pale affright,
And says, ah! dwells in manly breasts such spite.
Much we for such, these kind emotions prove,
Or cheer a viper with the warmth of love.
Juvenal, a Latin poet, who wrote a very severe and injudicious satire on women.
What could, O Ju^^^al, ^^rag^ thy soul,
To scourge the tender ^e^, condemn them whole,
Describe the virtuous mistress, or the wife,
As man's worst torments of a weary life.
Boileau -- a French poet, wrote with great acrimony against women -- He
burlesqued the fond expressions of Madame Colbert, wife of the grand Colbert --
which she used toward her husband -- and inserted in one of his satires a
burlesque character of the wife of his own brother, Giles Boileau.
Thy heart, O Boileau, did the furies steel
With iron rage and teach thee not to feel?
That thou could paint the sex in blackest dies
As f^end^ which from infernal darkness rise;
Or ridicule the fondness of a wife.
Who deems her husband the b^st joy of life --
Or a mere tyrant, in (...) pride,
To mark this foibles of thy brother's bride.
Or Jonathan Swift Dean of St. Patrick's in Ireland. In many parts of his works
he represents women in the most disgusting light -- He courted several women
for his amusement and disappointed them, married one in the morning and
deserted her before night.
Swift, relentless as the savage brood,
To paint the sex in every form but good.
Even illbred Chesterfield his plan belies,
And draws resentful tears from woman's eyes.
But chief when Pope who wrote the "characters of women," a work which did not
meet with the approbation of the public.
Pope, in fierce satiric spleen,
Sharpened against women's character his pen;
And even the bounds of decency to break;
Wrote "every woman is at heart a rake."
Then did the muses mourn, through all their groves,
Then wept the graces and the little loves.
Who had on him their choicest care bestowed,
In whose soft strains their sweetest music flowed.
Then female plaints to all their echoes tossed,
Proclaimed, ungrateful Pope, how art thou lost.
Yet still not every page such colors shame,
There are who love the sacred female name.
Whose hearts are deeply touched with human woe,
Whose generous tears in just compassion flow,
Fair handed nymphs promote their sweet renown,
For Milton weave the unfading laurel crown.
A grateful tribute Thompson shall demand,
From every feeling heart, and gentle hand.
Goldsmith and Addison conspicuous shine;
Nymphs bring fresh flowers to deck the immor^al shrine.
Could man but know, how often the keenest smart,
Pervades the fair, the harmless virgin's heart;
When pages vile her tender soul perplex,
Blackened with vilest censures on the sex;
Sure the chilled heart humanity might warm,
To quit the pen, nor the defenseless harm.
William Boyd, who wrote a delicate and judicious Poem entitled WOMAN, relished
by the ladies of the school; but which for want of that obscurity and acrimony
which the modern critics delight in, has never met with the commendati^^ which
it deserved.
But yonder maidens turn your wondering ^ight,
View the young Swan, who perched on Harvard's height,
Instructs that every bird of tuneful race,
With choicest notes true female merit grace.
Here no false lure the cheated eye detains,
How bright his plumes, how pure are all his strains.
He proves by bright examples of the fair,
That heaven has made them his peculiar care.
Go said the power, who human merit forms;
Who each fair mass with vital spirit warms;
Go then ye servants of creative power,
Search every herb, and rifle every flower.
Let every fragrance, each delicious sweet,
In some new, perfect, composition meet.
Add all the graces of the queen of love,
Add all the music of the vernal grove.
Add all those virtues, which so well h^^^ng;
Add all that love, which should to these belong*
Let purest delicacy her soul refine,
Then, generous Boyd, the lovely prize be thine.
But if one formed of different mould appear,
Who laughs in starting beauty's painful tear;
In whose satiric page replete with gall,
The unkindest censures should on woman fall.
Let him not fear the gentle weeping maid,
To curse, or kill, is not a woman's trade.
Yet let heaven's mercy to his errors blind,
Bestow a juster thought and ^o^ter mind.
THE PRAISES OF A LONG AND HEAVY PURSE. An INTERMEDIATE. Spoken at the winter
EXHIBITION, January 31st, 1798.
By MR. SAMUEL BOWMAN.
I HOPE to meet with the countenance and encouragement of this assembly, while
I attempt a theme of which, I trust, all will confess the utility. I would
speak the praises of a long and heavy purse -- Well stuffed with substantial
coin -- While Orations are made on all other subjects of all kinds ^it seems
quite improper that this should be neglected. The present scarcity of cash,
must give peculiar force to the arguments with which this theme abounds -- It
is generally the scarcity of any thing, which is valuable, which effectually
teaches us to esteem it -- Who then can be more sensible than we are of the
value of that ready assistant in all manner of business? Some have asserted
that it is in the power of money to do anything -- That it can change vice into
imaginary virtue, and deformity into beauty -- But while we are speaking in
this respectable assembly; we have nothing to say of vice, but that it exists
not here -- and while we are addressing this lovely choir of ladies, to mention
deformity would be straying wide from the purpose -- It will not be denied,
that with the perfection of beauty, it is very well to possess a handsome
interest in pecuniary matters -- It makes the heart cheerful, and the business
of life easy -- It is written of Mrs. Primrose the celebrated wife of the Vicar
of Wakefield, that she would have her daughters each carry in her pocket a
guinea, without ever changing it, to keep them in spirits. If a single guinea
has such virtue, what may not be expected from a long and heavy purse, well
stuffed with them? It must doubtless do wonders. There are those who maintain
that many evils arise from the length, and heaviness of the purse -- That it
makes prodigals of young heirs; and instigates them to all manner of excesses.
But that their purse is not to be blamed may readily be proved from o^e easy
supposition. Money is just as willing to do good as to do evil, nay it answers
its own purpose best by being the instrument of happiness to human-kind -- If
it does, a man's money is no more to blame for his crimes than his bodily
strength for his committing murder -- For my part tho I have never experienced
so much of the benefit of money, as some men have, yet the little I have had
has done me so much good, that I most earnestly desire to have more, and I
shall think it strange if you doubt of my sincerity in this assertion -- I have
a strong imagination that if I had a great fortune I should do much good with
it -- And if I could handsomely come to the possession of an affluent estate --
I have so much confidence in my own integrity, that I should not be afraid to
trust myself with it. And while I am wishing for a great plenty of money
myself, I cannot help wishing that my neighbors had more than they have, and in
this respect I hope I have the happiness of coinciding with their own ideas. I
will allow that virtue is of more value than money -- for virtue can procure
money, but money cannot buy virtue -- I will also allow health to be better
than cash: because without health we cannot enjoy our money -- but money is the
third great blessing of human life. Therefore, Ladies and gentlemen -- that you
may all have the consolations of virtue -- the blessings of health, and the
convenience of a plenty of Dollars -- and that I may have my full share of
each, is the hearty desire of your very humble Servant.

A FABLE. THE TWO LILLIES, THE FLORIST AND THE BEAR. INTERMEDIATE, at the
LADIES' EXHIBITION, Sept. 29, 1795.
By Miss SUSANNA. HOBBES, of Weston.
THE summer's pleasing season now is past,
And autumn chills us with his rigid blast;
Let us reflect what prudence we have learned --
What wisdom in the summer months discerned.
I Have heard a tragic tale -- Tho grief remain,
Yet if we learn discretion that is gain.
Two LILLIES of the fairest virgin hue,
In the same vale nigh to each other grew;
One gave her beauties to the blaze of day,
From the bold gaze the other turned way;
And if a savage figure chanced to pass,
Would veil her beauties in surrounding grass;
Through this same vale one most unhappy day,
A lordly BEAR, slow sauntering, found his way.
The forward flower, impatient to be seen,
Displayed the beauties of her shape and mein.
Turned on her stem to meet his haughty eyes,
And bade the sweetest gales of fragrance rise.
A leaf he cropped, but scarcely owned 'twas sweet,
Then trod the beauteous flower beneath his feet.
Warned by her sister's fate, the living flower
Grew still more cautious each succeeding hour;
And if a brutal creature came in sight,
Would close her leaves, and veil her beauties quite.
At last a FLORSIT came, the meads to trace;
True friend to flowers, and guardian of their race.
She heard his honest fame in whispering gales,
Which bore the fragrance of the blossomed vales.
It Is true, each be, each bird, each insect said,
Which on the sweetness of his garden fed.
As gently he drew nigh, with looks serene,
The flower, tho modest, ventured to be seen.
With gentle touch, and gentler breath, it is true,
Partly, her beauties met his raptured view,
Her lovely colors beaming on his sight,
Her fragrance filled his sense with keen delight.
With gentlest hand he reared her tender head;
And soon transplanted to his choicest bed.
Where nursed with all his cares by days and hours,
She filled his garden with the sweetest flowers.
Ye LILLIES sweet, of fair Columbia's vale,
Learn safe instruction from the moral tale.
Let modest caution always be your care --
And tho you love a FLORIST, shun a BEAR.
Section III. EPILOGUES; or Concluding Pieces.
EPILOGUE, at the LADIES' EXHIBITION, Sept. 27th, 1793.
By Miss HANNAH FISK.
SISTERS attend -- The boon by heaven designed,
At once to bless and dignify our kind;
Heaven has reserved to these happy days,
When worth is known, and merit meets with praise*
Woman is now a venerable name,
And heroes from her eyes imbibe the flame;
Which fills their hearts with virtue's generous fire,
And bids their souls to nobler deeds aspire.
And lo, even now, does solemn silence reign --
Could females once such kind attention gain.
Ere while when foreign tyrants held the chains
Of power despotic over Columbia's plains --
Our genius was the sport of witlings made;
And our best virtues perished in the shade.
Blessed in the range of time our being placed,
Shall the first fruits of generous freedom taste.
Our sires heroic crushed the tyrant lord;
Our cradles were defended by the sword,
Kind mothers, while we hung upon the breast,
For absent heroes anxious fears confessed,
With soft compassion saw our infant years --
Then kissed our cheeks, and bathed them with their tears.
But He those mighty mandate rules the skies
Bade other years, far other scenes arise,
The voice which bade us live bad wars to cease:
Blessed were our prospects, sweet the smiles of peace,
Science the source of truth, of bliss refined,
Sheds her blessed influence on the female mind --
No more the daughter, or the wedded wife,
With all the pains, and half the joys, of life;
Is treated now as man's domestic slave,
Such passion dwells not with the free, the brave.
With us the generous patron, and the friend --
The toils of life, and all its cares shall blend --
The willing youth life's roughest bu^den bear,
Its comforts, and its elegance our care --
Our decent gratitude may then be shown,
When man shall make his happiness our own.
Science shall dwell in cities, and on plains,
Courtiers adorn, and animate our swains --
Maidens delight in pleasures of the mind:
And lovers whisper sentiments refined:
New patriot chiefs their cultured field^ shall roam,
And new Penelope^s shall guide the loom.
But shall we then, a parent's boun^y share,
Yet be forgetful of a parent's care?
Sooner these eyes shall cease to enjoy the light,
Our brightest prospects vanish from the sight,
Our voice each pleasing accent to repe^^,
Sooner these bosoms shall forget to beat.
And can we then, by vicious deeds or vain,
Through parents' bosoms dart the rage of pain?
No sisters, every fleeting hour employ,
To fill their hearts with sympathetic joy --
Its influence on each reverend face shall bloom,
The promise fair, of happier days to come --
Us let the tender office long engage,
TO allay the pains and sooth the cares of age --
For honored years each worthy parent save,
From rage of death, and disappoint the grave.
THE PLEASURES OF KNOWLEDGE. EPILOGUE to the LADIES' EXHIBITION, Sept. 26, 1794.
By Miss SUSANNA HOAR.
HOW fleet is time! it will not, will not stay,
Sweet summer's suns have swiftly rolled away,
Winter's approach now bids us to retire,
Tho fond of arts, to quench the pure desire:
Must we then learning, quit thy sacred store,
Thy pleasing voice perhaps, to hear no more,
And shall we then forget? no in this heart,
Grave wisdom ever shall command her part;
O might my soul, my powers, my passions be,
At thy command, and ever ruled by thee.
How often the sons of indolence and ease,
Contemn fair wisdom and her mild decrees,
Lame is the pains on science ill bestowed --
And deem that virtue's path's a thorny road,
Nothing's so dreadful, as to see their state,
To think or feel, the very things they hate.
It Is thus the coward heart a lion sees
In every path, and trembles at each breeze --
Starts at the moonshine shadow of a rush,
And sees a murderer rise from every bush --
Thus the dull mind from public light retires,
And secret in the dark, itself admires.
My soul to their assembly shall not come,
Nor with the sons of folly find her home.
Fair grows the tree of knowledge to the view,
Woman desires it, and shall claim it too.
What pleasures hence some flippant wits receive,
"Look back, say they, and think of ancient Eve,"
Be It so. So plain a cause we shall not try,
Nor shall a single useful fact deny --
Women, we ever fond of knowledge see,
Yet still with judgment they may crop the tree*
Despising wanton wits, and wanton rhimes,
Women are wiser than in former times --
From that same tree we cull what ever is best,
To those, who would despise us, leave the rest,
The good we take, and more their hearts to ve^,
Let evil be to those who scorn our sex.
PRECEPTS OF WISDOM! what divine repast,
Sweet to the soul, as honey to the taste --
RELIGION, how august! and yet how fair!
(...) and amiably severe --
The ETERN^^^ SIRE* by whom we live, and move,
To know hi^ goodness, and to feel his love.
What ca^ like this, the wavering heart sustain,
Its full ^own joy transcends the bounds of pain --
PHILO^^^HY! from hence what pleasures flow,
Nor ha^^ nor crabbed as dull fools suppose,
But mu^^cal ^s is the Seraph's song --
O^ h^^venly ha^^s, who notes divine prolong,
TO unfold the simple plan of nature's laws,
To ^race the footsteps of the Eternal Cause;
In scenes fore or various, ever new*
Where wonders rise, on w^nder^ to the view
The SCHEME OF MORRIS opening every store,
Whence man possessed of bliss obtains the more,
Shows happiness our being's end and aim;
That true selflove and social are the same.
And shows in pride's in erring reason's spite,
That God, in all his laws, is just and right.
Then RHETORIC her magic power imparts,
To war^, and to amend all human hearts --
Displays the movements of the varied soul,
Grander than motions of the starry pole --
Not all the constellations of the skies --
Where worlds on worlds in endless order rise --
Nor all those powers which various systems bind,
Display such grandeur as the human mind.
Of handmaid arts beside a numerous train,
The search not joyless, nor the labor vain.
But School association.
YOU as patrons of our virgin band,
O^^ gratitude and just esteem demand,
Prompted by hearts, warm, generous and kind,
To br^^^ the f^tters of the female mind --
To help the guiding hand and clear the way,
On our young minds to pour the mental day.
Fathers and patrons, you shall largely share,
The fervent prayers of every grateful fair.
Yet still above our prayers, and wishes blessed,
Find the rich joy already fill your breast --
By all acquaintance, loving and beloved --
Your friends applaud what conscience has approved,
Love's SACRED RITE your hearts enraptured binds,
To A just description of the Ladies, the wives of the prop^^etors.
sweetest beauties, and the loveliest minds.
Tho generous deeds should fill up every day,
Your kinder spouses would each deed repay --
Would man despise its never let such ^harms,
Such minds celestial bless his worthless arms,
Would man enslave us or expose to shame,
Let no sweet infant ever lisp his name.
To heaven's great Lord our gratitude is due,
That we now live, and that we lived by you,
That in the land of freedom we were born,
Where with due honors men our set adorn.
May every virtue crown our happy days,
May our whole lives be offered to his praise.
Say then, what labors shall our hands engage,
To pay those cares which nursed our feeble age,
Which formed the heart and bent the stubborn mind,
Taught the rude soul, the paths of truth to find,
And by the finer arts has sought to raise
Our souls, and teach us how to merit praise --
The heights refined of human joys to try,
And shine with those who claim the public eye.
Be friends with those who follow virtue's plan;
And dare assert the dignity of man --
To those who merely make their offspring live,
What joys superior shall your hearts receive.
Ah me! our sires revered! -- our honored dames
O what heart-moving, dear, parental names!
How shall a daughter nursed with fondest love,
Caressed, indulged, her gratitu^e approve?
How the soft movements of her heart explain?
Love must -- or tears supply -- for words are ^^in.
VALEDICTORY ADDRESS, at the YOUNG GENTLEMEN'S EXHIBITION, March 25th, 1795.
By MR. SAMUEL HOAR.
RESPECTABLE LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF THIS ASSEMBLY.
THIS band of Brothers, the young gentlemen of the school* now present to you
their most sincere thanks, for the candid and pleasing attention with which you
have ^avored our performances.

We shall believe that you love virtue, and are disposed to encourage learning;
by the friendly countenance which you have given to both -- It is the intention
of the young gentlemen ever to deserve your approbation. Permit me, my
brethren, to express what I believe to be your sentiments, to this assembly --
You are determined to pursue those methods of life; by which you may be
respectable in yourselves, and useful to society -- We will ever (I trust you
will support me in the assertion) maintain a grateful sense of the various
means by which our kind parents have labored for our happiness. The fair
advantages for acquiring useful knowledge, the kind instructions we have
received from our nearest relations, and from this school, lead us to virtue,
and to real praise. We do not place our happiness, worthy parents and friends,
in riot, and debauchery -- We have no imagination, that noisy revels, gaming
parties, scenes of lewdness, or low knavery, are calculated to convey joy and
happiness to the soul -- We do not imagine that to despise the counsels of
parents, to contract habits of impiety and profanity, which are always attended
with savageness of manners, are ways to gain esteem Nor have we formed any idea
of happiness as existing in transient sensations of joy, or mirth succeeded by
the severest remorse -- No -- We suppose that probity is honor, and that virtue
is happiness.

Speaking of happiness, an idea occurs intima^^ly connected therewith. It is
that of conversing with those whose gra^^s and virtues and beauties necessarily
excite felicity -- we believe the sacred text, which says, that after the
supreme had formed man, he from the substance of the man, and from materials
taken ^ear his heart, formed another being more beautiful, more graceful, more
lovely -- We believe it for we feel to this day the sensible anguish of that
primitive wound, nor do we expect that our hearts shall know settled
tranquillity, or we have permanent happiness of the soul, till the materials,
ravished by the divine hand, from the very springs of life, be restored to
their native seat -- We hope, ladies, to convince you, that to be near our
heats, is to live at your proper home.

Yet think not, therefore, that those here present, whose families are
illuminated with many of those brightest gems of beauty, need secure those
treasures from our approach. Need you defend them by bolts, or bars, or brazen
walls? We have no idea that there can be love, where there is a design to
destroy: we suppose that it might as truly be said of the hawk that he loves
the trembling bird, whom he pierces with his cruel talons -- of the wolf that
he loves the lamb when he sucks her reeking blood -- as that the perfidious
traitor loves the innocent and blooming maiden; when he seeks to ruin her best
interests, and to fully her spotless fame. Let that heart perish which harbors
a savave selfish desire, burning only to destroy. Our idea of love is that of a
most innocent harmless kind affection; seeking always the good of its object,
like that of the guardian angel over the precious saint, by heaven committed to
his care -- In respect to these amiable beings, whom we must ever admire and
esteem, you will ever, I trust, find our conduct to be void of blame.

N^w young ladies, you perceive, that we have entirely cut ourselves off from
the refuge of lies, we have been telling your parents, a precious plausible
story, how good, how honest and how harmless we mean to be, in all our
conversation with you -- It happens that you are so near as to hear every word
-- we have now no advantage to deceive you; and should we attempt any wicked
sophistry -- you would confute us from our own mouths -- yes, ladies, you have
that advantage over us, nor do we wish to recall it: keep it and make the utmost
of it, you can. We will further tell you, and our hearts witness it to be true,
-- that every injury from a man to a woman, proceeds from open, or secret
contempt; from a mind careless of your best interests, and actuated by mean and
selfish motives -- reverence yourselves ladies, and it will be impossible that
we should not respect and love you.

But need we become your advisers -- you know these things; these sentiments
are conformable to your daily practice. What respect, what admiration have not
your accomplishments, your graces and virtues, inspired. All eyes, ranks acd
professions, of men, speak of you with pleasure and say -- How accomplished and
how virtuous are the young ladies of these days -- We hope the time is rapidly
advancing, when the parents shall no more shed bitter tears for the weakness of
a daughter; nor a brother, by a sister's fault, feel the venomed sting of
infamy in his heart -- When there shall be no more hurting or destroying, in
all the land, of innocent and virtuous love.

FRIENDS OF THE ASSEMBLY, AT LARGE,

The moral, all the social and virtuous affections, are strengthened by the
cultivation of the liberal arts -- Nay, by education we may turn the whole
force of habit, on the side of virtue, and real religion. This matter seems to
be better understood now than formerly, and instead of mere language and the
more abstract sciences, it becomes more generally the practice in schools to
instill into the minds of youth the principles of religion and morals. Instead
of considering religion and virtue as the restraints and letters of the mind --
they are regarded as the helm and compass, to convey us to happiness, through the
boisterous ocean of human affairs. The moral part of science; and those which
affect the heart* are much more studied than in former times -- and the
charming sex are advancing from a state of comparative slavery through want of
education, to be the equal friends and companions of men -- They are now
treated as the sisters and not the slaves of the other sex -- May the great God
of heaven preserve us from the horrid calamities of war; and give our plans of
education time to ripen, and be pe^fected* and we trust that the rising states
of America shall eclipse in there glory all the nations of the east -- and be a
name and praise to God, in the earth.

THE GRATITUDE OF WOMEN. EPILOGUE to the LADIES' EXHIBITION, Sept. 29th, 1795.
By Miss HANNAH FISKE.
ALL danger's past, then sinks the seaman's fear,
How sweet fair skies and gentle gales appear;
How blessed the harbor which he wished to gain!
How lost the sense of toil, of gr^ef and pain --
From both the keen extremes of hope and fear,
This brilliant day's parade has cost us dear --
Hard is the conflict which our hearts have known;
Which trusted to no candor but your own.
But now this patience, this approving smile,
Will every sense of pain and fear beguile.
Soft as the infant's features at the breast,
When he, from fond caresses, sinks to rest;
Tender as vows which maiden bosoms move,
To heaven addressing for their absent love.
Such is the gratitude which fills us now,
So dear the Parents and guardians of the ^^dies.
objects of our filial vow --
May such reward to you, kind friends, be given,
As none bestow, except approving heaven --
O blessed be every parent, every friend!
Nor cease that bliss when time itself shall end.
Sisters, shall we forget the The proprietors of the school, at whose expense
it was established.
generous band?
Who first this dome designed, and bade it stand.
Not as the tyrant his proud columns rears,
At cost of orphans' sighs and widows' tears --
To bless the sprightly youth, the virtuous maid,
The modest building rears its humble head --
The lovely sex you prized; you sought to raise
The gems of beauty to the brightest praise --
Were not your mates the loveliest of their kind;
Perhaps in you had dwelt another mind --
-- Ah no --
Heaven saw your hearts and beauty's, virtue's charms
Sought, led by heaven, the asylum of your arms.
When merit does its kindred virtue know --
It Is the best blessing heaven has left below.
Heaven all intent, on bliss of human kind,
"Such union for his favorites designed.
"Then envy grieves, with inly-pining hate*
"The good exult, and heaven is in your state."
Who seek the real good of woman kind,
Their choicest prayers and best regards shall find;
Hence generous maids shall fluttering fops despise,
And selfish coxcombs banish from their eyes
By grateful sense -- These hearts shall prove it true,
And ere they beat for love, shall beat for you.
Too long the dove like female heart deplored
Man her fierce tyrant and despotic lord --
With us we trust these iron-times shall end --
Man is our patron, benefactor, friend.
Unlike the despot of a former day;
Who locked up wisdom's store, and kept the key.
It Is opened now, and we are called to taste;
And women guiltless now enjoys the feast --
And hence retiring often the maid shall say
How swift the summer's suns have rolled away.
For you the matron's earnest prayer is made.
Their children's blessings throng to crown your heads
The virgin's vows shall every morn arise --
From such pure hearts accepted sacrifice.
Now we from hence, and from each other part:
Ah how the prospect pains the feeling heart,
Grim winter frowns, and says we must not stay --
And even parental duty calls away --
Fly, lovely spring, on swiftest wings return;
For us the sun of science yet may burn --
Yet duty calls and duty we pursue.
Sweet friends, kind sires, and worthy dames, adieu.
ON DIALOGISTIC INSTRUCTION, At the WINTER EXHIBITION, January 1796.
By Miss HANNAH FLYNT.
TO bring fair virtue's image full to view --
To prove by facts her prudent maxims true,
Hold up to wanton vice her just disgrace,
And bright examples give to human race --
For this the comic muse should tread the stage --
And just applause should win from every age.
If ancient poets stained the muse's fame,
If modern wits have sung abroad their shame,
For this must brilliant action be denied,
Our forms be lifeless o^ our tongues be tied --
Beauty, and grace, be ever hid from sight,
And human glories sink in endless night.
Reason forbids, and Moses who was supposed to write the book of Job, which is
a proper drama.
Moses, hence of old
Of patient Job his pious story told,
Showed us how heaven afflicts, the more to bless,
And calls sublimest joys from deep distress --
Hence every age the patient seer admires,
And pure devotion brightens up her fires.
Great Socrates inventor of the dialogistic way of reasoning.
Socrates despised the crabbed schools,
And knew false reansoners were but learned fools.
Fond Greece his pleasant dialogue admired --
While Athens' youth to real glory fired.
Tully wrote the dialogues called Tusculum Conversationes.
Tully who quelled the rage of civil war,
Made tyrants dread his thunders at the bar,
Not less among his Tuscan neighbors shone,
When mild philosophy was all his own --
Sweet conversation gave his village charms,
Above the pride of states, or power of arms.
When gloomy monks the Priesthood's lasting shame,
Stained the bright glories of the Christian name.
Deep in the convent's dreary shade confined,
Forged cobweb fetters for the human mind --
Erasmus wrote fifty dialogues which contributed greatly to the reformation.
Erasmus saw, and kindling at the view,
W^t's keenest arrows at their system threw --
His fifty dialogues disarmed their rage,
"And drove those holy Vanda's off the stage,"
Nor think it vain to us that these arose,
In whose bright lines the fire of genius glows;
For truth outlives the raging waste of time,
And proves the wonder of each distant clime.
Pathetic speech, adorned with magic rhimes,
Shall raise the worthy dead of ancient times.
On the same stage you will see a Moses rise;
Or Socrates command approving eyes --
Here Tully's sentiments you often shall hear,
Erasmus has appea^ed, and shall appear.
Action, when ardent, and to nature true,
Presents their thoughts, their word^, their deeds to you,
Here shall you see those solid truths displayed,
To which a hundred nations homage paid,
Virtue's our friend, vice only shall appear,
To feel disgrace, and strike her sons with fear.
No false opinion here, no jest obscene,
Perver^s the youth, or gives the virgin pain.
False rhetoric as poison shall be feared,
And here shall decent mirth alone be heard.
Here modest truth shall always be our guard,
And virtue's joy shall be our prime reward.
Happy if we your approbation gain,
Yours be the pleasure here and ou^s the pain.
Midst the diversions of this grateful eve,
What wounds shall virtue or her friends receive.
These definite characters exhibited in the school, Peggy, Jenny, James, and
Patric, belong to the Gentle Shepherd already in print.
Maria lost her gentle sire reclaims,
Whom thence she honors with love's dearest names.
Hence we your counsels with desire shall hear,
And all that you condemn shall justly fear.
The kind-souled Daphne, acting nature's part,
Unthinking gains her worthy lover's heart --
The vain These definite characters exhibited in the school, Peggy, Jenny,
James, and Patric, belong to the Gentle Shepherd already in print.
Coquette man's hardy breast defies,
When lost she mourns in vain, her noble prize.
When maidens fair shall affectation scorn,
And give to merit kind, a just return --
To stain our morals, or corrupt our mind,
What other part what other scenes you find,
Can Jenny's caution indiscretion move,
'Bove wit and wealth who honesty could love.
Or learn we falsehood from sweet Peggy's strain,
Where love and virtue teach her to complain?
Mild pity in our souls shall praise ensure,
Soft is her heart yet never heart more pure.
Who love not sweet Cecilia's gentle soul?
Sophia's good sense and pathos crown the whole.
Such fair examples held on woman's part,
Can they pervert the mind, or stain the heart.
Or shall the manly soul imbibe offense,
From Jamie's honesty or Patrick's sense.
Of virtuous beauty Albin feels the force --
Swains shall be warned, by Albin's deep remorse;
Vice dares not seek for commendation here,
Where suffering virtue draws the silent tear.
Kind hearted sires, and worthy dames, receive
Such thanks as children's hearts alone can give.
Warm gratitude parental care demands
Duty from filial hearts, and filial hands --
May you, with rapture, see a virtuous race --
Adorned with beauty, and with every grace --
Through every stage of life whose hearts are true
At once to heaven, to virtue, and to you.
VALEDICTORY, March 26th. 1796.
By MR. JAMES FARRAR.
THE manner of your receiving the performances of this evening, sufficiently
demonstrates that your disposition to favor the enterprizings of learning
remains unchanged -- We repay your candor with the most fervent gratitude.

The politeness of our visiting assemblies is a comfort and encouragement to
the students. We feel a delightful security that those who are our observers
will receive with pleasure every thing that is well performed, and with
tenderness of heart regard all our defects. Happy children, whom a gracious
providence has provided with parents of such a temper. We should be unworthy
the name of humanity, if we should be ungrateful for such a blessing.

We feel a disadvantage by way of comparison -- only a few weeks ago you saw on
this stage, such performances as had a peculiar advantage to attract the
attention. We cannot doubt that the benign countenance of so full an audience
was greatly owing to the assistance of those amiable young ladies, who then
united the sublime and beautiful in their performances.

Animated by your presence; assisted by all that was amiable; we exceeded our
proper selves, and shone with the reflected rays of genius and beauty. All
experiments, ladies, prove that we cannot attain our proper perfection without
your society. This day have we been destitute of that advantageous assistance.
It made us deeply feel our solitude. But the countenance you have maintained
toward us, has been a delicious consolation. It is your faculty, ladies, to
indulge a kind and benevolent heart, and to make many happy without the least
departure from true dignity. These and a thousand other agreeable qualities,
are daily increasing your influence on our hearts.

We trust, respected fathers and mothers of families, that you will not blame
us for regarding our once charming companions in our studies. You will readily
believe, that their society must be pleasing to us: but your wisdom has
determined, that in some instances, we should be deprived of their society; and
that they shall not mix the common course of their studies with ours. But
without any impeachment of your wisdom, we cannot but rejoice, that there is a
way, in which we may attain the permanent blessings of their society, without
injury to them; and we humbly hope, without offense to you.

My brethren of the school -- we have lived together in the course of this
term, in delightful harmony and good ^um^r -- most remarkable, considering the
number of students collected from various towns -- and the length of the term.
We have been engaged together in the most honorable pursuits. To separate, to
leave our favorite studies, and dissolve our favorite society, must be painful
to the heart of sensibility: yet we have this comfort, that our society is not
wholly dissolved -- the root of it remains, and when we please we can make it
fl^urish again. The institutions of the school form all the gentlemen and
ladies in the town, who have been students, or those who wish to join them into
a permanent society, for their improvement in learning, in politeness, and
virtue, and all that is commendable. I must now, compelled by the desires of
the students, and sufficiently prompted by my own heart, return the fervent
thanks of the school* to all the ladies and gentlemen, who have been present,
for their polite and consoling countenances, which they have given us this
evening. Your looks have shown, as in a mirror, the benevolence of your hearts,
and we trust that the respectable gentlemen, visitors of the school, if we may
conjecture from the countenance they have preserved, in their result on our
performances, will raise our hearts to the highest pitch of gladness they can
at present receive.

THE BEAUTIES OF THE MIND. EPILOGUE to the LADIES' EXHIBITION, Oct. 6, 1796.
By Miss LUCY FISKE.
SWEET are the blushes of the opening day;
And sweet the flower which decks the breast of May.
The lovely maid, or youth in beauty bright --
With lovely pleasure greets the human light --
Soft music pleases from the vo^al grove,
When spring delights us, with the voice of love.
Yet not the blushes of the opening day,
Nor the fair bloom which deck^ the breast of May,
Nor lovely maid, nor youth in beauty bright,
Whose shape or color, please the wondering sight.
Not music warbling from the vocal grove;
The simple eloquence of thoughtless love,
Not all the sources human search can find,
Cause such high pleasure as the human mind.
MINDS give the only joy which time defies,
Within our souls the source of pleasure lies.
The bean enchanted by the love of dress,
Who not the fair, but must himself caress,
His sweet perfumes upon our senses seize.
He spreads his plumage to the fanning breeze,
Even while he dances light before our eyes,
We see, we scorn -- may flatter -- but despise.
Not less the Belle who with her toilet's strife,
Fills half the weary hours of human life,
In every costly ornament who shines,
From Persia's looms, and farthest India's mines.
It Is all in vain, the mental charm away --
We curse the star, which sheds delusive day.
Without the mind, the sense of pleasure flies,
Without the mind, the charm of beauty dies.
But let the soul exert her angel power,
Each scene is lovely, blessed is every hour,
Then love or friendship yield a pure delight,
To charm the day, or bless the lingering night --
Each various object as the seasons roll,
Affords new pleasures to the studious soul --
Israel's famed king saw each luxurious scene,
With shades of grief, and vanity overcast,
And Shenstone, laid on Leasowes a beautiful rural seat of William Shenstone
the poet.
Leasowes flowery lap,
Alas! he cries it will not, will not last.
Not such as Moses sung, his early theme,
The Syrian Shepherd near Euphrates stream;
With his own Rachel tasted joys refined,
Fair in her person, fairer still in mind --
Not slavery's bands his ardent soul affright,
Not scorching heat by day, nor frost by night,
She sees, and suffers all her lover's woes --
Her words console, her tear in pity flows,
Her genuine sense pours on his bleeding heart,
Hope's pleasing balm, to ease the anxious smart --
Hard slavery's term unheeded stole away --
And seven long years but seemed a pleasant day.
This worthy sire, you saw, you saw the mind
Replete with joys the noblest* most refined.
Hence did your anxious care the means bestow,
That beauty with unfading luster glow --
To give to human hearts the dearest bliss,
Virtue's sweet smile, and wisdom's happiness --
Full many a youth shall bless your kindly care,
For the bright virtues of his chosen fair.
Full many a maid for you address the skies,
Who made her lover constant, good, and wise.
Full many a pair in Hymen's happy scene,
Of mental joys shall hail you "best of men."
Yet could you err in thought? Each had the life,
From whence to copy each a virtuous wife.
Enlightened thus by virtue's fairest ray,
To joy's pure source you could not miss the way.
Your worthy mates who wisdom's pleasures loved,
Your generous thoughts incited and approved.
Hence ladies! you a daughter's thanks receive,
Scarce angel souls sincerer thanks could give,
Not less than to our sires to you we owe,
The pure delights with which our bosoms glow.
And you shall live the blessed effects to see,
From learning's source which flow so clear and free,
For maids whom shades of ignorance entomb,
The rose of spotless fame shall never bloom.
The heart untaught admits the wily snare,
Laid by seducers for the unthinking fair --
By KNOWLEDGE maids the sense of (...) feel,
This arms their bosoms pure, with tripple steel,
Who vice and virtue's bounds can scarcely know,
By thousands sink to infamy and woe --
It is a very striking fact, that studious women are rarely inclined to
licen^iousness of manners.
Where is the instance of the studious maid,
Wi^h tears of shame who damps the woodland shade?
Ye dear associates of the studious hour,
Allied by friendship's sweet attractive power,
Will you the sat of heedless maidens share,
Drink of their bitter woes and deep despair?
No you will aspire, led on by wisdom's ray,
To reputation clear as brightest day --
By you shall woman fly her deathless shame,
By you shall know the worth of honest fame.
Yet, in a moment, now the curtain falls,
We leave these much loved scenes, these hallowed wall^,
Where wisdom, all in one pursuit, we sought,
And friendship fair her consolation brought --
While on the mind the bright ideas play,
How swe^tly pass the hours and seasons gay.
But now we part -- Alas, that scenes so sweet,
Should not our souls with constant pleasures greet!
Too much already is the heart oppressed;
Let me retire, sweet friends, and weep the rest --
GOODNESS OF THE HEART. EPILOGUE to the EXHIBITION, January 1797.
By MISS THANKFUL HOAR.
THE Merchant boasts, who plows the stormy main,
On the frail bark; ardent with thirst of gain.
The Warrior boasts those joys his laurels yield --
Reaped in the sanguine harvest of the field.
The Miser broods on heaps of treasured ore;
And sick with cares of wealth yet pants for more.
The Tyrant boasts of boundless regions won,
And realms by recent victories undone.
Each vain pursuit affords a transient joy;
Whilst real pain must countless hours employ.
Not so the mind with love of wisdom fired,
Forever active, it is never tired --
The more we learn, the more is opening still;
The field of truth, to explore it if we will.
Fair handed pleasure leads the keen pursuit;
Through endless gardens of delicious fruit --
Death now has left the tree of knowledge free --
To cull the fruit is safe for you or me.
Yet better still there is a treasure found,
Not sealed in heaven, nor sunk beneath the ground.
Death and destruction may have heard its fame,
Yet on this treasure no dominion claim --
The pompous east to this no dwelling gave,
Nor does it sleep beneath the western wave.
The learned may miss it tho of subtlest mind,
The honest, following nature's path, shall find.
It Is in, and with us, always if we will;
And even in death we shall enjoy it still --
What is this treasure then, kind friend impart,
Mysterious wealth! -- THE GOODNESS OF THE HEART.
This once possessed all happiness ensures;
And wealth, and worth, and life and fame, are ours --
In want of this, nor wealth nor power avails;
Beauty is useless, and even science fails --
For tho the maid in matchless beauty fair,
Outshine the silver moon or morning star;
Yet if by lewd, and wanton deeds of sin,
In the warm heart defilement should begin,
By deepwrought stains the soul imbruted grows,
Til^ she her first and spotless being lose;
The precipice of vice she glides adown --
And sure perdition marks her for his own.
But if her soul the love of virtue fires,
With will corrected; and with pure desires --
Then heavenly messengers attend her state,
And liveried angels cheerful round her wait.
The unblemished heart has seldom cause to fear,
Banditti fierce, or lawless Buccaneer --
She travels safe the unfrequented shade;
Nor need of Ghosts, or Demons be afraid --
Chaste looks, and actions drive to deepest woe
The insulting spirits of the world below.
Thrice blessed the blooming youth, or sprightly maid,
By means of learning, who has truth conveyed,
Till it be fixed and settled in the heart.
This makes the unfailing dower, the better part --
Knowledge excels what most we pleasure call;
But goodness of the heart is best of all.
This did our worthy careful sires attend;
Not only to enlighten us, but mend.
Not to the arts alone they raised this dome;
But here that virtue make her proper home --
Preside over every page, and every scene;
And keep the soul's apartments neat and clean --
That with celestial furniture they shine;
Fit habitation for a guest divine.
With you this bright matronal band combines,
They aid your generous hearts, and good designs --
Practiced in all the skill of human life --
No praise too much adorns the virtuous wife.
Each venerable form needs but be seen,
To know a good and generous heart within --
When time your souls to heavenly bliss shall give,
You, in your virtuous families shall live --
Heroes in spite of marble lose their name;
But these shall give you to eternal fame --
Kind heaven may virtue fair, with truth her guide,
Over all our hearts, and all our ways preside --
That men renounce the crooked ways of art,
And speak the honest language of the heart.
No angel face admit a treacherous smile*
Nor one fair form conceal a serpent's guile.
That each should seek to save and not destroy,
And find true bliss to fix another's joy.
No youth should then betray the trusting maid,
Nor sorrow's victim pine in every shade.
No ghost of youth rejected shall be seen,
At midnight hour pale glancing over the green.
Each honest swain through life his nymph attend,
By night protect her, and by day befriend.
Each gentle nymph delight her virtuous swain,
And paradise shall be on earth again.
VALEDICTORY ADDRESS, at the EXHIBITION, March 27th, 1797.
By MR. JOSIAH ROBBINS, of Watertown.
THE kind attention with which you have been pleased to hear our performances,
excites the most agreeable sensations in our hearts. The countenance of the
assembly has given us courage and enabled us to please -- praise to the
youthful heart attempting worthy deeds is like dew upon the springing grass. If
thus you cherish the sensations of the youthful heart, and fan the rising ardor
of virtue -- your institutions of learning must prosper even beyond your most
brilliant expectations.

The giving of this most brilliant part of your exhibition to a person, not an
inhabitant of your town -- shows the liberality of your institutions -- and the
impartiality reigning in the school -- the way to be conspicuous in any branch,
is open to any one who has a passion for laudable improvement -- I would
willingly convince you, that the love of learning flourishes in other places,
and other towns, as well as yours. Shall I not in my addresses to the several
parts of the assembly begin with the most deserving? We must then pay our
devoirs to our respectable Matrons here present -- Our hearts will will not
suffer us to omit this; which is both our duty and pleasure -- You have done us
the honor to think our performances worthy of your attention -- And be assured,
in proportion as our minds expand to receive knowledge; they will increase in
respect to you -- That mind must be stupid which thinks not with gratitude on
the painful duties and attentions of a mother -- Happy the youth who has one,
who delights in his accomplishments -- No means will be left unessayed that he
may have them in perfection.

Yet while we remember matronal dignity, and recompense with gratitude maternal
care, we cannot forget the agreeable young ladies, who, tho they study not with
us, are related to us, in the privileges of the school -- You hide our faults
from them, that they may respect us; you discipline them not in our presence,
lest their delicate minds should not support the mortification -- Yet in the
assembly of the dance -- or harmless evening amusement -- you permit us to have
their society. Thus from early life you cherish mutual respect and esteem
between the sexes -- Young as we are, our hearts already begin to bless you.

My heart delights to address you, young Ladies, for who can be insensible to
your approbation -- Who be indifferent to your beauties and accomplishments --
The heart which is cherished by you; must learn the virtues from your conduct
of life -- The mind contemplates your beauties, admires your graces, and
prefers your virtues -- Nothing could console us in leaving your animating
presence, but the hope of being reunited, with our dearest domestic friends.

My delightful associates, and fellow students -- permit my address to you --
If the ladies have our love -- and we cannot recall it; our friendship is left
for you. We have passed our winter in learning and in pleasure -- In pleasure
not deserving reprobation -- but which every noble mind must approve -- The
pleasures of learning and of virtue -- We would wish such society to last
forever -- And now shall these hearts pure from the pollution of the world
receive the first impressions of vice -- No if we be tempted to depart from
truth, from elegance and from virtue -- we will think of these amiable beings
-- these exemplary young ladies, and ^ey will recall our minds to all that is
worthy the pursuit of human kind -- May the heavens smile on these m^nds, who
are devoted to the useful arts -- Virtue and happiness will establish their
rule in this house. We shall always remember with pleasure the days we have
passed together -- We thank our parents for their attention to our improvement
-- We thank the Patrons and Instructors of this assembly -- We thank the ladies
for their politeness, and candor. We thank the Almighty Father both for wisdom
and happiness -- Our hearts are full of gratitude to Him, that is above us; and
to all and every being around us -- May the choicest of heaven's blessings,
rest on you, respectable matron -- Our venerable fathers, our associates, and
friends, forever, may you possess all the happiness, that the mind can imagine,
or the heart can desire -- and may that happiness be absolutely without end.

THE PLEASURE OF PARENTS IN THE VIRTUES OF THEIR CHILDREN. EPILOGUE to the
LADIES' EXHIBITION, October 5th. 1797.
By MISS ELIZABETH HOAR.
TO THE STUDENTS,
DEAR friends, our task is drawing to a close;
Thus kindly after action comes repose.
Your eyes are fixed, that I should speak for you,
And in your name should bid our friends adieu.
Could you not find a better voice than mine?
That I should close, and crown your whole design.
So from this scene that every hearer part;
The sting of pleasure deep within his heart.
To send him with such poignant tho'ts away,
That he might wish to see us every day.
But could you ever think of this from, me?
How ill your choice and your design agree.
Your orders I obey, will try, not claim,
The palm of praise. May I escape from blame.
TO THE FATHERS, etc.
Dear sires expect not eloquence from me,
Fine speech and simple truth will scarce agree.
Indeed what would, or can, we say; but this,
Your favor is our greatest earthly bliss.
Tho this we have said full many times before,
The more it is said, our pleasure is the more,
Within our simple hearts from day to day,
O may a sense of duty bear the sway.
To you our life, to you our pleasures owe,
And, next to heaven, you all our bliss bestow.
You give to us the daily staff of bread;
By your kind efforts are we clothed and fed;
To aid our virtues generous, and kind;
By pouring fresh instruction on the mind.
From brutal stains, our moral^ to refine,
And in our hearts to kindle love divine.
Parents, worth equal praise, are scarcely found,
Even on Columbia's heavenly favored ground.
To say that few, if any, know like you,
Their children's interest, and pursue it too.
In this frail life their happiness attend;
Or seek for them a life which shall not end.
Is this then flattery? No it is praise too cold;
A plainer tale of truth was never told.
But will you say; the praise is all your own,
When eyes as bright the brilliant path have shown*
This venerably fair, majestic band,
To all your efforts lent an aiding hand.
Our praise to them in like degree is due;
They long to make us happy even as you.
Without the tender mother's nursing care,
Your blossoms must have pined in desert air.
Your grateful homage honored dames receive,
For gratitude is all a child can give.
If ought a mother's anxious cares assuage;
Those cares which must attend our infant age.
If ought repay a mother's sighs and tears;
The sure attendants of our minor years.
It must be this, to see the favored child,
In beauty blooming; and in virtue mild;
Skilled in whatever becomes the youthful fair,
To make her virtue, and your joys her care.
Her fame unstained, her moral temper sound.
And gaining just esteem from all around;
Aiming to reach the world of endless bliss;
By all the virtues she displays in this.
To see the graces thus your child adorn,
Sweet beaming like the star which gilds the morn.
Would not a mother prize the blessing sent,
And in a daughter's virtues find a sweet content?
Such you we trust shall find, unhappy she,
Whose conduct with such hopes shall disagree.
But now kind mates the tender tas^ remains,
To friendly hearts presaging keenest pains.
Ye kind associates of the studious hour,
When friendship full displayed her sweetest power*
When search of wisdom did our minds employ;
How pleasing were our days, how pure the joy!
We re^d the page where ardent genius shone,
And learning's splendid treasure made our own.
Long we attended yet not seeming long;
To maxims sweeter than the Syren's song.
What days more happy mark life's busy stage,
Than those when education forms our age?
What hours more happy found than when we too^
The rules of virtue from some goodly book;
Or when Minerva's steel with touches true,
Over the fine drapery flowers and foilage drew.
Flowers to our partial eyes the lovelier shown;
Because the fair creation, was our own.
Or were we senseless in the social hour,
Where love first shows his little harmless power?
For us perhaps these joyous scenes are over,
Full soon perhaps we part to meet no more.
Indulge dear girls, the sadly pleasing pai^,
To mourn the loss of you; tho I must mourn in vain*
Yet let not grief deform this brilliant eve;
Duteous attentions should our hearts relieve.
Friends to your candor, and attention lent;
If aught was well performed, 'twas better meant.
Your kind regards, our fainting hearts have cheered,
Our fear was less because you kindly heard.
Indulge one prayer, before the curtain fall;
Heaven bless you, my dear friends, heaven bless you all.
DEFINITION OF MODESTY. EPILOGUE to the WINTER EXHIBITION, January 31st. 1798.
By MISS SUSANNA STEARNS.
THOSE plants which best repay the tiller's toil;
By frequent use are natural to the soil;
They take the genius of the favored clime,
And every spring renews the waste of time.
So frequent by your approbation shown,
Sweet gratitude within our hearts has grown*
If ever it fade the blessings which you give --
In us, shall bid the charming virtue live --
Tho often our hearts the warmest incense pour,
It but prepares the heart, to yield the more --
Thus ask we of our friends with earnest care --
To grant the subjects of our humble prayer. --
Since it is from you like pensioners we find,
Our outward wealth and sweetest peace of mind.
Permit a maid unskilled in flattery's lore,
Who speaks just what she thinks, and speaks no more --
While your kind looks the sense of fear beguile;
To thank your kindness in the simplest style.
Nor deem me venturous, nor beyond my line --
While I the maiden's brightest gem define;
Fair modesty, than Dian's face more clear,
To reason, and to heaven, forever dear.
The gaudy tulip thinks the prize to gain
In beauty's court by many a gaudy stain;
Vain of her streaked robe she meets the gaze
Of day, and wantons in the solar blaze --
Her boastful colors strike the expanded eye;
Even cold indifference they dare defy --
But by too much exposure soon betrayed,
The plant repines, her wanton colors fade.
With sure effect the lilly of the vale;
To win the palm of beauty shall not fail.
She never wantons in meridian blaze;
But veils her bosom from the solar gaze.
Her beauty sought for, is the more admired,
Of her kind sweets the s^^^e is never tired --
Thus tulips which the rainbows d^ as in^^^^*
Please us far less than lillies of the vale --
Yet still the fairest flower if never see^,
Is on a level with the base, and mean --
Ge^s viewed too often in their value ^all --
And those as worthless never seen at all.
The power of reason must direct our way,
When to appear, and when to shun the day*
The name of modest, to those maids we give
Who by the purest modes of reason live;
Who never display their charms till reason call,
Nor yet insist they will not be seen at all.
And what shall we obey on either hand,
Better, dear generous sires, than your command?
Not vanity this lovely band displays.
Nor the blind pride of gathering useless praise --
We wish to shine, in arts which justify
Our sex, and well may claim a parent's eye --
By studious exercise we hope you will see,
Your sons and daughters, what they ought to be --
While in return for all your kindly care --
The honors of your house are bright, and fair --
When all your children live by virtue's rules;
Then shall you praise the wisdom of the schools,
Nor less matronal love deserves our praise;
Sweet providence which rules our infant days --
First of all blessings is a mother's ca^e,
Of future worth materials to prepare.
From which the studious head, and forming ^and,
Spread polished gems of virtue through the land.
Where are the great? An infant first you see,
Smiling, or weeping on a parent's knee,
By pure maternal care the exulting sun,
Shines on an Adams, or a Washington.
Those glorious chiefs who sway this mighty land
First asked sweet favors from a mother's hand.
Good lessons from a wise and prudent dame,
First warmed their heart to worth, and led to fame*
Thousands of glorious patriots claim our praise,
Our nation's wealth and wonders of our days.
Who from maternal influence nobly rise,
To fill with virtuous fame the boundless skies.
Hence shall you see from every circling year,
The virtuous lad, and prudent maid, appear;
Here the parterre of youths and maids, shall move,
Your kindling bosoms with ma^e^nal love.
And shall rejoice that heaven has favored you,
With natural friends to all your wishes true.
And now my loved associates shall you find,
Sweet bliss arising in the ambitious mind;
By keeping reason's rules and virtue's laws,
The joys of virtue, and her just applause.
Your conduct will a noble sample give;
By virtue's justest, strictest laws to live.
T^ ensure your happiness, from vice abstain,
For virtue's sacrifice is noblest gain.
Friends, fathers, mothers, of this youthful band,
Patrons of worth, and glory of our land.
May your kind favors just attention find.
The liveliest joy inspire each virtuous mind.
The anxious beating of your hearts to assuage,
And fill the comforts of declining age.
May every breast which youthful worth approves,
Melt in sweet raptures of parental loves.
May all sweet blessings to your vows be given,
And you from happy life aspire to heaven.
LIST OF EXHIBITIONS AND HONORARY PARTS.
The EPILOGUE is the first honorary part -- the PROLOGUE the second --
INTERMEDIATE the third.
This mark (*) signifies, not found repeated, or printed elsewhere.

First Exhibition -- Sept. 27th, 1793,
LADIES
1. Miss Hannah Fiske. Page 509 2. Susanna Hoar, Page 481 3. Anna Harrington*
Page 49^
Second -- January, 1794.
LADIES.
1. Miss Hannah Fiske. * 2. Susanna Hoar. * 3. Anna Harrington, *
Third -- Sept. 26th, 1794.
LADIES
1. Miss Susanna Hoar. Page 511 2. Susanna Underwood. Page 484 3. Susanna
Stearns. Page 500
Fourth -- March 25th, 1795.
GENTLEMEN.
1. Mr. Samuel Hoar. Page 514 2. James Farrar. Page 482 3. Charles Wheeler.
Page 502
Fifth -- Sept. 29th, 1795.
LADIES.
1. Miss Hannah Fiske. Page 517 2. Elizabeth Hagar. Page 489 3. Susanna Hobbes.
Page 508
Sixth -- January, 1796.
LADIES and GENTLEMEN.
1. Miss Hannah Flynt. Page 519 2. Mr. Eleazer Brooks. Page 490 3. Nathan
Meriam *
Seventh -- March 27th. 1796.
GENTLEMEN.
1. Mr. James Farrar. Page 521 2. Samuel Hoar. Page 457 3. Nathan Hagar. *
Eighth -- October 6th, 1796.
LADIES.
1. Miss Lucy Fiske. Page 523 2. Susanna Stearns. Page 492 3. Hannah Jones.
Page 504
Ninth -- January, 1797.
LADIES and GENTLEMEN.
1. Miss Thankful Hoar. Page 526 2. Mr. Joseph Russell. Page 493 3. William
Wheeler. *
Tenth -- March 27th. 1797.
GENTLEMEN.
1. Mr. Josian Robbins. Page 528 2. Nathan Meriam. Page 495 3. Charles
Stearns.*
Eleventh -- October 5th, 1797.
LADIES
1. Miss Elizabeth Hoar. Page 530 2. Ruth Flynt. Page 496 3. Rebecca Farrar.* a
double Intermediate. 3. Julia Stearns.* a double Intermediate.
Twelvth -- January 31st, 1798.
LADIES and GENTLEMEN.
1. Miss Susanna Stearns. Page 533 2. Mr. William Wheeler.* 3. Samuel Bowman.
Page 506
Conclusion.
THE Author, having completed the plan of his work, would take a decent
farewell of his readers. He has endeavored to set in a clear light, in his
Dialogues, some of the most necessary and useful principles of morality, and
religion; and to awaken, and exemplify, those decent and tender affections,
which form the felicity of domestic life -- these are more level to the
comprehension of persons under twenty years of age -- than the speeches of
generals at the head of armies, or the high wrought satires* which find
acceptance in old and corrupted courts: and the author supposes they have a
better effect on the hearts of young persons of both sexes. And are more
suitable to the simplicity of manners generally prevailing in our commonwealth
-- He condemns not other men's works however -- all may be useful in their
place.

The manuscript copy of this wo^k, contained about 1,100 pages in quarto,
close^y written, and the book was printed wholly from the manuscript. It may be
though it not strange therefore, that there should be some errata in it -- the
author supposes that half the errors arose from his manuscript. The printer
will not then be chargeable, with any great number. The following he thinks
ought to be noticed because they confound the sense of the passages in which
they are found.

Page. Line. For Read 16 7 completed contemplated. 23 16 with her arm with his
arm. 50 13 tyrant tyrants. 109 8 low courtesy short courtesy. 117 24 that lad
that loves the lad who loves. 147 25 breath of abomination broth of
abomination. 151 21 experience experiment. 166 11 shepherd saphead. 189 3
mutual martial. 199 9 nephew kinsman. 204 10 gets away continues eating. 212 7
sweak swear. 228 30 purlough furlough. 288 11 And heiress An heiress. 306 22
Mary Magdalen's Mary Magdalen. 309 32 breathing from his mouth breathing fire
from his mouth. 315 17 humpish lumpish. 321 22 be afraid feel afraid. 330 28
You like old Jeremy You look like old Jeremy. 358 5 Mischance agency Mechanic
agency. 480 1 great gains great pains.

The Author readers his most sincere thanks to the encouragers and patrons of
his work. Several Towns in the country, have each subscribed for more than an
hundred copies -- Perhaps never was a more respectable subscription. But it is
not in the Author's power to give a list of the Subscribers; for not one half
of the Papers are returned. If the work lives to another edition, the Author
will treat all his encouragers with due honors; and will publish a correct list
of the Subscribers. But if the work must die in the infancy of its existence,
the Subscribers may think it best, that their names were not annexed to it. The
type is smaller than the Author at first intended -- but on that account the
book contains more matter; which, in a book of this kind, is an advantage -- A
larger type with the same materials must have made a book out of all proportion
for a duodecimo -- and the Author could not have afforded it at the assigned
price. Wishing his Patrons, and his Readers, all happiness in this, and the
better life -- he remains their sincere friend and

SERVANT.

INDEX.
PART I.
INTRODUCTION, On Exhibitions, Page 5
PART II. DIALOGUES.
Subjects. Titles. Goodness of heart and veracity of speech, w Woman of Honor,
31 Folly of lying and hypocrisy, m w The male Coquette. 45 Absurdity of
altering reports, m The Growth of Rumors. 51 Mildness of disposition, m w The
Gamester. 69 Command of the angry passions, m w Triumph of Temper. 81 Patience,
w Mother of a Family. 99 Compassion to the miserable, w The Captive. 113
Self-government, w Ronscevalles. 125 Modesty, and virtuous love, m Panthea, 141
Torments of a man of pleasure, m The Foundling, 155 Danger and cure of vicious
habits, w The Female Gamesters, 169 Voluptuousness dangerous to youth, m
Scanderbeg. 183 Dignity of character superior to riches, m w Maid of the
Groves. 199 Absurdity of a capricious temper, m w The Coquette. 217 Prudery and
forwardness, w Insolvable Question. 231 Baseness of fortune hunting, m w Match
Dissolved, 243 Youth the season for love and marriage, w Spring for Flowers.
255 Frivolity of matrimonial quarrels, w Discontented Wife. 267 Confidence
necessary among the members of a family, m w Father of a Family. 281 Absurdity
and folly of fortute telling, m The Bottle Conjurer, 299 Superstition generally
arises from vice, w The Apparition. 313 Folly of local prejudice, m The Wooden
Boy, 325 Folly of profuseness m Bernard of Berlin. 341 Benefit of the principle
of civil liberty, m w Rogue sound honest, 353 Moderation in politics, m The
Little Box. 367 Honesty better than learning, m w The Inquisitor, 383 Grandeur
of piety, m Death of Socrates. 399 Christ^anity favorable to women, w
Constantia. 441 Future retribution, m w Zenobia. 427 Virtue the basis of
liberty, m Orphan of China. 451
PART III.
SINGLE PIECES 477
[For a more particular Index to the third part, see List of Exhibitions. etc.]

The letter (w) signifies the women's characters prevalent in the piece -- (m)
the men's -- (m w) men's and women's characters, whose connection is necessary
to the piece.


