DEPOSITION OF GENESIS ELIJAH CLARK, OF THE STATE OF GEORGIA, RESPECTING A LETTER
FROM HIM TO DON DIEGO MORPHY, CONSUL OF HIS CATHOLIC MAJESTY, At Charleston,
South Carolina, CONTAINING The answers of the said Deponent, to certain
interrogatories framed by the COMMITTEE Appointed on the 2d of February last,
"To take all such steps as may be necessary for obtaining the testimony of the
said ELIJAH CLARK, or any other person or persons, on the subject matter of the
said Letter."

Taken before certain Commissioners empowered by the said committee, for the
purpose of taking the said deposition.

27th April, 1798, Ordered to lie on the table.

DEPOSITION.
TUESDAY, 27th of March, 1798* Georgia, Wilkes County.
BY virtue of a resolution of the House of Representatives of the United
States, passed Friday, the 2d of February, 1798, appointing the Honorable Mr.
Sitgreaves, Mr. Baldwin, Mr. Harper, Mr. Dawson, and Mr. Bayard, a committee
with instructions to take all such steps as might be necessary for obtaining
the testimony of General Elijah Clark, respecting a letter from the said Clark,
to Don Diego Morphy, Consul of His Catholic Majesty, at Charleston, (S. C.) and
communicated to the said committee by his Catholic Majesty's Minister
Plenipotentiary -- and by virtue of the power vested in us by the said
committee, and agreeable to instructions, bearing date the 20th of February,
1798, WE James Hendricks, William Barnett, David Cresswell, Robert Christmas,
John Griffin, and Edwin Mounger, met at Col. Wiley Pope's, in the county and
state aforesaid, and having caused General Elijah Clark to come before us --
Who being sworn by William Barnet, Esquire. one of the Justices of the Inferior
court, to make true answers to the interrogatories transmitted to us and
Benjamin Taliaferro, Esquire. or any two of us, by the said committee -- Deposes
to the first interrogatory, and says:

That he wrote the letter of which the annexed is a copy, to the best of his
knowledge and belief, and to the person to whom it is addressed.

To the second interrogatory, he says, There was an application made to him as
suggested in the said letter. That the application was made to him by one
William Carrick, to the best of his recollection, some time in the month of
May, in the year 1797, at his house in Wilkes county. That the said Carrick
came to his house the day before any propositions were made, and tarried all
night. That he appeared to know this deponent, and said he had seen him about
ten years before, in Savannah, though this deponent could not call to his mind
that he had ever seen the said Carrick before -- that during the evening he
talked much of the existing war between France, Spain, and England -- that the
day after his arrival, some little time after breakfast he informed this
deponent that he was a British captain then from Charleston, and intended to
return there as soon as possible, by the way of Savannah, where he expected to
see Col. John M'Intosh, and that he was authorized by the British government to
propose to this deponent 10,000 dollars, as mentioned in the said letter, as a
salary, if he, this deponent, would engage in the British service, against the
Spaniards and French; and this deponent should hold in the said service, the
same rank that he held in the state of Georgia.

That the said proposals were oral, and not in writing: And this deponent
further says, that after he had contemptuously refused to close with the said
propositions, the said Carrick asked this deponent, if any sum would engage
this deponent to enter into the service of the British government? And having
explicitly informed the said Carrick that nothing could induce him to enter
into their service, the said Carrick extorted a promise, that nothing more
should be said of the propositions, so as aforesaid made, which this deponent
felt no reluctance in giving; not believing at the time, that a disclosure
could in any manner be interesting to the government of the United States. That
the design, scheme or enterprise was not disclosed to this deponent: And that
the said Carrick left the house of this deponent in one half hour, he believes,
after the said propositions were made and rejected.

To the third Interrogatory he says, that he does not know of any proposals
made by and on the part of the British, or any other foreign nation, to any
other citizen or citizens of the United States, for the purpose of engaging
them in any enterprise hostile to the United States.

ELIJAH CLARK. X his mark.
Certified by -- James Hendricks, William Barnett, David Cresswell, Robert
Christmas, John Griffin, and Edwin Mounger,
Com'rs.

INSTRUCTIONS, etc.
To Benjamin Taliaferro, James Hendricks, William Barnet, David Cresswell,
Robert Christmas, John Griffin, and Edwin Mounger, of the state of Georgia,
Esquires.
Philadelphia, 20 th February, 1798. Gentlemen,
ON the 23d of November last, the Minister Plenipotentiary of his Catholic
Majesty, communicated to the Committee of the House of Representatives of the
United States, charged to enquire into the nature and extent of the conspiracy
of William Blount, a letter purporting to have been written by General Elijah
Clark, of Georgia, to the Spanish Consul, at Charleston, (S. C.) dated "State
of Georgia, -- Washington, 9th August, 1797," and containing a declaration in
the following words -- An application was made to me from the British, through
a channel which bound me to silence, if not acquiesced in, and this question
asked me by that person, -- Whether a salary of 10,000 dollars would or would
not induce me to join the British? -- The House of Representatives having
deemed it proper to investigate the contents of this letter, and, if possible,
to obtain a disclosure of the application to which it refers, have, for that
purpose, appointed a committee with instructions to take all such steps as may
be necessary for obtaining the testimony of the said General Clark or any other
person or persons, touching the subject matter of the said letter.

You will receive herewith, a copy of the report of the late committee,
referring to and including the letter of General Clark; and also a copy of the
resolution of the House of Representatives of the 2d of February instant, for
the appointment of the present committee.

Being informed that you reside in the vicinity of General Clark, and having
perfect confidence in your zeal and attachment to the welfare of our common
country, we have thought that we could not better discharge the functions
assigned to us by the House of Representatives, than by delegating to you the
care of the examination of the said General Clark, and of such other witnesses
in the state of Georgia, as from his information, or from any circumstances
within your knowledge, you may be led to believe can throw any light on this
subject.

In pursuance, therefore, of the powers and duties committed to us by the said
resolution, of the 2d of February, 1798, we do hereby request and authorize
you, or any two or more of you, to call before you, at such place as you shall
appoint, and as soon as conveniently may be, after the receipt hereof, the said
General Elijah Clark, and to examine him, upon oath, in relation to the
premises, on the interrogatories accompanying this letter, and on such others
as may appear to you to be proper or necessary to effect the desired
disclosure, or which may grow out of the examination.

We do further request and authorize you, or any two or more of you, to cause
to appear before you, such other person or persons as you may deem to have any
knowledge of the subject of this enquiry; and to examine such person or
persons, touching the same, on oath, on such interrogatories as the occasion
may require: and to make return of the said interrogatories and examinations,
as soon as may be, to the committee aforesaid, at Philadelphia.

The recited paragraph from the letter of General Clark states, that the
application, alluded to, was made to him under injunctions of silence. A good
citizen will have no secrets in relation to subjects involving the interests or
welfare of his country: And the committee have no doubt that General Clark,
paying respect to the high authority of the House of Representatives, will
make, without any hesitation, a full and particular disclosure of all the
circumstances relative to this application: the more especially, as having
already departed from the injunction so far as to mention, that such an
application had been made to him, it becomes more strongly his duty, now, to
relieve the anxiety which this partial communication has produced. You will
present these considerations to him in such manner as you shall think most
likely to be effectual, and to prevent the necessity of summoning General Clark
to the seat of government.

The expenses which may be necessarily incurred in the execution of the
business hereby committed to your care, will be reimbursed to your order on the
Clerk of the House of Representatives.

We have the honor to be, With consideration, gentlemen, Your very obedient
servants, S. SITGREAVES, ABR. BALDWIN, ROB. G. HARPER. J. DAWSON, JAMES A.
BAYARD.


In the House of Representatives of the United States,
Friday, the 2d of Febuary, 1798. On motion,
Resolved, That so much of the report made to this House, on the fourth day of
December last, by the committee appointed to prepare articles of impeachment
against William Blount, a Senator of the United States, as relates to a letter
from General Elijah Clark, of the state of Georgia, to Don Diego Morphy, consul
of his Catholic Majesty at Charleston, South Carolina, and communicated to the
said committee, by his Catholic Majesty's minister plenipotentiary, be referred
to a committee, with instructions to take all such steps as may be necessary,
for obtaining the testimony of the said General Clark, or any other person or
persons, touching the subject matter of the said letter.

Ordered, That Mr. Sitgreaves, Mr. Baldwin, Mr. Harper, Mr. Dawson, and Mr.
Bayard, be appointed a committee, pursuant to the said resolution.

Extract from the Journal. JONATHAN W. CONDY, Clerk.

State of Georgia, -- Washington, 9 th August, 1797.
SIR -- I RECEIVED your letter by Major Patton, requesting me to inform you the
propositions and persons who made them to me respecting my junction with the
British. The peculiar and delicate manner in which these propositions were
made, and the delicacy with which the whole business was conducted, prevents me
from giving you that satisfaction on the subject which I wish. I can only say
that an application was made to me from the British, through a channel which
bound me to silence if not acquiesced in: And this question asked me by that
person -- Whether a salary of ten thousand dollars would or would not induce me
to join the British? I answered that no sum could ever induce me to join the
British upon any occasion whatever. In fact I rejected the offer with disdain.
Could I be more explicit upon the subject, I would gratify you with pleasure,
but from the circumstances heretofore mentioned, I am confident your good sense
will dictate, that silence on my part is the most prudent act.

I am with respect, Sir, your most humble servant, ELIJAH CLARK.
Diego Morphy, Esquire. Consul of Spain. (Indorsed) -- Hon. pr. Maj. Patton.
True copy from the original.

JONATHAN W. CONDY. Clerk of the House of Representatives of the United States.



INTERROGATORIES To be administered to General Elijah Clark, by the
Commissioners for that purpose appointed under the authority of the House of
Representatives of the United States.
INTERROGATORY 1. -- Was the letter, whereof the annexed is a copy, dated
"State of Georgia, Washington, 9th August, 1797," and directed "to Diego
Morphy, Esquire. Consul of Spain," Hon. by Maj. Patton," written by you, or by your
knowledge or direction, to the person to whom it is addressed?

INTERROGATORY 2. -- Was there any application made to you, as suggested in the
said letter? If so, by whom, when, and where was it made? What were the
proposals? and were they oral or written? What was their object? What were the
terms or conditions by which it was attempted to engage you? What was the
design, scheme or enterprise in which it was proposed that you should engage?
and from whom or by whose directions were the proposals made to you? What was
you to have undertaken for the salary of 10,000 dollars? -- Answer
particularly, and fully; and relate, as far as you can recollect, the whole
conversation or conversations, which you have had with the person or persons by
whom these proposals were made: or, if they were in writing, produce the
originals of such writings, or copies of them, if you have not the originals.

INTERROGATORY 3. -- Do you know of any proposal made by, or on the part of the
British, or any other foreign nation, to any other citizen or citizens of the
United States, for the purpose of engaging them in any design or enterprise
hostile to the said United States? -- If so, declare your knowledge fully, and
at large.


