THE CLAIM AND ANSWER, IN THE CASE OF WILLIAM CUNNINGHAM and CO. AGAINST THE
UNITED STATES; UNDER THE SIXTH ARTICLE OF THE TREATY OF AMITY, COMMERCE AND
NAVIGATION, BETWEEN HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY JOHN FENNO.

M,DCC,XCVIII.

THE CLAIM. TO THE COMMISSIONERS For carrying into effect the Sixth Article of
the Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation, concluded between his Britannic
Majesty and the United States of America, the Nineteenth day of November, 1794,
THE MEMORIAL of William Cunningham, Peter Murdoch, James Robison, and John
Hamilton, Junior, surviving partners of Andrew Cochrane, William Cunningham,
Robert Bogle, John Murdoch, Peter Murdoch, James Robison, William Henderson,
William Reid, and John Hamilton, Junior, RESPECTFULLY SHOWS,
THAT the said Andrew Cochran, William Cunningham, Robert Bogle, John Murdoch,
Peter Murdoch, James Robison, William Henderson, William Reid and John
Hamilton, junior, were subjects of his Britannic Majesty carrying on business
under the firm of William Cunningham and company, and that the said William
Cunningham, Peter Murdoch, James Robison and John Hamilton, junior, are the
survivors of the said firm.

Your memorialists further beg leave to show, that for many years previous to
the fourth day of July one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six, they carried
on extensive business as merchants in the then colony, now state of Virginia,
and had established several considerable stores in that country under the
management and direction of different factors and agents, among others the
store called William Cunningham and company's Brunswick Store, the accounts of
which will be herein after more particularly mentioned.

Your memorialists further beg leave to state and show, that from the earliest
settlement of Virginia, the inhabitants, having very little circulating cash
among them, had no means of procuring necessaries from Europe but by the crops
they annually made -- hence arose a practice of obtaining goods upon credit
until their crops were reaped, and as the articles taken up at any one time
were generally small in value and quantity, being chiefly occasional supplies
for their families, it was never thought necessary to procure evidence of the
facts, the most perfect and deservedly well grounded confidence, was placed by
the planter in the books of the merchant; but in process of time, as the
inhabitants became much more numerous, debtors sometimes disputed the accounts,
which threatened destruction to that confidence which had hitherto subsisted
between the merchants and the planter, and which was essential to the
convenience of the inhabitants. This induced the legislature of Virginia in the
year 1748 to pass the act entitled "An act prescribing the method of proving
book debts" -- a copy of which act is laid before the board.

After the passage of this law the course of trade continued upon the ancient
footing, the decisions of the courts were equitable, and the practice of the
bar liberal -- a mutual confidence existed between the merchant and the
planter, and in the public opinion few evidences were more respected than a
merchant's books. From this temper and disposition of the parties, and the
security which the law and the practices of the country afforded the creditor,
suits were seldom brought unless the delay of payment was unconscionable or the
debtor declining in his circumstances, in which cases they were brought not to
authenticate the debt, for that was considered as established without, but
merely to enforce payment of the money. The revolution and its consequent
regulations, came therefore on your memorialists by surprise; but even if it had
been foreseen, it was not in their power to compel payment after the twelfth
day of April 1774, as the costs of suit in Virginia were regulated by a
temporary law called the Fee Bill, which expired on that day and was not
revived again until other impediments hereafter to be mentioned began to exist.
In this situation were things when a law was passed which obliged the
creditors, their factors and agents to leave the country.

Your memorialists further beg leave to show, that on the 4th day of October
1779, an act was passed in Virginia, entitled "An act for discouraging
extensive credits, and repealing the act prescribing the method of proving book
debts" -- a copy of which is also before the board. By the operations of this
act and the decisions under it, those hopes which your memorialists had
entertained, that on a return of peace they would have been permitted to prove
their debts according to the existing mode at the time they were contracted,
were entirely blasted -- for their books being no longer admitted as proof of
the debt, and the factors, agents and store-keepers who might in some cases
have proved them, being driven out of the state, dead, or dispersed into
different parts of the world, your memorialists, in all cases of this
description are without redress in the courts of the state.

Your memorialists having made these few preliminaries, and in their opinion
necessary observations, beg leave further to show that prior to the fourth day
of July 1776, they had established (among others) a store at (...) in Virginia
under the care, superintendance and direction of Mr. Alexander Hosburgh, which
went by the name of their Brunswick Store; and that at the time your
memorialists said factor was obliged to leave Virginia there was justly and
bona fide due and owing to them from diverse citizens of Virginia, ^
the sum of thirteen hundred and twenty-nine pounds thirteen shillings and two
pence three farthings Virginia currency, equal to (...) sterling money of Great
Britain principal sum, a true and accurate statement of which with the names of
the several debtors and the dates, nature and amount of the several debts and
the interest accrued thereon are annexed to this memorial on the several papers
marked A, B, C, D, E, which your memorialists pray, may be received taken and
considered as part of this memorial and claim, and the several original notes,
bills, orders and bonds, together with the accounts of the said store are ready
to be produced before your board when and where you shall be pleased to direct.

Your Memorialists further beg leave to show that each, every and all of the
debts stated on the several papers marked as above, and forming part of this
memorial, remained due and unpaid to your memorialists and their factor, at the
time of their factor's leaving Virginia in obedience and conformity to the law
before mentioned, And that no part or parts of the said debts and demands, or
any of them, have since been recovered or received by your Memorialists, or by
any other person or persons to their use, but that each, every and all of them,
still remain due and unpaid.

Your Memorialists further beg leave to show, that from a short time after the
definitive treaty of peace between Great Britain and the United States, they
have had an Agent in Virginia, and yet have, fully authorized and empowered to
collect and give acquittances for the debts due to them, but all the endeavors
of their said Agents were without effect, owing as well to the Impediments
before stated as to others herein after mentioned. In fact your memorialists
assert, that notwithstanding the provision contained in the 4th article of the
said treaty of peace, no judgment was or could be obtained in Virginia, at the
suit of a British subject, for a debt due before the war, where a plea of
British debts was put in and supported, until after the commencement of the
year 1793, which year the first judgment was rendered, and the decisions in
many of the districts and county courts were not effected sooner than between
two and three years afterward.

The legal impediments which existed in Virginia since the peace, preventing
the recovery of British Debts, are to be found in the following Acts of
Assembly, in addition to those abovementioned, copies of which, in the
following order, are before the Board.

October 20, 1777. An Act for sequestering British property, enabling those
indebted to British subjects to pay off such debts, and directing the
proceedings in suits where such subjects are parties. May 1780. The paper money
being depreciated to so great a degree as to be worth scarcely any thing; so
much of the above Act as authorized payment of it into the Treasury, was
suspended -- but by the Act of May 1782, The suspended clause was again
revived.

The operation and effects of the foregoing acts are too obvious to require
comments.

The next act of the Legislature of Virginia which operated as an impediment,
is the law of

November 1781, entitled An Act directing the mode of adjusting and settling
the payment of certain debts and contracts, and for other purposes.

This act is more generally known by the name of the Depreciation Law, and
operates as an impediment in the following manner. The debts due to your
Memorialist^ were contracted before any Depreciation was known, but in many
instances the Bonds were not taken for the said debts until after the period at
which this retrospective law has fixed the commencement of the scale of
depreciation. The bonds are taken for current money of Virginia; and as the
courts of law refuse to admit parol proof to alter the purport of what is under
seal, these bonds are determined to have been taken for the money current at
the date, and to be reduced accordingly.

Your Memorialists deem it unnecessary herein particularly to state each and
every Act of the Legislature of Virginia which created impediments to the
recovery of their just demands; they will only add, that when the Assembly of
that State on the 12th December 1787, passed an Act to repeal so much of all
and every Act or Acts of Assembly as prohibits the recovery of British Debts.
They added --

Sect. 2. Pro^ided, that this act shall be suspended until the Governor, with
the advice of Council, shall, by his Proclamation, notify to this State that
Great Britain has delivered up to the United States the posts therein now
occupied by British troops, which posts were stipulated to be given up to
Congress immediately after the conclusion of peace, and is also taking measures
for the further fulfilments of the said treaty by delivering up the negroes
belonging to the citizens of this State, taken away contrary to the seventh
article of the treaty, or by making such compensation for them as shall be
satisfactory to Congress.

Your Memorialists further show, that by means of the impediments aforesaid, no
suits whatever could be maintained for debts due before the peace, in Virginia,
to British subjects, until after the adoption of the present Constitution of
the United States -- That even since the adoption of the said Constitution, no
debt can be recovered where your Memorialists Store Books are the only evidence
to support the demand, and in many instances of promissory notes and signed
settlements acknowledging the balance, the Act of Limitations has barred
recovery.

That in suits upon obligations under seal, bearing interest, the juries in all
cases deduct at least eight years interest, in many cases they barely allow the
principal, and in others allow interest only from the impetration of the writ
-- That during the continuance of the impediments aforesaid, many of your
Memorialists' debtors have absconded or become insolvent, and from those yet
reputed solvent, and whose debts are evidenced by bonds or notes, your
Memorialists cannot now actually have and receive the full value thereof in the
ordinary course of judicial proceedings, as well owing to the deduction of
interest as aforesaid as to this further impediment, to wit, that at the time
the said debts were severally contracted the difference between sterling money
of Great Britain and the currency of Virginia was only 25 per cent, whereas by
laws passed since, there is now a difference of 331/3; per cent. --

Your memorialists therefore pray that this their claim may be received to the
amount of the several sums of money principal and interest stated in the
several schedules annexed to and forming part of this memorial, in which they
have arranged the several debtors to their Brunswick store, under the following
classes. --

A. Debtors upon open accounts in the store books of your Memorialists'
Brunswick store -- No recovery could at any period since the peace be had upon
any of these demands. B. Debtors who have become insolvent during the legal
impediments, whose debts are evidenced by bond etc. -- C. Debtors whose debts
are evidenced by bond etc. whose estates have been, and yet are reputed
solvent, and from whom it is probable a recovery may be had, except interest
and the difference between the currency at the present time and when the debt
was contracted, but the amount which may be recovered, or the loss which may be
sustained whether by deductions or insolvencies may not be ascertained until
after the time limited for receiving claims shall expire. -- D. Debtors who
have deceased and their property divided or squandered, or who have removed
during the existence of legal impediments, and whose present residence and
circumstances are unknown. E. Losses sustained by deductions of interest and
the difference between the Currency of Virginia at the time certain debts were
contracted, and the time they were paid.
Your Memorialists hold themselves ready at all times to execute such releases
and such assignments of the said debts as shall be awarded and directed by the
Board, in order that the United States on compensation made, may not only be
released from the claim of your Memorialists, but may be enabled to recover
from such of their debtors as yet remain solvent. But if your Board shall think
it consistent with equity and justice, after the delays, losses and expenses
already incurred, that the Agents of your Memorialists should still longer be
detained in the prosecuting the said debtors yet remaining solvent, your
Memorialists pray that a partial award may be made upon the whole of this
claim, excepting the debts on sheet C, together with such further allowances as
justice and equity shall require.

THOMAS GORDON, Attorney in fact for WILLIAM CUNNINGHAM and Co.

A A LIST of DEBTS due William Cunningham and Co. on the Books of their Store
in Brunswick County, Virginia, which cannot be recovered in the Courts in
Virginia.
Debtors' Names and Residence. Character. How constituted. Time of Interest
Int. to Jan. 1, 1798. Names. Residence Doubtful Good. Voucher When due. Y. M.
Pr. An. on doubtf. On Good. James Bal^our Brunswick 4 9 5 Account 1773. Nov. 2
24 1 4 s5 1-2 5 7 7 William Burns 6 May 21. 24 7 3 d 6-10 7 4 Joseph Bennett 1
5 4 May 5. 24 7 1 s3 2-10 1 11 1 Gray Briggs Dinwiddie 18 3 Feb. 22. 24 10 10
2-10 1 2 7 John Cowles Amelia 2^ Aug. 6. 24 4 22 s 26 15 4 John Dugger, jun.
Surry 22 18 9 1772, Dec. 21. 25 ^ s11 28 13 5 James Fisher Brunswick 4 7 1773,
April 13. 24 8 2 d 7-10 5 7 Lawr Gibbons, jun 2 10 4 1774, Aug. 1. 13 5 2 s6
2-10 2 18 11 Philip George 9 15 10 1775, Sept. 29. 22 3 9 s9 5-10 10 17 10
Ambrose Harwell 3 12 3 1772, Sept. 23. 25 3 3 s7 7-10 4 11 2 Lewis Hicks 1 3 10
1773, Sept. 7. 24 2 1 s^ 3-10 1 8 9 James Harwell 7 ^ 1773, Jan. 28. 24 11 4 d
2-10 8 10 Henry Hancock Surry 14 9 1773, Mar. 29. 24 9 8 d 3-10 18 3 James
Jones Brunswick 1 6 2 1774, April 1. 23 4 ^ s3 7-10 1 11 0 Michael J^nes
Dinwiddie 2 6 10 Sept. 1. 23 4 2 s4 1-10 2 14 8 Benjamin Lani^r Brunswick 29 18
9 23 4 29 s5 2-10 34 6 10 Joel Mab^y 3 3 1 23 4 3 s1 8-10 3 19 7 Henry Morris
26 5 1773, Sept. 29. 24 3 26 s3 31 16 6 John Marshall N. Car. 15 3 July 9. 24 5
9 d 1-10 18 7 William Nicks Brunswick 4 6 4 July 14. 24 5 4 s3 8-10 5 4 1
Robert Nicolson 29 14 6 May 29. 24 7 29 s8 7-10 36 10 8 Augustine Pittillo 14
Oct 7. 24 2 8 d 4-10 16 11 Jesse Peeples, jun. 9 15 7 1775, Mar. 1. 22 10 9 s9
3 10 11 2 6 William Pool Di^widdie 1 5 8 1772, Jan. 1. 26 1 s3 4-10 1 13 4 Edm.
Stith's Estate Brunswick 4 4 4 1773. July 21. 24 5 4 s2 6-10 5 5 5 Bethia
S^sson 13 6 1772, Aug. 24 25 4 8 d 1-10 27 1 Littleberry Stanback 1 11 July 20.
25 5 1 d 1-10 2 5 David Simms 1 2 1774, Sept. 1. 23 4 7-10 1 4 Col. William
Stith 2 10 5 1772, June 2. 25 6 2 s6 1-4 3 4 3 Sheriff of Brunswick 9 4 9 1775,
Sept. 1. 22 4 9 s^ 8-10 10 6 3 Paul Tatum 1 6 10 July 1. 22 6 1 s4 1-10 1 10 8
China Tatum 7 2 3 Jan. 18. 22 11 7 s1 3-10 8 0 3 Henry Taz^well ^ 8 Jan. 25 22
11 2 d 2-10 4 2 George Wall 6 1 4 1773, July 2. 24 5 6 s 8-10 7 8 1 Avris
Wi^nson 1 4 1 1774, July 9. 23 5 1 s2 4-10 1 8 3 Edmund Wilkins 5 5 8 1773.
June 17. 24 6 5 s3 4-10 6 9 5 9 18 ^ 207 9 7 12 2 3 249 0 7

B. A LIST of DEBTS due on Bond, etc. to William Cunningham and Co. at the
foregoing Store, from persons whose Estates are now insolvent.
Doctors' Names and Residence Characters How constituted Time of Interest Int.
to Jan 1, 1798. Names. Residence doubtful Good. Voucher When due. Y. M Per An
on doubtful on good. William Coley Brunswick ^ 11 2 Bond 1774, Jan. 22. 23 11 2
s6 7-10 3 1 2 Randall Daniel Dinwiddie 7 14 4 1773, April ^. 24 9 7 s8 6-10 9
11 0 William Parsons Brunswick 6 15 3 Nov. 4. 24 1 6 s9 1-10 8 2 21 Michael
Wall Sussex 14 13 1 Judgmt. 1774, Feb. 1. 23 11 14 s7 2-10 17 10 5 Edward
Walker Dinwiddie 55 12 Bond 1774, Oct 25 23 2 55 s7 3-10 64 8 0 7 14 4 79 11 6
9 11 0 93 2 7

C LIST of DEBTS due upon Bond, etc. to William Cunningham and Co. at the
forgoing Store, from persons whose estates are reputed to be solvent, and from
whom a recovery may probably be had, except interest during the War.
Names and Residence. Characters. How Constituted. Time of Interest. Int. to
Jan. 1, 1798. Names. Residence Doubtful. Good. Voucher When Due. Y. M per.
annum on doubtf. on good John Butts Brunswick 29 19 0 Bond 1773, June 12. 24 5
29 s11 4-10 36 13 9 Suit in Bunswick District Court. Martin Baker Halifax 37 18
7 1776, Sept. ^. 21 4 ^^ s^^ 40 9 1^ John Collier Brunswick 9 9 ^ 1774, March
28 23 9 9 s^ 4 10 11 4 5^ Suit in Brunswick County Court. Lewis Charles 117 19
8 1773, Jan. 1. ^5 117 s11 3-10 117 9 7 Deceased, Lewis Charles, executor
Eldridge Cleck 6 6 6 Oct ^6 21 2 6 s3 9-10 7 12 11 Daniel Fisher 3 10 3 Account
1775, Oct. 18. 22 2 5 s^ 2-10 6 2 3 William Goodrum 18 1 2 Bond 1774. June 29
23 6 18 s 7-10 21 4 4^ Suit in Brunswick District Court. Charles Harrison 25 15
3 Account 1775, Sept. 1 22 3 ^6 s9 1-10 28 13 2^ Stephen Kirkland 26 4 8^ Bond
1773, Oct. 25 24 ^ ^6 s^ 8-10 31 14 Robert Kennon 4 18 8 Note 1773 Oct. 13 24 2
4 s11 2-10 5 19 2 William Lanier 125 0 2 Bond 1775. Jan. 25 22 11 12^ s 1-10
143 4 9 Suit in Brunswick District Court. Nicholas S. Lanier 1 15 2 1773 Nov.
15 24 1 1 s9 1-10 2 2 4 Evans Mabry 6 9 1 1774. Sept. 1. 23 4 6 s^ 4 10 7 10 7^
Isaac and I. Marshall 30 12 11 1773, July 26 24 ^ 3^ s^ 7-10 37 8 3 Suit in
Brunswick District Court: Henry Roll^ 11 14 5 Sept. 1 24 4 1^ s8 6-^0 14 5 2
Suit in Brunswick County Court. Edward Saunders 2 19 8 Oct. 3. 24 2 ^ s1 8-10 3
12 1 Jones Williams 6 8 4 Sept. 15 14 3 6 s^ 7 15 7 Deceased, John Smithy
admin'^^ William Walker 34 7 4^ May 2^. 24 7 34^ 4-10 4^ 4 10 Isham House 11 9
1 Oct. 30 24 2 1^ s^ 4-10 13 6 9 64 3 3 448 15 ^ 7^ 3 ^ 536 10 3^

D LIST of DEBTS due upon Bonds, etc. to William Cunningham and Co. at the
foregoing Store, from persons who are dead, and their property divided or
squandered; or whose residence and circumstances are not known.
Names and former Residence. Characters. Voucher and when Due. Time of Interest
Int. to Jan. 1, 1798. Names. Form. resid. Doubtful. Good. Voucher When Due. Y.
M. per. annum. on doubtf. on good. Lewis Brown, junr. Brunswick, 5 8 4 Bond
1773, Nov. 16. 24 1 5 s4 9-1^ 5 10 0 William Brown 25 16 0 Nov. 22. 24 1 2^ s9
6 10 31 1 4 Removed. Samuel Bagley 2 1 6 May 22. 24 7 2 s 9-10 2 11 0 Removed.
William Brent 56 10 2 Dec. 25. 24 56 s6 7-10 67 16 2 Removed. Benjamin Chapman
22 17 7 Judgment 177^, Dec. 1. 25 1 22 s10 5 10 28 13 11 Removed. Britain
Clayton 6 14 2^ Bond Nov. 15. 25 1 6 s8 1-2 8 8 3 Removed. Joseph Carter 16 1 7
Note 1772, Nov. 4. 25 1 16 s1 2^ 3 3 Removed. John Carlos, senior 15 5 9 Bond
1774, Nov. 22. 23 1 15 s3 4 10 17 12 10 Dead. Mother Ca^l^s 16 1 2 1772, Sept.
1. 2^ 4 16 s 7-10 20 6 9 Dead. Peter Harwell 13 8 11^ Judgment 1775, Sept. 1.
22 ^ 1^ s11 4-10 15 10 4^ Removed. Peter Green 5 7 5 Bond 1774, June 29. 23 6 5
s^ 4-1 6 6 2^ Removed. Frederick Harwell 3 12 8 Note 1773, Oct. 25. 24 2 ^ s7
6-10 4 7 10^ Removed. Samuel Harwell 125 6 6 Bond 1775, Oct. 25. 22 2 12^ s^
9-10 138 18 01/^ Removed. Seany Harrison 11 7 10 1773, Nov. 5. 24 1 11 s4 7-8
13 14 4 Mark High Dinwiddie, 2 3 5 1777, Oct. 22 22 1 2 s2 2 8 1^ Removed.
Clement Hartley 7 6 9^ 177^. Nov. ^. 24 1 ^ s4 8 16 9 Thomas Johnston
Brunswick, 12 10 7^ 1774, Nov. 28. 23 1 12 s6 ^-10 14 9 2 Removed. John Russ ^0
17 10 1773, Oct. 2^. 24 2 ^^ s10 7-^^ ^1 9 10 Removed. Charles Smith 21 1 10
Sept. 10 24 3 21 s1 1-1 25 11 5^ Removed. Isaac Withers 11 2^ 1773, Oct. 23 24
2 0 s6 7 1 13 6 Burgess Wall 90 18 8^ Judgment 1773, April. 4. 24 8 90 s11 2 1^
112 3 1 Removed. 75 16 11^ 436 3 ^ 92 14 9^ 513 17 8^

E. LIST OF LOSSES sustained by William Cunningham and Co. by Deduction of
Interest during the w^, upon Debts due at the foregoing Store.
Vouchers. Orig. Debt. When due. Debtors' Names. Int. to the time of paymt. ^m
of P. and I Payment. Loss of Int. Bond 5 1 7 1775, Jan. 25. Margaret Bruce
1796, June 3. 5 8 2 10 9 9 8 13 8 1 16 1 9 15 6 1773, Oct. 2. Thomas Short June
3. 11 1 6 20 17 0 16 18 10 3 18 2 8 14 2 1773, Oct. John Clayton June 12. 7 18
1 16 12 3 13 2 7 3 9 8 Account 4 1773, Nov. 1. Thomas Stith Dec. 2. 4 10 8 10 4
4 10 Bond 10 14 1775, Jan. 25. Edward Goodrich 11 14 1 22 8 1^ 18 2 7^ 4 5 6 15
2 2 1773, Oct. 30. William Short 1797, June 30. 17 13 10^ 32 16 0 26 3 2^ 5 12
10 Bond 6 2 11 Nov. 16. Lewis Brown 1795. Jan. 26. 6 2 11 12 5 10 10 3 2 2 2 8
32 6 ^ 1775, Dec. 25. 1796, May 25. 33 8 9 65 15 0^ 52 16 6^ 12 18 6 11 9 11
Feb. 28. J. B. Goldsberry 1795, July 27. 11 13 9 23 3 8 18 9 3 4 4 5 8 11 6
1773, Dec. 29. John Loyd April 29. 9 10 10^ 18 2 4^ 15 2 7 2 19 9 Account 7 3 6
1775, May 1. Douglass Wilkins May 8. 7 3 6 14 7 11 2 7 3 4 5 Bill of Sale 13 4
11 July 1. William Rideout July 27. 13 4 11 26 9 10 23 8 10 3 1 128 10 5 135 5
3 263 15 9 214 17 10 48 17 11 Difference between the Currency of Virginia when
the above debts were contracted and the time when they were paid, 6 2-3 per
cent. on l. 214 17 10 1-2 14 16 5

Total Amount of the foregoing Claims.
Class. Characters. Interest to Jan. 1, 1798. Doubtful. Good. Doubtful. Good.
A. 9 18 3 207 9 7 12 2 0 249 0 7 B. 7 14 4 79 11 6 9 11 1 93 2 7 C. 64 3 3 448
15 10 72 3 3 536 10 3 D. 75 16 11 436 3 3 92 14 9 513 17 8 157 12 11 1172 0 3
186 11 2 1392 11 2 186 11 2 1172 0 3 157 12 11 - 2908 15 8 E. - - - - 48 17 11
Virginia Currency, L 2957 13 7 Difference of Currency, 14 6 51/^

Petersburgh, Virginia, December 1797. Errors and Omissions Excepted, Thomas
Gordon, Attorney in fact for William Cunningham and Co.
N. B. The foregoing Lists of Debts were contracted at a Store kept by
Alexander Horsburgh, as Factor for William Cunningham and Co. previous to the
American war, and are characterized agreeably to a List made out in 1775.



THE ANSWER. TO THE COMMISSIONERS For carrying into effect the Sixth Article of
the Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation, between His Britannic Majesty and
the United States of America, concluded on the Nineteenth of November, 1794.
The answer of the United States by their agent to the claim of William
Cunningham, Peter Murdoch, James Robison and John Hamilton, junior, surviving
partners of Andrew Cochran, William Cunningham, Robert Bogle, John Murdoch,
Peter Murdoch, James Robison, William Henderson, William Reid and John
Hamilton, junior.
SECTION I. AS this claim is conceived to submit to the decision of the board
of commissioners many of the important principles relative to the debts within
the state of Virginia, of which payment may be claimed under the treaty of 1794
from the treasury of the United States, it seems necessary that it should be
distinctly and thoroughly examined in all its parts, and that every material
principle which it involves should be fully discussed.

Limited jurisdiction of the Arbitrators.
The United States and his Britannic Majesty have constituted by mutual consent
an extraordinary tribunal for hearing and deciding the special cases contained
in the 6th article of the treaty of 1794. As the cognizance of this tribunal is
expressly limited to special cases, nothing can be more indispensably requisite
than to understand the limits which are set to it. In arbitraments between man
and man under the municipal regulations of a state, it is a rule that the
arbitrators ought not to exceed their jurisdiction, and if they do, a remedy
may be easily supplied in the ordinary course of justice, for by the civil as
well as the common law an award upon a case to which the submission does not
extend is void. In arbitraments between nation and nation the same rule
prevails that the arbitrators ought not to exceed their jurisdiction, but if
they do, there being no common controuling power to correct the error each
nation has a just right to judge for itself, and may justly consider as void
every arbitrament upon a case out of their limited jurisdiction. This
observation is made to impress on the commissioners the primary importance of
understanding the limits which are prescribed to them by the terms of the
article: For should an error unfortunately occur on this point it may lay a
foundation for disappointing all the good consequences that have been expected
from the article and perhaps for renewing the dissensions between the two
nations which it is so desirable should be forever composed.

In expressing on the part of the United States their opinion, that it is
necessarily reserved to each nation to determine for itself whether an award is
within the sphere of the submission, Limited jurisdiction of the Arbitrators.
it is not meant to assert that the arbitrators are not to decide for
themselves whether a case is cognizable before them or not, but it is meant to
assert that though they shall decide a case to be cognizable before them, yet
if it appears to either nation that it is not, either has a just right to
disregard the award. If this were not so, there would be no difference between
a limited and an unlimited submission. If this were not so, the commissioners
might determine any and every question upon any and every subject which concern
the two nations. Though this opinion is so reasonable in itself that it need
not be supported by any authority, yet what a learned modern writer has said
upon this subject deserves to be noticed. Vattel relative to the arbitration of
national disputes observes It may then happen, as in the example just alleged,
that the arbitrators may exceed their power, and pass their judgment on what
has not been really submitted to their decision: and being called to judge of
the satisfaction a state ought to make for an offense they may condemn it to
become subject to the offended. Certainly that state never gave them so
extensive a power, and their absurd sentence is not binding. To avoid all
difficulty, and to take away every pretense from bad faith, it is necessary to
determine exactly in the compromise, the subject of the dispute, the respective
and opposite pretension, the demands of the one, and the oppositions of the
other. This is what is submitted to arbitrators, and upon this they promise to
adhere to their judgment. If then their sentence is confined within these
bounds, Limited jurisdiction of the Arbitrators.
it is necessary to submit to it. It cannot be said that it is manifestly
unjust, since it is pronounced on a question which the dissension of the
parties renders doubtful, and which has been submitted as such. In order to be
free from such a sentence, it should be proved by indubitable facts, that it
was produced by corruption, or a flagrant partiality. -- Book 2d, section ^29.

Hence it appears if a case within the submission is decided by arbitrators,
even though the sentence is conceived to be unjust it ought to be executed
unless proceeding from corruption; but if the case be out of the submission
then the sentence is not obligatory.

When the treaty of 1794 was formed, the courts of justice in all the states of
America were open. This was well known to the negociators on both sides as well
as to both nations. But there were some particular and extraordinary cases in
which complete justice was not attainab^e in the ordinary course of justice and
to decide these a particular and extraordinary tribunal was instituted. The
treaty having been made between two nations who speak the same language, who
are alike in manners and morals, who till lately were united under the same
empire and whose principles and ideas of justice are derived from the same
sources, it may be hoped to receive the same interpretation in both countries,
and especially that there will be no disagreement respecting the meaning of the
6th article among the commissioners who are selected to decide upon it. In the
proposed discussion much aid will be sought by the agent for the United States
from the rules and principles of equity recognized by the judicial
determinations of the British courts, whose pure and wise administration of
justice for many ages while it has been the source of happiness to the people
of that country, has also been an object of the highest admiration among
mankind.

It is a general rule that has prevailed at all times and which is acknowledged
in all courts that the plaintiff or claimant must produce sufficient proofs of
his case to be entitled to the redress he seeks. Claimant to prove his Case.
Melior est conditio defendentis is a maxim highly esteemed because it conduces
to the security of property and to the repose of society. This rule applies to
the claims which may be brought before the board with more than ordinary force
from the nature of the transactions to be examined and proved, which in detail
are unknown to the United States or their agent but which may be presumed
generally to be known to the claimants with all the material circumstances
belonging to each case. The propriety of applying this rule with precision is
further strengthened by the terms of the agreement on the part of the United
States who promise to make full compensation for losses and damages in those
cases only where full compensation cannot be obtained in the ordinary course of
judicial proceedings and which have been occasioned by some lawful impediment,
without the delay or negligence or wilful omission of the claimant and without
the insolvency of the debtors or other causes as would equally have operated to
produce such loss if some legal impediment had not existed. Claimant to prove
his Case


Wherefore the agent for the United States cannot omit to insist that the
United States ought not to be awarded to pay the debt of any citizen to the
claimant until the latter shall produce satisfactory proof of every ingredient
essential to a case of loss and damage chageable to them under the stipulations
in this article of the treaty. What those ingredients are, will now be the
subject of enquiry, for which purpose it will be convenient to recite the first
clause of the article under consideration which is as follows:

Whereas it is alleged by diverse British merchants and other his majesty's
subjects, that debts to a considerable amount, which were bona fide contracted
before the peace still remain owing to them by citizens or inhabitants of the
United States, and that by the operation of various lawful impediments since
the peace, not only the full recovery of the said debts has been delayed, but
also the value and security thereof have been in several instances impaired and
lessened, so that by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings, the British
creditors cannot now obtain, and actually have and receive full and adequate
compensation for the losses and damages which they have thereby sustained. It
is agreed, that in all such cases, where full compensation for such losses and
damages cannot, for whatever reason, be actually obtained, had and received by
the said creditors in the ordinary course of justice, the United States will
make full and complete compensation for the same to the said creditors:
Claimant to prove his Case*
But it is distinctly understood, that this provision is to extend to such
losses only as have been occasioned by the lawful impediments aforesaid, and is
not to extend to losses occasioned by such insolvency of the debtors, or other
causes as would equally have operated to produce such loss, if the said
impediments had not existed; nor to such losses or damages as have been
occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or wilful omission of the
claimant.

So brief and intelligible is this stipulation that it is difficult by any
phraseology to make it either more concise or plain. To attempt it let it be
said that every claim against the United States must be founded on a debt
contracted before the peace and remaining due to a British subject on the 19th
November 1794, from a citizen or inhabitant of the United States, which by the
operation of some lawful impediment since the peace, has been either delayed as
to recovery or lessened in value or security, so that a loss and damage has
accrued to the creditor for which in the ordinary course of judicial
proceedings full compensation cannot be obtained and which loss and damage was
not occasioned by the insolvency of the debtor or any other cause that would
have equally produced it, if a legal impediment had not existed, or by the
manifest delay or negligence or wilful omission of the claimant. For every such
loss and damage, full and adequate compensation is promised by the United
States, and God forbid that a promise so just and so honorable should not be
fulfilled with exemplary fidelity.

Claimant to prove his Case.
Every remediable claim must be for a loss of the special description following:

1st. There must have been a debt from a citizen of the United States to a
British subject contracted before the peace of 1783.

2d. This debt must have remained due in whole or in part on the 19th November
1794, when the last treaty is dated.

3d. The debtor must have been solvent at the date of the treaty of peace and
during the existence of some lawful impediment must have become insolvent and
be so yet.

4th. Some loss and damage to the creditor must have arisen from some lawful
impediment either by delaying the payment of it or lessening its value or
security, and the nature and extent of that loss should be described.

5th. There must be an incompetency in the ordinary tribunals of justice to
compel the debtor to make full compensation for the loss and damage before
mentioned.

These several ingredients it is incumbent on the claimant to prove to the
satisfaction of the commissioners before an award can be justly made in his
favor; and moreover, if it shall appear from the proofs produced either that
the loss and damage aforesaid had been occasioned by the manifest delay or
negligence or wilful omission of the claimant or by the insolvency of the
debtor or other cause that would have equally. produced it, if no legal
impediment had existed, The claimant to prove his case.
it is not to be compensated by the United States.

Nothing need be said to show the necessity of proving the first, second and
fourth particular nor to elucidate the reasonableness of requiring that proof
from the claimant. A few remarks however are expedient relative to the third
and fifth.

As to these it may be observed the claimant is to be presumed to know the
circumstances of the debtor, because they are generally known when the credit
is given, and the creditor having an interest in the affairs of his debtor,
will naturally from time to time make enquiries concerning his transactions, so
as to know how he has been employed, whether he has been thrifty or prodigal,
what estate he possessed, what was done with it, where his domicil is, and many
other particulars which need not be here enumerated. If the agents of the
United States were multiplied so as to fill every corner of the country this
sort of knowledge would be acquired by them in most instances with great
difficulty and expense. This observation is specially applicable to claims
arising out of debts contracted in America in the course of retail dealing.
Therefore it seems on this account reasonable that the claimant should be
required to prove the solvency of the debtor at the treaty of peace, and his
insolvency since, and the legal impediment to the recovery of the debt which
has occasioned a loss. But another reason for requiring these proofs from the
claimant arises from the nature of the promise of the United States. It is a
promise to pay out of their treasury whatever sum of money is necessary in
certain cases for doing complete justice to the creditor which the debtor ought
to pay, but which cannot be got from him. They are responsible to pay, only if
the debtor cannot either by reason of inability or certain other causes be
compelled to make full compensation, and have agreed to pay whatever deficiency
of full compensation shall remain unattainable from the debtor in the ordinary
course of judicial proceedings in the particular caseS described in the
article. The claimant therefore ought to prove what this deficiency is, which
implies that he must also prove that he has diligently prosecuted all
reasonable means for recovering from the debtor whatever it was possible to get
from him in the ordinary course of justice. In the case of every particular
debtor a question will arise to be decided by the commissioners, whether the
creditor has used reasonable diligence to compel him to pay the debt. Hence it
may be inferred as a general rule that the creditor ought to apply to the
courts of justice against the debtor before he applies to the commissioners
against the United States.

Cases not relievable under the treaty.
If this interpretation of the meaning of the stipulation be correct, it will
follow that compensation ought not to be awarded against the United States for
a loss and damage in any of the following cases.

1st. Where a debtor has resided in a state, in which ever since the peace the
course of justice has been as free and unimpeded in respect to British
creditors as it was before the war.

2d. Nor where the debtor was insolvent at the date of the treaty of peace.

3d. Nor where the debtor was solvent at the time when the present constitution
of the United States went into operation and by ordinary judicial proceedings
might have been compelled to pay the debt if he had been prosecuted with
reasonable diligence.

4th. Nor where the debtor is solvent now, and the ordinary course of justice
is competent to full relief.

5th. Nor where the debtor is solvent now and the ordinary course of justice is
competent to partial relief for any more than the part which cannot be
recovered from the debtor in the ordinary course of justice.

6th. Nor where the debtor and creditor have voluntarily compromised the
original demand by a new contract, or satisfactorily settled it before or
subsequent to the treaty of peace.

7th. Nor where the creditor from the consideration of blood or friendship to
the debtor, has omitted to sue for it till it has become irrecoverable, or
would not now sue for it if the debtor was able and might be compelled to pay
it. That cannot be said to be a loss and damage, to which the party freely
consents.

8th. Nor where the creditor at the commencement of the war was barred
according to the laws of the land by the judgment of a competent court or by
any act of limitation or other cause, so that if the independence of the United
States had not been established a recovery could not have been had.

9th. Nor where the treaty of peace having complete operation, the justice and
extent of the claim has been judicially decided and ascertained according to
those rules of law and equity which prevailed when the contract was made and
the judgment of the court has been fully satisfied and discharged. For
instance, where verdicts founded on equity have been rendered for the
defendant, or where in judicial proceedings off-sets and credits have been
justly allowed to reduce the debt, or where interest during the war in whole or
in part has been disallowed upon equitable considerations.

It is not attempted to enumerate here all the cases which may be brought
forward, containing some feature or other that excludes them from relief under
the 6th article of the treaty, but those are presented to view which seem least
liable to controversy. This article must be admitted to have grown out of the
4th article of the treaty of peace, and was meant to retribute the losses and
damages in certain cases arising from a contravention or imperfect execution of
it. If this be the policy of the stipulation, it may be laid down as a
fundamental rule, that no loss nor damage is reparable under the treaty of 1794
that is not grounded on a debt comprehended in the 4th article of the treaty of
1783 and has not proceeded from the violation or non execution thereof. This
leads to an enquiry as to the true meaning of the lastmentioned article and
particularly whether it meant to provide for the payment of interest during the
war, and if it did not, then it must be contended that compensation ought not
to be awarded for interest during the war.

SEC. 4. Interest during the War.
These debts were contracted either in the then American colonies where the
creditor and debtor resided at the time of contract, or elsewhere in other
parts of the British dominions where the creditor resided. Most of the
objections against the claim of war-interest, are alike applicable to both
descriptions of debt and a few will apply with greater force to the former.

Though the 4th article of the treaty of peace, is in its terms reciprocal so
that it would seem that each nation was equally interested in having it plain
and free from doubt, yet the contrary is well known to be the fact. The
creditors almost entirely belonged to one and the debtors to the other nation.
It was then the peculiar interest and duty of the creditor nation to express
this stipulation in such language as to leave no doubt that it embraced not
only the principal debt but the interest also during the war, and if this
explanation has not been made it is the worse for that nation. Veteribus placet
pactionem obscuram vel ambiguam venditori et qui locavit nocere; in quorum fuit
potestate legem apertius conscribere. Digest, lib. 2, tit. 14, de pactis leg.
39. "It is an ancient rule that an obscure or ambiguous pact is to be construed
unfavorably to the vender and creditor in whose power it was to express the
legal meaning more plainly." The same thing is laid down by Vattel as a general
maxim in interpreting treaties B. 2. Section 264. "If he who can and ought to
have explained himself clearly and plainly has not done it, Interest during the
War.
it is the worse for him; he cannot be allowed to introduce subsequent
restriction; which he has not expressed," nor (I will add on the same
principle) can he be allowed to introduce subsequent extensions which he has
not expressed. The pact made between the two nations exists only in the article
now under consideration, and if the expressions admit a reasonable doubt
whether interest during the war was comprehended or not, and if it was the duty
of the creditor to have been more explicit than he has been, that
interpretation is to be received according to these rules, which is most
favorable to the debtor.

This argument is enforced by what passed between the Commissioners of the
United States for negotiating a peace with Great Britain, and David Hartley,
minister of his Britannic Majesty. Before the definitive treaty was signed in
their letter of the 17th July 1783, they represented the sense of Congress on
war-interest, in the following words "Congress also think it reasonable that
such part of the interest which may have accrued on such debts during the war
shall not be payable, because all intercourse between the two countries had,
during that period become impracticable, as well as improper. It does not
appear just that individuals in America should pay for delays in payment, which
were occasioned by the civil and military measures of Great Britain."
President's Messages, page 140.
After this if War-interest was meant to be claimed on the part of
Great Britain some uneqivocal terms should have been used, comprehending it,
and the not using such terms is an acquiescence in the opinion entertained by
Congress, Interest during the War.
which had been communicated by the American negotiators of the Treaty.

Hence it may ^e presumed that the article was understood by Great Britain, as
it was by America, and understood not to comprehend war-interest.

Moreover, it is said by Grotius, that if the meaning of words be dubious as
the seller or buyer may be affected, the interpretation ought to be against the
seller, who ought to blame himself for not fully explaining himself. B. iii.
Chapter 20. Sect. 26. So if a doubt arises whether the words of a stipulation ought
to be interpreted favorably to the creditor or to the debtor, the reason of
this rule ought to be applied in favor of the debtor, who is generally in the
greater want, and therefore is in more need of the benignity of construction.

2dly. Supposing the words of the article to be ambiguous, that interpretation
is to be preferred that leads to equality, and therefore it has become a well
known rule, that the cause of him who wishes to avoid a loss, is to be
preferred to him who seeks an advantage. Vattel, book 2d. section 301. To deny
interest on these debts during the war will put the creditor and debtor upon a
more equal footing than to exact it, and a loss will not be incurred by the
debtor for the sake of a gain to the creditor.

What is meant by interest?

If interest be defined the hire of money to be paid by another for the use of
it, this ought not to be paid to the creditor, when the debtor has been
deprived of the means of using it with profit by unforeseen events, Interest
during the War.
to be attributed to the creditor equally, if not more than to himself. If the
creditor receive interest during the war, he loses nothing, and gains every
thing that he would have gained in peace. To him the war is no calamity. On the
other hand if the debtor pays interest during the war, having made no profit
during this period, but in many instances having sustained losses, he will be
charged with an additional loss.

Thus then it is apparent, that if the British creditors remain without
war-interest from their American debtors, who made no profits during the war,
the two parties will be in a more equal situation, than if the former should
receive that interest.

Thirdly. The stipulation in the fourth article of the treaty of peace "that
creditors on either side shall meet with no lawful impediment to the recovery
of the full value in sterling money of all bona fide debts" contracted before
that time, provides for the principal only, and leaves all claims of interest
open, to be decided judicially, according to all the circumstances of each
case. There is no country in the world, where the distinction between principal
and interest is better understood than in Great Britain, and there Debt in
common parlance means principal exclusively of interest. Generally in accounts
the debt and the interest are distinctly stated.

If in the language of some political writers interest is truly defined to be
the hire of money, it cannot be contended that the hire of the sum is the same
thing with the sum itself. This would be to say that a profit produced by a
thing, was the thing itself. Interest during the War.
But the profit of land, or chattels is well known to be a distinct and
separate thing from the land or chattels. No remark perhaps can more strongly
enforce this distinction between debt and interest, than that debts in many
instances do not carry interest. This is too well known to require particular
illustration. If a sum of money be due, a promise to pay the debt is not a
promise that interest on the debt shall be paid also.

According to the Roman lawyers "interest is what is given more than the
principal, that the creditor may not be a loser;" Usura quod accedit ne in
damno versetur creditor. Grotius B. 2. chap. 12. note to sec. 21. The learned
Puffendorf observes that the damages allowed the creditor for what he might
have made of his money, are among other reasons, demanded for failure of
payment at the time appointed, which ought to be stated according to the loss
sustained, be it what it will; but because it would be difficult to prove and
adjust it exactly, it is therefore generally reduced to regular interest."

"Since therefore it is lawful to demand damages for tardy payment, or because
we lose by not having our money paid in at the time appointed, why may we not
bargain for something certain before hand, upon consideration that our money is
in another man's power, whereas we were not obliged for his benefit to venture
the loss, or to neglect the gain that might be made of it." B. 5. chap. 7. sec.
9. But on this point let the books of English jurisprudence be consulted, and
let that definition of interest be received in preference to any other,
Interest during the War.
which in a long course of judicial decisions, by learned, wise and just
judges, has been established in England. To this the claimant will not presume
to object, and the agent for the United States conscious of the integrity,
intelligence and equity, which the judges of that country have displayed, most
readily consents. By the English judges, interest is considered as compensation
for the damage arising from detaining the debt, and so distinct is the interest
considered from the debt, that an action of debt does not lie to recover the
interest accrued on the debt. In the case of Yeoman us. Barstow, justice Powel
said that "debt ne gist pour interet," 1 Lutwyche 274. In the case of Seaman
us. Dee, after several arguments lord chief justice Hale said "no action of
debt lies for the interest of money, though he which borrows it, promises to
pay after the rate of 6 per cent for it, but it is to be recovered by assumpsit
in damages. So where by deed the party covenants or binds himself to pay the
principal with interest, the interest is not to be included with the principal,
in an action of debt, but shall be turned into damages, which the jury is to
measure to what the interest amounts to." 1 Ventriss 198. This is a judicial
resolution upon the very point, whether interest was recoverable as debt, which
was brought before the court by demurrer, and therefore is of high authority.
If it be an axiom of English law, as it is believed to be that an action of
debt lies for recovering every debt, and if such an action does not lie for
interest, as has been shown, it then follows that in the eye of English law,
interest is not debt.

In the case of Holdiph us. Otway, Interest during the War.
it was declared by the c^ to be the course of both courts upon a judgment in
debt by default or confession to tax the damages occasion detentionis debiti
as well as the costs of suit etc. 2d. Saunders 206. In Hobior us. Ebyzson upon
a writ of error to the king bench, the counsel for the plaintiff said that in
an action of debt and judgment by default interest was allowable by the court,
by way of damages occasion detentionis debiti, without the trouble of a writ
of enquiry, and the counsel for the defendant, agreed, That in debt a jury will
be directed to give the interest in damages, and chief justice Parker in giving
judgment declared that by the common law in every action of debt damages are
given occasion detentionis debiti, either by writ of enquiry or by the court.
10th. Mod. 277. Lord Mansfield in the case of Zinck us. Langton, confirmed this
doctrine that in an action for debt interest is recoverable by the way of
damage and ought to be the rule for assessing the damage. This was a writ of
error, and a motion was made under the statute of Henry the 7th. that interest
on the original judgment should be allowed for damage sustained by the delay
arising from the writ of error which was granted by the court, who said that
the original action being for a debt, the interest ought to be the measure of
the damage." So in Sweatland us. Squire, justice Powel said that interest is
recovered by way of damages when damages are recovered occasion detentionis
debiti. 2d. Salkeld 623. In short no rule seems better established in the
practice of the courts of England as well as of the several United States than
that in an action of debt, interest is recoverable as compensation for the
damage occasioned by detaining the debt. Interest during the War.
Thus much has been thought necessary for supporting the position, that "debt"
is distinguishable from interest and does not necessarily ex vi termini include
interest. If this be admitted, then the 4th article of the treaty of peace
being silent as to interest, may be interpreted not to include it, but to leave
all claims of interest to be decided according to justice, upon a comprehensive
view of all circumstances attending each case.

As a general rule it may be admitted that interest from the ratification of
the definitive treaty of peace ought to be paid to the creditor in specialty
cases, and also wherever by the usage of trade it was in contemplation of both
parties that it should be payable. Though this should be admitted, yet it is
contended that interest during the war under the singular and unprecedented
circumstances under which the creditor and the debtor were placed by it, ought
not in equity to be paid.

1st. Because it may fairly be inferred that the omission in the treaty to
stipulate for the payment of war-interest, was meant to bury in oblivion that
species of damage arising from the detention of debt for which interest is the
ordinary compensation. This idea is strongly supported by Vattel, who says, As
every power at war pretends to have right on its side, and this pretension is
not liable to be judged by others, the state of things at the instant of the
treaty is to be held legitimate, and any change to be made in it requires an
express specification in the treaty, Interest during the War.
consequently all things not mentioned in the treaty, are to remain as they
were at the conclusion of it. This is also a consequence of the promised
amnesty. All the damages caused during the war are likewise buried in oblivion,
and no plea is allowable for those the restoration of which is not mentioned in
the treaty: they are looked on as if they had never happened. B. iv, sec. 21.
If then the damage to the creditor by detaining his debt during the war, is to
be buried in oblivion, there remains no ground to claim compensation for that
damage, or in other words to claim interest. This matter must remain incapable
of reparation as at the instant of the treaty.

2dly. In a liberal view of this subject it deserves to be noticed that
different opinions have been entertained in the United States and great Britain
concerning that part of the 7th Article which prohibits the "carrying away
negroes or other property of the American in habitants," and it has been
executed in the manner most favorable to the latter. The Americans insisted
that this Article was to be interpreted liberally in favor of their ancient
rights, but the strict construction has prevailed. With respect to the 4th
Article concerning debts, the Americans have contended and do contend, that a
strict construction ought to be given to it, excluding interest, but on the
part of Britain it is urged that a liberal construction should be given, so as
to include interest. Is it reasonable or equal that where a strict
interpretation of one article will be advantageous to Britain, it should be
taken, and that where a strict interpretaion of another article will be
advantageous to America, Interest during the War.
it should be denied. In a national point of view, may not the loss of slaves
by reason of the strict construction put on one article, be reasonably opposed
to the demand of interest during the war, when founded not on a strict but on
the most liberal interpretation of another article? Is it reasonable that every
article in the treaty shall be understood most unfavorably to the United
States? Is it consistent with those "principles of liberal equity and
reciprocity" which the preliminary articles declare to be the basis for
securing perpetual peace and harmony?

3dly. It cannot be said with reason or justice, that when by the laws of the
nation to whom the creditor was subject, it was highly criminal for him to
receive payment, the damage to him in not receiving payment, should be answered
by the debtor. So fully impressed with the weight of this argument was the
British Secretary of Foreign Affairs, in the year 1786, in a conversation with
the American Minister, that he agreed with him in the injustice of demanding
interest during that period. This may be seen in an extract of a letter from
the American Minister at the Court of Great Britain to the American Secretary
for Foreign Affairs, dated June 16, 1786.

Lord Caermarthen told me yesterday, "That he had letters from Mr. Anstey,
mentioning his civil reception." A long conversation ensued upon the subject of
the frosts, debts, etc. little of which being new is worth repeating. The
policy of giving up the interest during the war, Interest during the War.
and of agreeing to a plan of payment by instalments, was again insisted on,
from various considerations, particularly from the evident injustice of
demanding interest from that period. It was urged that the claim of interest,
in most cases, was grounded upon custom and the mutual understanding of the
parties; but that it never had been the custom, nor had it ever been understood
or foreseen that an Act of Parliament should be passed, casting the American
debtor out of the protection of the crown, cutting off all correspondence and
rendering all intercourse criminal; for that was the result and the legal
construction during the whole war. Here his Lordship fully agreed with me, and
even out-went me, saying, that "It was very true, that by construction of the
law of this land, it was high treason in a creditor in Great Britain to receive
a remittance from his debtor in America during the war." His Lordship added
some slight expressions concerning the interest, and wished that the Courts
were opened for recovering the principal: we might leave the interest for an
after consideration. President's Messages, 140.

4thly. The detention of the debt during the war, was unavoidable by reason of
the war, not only because all commerce was interdicted to the United States by
the British parliament, and all intercourse and access between the American
debtors and British creditors was unlawful and generally impossible in
consequence of the party creditor, but because the Americans were absolutely
deprived of the means of payment, Interest during the War.
by the nature, manner and events of the war. On the side of the Americans it
was a war for life, liberty and property -- it was a war pro aris et focis;
their country was invaded almost every where, hostilities were brought into its
bosom, their great towns taken, some of their small ones destroyed, the
husbandmen obliged to abandon their homes, the laborers carried away by force,
or seduced by reward, the plantations and farms not permitted to be cultivated,
as in ordinary wars between independent nations they might have been, and all
the products of the land were indispensably necessary for defense. There was
nothing left to an individual for paying interest on his debt, and in a contest
of this kind, if successful, few expected to be required at a future day to pay
interest upon any debt due to a British creditor, for that space of time when
all profit from their property was become impossible. Waving the enquiry before
a tribunal constituted as this is, concerning the justice of the war on the one
side or on the other, it may be asserted, that if the two nations had equal
justice on its side in regard to it, yet under the extraordinary circumstances
attending its prosecution it is not equitable to claim interest during the
period of the war upon American debts due to British subjects. The agent for
the United States is aware that Great Britain is to be viewed in the light of a
creditor nation in Europe, Asia and America, and that it deeply concerns her to
extend the claims of interest upon debts as far as may be practicable, yet he
relies they will be limited by the principles of equity. He shall avoid
controverting the proposition that debts due to private persons before a war,
shall be paid after the war, Interest during the War.
and with interest too during the war, if such was the contract, either tacit
or express. Bynhershook translated by Lee in his treatise on captures seems to
imply that interest during a war in ordinary circumstances ought not to be
paid, he says Debts therefore which are not taken hold of, seem as it were
suspended and forgotten in time of war, but by a peace return to their former
proprietor, by a kind of postliminy. Lee on captures, p. 118. If the proprietor
at the end of the war is only reinstated as he stood at the beginning of it,
which is the correct operation of postliminy, interest during the war is
necessarily excluded. If interest is allowed, the creditor is not in the same
but a better state, than he was when the war began. Can a debt be said to be
suspended and forgotten during a war, if during that period it is producing the
customary peace profit in the form of interest? This assertion is therefore not
so clear of doubt, as might be supposed, and on the present occasion is not
intended to be examined.
However just and true the proposition may be in general, yet he insists that
the present case ought to be excepted upon principles of sound reason and
genuine justice. Here he cannot omit making a few remarks upon a passage in
Grotius, and another in Vattel, lest they should be supposed to invalidate the
present argument. The former uses these words If nothing else be agreed upon,
yet this is to be supposed in every peace that no action shall be commenced for
damages done in war, which also is to be understood of those done to private
persons, these being also the effects of war: for in a doubtful case it is to
be imagined that neither party will be willing to own themselves guilty of
injustice, book 3. chapter 20. sect. 15. Yet those debts which were due to private
persons at the beginning of the war are not to be forgiven, for these were not
contracted by the right of war, but only forbidden to be demanded in time of
war, therefore the impediment being removed, that is the war ended, they retain
their full force. b. 3. 620. sect. 16.

It is to be observed that at the time this author wrote, Interest during the
War.
interest was lawful in but few countries, and there not generally but in
special cases: therefore interest on a debt during war could not have been in
his contemplation, and the latter section is to be confined to the principal
only. So understanding it the doctrine is not denied. But the former section
very much favors the idea which has been before pressed, that interest being
the rated damage for detaining the principal, and this detention being the
effect of the war, and the treaty not expressly mentioning interest, it ought
to be considered as a damage forgiven by the peace.

In like manner it is laid down by Vattel debts contracted with individuals or
injuries which they may have received without relating to the war, are likewise
not abolished by the agreement and amnesty, these relating only to their
object, that is the war, its causes and effects. That the effect of the
agreement or amnesty cannot be extended to things of no relation to the war,
concluded by the treaty. Thus claims founded on a debt or an injury prior to
the war, but which made a part of the reasons for undertaking it remain entire,
and are not abolished by the treaty unless it be formally extended to the
extinction of every claim whatever. It is the same with debts contracted during
the war but for causes of no relation to it or with injuries likewise done
during the course of the war, but foreign to the state of it. Upon this let it
be observed that the first clause relates to the debts due to the nation, and
the latter to the debts due to individuals; and it is agreed that neither
species of debts as distinct from interest, Interest during the War.
are abolished by a treaty of peace without express words to that effect. 2d.
It is true that the author lived at a time when interest on debts was become
more general than in the time of Grotius, and therefore perhaps he has used
different expressions, which as to individuals are confined to debts exclusive
of interest, or if they extend to interest during the war, they are to be
understood to abolish interest during this period. According to him claims for
reparation of injuries arising from or effected by the war, are abolished;
others not relating to the war are not. Tne detention of the debt during the
war was an injury or damage to the creditor, produced by the war, especially
under the circumstances of the American war; therefore a claim for reparation
for this damage, that is for interest during the war is abolished by the treaty
of peace.

But further to illustrate that the circumstances of the American war ought in
the judgment of just men to exempt the debtor from paying interest during that
period, it deserves to be noticed that in the understanding of both parties
when the credit was given, the expected profits of the farms and plantations in
America constituted the funds from which the debts were payable, and the
interest too in those cases where by contract or usage interest ought to be
paid. It is laid down by Viner in his abridgement of the laws of England that
where by a general and national calamity nothing is made out of lands which are
assigned for the payment of interest, it ought not to run on during the time of
such calamity. title Interest, C. 7. Basil us. Acheson. Surely it is not
necessary to enlarge on the calamitous situation of America during the war,
Interest during the War.
or to attempt to prove a fact so notorious, that individuals generally made no
profit to themselves out of their lands. In the language of the American
Secretary of State, in his excellent letter of 29th May 1792, to the British
minister, Can a more general national calamity be conceived than that universal
devastion, which took place in many of those states during the war? Was it ever
more exactly the case any where that nothing were made out of the lands which
were to pay the interest? The produce of those lands, for want of the
opportunity of exporting it safely, was down to almost nothing in real money,
e. g. tobacco was less than a dollar the 100lb. Imported articles of clothing
or comsumption were from four to eight times their usual price. A bushel of
salt was usually sold for 100lb. of tobacco. At the same time, these lands, and
other property, in which the money of the British creditor was vested, were
paying high taxes for their own protection, and the debtor as nominal holder,
stood ultimate insurer of their value to the creditor, who was the real
proprietor, because they were bought with his money. And who will estimate the
value of this insurance, or say what would have been the forfeit in a contrary
event of the war? Who will say that the risk of the property was not worth the
interest of its price. President's message, 80.

5th. In none of the states except Georgia and South Carolina was any law
passed after the definitive treaty which impeded the recovery of debts due from
American citizens to British subjects, Interest during the War.
that had been contracted before the war. Queen whether all acts of state
authority s^bs^quent to the treaty and contrary to it were not void.
The courts of justice immediately after the peace were open in almost all the
states to suits of this kind, and so plain was the equity relative to interest
during the war, that the practice of the courts and juries in disallowing it
was the same generally throughout the United States. Such was the practice of
the courts in Massachusetts till the year 1787. Such was and has continued to
be the practice of the courts of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware,
Maryland, Virginia and South Carolina, and in like manner have juries acted in
the cases that were under the power of their verdicts. A concurrence of opinion
on this point in the different states, of the numerous individuals whose duty
in some way or other it has been to decide upon it, speaks loudly in favor of
its rectitude; especially when it is remembered that in some of the states, the
claims of British debts were so inconsiderable, and so few as not to have
occasioned public concern, or to have excited any prejudices. This opinion
therefore must have proceeded from the purest principles of equity; and to
suppose the contrary would be to question the probity of the best and most
intelligent part of the American society.

Conscious that they were not entitled to interest during the war, the British
creditors themselves, or their agents, when they began the adjustment and
collection of their debts, almost universally disclaimed interest during this
period. When they obtained judgments in the courts, they formally released the
interest during the war, Interest during the War.
and the like rule they observed in all amicable adjustments with their
debtors. President's Messages, page 133, 134, 12, 6, 143. The Agent for the
United States is authorized to represent that this was the prevailing practice
in Maryland and Virginia; and to add, that demands for more than a million of
dollars have been settled and paid in those two states according to this rule,
with the consent of the creditors, and in most instances at their own
suggestion. The idea of claiming interest during the war, upon this kind of
debts, scarcely prevailed any where until of very late years, except in the
State of Massachusetts, where it began to appear in the year 1788.

Whether interest during the war, ought in equity to be paid, was a question
more likely to be decided rightly immediately upon the return of the peace,
when all the circumstances of the war were in the knowledge of the parties,
than at a later period; and the general impression, the general conviction and
general practice which was then taken up by the creditors, that interest during
the war ought not to be claimed furnishes an argument that deserves much
consideration.

These are the reasons that have occured for maintaining the proposition that
the British creditors are not entitled upon principles of justice to interest
during the war, on the debts due from the American debtors, which were
contracted before the war, whether the debts be evidenced by bond, note or
account. A bond in common form carries interest only by the usage of the courts
and juries in America as well as in Great Britain, for the legislative acts,
Interest during the War.
of both countries, are alike on this subject, and in both they limit the
annual interest not to exceed a certain sum and do not enact positively that
interest shall be paid in any case.

If according to the treaty of peace the payment of interest during the war is
not stipulated but left to be decided by principles of equity, and if these
principles dictate that it ought not to be paid, then the claim of interest
during the war cannot be awarded in any case whatever, under the treaty of
1794. The 6th article of this treaty was not designed to enlarge the rights of
creditors beyond what they were under the treaty of 1783, but to satisfy their
claims under the 4th article of that treaty, in instances where from the
operation of legal impediments contrary to good faith losses had occurred, and
complete justice was unattainable from the debtors, and the creditors had not
been in fault.

Having upon general principles investigated the subject submitted to the
commissioners under the sixth article of the treaty of 1794, Virginia law^ and
usages.
the agent for the United States will proceed to discuss the particular claim
of Cunningham and company. In doing this it will be necessary to enquire into
the municipal laws and usages of the state of Virginia, where the debts were
contracted, which are the foundation of the claim, and where the debtors, as
well as the creditors or their factors did, and yet do reside: And a more
particular attention will be necessary, because there is an evident want of
legal information discoverable on the part of the claimants.

It is not denied on the part of the United States that the claimants are the
surviving partners of William Cunningham and company, who were a company of
British merchants, owning sundry stores in the then colony, now state of
Virginia, of which a store called. William Cunningham and company's Brunswick
sto^ was one, and which for several years was under the management of their
factor residing in the county of Brunswick. Nor is it denied that the practice
of selling goods by retail to the planters on cre^ to answer their occasional
wants, prevailed generally among the British merchants, from the earliest
settlement of Virginia until the commencement of the war. Nor is it denied that
anterior to the independence of Virginia, justice was administered in a
satisfactory manner, but it is confidently asserted that since that period many
improvements have been made from time to time, and especially within the last
ten years in the judiciary system of that state, so that at present justice is
no where better administered than in its superior and most of its inferior
courts.

Whatever respect might have been shown anciently in the courts of justice to
the evidence of merchants books, when the planters were in greater ignorance
and in greater necessity than within the last forty years, it seems very
certain, that this kind of evidence had declined in reputation in the year
1748, when the act prescribing the method of proving book debts was passed, to
which the claimants have referred. To encourage the merchants of Great Britain
who traded to America, was the policy declared and practiced by that kingdom,
Law concerning book debts.
and this very act proceeded from a partiality to the mercantile interest, and
was always considered in Virginia in the light of a grievance to the planters.
It instituted a species of proof unadmitted in Great Britain, in controversies
between subject and subject in that country; a species of proof which the first
principle of justice rejects: For no man shall be a witness for himself. But it
is not correctly stated by the claimants that at the time the revolution was
commenced, the book of a merchant who or whose factor resided in Virginia when
the goods were sold and delivered, was conclusive evidence of the debt in all
cases, but on the contrary it was only admissable evidence in special cases and
under special circumstances and relative to goods sold and delivered within a
certain short time previous to the action brought, and was liable to be
oppugned by any legal evidence whatsoever. The law consisted of the following
particulars.

1st. To entitle the plaintiff to this evidence at the trial of the cause, he
was required to swear or solemnly affirm that the matter in dispute is a store
account, and that he has no means to prove the delivery of the articles
therein contained, or any of them, but by his store account. This implies that
goods must have been delivered by himself or by some persons since dead, or
whose testimony cannot be reasonably expected to be produced.

2d. The oath or affirmation is to set forth that the book contains a true
account of all the dealings or the last settlement of accounts between the
parties, Law concerning book debts.
that all the articles therein contained were bona fide delivered, and that all
just credits have been given to the defendant.

3d. Such book and oath or affirmation might be received as good evidence for
any of the articles delivered within two years before action brought, but not
for any article of longer standing, unless the defendant should have removed
out of the county where the debt was contracted, in which case the time limited
was three years after the article in dispute was delivered.

4th. A copy from the book with the like oath or affirmation might be received
instead of the book itself, unless the defendant required at the time of
joining issue, the book to be produced.

5th. If the creditor who delivered the merchandise be dead, his executor or
administrator upon making oath that there are no witnesses to his knowledge
capable of proving the delivery of the merchandise, and the book was found so
stated, and that he does not know of any credit to be given, might give such
book and oath in evidence for any articles delivered within the time aforesaid.

6th. This evidence might be contested and opposed by other legal evidence, and
if the defendant was dead, his book might be given in evidence against the
plaintiff's book. Virginia laws, 229.230. Let it be also here observed that by
an act passed in 1755, the factor for merchant resident in Great Britain or
Ireland was allowed to take the same oath to his book of accounts or to a copy
thereof which was admissable evidence in the same manner and under the like
limitations and restrictions as were imposed on the creditor by the act of
1748. Law concerning book debts.
But where non-resident merchants had factors resident, they were excluded from
the saving in the act for the limitation of actions, to persons beyond sea at
the time the action accrued. Virginia laws 324.325.

These laws were in force when the revolution commenced, and are at this day in
regard to goods wares, and merchandise sold and delivered before the first day
of May 1780. The act of October 1779 which has been mentioned by the claimants
as repealing the act of 1748, need only be quoted to show the erroneous
representation which the claimants have made of it. The first section enacts
"that from and after the first day of May next, the act entitled " an act
prescribing the method of proving book debts, shall be and the same is hereby
repealed, except only so far as relates to goods wares and merchandise sold and
delivered, or debts contracted before the said first day of May." If any
inferior court in Virginia has otherwise determined it must have been an
erroneous determination, to which the creditor ought not to have submitted, and
which might and should have been carried to a superior tribunal to be
corrected. In acquiesicng to such a decision the creditor has been manifestly
negligent, or has wilfully omitted to use the means proper and competent for
his redress, and in either case no damage arising from this source can be
brought within the 6th article of the treaty of 1794.

Law concerning book debts.
It is probable that some instances may have occurred, where the creditor or his
factor has offered to prove his account by his own oath, but in consequence of
failing to comply with some of the requisites of the act^ of 17^^ or 1755, he
has been denied. However in such a case there is no ground of complaint against
the court. These acts then have never been repealed and exist at this moment in
full force relative to debts contracted before the war, and if this be admitted
it cannot be pretended that though the factors and store keepers are dead or
dispersed into distant parts of the world, the creditors are deprived of any
means of proof which were admissiable before the war; or that enjoying the same
means of proof since the revolution which they had formerly, because they
cannot satisfactorily prove the justice of their claims before an ordinary
tribunal of law or equity so as to obtain payment from the debtors, they have
therefore a right merely on this account to seek redress from the United
States. Enough it is hoped has already been said upon the interpretation of the
treaties to show the untenability of such a doctrine, and with great deference
to the board the agent for the United States submits whether what has been
stated by the claimants relative to the operation of the acts of Virginia above
mentioned, on their claims founded on book-debts, be not either erroneous or
irrelevant.

No legal impediment in Virginia since the peace.
It is true the courts of justice in Virginia were occluded on the 12th April,
1774, by the expiration of the act commonly called the "Fee Bill" and so
continued 'till the revolution commenced. No legal impediment in Virginia since
the peace.
From that time 'till the third day of September in 1783, when peace was made,
the courts were not open to the recovery of debts due to British subjects, who
being enemies were incapable by common law and by the law of nations of
maintaining actions in the American courts during the war. But peace being
definitively made, it is contended that no legal impediment afterward existed
in Virginia to their prosecuting suits. This rests on two grounds -- first that
there was no act of assembly which prohibited the original creditors from suing
for their debts: And secondly, that the treaty abrogated every law of the state
which was contrary to it.

The acts of the legislature which the claimants have represented as containing
impediments to the recovery of their debts are,

October 1779, An act for discouraging extensive credits, and repealing the act
prescribing the method of proving book-debts. This is alleged to have repealed
the acts of 1744 and 1755, relative to the mode of proving book-debts. It is
hoped enough has already been advanced to prove the erroneousness of this idea.

20th October, 1777, An act for sequestering British property, enabling those
indebted to British Subjects to pay off such debts, and directing the
proceedings in suits where such subjects are parties. Chancery revisal, page
64. It is not expressly stated by the claimants how this act impeded the
recovery of any British debts, and more especially any of those set forth in
their claim: No legal impediment in Virginia since the peace.
Nor can it be supposed that it created any impediment unless in two ways.
First, by authorizing debtors to British subjects to make payment into the loan
office of the state: but it has been solemnly determined in the supreme court
of the United States, that payments under this act are no legal impediment to
the recovery of the full value in sterling money, of any debts contracted
before the war. Jones executors us. Hylton. at February term, 1796. To this
judgment all the inferior courts are bound in duty to conform, and it is
believed do actually conform, Therefore it cannot be admitted that the payments
into the loan office under this act or any other are legal impediments.
Secondly, by suspending executions until the further direction of the
legislature, in those particular suits which were depending in any court of law
and equity the 12th day of April, in the year 1774, wherein British subjects
alone were plaintiffs, and any citizen of the Commonwealth was a defendant; see
5th section. It is answered that to permit these suits to continue in court
during the war was a favor to which the plaintiffs, who had become enemies,
were not on general principles entitled. These suits should have been abated in
consequence of the war, but they were not, and on the return of peace they
might have been immediately, as they have since been prosecuted, and in many
instances with effect. In the classification which the claimants have made of
their various debts, none were in suit on the 12th day of April, 1774, as will
appear hereafter, upon examining the several claims which are presented by them
to the board, and therefore, they cannot have suffered any damage whatever in
consequence of this part of the act of 1777. No legal impediment in Virginia
since the peace.
This alone is a sufficient answer to these claimants, and as to those
particular persons who may have had suits pending on the 12th of April, 1774,
the treaty removed the suspension imposed by this act. On the operation of the
treaty upon the laws of the state more will be said hereafter.

May 1782, An act providing more effectual funds for the redemption of
certificates granted the officers and soldiers raised by this state. Chancery
revisal, page 166. This act is alleged to have revived the act of 20th October
1777 above mentioned, by repealing the act of May 1780, which suspended so much
of the act of 20th October 1777, as authorized those indebted to British
subjects to make payment into the loan office. In this the claimant is correct,
yet if it has been satisfactorily shown, and the agent for the United States
trusts it has been satisfactorily shown that no payment under the act of 1777
is a legal impediment, the revival of it must be deemed wholly immaterial.

November 1781, An act directing the mode of adjusting and settling the payment
of certain debts and contracts, and for other purposes. Chancery revisal, p.
147. The claimants represent this act to have operated as an impediment in the
following manner, that bonds were taken subsequent to the period when the scale
of depretiation commence for securing debts contracted prior to that period,
and that in suits on these bonds in courts of law, parole proof is not admitted
to explain or alter the purport of the bonds, No legal impediment in Virginia
since the peace.
so that they are determined to be liable to be sealed according to the date.
The material words of this act are And whereas the good people of this state
will labor under many inconveniences for want of some rule, whereby to settle
and adjust the payment of debts and contracts entered into and made between the
first day of January, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-seven, and the
first day of January one thousand seven hundred and eighty-two, unless some
rule shall be by law established for liquidating and adjusting the same, so as
to do justice as well to the debtor as creditor: Be it therefore enacted by the
General Assembly, that from and after the passing of this act, all debts and
contracts entered into or made in the current money of this state or of the
United States, excepting at all times contracts entered into for gold and
silver coin, tobacco, or any other specific property, within the period
aforesaid, now remaining due and unfulfilled, or which may become due at any
future day or days, for the payment of any sum or sums of money, shall be
liquidated, settled and adjusted, agreeable to a scale of depreciation herein
after mentioned and contained, that is to lay, by reducing the amount of all
such debts and contracts to the true value in specie at the days or times the
same were incurred or entered into:

Let it be observed that in the lists of debts presented by William Cunningham
and company the present claimants, No legal impediment in Virginia since the
peace.
there is not a single bond of this description; for they are dated anterior to
the first day of January in the year 1777, and the space of depreciation fixed
by the act commenced on the first day of January 1777, and ended the 1st day of
January 1782. Consequently these claimants have no right to complain of the
depreciation law, as they have not received a loss from it in any case, in any
form whatever. It is reserved to the United States more fully to discuss this
law, when any case of loss under it shall be presented to the board. In the
mean time the agent for the United States thinks proper to mention his
information, that by judicial decisions it has been settled in Virginia, that
if a bond dated at any time between the 1st day of January 1777, and 1st day of
January 1782, contains in the condition or any part of it any thing to show the
debt was originally contracted before the date of the bond, the depreciation
law shall not be construed to operate on such a case; but if the bond has no
such intrinsic evidence of the time the debt was contracted, it is liable to be
scaled and parole evidence is not admitted to alter the effect and purport of
the sealed instrument. Thus then if the creditor omitted to take a bond so as
to show by something in it, that it was probably to secure a debt contracted
before the war, it was a wilful omission in him, and if any loss arises from
hence, it is a loss not intended by the treaty of 1794, to be charged on the
United States.

12th December 1787, An act to repeal so much of all and and every act or acts
of Assembly as prohibits the recovery of British debts. These are the words, No
legal impediment in Virginia since the peace.
Whereas it is stipulated by the fourth article of the treaty of peace between
the king of Great Britain and the United States of America in Congress
assembled, that creditors on either side shall meet with no lawful impediment
in the recovery of the full value in sterling money of all bona fide debts
heretofore contracted; Be it therefore enacted by the General Assembly, that
such of the acts or parts of acts of the legislature of this commonwealth, as
have prevented or may prevent the recovery of debts due to British subjects,
according to the true intent and meaning of the said treaty of peace, shall be,
and are hereby repealed.

Provided that this act shall be suspended until the governor with the advice
of council shall, by his proclamation, notify to this state that Great Britain
has delivered up to the United States the posts therein now occupied by
British troops, which posts were stipulated by treaty, to be given up to
Congress immediately after the conclusion of peace; and is also taking measures
for the further fulfillment of the said treaty, by delivering up the negroes
belonging to the citizens of this state taken away contrary to the seventh
article of the treaty, or by making such compensation for them as shall be
satisfactory to Congress. It will not be urged that this act repealed any act
whatsoever prohibiting the recovery of British debts, if any legal prohibition
at that time existed. But the whole act is to be considered as nugatory; the
proviso annexed to the act which is correctly set forth by the claimants
suspended the operation of the act completely, No legal impediment in Virginia
since the peace.
if indeed there had been any subject for its operation. In reality there was
no such subject. There was no act or part of an act in force which prohibited
the recovery of British debts on the 12th of December 1787, and it was passed
under an erroneous opinion that some such act or part of an act did then exist:
an opinion that was generally prevalent as much because the creditors did not
venture to bring forward their claims from an idea of a general prejudice
against them before a court of justice, as for any other reason which can be
assigned.

It has been alleged as another impediment to the recovery of the full value
of the debts in sterling money, in the ordinary course of judicial proceedings,
that at the time the debts were severally contracted the difference between
sterling money of Great Britain and currency of Virginia was only 25 per cent,
and by the laws passed since the revolution the difference is now 33 per cent.
Since the year 1755 to this day, the law has been respecting the sterling money
debts, the same. It was enacted, that in any action which has been or shall be
commenced, and is or shall be depending for the recovery of any sterling money
in any court of record within this commonwealth, wherein the plaintiff or
plaintiffs shall recover; such court shall have power, and are hereby directed
by rule, to be entered at the foot of their judgment in such action, to order
such judgment to be discharged or levied in current money at such rate of
exchange as they shall think just, any law, usage or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. No legal impediment in Virginia since the peace.
Virginia laws 121,323. These are the very words of the act of assembly at this
day in force, and consequently there seems no pretense for the complaint which
has been made relative to debts contracted in sterling money. As to debts
contracted in Virginia, in current money of Virginia, there never was a law
which fixed the value of current money of Virginia in sterling money of
Great Britain at any certain rate, nor was a debt in the current money of the
state ever expected to be discharged in sterling money: The lex loci was in
theory and practice the rule, and when the current money debt was paid in
specie at the current value, the debtor was discharged in equity as well as
law. The value of a Spanish milled dollar varied from five shillings and
ninepence currency to six shillings currency, and was estimated of the latter
value about the time the revolution commenced. Since the revolution the value
of a dollar is fixed by law to be six shillings, and other silver coins in
proportion, and the dollar is the adopted item in account. Was it contemplated
by the two nations when they made the treaties, that this was a subject on
which a difference would arise? Rather was not the phrase value in sterling
money in the treaty of peace intended to preclude paper money in all varieties
of form: Ought it not to be restrained to paper money, and not extended to
specie? especially when the actual rate of specie in the dealings of
individuals was the same on the 19th April 1775, or 4th July 1776, as at this
day in Virginia.

These are all the acts which the present claimants have specifically alleged
to create impediments to the due recovery of British debts, No legal impediment
in Virginia since the peace.
and to their an answer has been severally given. But having said they dee^ it
unnecessary particularly to state, each and every act of the legislature of
Virginia of this kind, it is incumbent to go still further into this subject.
The only act that can be supposed to have created any impediment to the
claimants is the act of May 1782, An act to repeal so much of a former act as
suspends the issuing of executions upon certain judgment until December 1783.
By the second section it is enacted that no debt or debt or demand whatsoever,
originally due to a subject of Great Britain shall be recoverable in any court
in this Commonwealth, although the same may be transferred to a citizen of this
state, or to any other person capable of maintaining such action, unless the
assignment has been or may be made for a valuable consideration, bona side
paid before the first day of May, in the year one thousand seven hundred and
seventy seven, the proof of which consideration and the time thereof, shall be
on the plaintiff. Chancery revisal, page 165.

The intent of this act which passed flagrante bell^ was evidently to disable
citizens assignees of bonds, notes or other evidencies of British debts from
suing and recovering those debts which it was suspected would have been in most
cases collusively done for the benefit of the original creditor. By a law of
Virginia of old standing an assignee of a bond note or bill may sue in his own
name an action of debt. To disable the British creditor who was declared by law
an alien enemy from prosecuting suits in the courts of Virginia, No legal
impediment in Virginia since the peace.
the particular interposition of the legislature was not at this time
requisite. The state of war created this disability in British subjects, who
being enemies could not maintain actions in our courts. But suits might have
been prosecuted, upon debts of this kind assigned to citizens. This during the
trouble and distresses of the war would have been oppressive and intolerable,
and it called for the preventive aid of the legislature: Therefore this act was
made, which may be reasonably restrained to the recovery of British debts
assigned to citizens; and if this be the most proper construction it follows
that no impediment has arisen to British creditors from this law.

But supposing it must be understood more generally, yet it will be found not
to have been in force longer than July 1784, if so long. This act not being
satisfactory, another act was at the next session of assembly passed, embracing
the same subject, which it is contended repealed so much of the act of May
1782, as related to suits for British debts. This last law is expressly limited
to continue in force from the passing of it 'till the first day of December,
1783.

October 1782, An act to amend an act, entitled an act to repeal so much of a
former act as suspends the issuing of executions on certain judgments until
December 1783. Whereas from an act entitled, an act to repeal so much of a
former act as suspends the issuing executions upon certain judgments until
December, one thousand seven hundred and eighty three; sundry great and ruinous
inconveniences and hardships will result to the good people of this
commonwealth, unless a speedy remedy be applied: No legal impediment in
Virginia since the peace.
Be it enacted by the general assembly, that no debt or demand whatever,
contracted with, or due to any British subject, or contracted with, or due to
any other person, for the use of, or in concern with any British subject, and
still remaining unpaid, shall be recoverable in any court of record within this
commonwealth, notwithstanding the same may have been renewed, changed, altered
or acknowledged, to any agent, partner or assignee of such British subject, or
to any other person whatsoever, either for their own use or benefit, or for the
use or benefit of such British subject, since the nineteenth day of April, in
the year one thousand seven hundred and seventy five, any law to the contrary,
in any wise, notwithstanding.

And whereas from the commencement of hostilities by the British against these
United States, and the subsequent proceedings of the general convention and
general assembly, there is reason to believe, that much fraud has been used to
secure the debts due to British subjects, their agents or factors within this
commonwealth, by pretended sales, exchanges or assignments (to the citizens
thereof or other persons qualified to maintain suits for the recovery of such
debts) bearing date prior to the nineteenth day of April, one thousand seven
hundred and seventy five, thereby interesting a part of the citizens, in
supporting the British interest and connection, to the injury of another part,
and to the disturbance of the peace and harmony of the commonwealth: Be it
therefore enacted, No legal impediment in Virginia since the peace.
that where any debt or demand shall not be recoverable in any court of record
within this commonwealth, unless it shall appear on the trial of any suit or
suits for the recovery thereof, that the same was transferred or assigned for
the full value thereof bona fide, paid at the time of such assignment or
transfer, before the said nineteenth day of April one thousand seven hundred
and seventy five, and that notice thereof shall have been given to the debtor
before the tenth day of September, in the year one thousand seven hundred and
seventy five, the proof of the said consideration paid; the time of assignment
or transfer, and the notice thereof given as aforesaid to be on the person or
persons claiming such debt or demand. And all and every thing in the said act,
and any other act whatsoever, not compatible with the above, and every part
thereof, is, and the same is hereby declared to be repealed: Provided always,
that nothing in this act or any other act (except for British debts as
aforesaid) shall prevent the recovering by executions, debts under five pounds,
but that the same shall be prosecuted in like manner as if this or any other
act to the contrary thereof, had never been made.

Provided nevertheless, that this act shall continue and be in force from and
after the passing thereof, until the first day of December one thousand seven
hundred and eighty three. Chancery revisal, 182.

It cannot be controverted that one statute may be repealed by another, No
legal impediment in Virginia since the peace.
without express words of repeal, if such be the evident sense of the latter:
if for example the former be digested and merged in the latter, so that both
may not consistently be in force at the same time. This is conceived to be the
case with respect to the acts of May and October 1782. Besides the latter
contains a sentence of repeal of every part of the former not compatible with
the latter. If then the act of May 1782 be digested, amended and merged in the
act of October 1782, which was temporary, it may be considered as being out of
force with the act of October 1782. It is admitted as laid down in Hobart, 215,
that an affirmative continuance for a limited time, of a perpetual statute
will not abrogate it, after the expiration of the limited time, but this rule
does not apply to the present case, where a perpetual statute was digested,
merged and re-enacted under additional modifications by another statute which
was limited in its duration. This was the sense of the legislature as is
undeniably manifest by an act passed in December 1783, reviving the two acts of
May and October 1782, for the short space of four months from the first day of
December 1783, when they had expired, and from thence to the end of the next
session of assembly. This period happened early in July 1784, as can be proved
if required. The act of December 1783 is too material not to be quoted, and is
in the words following,

December 1783, An act to revive and continue the several acts of assembly for
suspending the issuing of executions on certain judgments until December 1783.
No legal impepiment in Virginia since the peace.
Whereas the present scarcity of specie in this state, causes an utter
inability in debtors to discharge their debts, unless they are still permitted
to pay them in the produce of the country, or by transferring property to their
creditors, and it is therefore wise, just and necessary that the act, entitled
an act to amend an act, entitled an act, to repeal so much of a former act as
suspends the issuing of executions on certain judgments, until December, one
thousand seven hundred and eighty three (which provides a remedy for the said
mischief) and expired on the first day of the present month, should be revived
and continued: Be it therefore enacted, that the said recited act, entitled an
act, to amend an act, entitled an act, to repeal as much of a former act as
suspends the issuing of executions on certain judgments until December, one
thousand seven hundred and eighty three, be, and the same is hereby revived and
further continued, from the day on which it expired, for and during the term of
four months, and from thence to the end of the next session of assembly.

And whereas, the said before recited act, entitled an act to repeal so much of
a former act as suspends the issuing of executions upon certain judgments,
until December, one thousand seven hundred and eighty three, has also expired:
Be it further enacted, that the said last recited act, entitled an act to
repeal so much of a former act as suspends the issuing of executions upon
certain judgments until December, No legal impediment in Virginia since the
peace.
one thousand seven hundred and eighty three, shall be, and the same is hereby
also revived, and shall continue and be in force for and during the term of
four months, and from thence to the end of the next session of assembly.
Chancery Revisal, page 218.

From this view which has been fairly presented of the acts of Virginia, there
seem strong grounds for the opinion, that independent of the operation of the
treaty of peace, there was no law in force in that state which prohibited
British subjects from recovering their just debts from the date of the peace,
and at all events from the (...) of July, 1784, when the aforementioned acts of
1782 expired. Since the peace no act was passed by that state prohibiting the
recovery of British debts: If any such be supposed to exist, let it be produced.

Secondly. The operation of the treaty of peace upon the acts of Virginia, will
now claim some attention. It is contended that the treaty abrogated all the
legislative acts of Virginia, which were contrary to it if any such were to be
found. On the 14th of January, 1784, Congress ratified it, and proclaimed it
the law of the land, and required it to be executed and obeyed accordingly. In
this light it was generally considered throughout the United States; and it is
not believed that any judicial decision was ever made to the contrary by the
judges of any court in any state; and if by accident such a decision was ever
made, it may be pronounced to be erroneous, and it would have been corrected if
it had been carried before a higher tribunal. No legal impediment in Virginia
since the peace.
Much useful information may be obtained on this head in the letter of Mr.
Jefferson, the American secretary of state, to Mr. Hammond, the British
minister at Philadelphia, dated 29th May, 1792; see the sections 40 to 52,
President's Messages.

On the 13th of April 1787, the sense of Congress was unanimously expressed in
their circular letter to the states that under the 9th article of the
confederation, the sole and exclusive right and power of determining on war and
peace, and entering into treaties, was vested in them, and that a treaty made
and published by them, became immediately obligatory on the whole nation, " and
superadded to the laws of the land without the intervention of the state
legislatures." On the same day Congress resolved that the legislatures of the
several states cannot, of right, pass any act or acts for interpreting,
explaining or construing a national treaty, or any part or clause of it; nor
for restraining, limiting or in any manner impeding, retarding or counteracting
the operation and execution of the same; for that on being constitutionally
made, ratified and published, they become in virtue of the confederation, part
of the law of the land, and are not only independent of the will and power of
such legislatures, but also binding and obligatory on them. Journals of
Congress, 1787, p. 49.

The propriety of this resolution is apparent from the words of the ninth
article. The United States in Congress assembled, shall have the sole and
exclusive right and power of determining on peace and was, No legal impediment
in Virginia since the peace.
except in the cases mentioned in the sixth article of sending and receiving
ambassadors; entering into treaties and alliances, provided that no treaty of
commerce shall be made, whereby the legislative power of the respective states
shall be restrained from imposing such imposts and duties on foreigners as
their own people are subjected to or from prohibiting the exportation or
importation of any species of goods or commodities whatsoever. 2 Volume Laws of
the United States, page 551.

A treaty of peace binds the contracting parties from the moment of its
conclusion as soon as it has passed through all its forms. On the publication
the treaty becomes a law to the subjects and they are obliged to conform to the
articles stipulated therein. Vattel B. 4. Section 25.

If the commonwealth of Virginia had not been confederated with the other
states, and had alone made a treaty; there is no pretense for doubting whether
it would not have been received as part of the law of the land in that state,
and consequently have repealed all laws in that state contrary to it. Shall it
have less force, when it has been made by that state, united with other states,
in conformity to the articles of confederation. Surely not. Congress made the
treaty for all the states; and none but Congress could have made it. If it be a
part of the laws of the land, it has repealed all legislative acts incompatible
with it upon the principle that leges posteriores priores abrogant. Though in
the present constitution of the United States the power of a treaty over the
laws of the states, No legal impediment in Virginia since the peace.
is expressly declared to be supreme, yet this expression was introduced for
the sake of explicitness to prevent all misapprehensions on the subject. It
furnishes no substantial argument against the power of a treaty over prior
state laws under the old confederation, on which there seems to have been a
concurrence of sentiment in every part of the United States. In confirmation of
this doctrine, the unanimous judgment the circuit court of the United States in
the district of North Carolina held in June 1796, in the case of Hamiltons
against Eaton, may be cited as of the highest authority. Chief justice
Ellsworth in delivering his sentiments observed with his usual strength and
perspicuity of expression, As to the opinion that a treaty does not annul a
statute, so far as there is an interference, it is unsound. A statute is a
declaration of the public will, and of high authority; but it is controulable
by the public will subsequently declared. Thence the maxim, that where two
statutes are opposed to each other, the latter abrogates the former. Nor is it
material as to the effect of the public will, what organ it is declared by,
provided it be an organ constitutionally authorized to make the declaration. A
treaty when it is in fact made, is with regard to each nation that is a party
to it, a national act, an expression of the national will, as much so as a
statute can be. And it does, therefore, of necessity, annul any prior statute
so far as there is an interference. The supposition that the public can have
two wills at the same time, repugnant to each other, one expressed by statute
and another by a treaty, is absurd.

The treaty now under consideration was made, No legal impediment in Virginia
since the peace.
on the parts of the United States, by a congress composed of deputies from
each state, to whom were deligated by the articles of confederation, expressly,
"the sole and exclusive right and power of entering into treaties and
alliances" and being ratified and made by them it became a complete national
act, and the act and law of every state American law cases. Hamilton us. Eaton,
page 77.

These are the reasons by which the agent for the United States maintains the
proposition, that in Virginia there was no legal impediment to the recovery of
British debts, subsequent to the peace of 1783, or at all events, subsequent to
July 1784. If this shall have been satisfactorily proved to the board, it will
be difficult to produce any case grounded on a debt contracted in Virginia,
where according to the treaties, the creditors will be entitled to reparation
from the treasury of the United States. It is therefore a most important point
to be determined by the board. It is not denied that the British creditors
generally entertained the opinion that suits were not maintainable in the
courts of Virginia, and consequently the fact was, that very few suits were
commenced by them 'till the operation of the present constitution of the United
States. This was a wilful omission on their part, and especially on the part of
those who were advised, by respectable counsel, that the courts were open to
the recovery of their debts.

Having said that the judicial system in Virginia Judicial System in Virginia.
was proper and well executed the agent for the United States will proceed to
give a general sketch of it. Judicial System in Virginia.


Virginia is divided into counties and judicial districts. In each county are a
convenient number of justices of the peace; who possess jurisdiction singly to
hear and determine all claims for debt under five dollars and award execution
against the debtors goods and chattels. In each county a court which is a court
of record, consisting of any four or more of the justices, is to be held every
month, who have final jurisdiction to hear and determine in a summary way on
all demands of debts under twenty dollars, and to hear and determine all
actions founded on contract, where the sum in controversy amounts to twenty
dollars or more, and all actions founded on tort, according to the principles
of common law or chancery, as the case may require; and their jurisdiction is
final in common law cases founded on contract where the judgment is for less
than one hundred dollars, if for more, it may be carried into the District
court for correction, by writ of error or appeal, upon giving approved security
for satisfying the judgment and damages for the delay, if affirmed, and in
Chancery cases an appeal lies to the high court of Chancery, on giving approved
security for performing the decree if affirmed. The rules of proceeding are
declared by law, so that they are not only easily understood but productive of
an uniform practice. These rules are generally derived from the most improved
practice of the courts of King's Bench, and of Chancery in England, with such
alterations and additions as by experience have been found to render them more
cheap, more plain and more suitable to the judiciary system of that state.
Judiciary of Virginia.
Each judicial district it composed of several counties. A court is held in it
at a fixed place twice a year, by one of the judges of the general court,
according to allotment. It possesses original common law jurisdiction, in civil
cases, for all sums above one hundred dollars, but their judgments may be
revised and corrected in the court of appeals, by writ of error or appeal,
security being given to satisfy the judgment and damages for the delay if
affirmed. It possesses an appellate jurisdiction over judgments rendered in the
county courts for one hundred dollars or more. The judges are selected from the
most able, virtuous and learned of the bar.

There is a high court of Chancery, consisting of one judge, having general
jurisdiction in Chancery over persons and things within the state where the
matter in controversy is of greater value than ten pounds. It has three
sessions annually, and for certain purposes is always open. The Chancellor is
distinguished for his probity, learning and experience, for his impartiality,
and for his unremitted, diligent and sincere endeavors to fulfill the duties of
his station, so that from this court, justice has been dispensed for many years
with expedition, and to the very great advantage of the state. The rules and
forms of proceeding in general are established by law, and are very similar to
those of the Chancery in England.

There is a court of appeals consisting of five judges, composed of law
characters of the most eminent abilities and integrity, Judiciary of Virginia.
who exercise appellate jurisdiction only in cases decided in the high court of
Chancery and district courts. This court holds two sessions annually, and its
decrees and judgments are final.

The person and property of the debtor are liable to be taken in execution; the
person by capias ad satisfaciendum, the goods and chattels by fieri facias, and
the lands by elegit, which writs are issuable from and returnable to the court
where the judgment or decree is rendered. This brief account of the judiciary
of Virginia has been thought proper, not only to do away the mistaken notions
that are prevalent on this subject, but to prepare for those observations which
a particular examination of the claim of Cunningham and Company renders
necessary.

William Cunningham and company.
The claim of William Cunningham and company is for the principal sum of one
thousand three hundred twenty-nine pounds thirteen shillings and two pence
three farthings, current money of Virginia, of which a part, one thousand one
hundred seventy-two pounds three pence three farthings, is stated to be good or
sperate, and the residue one hundred fifty-seven pounds twelve shillings and
eleven pence to be doubtful. The debts arose in the course of retail dealing in
the state of Virginia, in current money of the state, and the debtors charged
with the different parts of the debts are in number eighty-one, who are
distributed by the claimants into five classes as expressed in the lists A. B.
C. D. E. each of which will require a separate consideration.

A. William Cunningham and company.
Debtors upon open account of whom it is asserted no recovery could at any time
be had since the peace, of any part of the debts.

B. Debtors whose debts are evidenced by bonds, etc. and who are said to have
become insolvent since the peace, during the existence of some legal
impediments.

C. Debtors whose debts are evidenced by bonds, whose estates are solvent and
from whom it is probable a recovery may be had, except interest, and the
difference between the currency at the present time and when the debt was
contracted, but the amount of the loss not likely to be ascertained till the
time for receiving claims shall have expired.

D. Debtors who are deceased and whose property has been divided or has been
squandered, or who have removed during the existence of some legal impediments
and whose residence and circumstances are unknown.

E. Losses in consequence of deductions of interest and the difference of
currency at the time the debts were contracted and at the time they were paid.

The lists of A. B. C. D. are said by the claimants to have been made out and
characterized in 1775. This remark is understood to refer to the names of the
debtors, the sums due, the evidences of debts, and whether doubtful or good in
1775, and not to the other matters which they contain.

LIST A.
William Cunningham and company, list A.
Upon examining this list which contains debts claimed from thirty-six
individuals, amounting to the sum of L. 217.7.11, of which L. 207.9 7 are
stated to be good, and the residue L. 9.18 3 to be doubtful, a question
naturally arises upon what grounds do the claimants demand payment of the
several sums set forth in this list from the United States. As to those which
are stated to be good, why have not suits been brought? In such cases can it be
said that full compensation is not attainable in the ordinary course of
judicial proceedings until a trial shall be made? Can this be admitted to be
true as to all these cases in aggregate? Perhaps in some instances compensation
might be had if it was sought in the tribunals having cognizance and these
instances ought to be deducted.

Of these thirty-six cases twelve are cognizable before a single magistrate,
each being under the sum of five dollars, one is for so small a sum as one
shilling and two pence: other twelve are recoverable in a summary way by
petition before a county court, each being for a sum less than twenty dollars.
While such demands furnish a proof of the extreme care and industry with which
the claimants have been gleaning their books and papers, they are liable to
this objection, that the two nations never contemplated such to be subject to
the awards of the commissioners. Not only the maxim, de minimis non curat lex,
but the honor and dignity of the nations dictate their exclusion. If it be said
that the principles of equity are the same, whether the debt be one shilling or
one hundred pounds, William Cunningham and company, list A.
let it be observed that there will be required the same proofs and
consequently the same trouble to investigate a claim for the smaller as for the
larger sum. Did Lord Grenville and Mr. Jay intend this? Did the nations intend
it? Or was the treasury of the United States to be resorted to for all the
little balances due in America to British subjects to save them the
inconvenience of requesting payment from the debtors? In all such cases payment
it is presumable would be made on request where the demand is just.

As to the other remaining twelve cases in list A. how is the assertion proved
that they are not recoverable in the courts of Virginia. Each of these is
represented to be good, that is to say, due from a solvent person. With respect
to these, the attention of the board is requested to all those observations
which have been made in a general point of view, relative to the interpretation
of the treaties, relative to the matters which ought to be proved by the
claimants, and relative to the judiciary of Virginia. It may here be added as a
general rule, that the creditors ought to go before the ordinary tribunals with
their claims, and ought to use reasonable endeavors to obtain payment from the
debtors capable of paying, before the United States shall be charged. These
endeavors should be made to appear before the commissioners, and ought not to
be presumed. Equity requires this not only for the reasons that have been
given, but because in suits against the debtors, some instances will probably
occur where the debts appearing to be due, William Cunningham and company, list
A.
according to the books of the merchants, can and will be proved by the debtors
to have been in whole or in part paid. Such instances the agent of the United
States is authorized to declare, have occurred in Virginia. It is also thought
reasonable that the creditor should go through the same labor and preparation
to obtain payment from the debtor, who is not certainly insolvent, as if no
treaty had been made. To ease him of this was not the intent of the treaty.
Again, some claims were barred by the acts of limitation before the
commencement of the war, and such cannot be reasonably brought within the
operation of the treaty, or it will have an operation retro-active to the first
settlements in America. As to interest on these cases, where the creditors and
debtors resided in Virginia at the time the debts were contracted, in retail
dealing, it may well be doubted whether interest is justly recoverable. For
goods sold, it was not usual in Virginia to allow interest in judicial
decisions before the war, and therefore they were sold at a higher price. The
exorbitance of price compensated for the denial of interest. At common law,
book debts do not of course carry interest, and if it be payable at all, it
must be in consequence of custom or of some special agreement, or, in cases of
long delay under vexatious and oppressive circumstances, of which a jury in
their discretion may judge. These are the words of Lord Mansfield in the case
of Eddowes us. Harris's executors. Douglass 361. Admitting this rule to be
proper as here laid down, and that the usage in Virginia was to disallow
interest on book-debts, and that no special agreement existed in any of these
cases in list A. it follows that unless there has been long delay under
vexatious and oppressive circumstances, William Cunningham and company, list A.
there is not ground to demand interest on these accounts. As to long delay,
the creditor, for aught appears, has not even asked payment; certainly he has
not sued, but has neglected from the time of the peace, or at any rate from
July 1784, to sue as it has been shown he might have done. As to vexatious and
oppressive circumstances, they, it is hoped, will not be the subject of
discussion, because such a discussion will draw forth an enquiry into the
conduct of the two nations relative to the non-execution of the treaty of
peace, which has been wisely consigned to oblivion by the treaty of 1794; and
therefore it would very improperly be stirred, even if any such circumstances
existed before the national arbitrators: But if it is, the agent for the United
States reserves to himself the privilege of a copious and thorough
disquisition. With respect to interest during the war, on debts of this kind,
an additional argument to what has been urged on this head, ought not to be
omitted. The creditors and their factors left Virginia and carried away their
books and vouchers, and were inaccessable to the debtors 'till the return of
peace. The place of payment was in Virginia, and the debtors were not bound to
pay while there was no person there to receive payment; and this alone ought to
discharge the claim of interest during the war, in cases of this kind. So it
has been judicially determined in the court of appeals of Virginia, in the case
of M'Call, us. Turner. No. 1. A manuscript report of which case, taken by one
of the able and judicious counsel of that court, is annexed for the
satisfaction of the commissioners. William Cunningham and company, list A.
If it be alleged that this absence was occasioned by the law of Virginia, and
therefore the creditor ought not to suffer by reason of this conduct; It is
answered that on the first day of January, 1776, the Parliament of Great
Britain had prohibited all intercourse between the two countries, and it was
not 'till the third day of January 1777, after allowing all persons to choose
their sides in the war, that any persons were ordered out of the Commonwealth.
Before this time, many had voluntarily gone, and only such of those who
remained were ordered away, who had given proofs of their disaffection to the
cause of America. It was therefore their own act, their preference to the cause
of Great Britain that occasioned their dismission. Under such circumstances it
was moderation, laudable moderation, on the part of Virginia, to permit or
direct them to be absent. They who were friendly to the American side, and
preferred to stay, were permitted to do so: Therefore, every individual may be
said to have been left freely to follow his own choice. A copy of the
proclamation on this subject is also hereto annexed. No. 2.

Some general observations relative to those cases of book-debts which are not
sanctioned by judicial determinations, if any such can be cognizable by the
commissioners, will conclude what was intended to be said relative to list A.
It is deemed reasonable that the books containing the original entries should
be exhibited to an authorized agent for the United States, with leave to take
copies of any thing material to the claim in such cases as shall be advised
unless they are produced to the commissioners. William Cunningham and company,
list A.


That each account shall state the dates and articles of debit and credit,
showing when and how the balance that is claimed has arisen in each particular
case.

That the books themselves be shown to the commissioners, unless in those
particular cases where consistently with justice, this rule may be suspended.

And lastly, that the best proof be required of the justice of the original
debt that the nature of the case admits, so as to guard effectually against
attempts to defraud the United States. It is for this end that judgments
against the original debtors should be required to precede applications to the
board, unless some good reason in any particular case is offered as the excuse.
It is remarkable that no proof has been yet produced of any of the debts
contained in this list.

LIST B.
This list contains only five cases, List B.
of which one appea^ to be on a judgment in February 1774, and the rest on
bonds. Why was not the judgment carried into execution before the war? is an
obvious question -- Was the debtor then insolvent? This may be supposed, and
surely if this was the fact, the United States cannot possibly be liable in
this or any such instance. William Cunningham and company, list B.
Thomas Gordon the agent for the claimants, has subjoined a remark which
applies to each list, that each is characterized agreeable to a list in 1775. A
doubt arises on the meaning of this phrase. If understood to mean among other
things the solvency or insolvency of the debtors in 1775 it is hoped that those
that are stated then to have been doubtful shall be excluded, unless solvency
shall be actually and satisfactorily proven subsequent to the peace, as well as
all the other requisites that have formerly in the general argument been urged
to be indispensable to entitle a claim to redress under the treaty of 1794.
Those which are then represented to be good, it is insisted ought to be proved
to have continued good on the third day of September 1783 when the treaty of
peace was concluded. And on this occasion it is repeated that wherever the
insolvency happened before the date of the treaty of peace, no circumstances
can bring any loss arising from thence within the meaning of the 6th article of
the treaty of 1794. It would be tedious to reiterate the arguments which
already have been adduced and which are almost all applicable to the debts
described in this list; and because they are not again distinctly pressed they
are not to be supposed in any manner waived. One observation relative to
interest during the war must however be here mentioned. By the municipal law of
Virginia of an ancient standing, it is enacted That in all actions which shall
be brought upon any bond or bonds for the payment of money wherein the
plaintiff shall recover, judgment shall be entered for the penalty of such bond
to be discharged by payment of the principle and interest due thereon and the
costs of suit. Virginia laws page 181. William Cunningham and company, list B.
By the terms of this act as adjudged and practiced in Virginia, it is the duty
of the jury to ascertain the interest due on a bond, who are to consider all
circumstances that in equity ought to cause any abatement or deduction. A
contrary opinion was however once expressed in the case of Jones' executors us.
Hylton by the chief justice of the United States on the meaning of this act,
who thought where the debt was evidenced by a bond, that the jury had no power
over the interest but it accrued of course. This opinion, though proceeding
from a most respected judge, was never approved by the bar or bench of the
state of Virginia, and a different interpretation has prevailed there. This
matter is explained in order that the opinion of the chief justice may not
improperly influence the question, whether in equity interest during the war is
payable. It was not on principles of equity but on the statute of Virginia
strictly considered that the opinion was expressed which with great deference
to the able and learned Judge, has been generally deemed erroneous. The case of
M' Call us. Turner is in point and expresses the unanimous judgment of the
court of appeals in that state.

LIST C.
All the debtors in this list are stated to be solvent now, List C.
and the only claim that can at any time be made against the United States in
these instances, will be for interest during the war and the supposed
difference in the current money of Virgia when the debts were contracted and at
the time they may be paid. William Cunningham and company, list C.
Upon these heads nothing new will be attempted to be advanced, but they are
submitted to the decision of the commissioners on the arguments which have been
adduced. In the present situation of these it is evident there can be no award
in favor of the claimants.

LIST D.
List D.
The debtors in this list are distinguishable into two classes.

1st. Those who it is alleged are deceased, and whose property has been
divided or squandered.

2dly. Those who it is alleged have removed during the existence of some legal
impediments, and whose residence and circumstances are unknown.

Respecting both it is contended that the Claimants should set forth, and prove
too, all the facts and circumstances belonging to each debtor which are
material for doing justice in the particular case between the Claimant and the
United States. Vague and uncertain declarations of losses are inadmissable.

As to the 1st Class, though the debtor is deceased and his property has been
divided, it does not follow that the United States are to be awarded to pay the
debt. By the laws of Virginia the personal property of the deceased is liable
in the hands of his representatives to pay all his debts, and the lands and
real property of the deceased are liable in the hands of his heirs or devisees
to pay his specialty or judgment debts: Therefore, though divided, the estate
may and ought to be pursued by the Creditor. Virginia Laws, Revisal of 1793,
page 54. Nor, William Cunningham and company, list D.
though the estate has been squandered either by the deceased in his life time
or by his representative, does it follow that the United States are to be
awarded to pay the debt. If the Creditor has neglected for a long time to
prosecute the debtor or his representative, when he might have prosecuted them,
and in this interval the estate has been wasted, the loss ought to remain with
the Creditor for his wilful laches.

Respecting the 2d class. It has been denied that any legal impediment to the
recovery of the British debts existed in Virginia since the peace. The treaty
of peace repealed all acts anterior to it, which created any such impediments,
and no laws of that kind were passed posterior to it, unless the continuance of
the acts of May and October 1782, 'till July 1784, be said to be one.

This point the agent for the United States hopes, with confidence, has been
fully and satisfactorily proven to the board, and to his former arguments he
prays leave to refer. Then the short space of a few months, viz. -- From the
third of September 1783 to the sixth of July 1784 was the utmost space that any
impediment existed in Virginia, and during this period very few debtors, if
any, removed out of that state into parts unknown. The damage arising from this
source if any, must consequently be very inconsiderable, and it is therefore
reasonable that every individual case of this kind should be explained and made
out by sufficient proofs. Surely the removal of a debtor from one county to
another in the same state, William Cunningham and company, list D.
will not form any subject of complaint. In list D, it will be proper for the
claimants to discriminate each case according to the foregoing ideas, and 'till
it be done, the claim founded on it, is too loose, indefinite and confused to
admit of any redress. Besides, let it be observed, that the onus probandi being
on the claimants, it is more especially necessary in claims, such as are
founded on debts situate a^ those are said to be, which are contained in list
D, there should be complete proof of every essential particular for bringing
the claim within the treaty.

LIST E.
List E.
This embraced losses said to be in consequence of deductions of interest during
the war by the juries who decided the causes, and losses said to arise from the
difference of currency when the debts were contracted and when they were paid.
The latter shall be left in the point of view in which it has been placed.
Relative to the former, in addition to the arguments already used upon this
head, let it be remembered that the trial of the causes in the courts of
justice, was in the same form and under the same laws which were in force
before the war. The contracts were made subject to the discretion of juries and
courts, as to the allowance or disallowance of interest in all cases in
Virginia, however evidenced, whether by bond, bill, note or book account. No
new law was introduced on this subject, and therefore this conduct of juries or
courts cannot be truly represented as a legal impediment in the contemplation
of the treaty of 1783. The legal impediments meant to be removed by it were
such as had originated subsequent ta the commencement of hostilities. William
Cunningham and company, list E.
These contracts have been carried into effect and satisfied according to the
laws in force when they were made. This is all that justice could or can
require. Can it be right to construe the treaty as repealing any laws that were
in force at the time the debts were contracted? Or can it be understood to
require the institution of new laws or a new mode for deciding upon and
recovering debts contracted before the war? If, therefore, the deduction of
interest has been regularly and justly made by the competent tribunal according
to ancient laws, no ground is perceived for makings this the basis any claim
against the United States. The deduction of interest so made if to be called a
loss is manifestly a loss occasioned not by any legal impediments created since
the 4th July 1776, but occasioned by other causes that would equally have
operated to produce it, if there had been no legal impediments since the peace
in Virginia. If this be admitted to be correct it follows that it is expressly
excluded from the provision of the 6th article of the treaty of 1794, and that
no award can be made against the United States for compensation of interest
that is deducted by the competent tribunal in the ordinary course of
proceeding, according to ancient usage and laws. The claim therefore grounded
on the cases in list E ought to be disallowed on this principle, if no other
objection had been brought against them.

The agent for the United States having made these observations on the
particular case before the board, Conclusion.
prays their serious attention to the general principles which he has
endeavored to maintain in the course of his argument. Conclusion.
Such of them as are satisfactorily supported he trusts will be applied with
discernment and candor to the variety of questions that arise in this case or
that may arise in any other which shall come under their notice. A
recapitulation of them is not necessary, and may the more readily be spared in
an argument which has been so far extended as to be in danger of being thought
tedious.

All which is most respectfully submitted. JOHN READ, Jun. Agent General for
the United States.
Agent General's office, United States April 3 d, Anno Domini 1798.
APPENDIX.
By his Excellency PATRICK HENRY, JUNIOR, Esquire: Governor or Chief Magistrate
of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS the king of Great Britain has waged war against this commonwealth and
the United States of America, and there are within this commonwealth diverse
merchants and others, subjects of the said king, who while they remain here,
have frequent opportunities of seducing and corrupting the minds of the people,
and are suspected of holding correspondence with and giving intelligence to the
enemy: I have therefore thought fit, by and with the advice of the Privy
Council, to issue this my Proclamation, in the name of the commonwealth; hereby
strictly requiring and enjoining all the natives of Great Britain, who were
partners with, factors, agents, storekeepers, assistant storekeepers or clerks
here, for any merchant or merchants in Great Britain, on the first day of
January 1776, the time the act of the British Parliament for restraining the
trade of America, and seizing our property upon the water, took place, to
depart this commonwealth, with their goods, within forty days from the date
hereof, except such of the said natives as have heretofore uniformly manifested
a friendly disposition to the American cause, or are attached to this country
by having wives or children here, agreeable to a resolution of the General
Assembly in that case made, and to the statute staple of the 27th of Edward 3d.
chapter 17th. in conformity to which, I do hereby notify to all such persons
that they are at liberty, in the mean time, to sell and dispose of their goods
and merchandise to any person or persons who shall be willing to purchase the
same.

Given under my hand, this 3 d day of January, in the first year of the
Commonwealth, and in the year of our Lord 1777. PATRICK HENRY, JUNIOR.

M'CALL us. TURNER.
THIS was an appeal from a judgment of the district court of King and Queen,
upon the following case. On the 18th day of January 1774. Reuben Wright, Reuben
Turner, Benjamin C. Spiller and William Aylett, entered into a bond of the
usual form, to Robert M'Kendlish, in the penalty of fifty five pounds with
condition to be void on payment of twenty seven pounds ten shillings on or
before the first day of October thence next following, with interest from the
date; which bond M'Kindlish assigned to the plaintiff by an indorsement in
these words, "Pay the within to Archibald M'Call" and signed his name to the
said indorsement. In July 1793, M'Call brought suit upon this bond in the
district court of King and Queen, against Reuben Wright, Reuben Turner and
Benjamin C. Spiller, the surviving oblig^rs; for William Aylett was then dead.
The writ was executed by the sheriff of King William, on Reuben Turner only,
and Spiller and Wright were returned "no inhabitants." The plaintiff filed a
declaration on the above bond in the common form of declarations upon assigned
bonds; after which follows an entry in these words, Abated as to the defendants
Reuben Wright and Benjamin C. Spiller, by the return, and a conditional order
against the defendant Reuben Turner and James Turner bail for appearance. The
conditional order was confirmed at the next rules; and at the succeeding court
Reuben Turner gave special bail, pleaded payment, and the plaintiff took issue.
In April 1795, the cause stood for trial; and the jury being charged upon the
issue, the plaintiff filed a bill of exceptions to the courts opinion, which
stated that the defendant by his counsel moved the court to be permitted to
give in evidence to the jury that the plaintiff was absent in foreign ports
beyond seas, and not within the state of Virginia for the space of eight years,
to wit, from the 19th day of April 1775, to the 19th day of April 1783, and
that during that period, he had not any known agent or attorney within the
commonwealth, who would receive payment of the debt and give a legal discharge
for the same, on which the suit is founded, with a view of extinguishing the
interest during that period, to which the counsel for the plaintiff objected,
but the court permitted the defendant to offer such evidence if he should think
fit so to do. And the defendant being permitted to give evidence to the jury,
to the purpose aforesaid, it was proved that the plaintiff was out of Virginia
in ports beyond sea, from some time in the year 1775, to some time in the year
1783, which was permitted to go to the jury. The jury found a verdict for the
plaintiff, that the defendant had not paid the debt in the declaration
mentioned, but that the same ought however to be discharged by the payment of
twenty seven pounds ten shillings with interest thereon from the date of the
bond until the 19th day of April 1775, and from the 19th day of April 1783,
until paid, and assigned damages to a penny; and the court gave judgment for
the plaintiff, for the penalty of the bond to be discharged according to the
terms of the verdict with costs of suit From which judgment the plaintiff
appealed to this court.

WARDEN for the appellant. It is unnecessary to say much upon this subject; for
the record shows manifest error in the opinion of the court in permitting
improper evidence to be given to the jury. The plea was payment, and nothing
but what went to prove that should have been received; for nothing else was
within the issue. The notice was not that the defendant would prove a payment,
but that the plaintiff was absent during a certain period; within which it does
not appear that there was no agent here to receive the money, had such a fact
ever been material which it was not. All that the jury upon this issue could
do, was to find whether the defendant had paid the debt or not; and in such a
case if traveling out of the issue they of their own accord should diminish
the debt, it would be the duty of the court to grant a new trial. The law is
that judgment shall be entered for the penalty, to be discharged by the payment
of the principal debt with interest and costs; and so it is constantly done in
cases of judgments by default; which proves the law to be as I have stated it.
Although the bill of exceptions does not state that this was all the evidence,
yet it is fair to infer that there was no other, as none appears; and therefore
I conclude that the evidence offered by the defendant was inadmissible: and
consequently that the judgment is erroneous and ought to be reversed.

WICKHAM for the appellee. This was a suit upon a joint bond, which could
neither be s^ or prosecuted severally. The plaintiff therefore should have
pursued all the obligors, and should not have abated the suit as to the
non-resident defendants; for he thereby discontinued as to him who was
arrested. It may be said that this should have been pleaded in abatement; but
that was not necessary, as it appears upon the record: and Turner could not
have pleaded it, because the declaration was joint. The act of Assembly had
provided the means of bringing all the parties before the court, and therefore
it ought to have been done. At least the plaintiff should have followed up his
process.

Then as to the point concerning the evidence: -- My own impression from the
act of Assembly originally was, that the jury were merely to find if any and
what payments had been made, and that the court was to ascertain the rest; but
on my first coming to the bar, I found the practice settled the other way, and
that the jury were to find the sum by which the penalty was to be discharged:
which I presume was done upon a proper consideration of the law. I had occasion
once to submit this question to the federal court, and contended that the jury
should find the payments specially; but the court enquired into the practice of
Mr. Brown the clerk of the general court, and being informed that the practice
was to find generally they submitted the cause to the jury. Therefore I
conclude that the practice is settled, that the jury may enquire into the
amount; and of course must be regulated by evidence and the circumstances.
Perhaps the circumstances do not all appear in this case; but if under any
circumstances there might be a deduction of interest, the court will suppose
those circumstances were proved upon the trial, as every thing transacted in a
court of justice is presumed to be rightly done until the contrary is shown.
The question therefore is, whether under any circumstances a deduction of
interest can be made by the jury?

The act of Assembly does not state from what period interest shall commence;
and I suppose the act was founded on the practice of the court of chancery of
relieving against the penalty on payment of principal, interest and costs. Now
in a court of equity circumstances would clearly be taken into consideration,
and a deduction made or not according as they should appear. In the present
case all the circumstances do not appear, but there are several mentioned which
afford an equity. The plaintiff was absent during all the interval mentioned in
the record, and had no known agent to whom payment could be made, which of
itself affords a strong reason for suspending the interest; but if during that
period he went into the hostile country and became an alien enemy, so that the
defendant was prohibited from having any intercourse with or paying him the
money, in that case the deduction would be more reasonable still. For it would
be against conscience that the creditor should demand interest when his own
absence was the cause why the debt was not paid. I don't say this was the case,
or what kind of proof was actually made, but as nothing contrary to what I
stated appears, the court will intend that those circumstances or some such
were proved; for the reason before given, that whatever is transacted in a
court of justice is presumed to be rightly done until the contrary is shown.

WARDEN. As to the question concerning the abatement, there is no difficulty in
it. The sheriff is bound to return the truth of the case, for otherwise the
process might be infinite. In the county courts it has been constantly done
both before and since the revolution. When this suit was commenced the district
courts did not possess the right of issuing mesne process out of the limits of
the district. There is a manifest difference in this respect between the act of
1788, under which this suit was brought, and the act of 1792, spoken of by Mr.
Wickham. The legislature by allowing copies of bonds to be used instead of the
originals in suits brought in other districts plainly intended to provide
against the defect of limited jurisdiction. The plaintiff proceeding under the
act of 1788, was obliged to submit to the abatement; for he could not follow up
the process as to the non-resident defendants.

Then as to the point of evidence; -- Any thing else might as well have been
proved on the plea of payment as the absence of the party. If the defendant had
pleaded the fact specially it would have been demurrable to; which proves that
such evidence before the jury cannot be admitted: for whatever goes to the
destruction of the plaintiff's right may be pleaded. Even a tender in this case
would not have availed; because the day of payment had arrived, before the
plaintiffs departure from the state. A case in the federal court was mentioned
which I do not recollect; but I remember that, in the case of Jones's executors
us. Hylton, chief justice J^y was of opinion that the jury could not deduct
impress; for he said it was the act of the court to ascertain the amount still
due after the payments were deducted, which was all that the jury could enquire
into. It has been said by some that no particular interest was fixed by law;
because the act of assembly does not say that any interest should be received
in so many words, b^t only that not more than five per cent shall be taken.
Though the law has said that the obligee shall not take more than five per
cent, it certainly implies that he may take that; and the uniform practice of
the country has been to give judgment for it, which proves the universal
opinion of the law. By the treaty of peace we agreed to the payment; and there
is no exception in it of course where the party was absent. It is therefore a
reflection on the state, and renders us rediculous in the eyes of foreigners,
that our juries have so long persisted in refusing to perform the stipulation
and to find the full amount due to those creditors.

The judges now delivered their opinions separately to the following effect.

Fleming judge. There were two points made in this cause; one by the appellants
counsel on the propriety of admitting the evidence in order to extinguish the
interest during the absence of the plaintiff from this country: and the other
by the defendants counsel on the ground that the plaintiff by failing to
continue the process against the non-resident defendants had discontinued his
suit altogether.

On the first question it was said by the counsel for the appellants that such
evidence could not be given upon the trial of an issue on the plea of payment;
and that position is correct if the case be considered upon the doctrines of
the common law only. But the act of assembly has altered the common law; and by
allowing the penalty "to be discharged by payment of the principal and the
interest due thereon," with the costs of suit, has necessarily turned the
quantum into a question to be determined by circumstances: and I think it was
the province of the jury to decide that question. The plaintiff by absenting
himself from the country put it out of the power of the debtor to make payment;
and therefore it is unreasonable that he should demand interest during that
period. This was a circumstance proper to be left to the jury, upon a plea of
this kind in an action of debt upon a bond. It is like collateral evidence to
mitigate damages in actions of assault and battery.

As to the other point, the act of assembly does not give such extensive
jurisdiction as the counsil for the appellees contended for; and the clause
relative to the copy of the bond proves it. Which would have been unnecessary
if the court had possessed general jurisdiction so as to force the appearance
of non-resident defendants from other districts. However according to any
construction, I think it ought to have been pleaded; and therefore I am of
opinion that the judgment of the court was right upon both points, and ought to
be affirmed.

Carrington judge. Every question in this case might have been saved except
that upon the bill of exceptions. If Mr. Wickhams argument was correct a
judgment might never be obtained, where there are several defendants; because
it would seldom happen that they all could be found in one district: and the
act of assembly does not admit of the enlarged jurisdiction which he contends
it does. For although the words of the proviso page 83, are calculated to give
that impression at the first view, yet a closer attention will lead to another
construction; because the next member of the sentence which allows a copy to be
given in evidence would according to the other interpretation have been wholly
unnecessary. But let the exposition be what it may, the matter should have been
pleaded in abatement; without which if it even be admitted that the argument of
the appellees counsel is correct, no advantage can be taken of it. Upon that
ground therefore I think there is no error.

The whole question then rests upon the other point; and I am of opinion that
the jury had the right of deciding what was the amount of the interest due^ The
act of assembly seems to me essentially to invest them with this power; for the
express language is that the penalty shall be discharged by payment of the
principal and the interest due thereon, with the costs of suit. Who then are to
say what interest is due thereon? The jury surely; who must decide upon the
circumstances of the case, and say when it shall commence, how long it should
continue, and when it should be suspended or extinguished. On all general
issues (and this is one) the whole circumstances of the case should be
submitted to the jury, who are to decide accordingly.

As to the justice of the case I do not think its being a British debt or not
makes any difference. The same rule would apply in a case between two citizens.
Now suppose a case between two citizens, in which one is creditor and the other
debtor; and that the creditor removes himself into parts of the world unknown
to his debtor: who thereby cannot come at him in order to make payment, would
it be just in such a case that full interest should be given; and ought not the
jury to enquire into the circumstances and reduce the interest accordingly? --
Again suppose there be a bargain and sale of property, and that the seller
keeps the property a long time; would it be right that he should recover
interest upon the purchase money during the time of his unjust detention of the
property? -- Surely not; no jury would do otherwise than deduct it: and I think
the act of assembly would warrant them in doing so. In this case the plaintiff
absented himself, and went into a country with which we had no intercourse, and
did not return until some time in the year 1783; so that his debtor could not
make payment to him or by remittance. If under these circumstances he were to
have full interest he would be better off than our own citizens who stayed at
home and braved the dangers of the war. Upon the whole, the trial appears to
have been fair; the plaintiff had notice of the evidence: the verdict I think
was just, and did not in my opinion endanger the honor of the country. I am
therefore for affirming the judgment.

Pendleton President. It was objected by the counsel for the appellee that the
plaintiff had suffered the suit to be abated as to the non-resident parties,
whom it was said he ought to have pursued by continuing the process; and that
having sailed to do so he had discontinued his suit. I thought at first, from a
slight reading of the act of assembly, that a testa^m capias might in the case
of a joint bond be issued into any county; but on a more attentive perusal of
the law I find I was mistaken, and that the first part of the proviso is
corrected by the latter, which allows the party to make use of a copy, in those
cases where all the defendants are not arrested in the same district. The
proviso though was for the benefit of the plaintiff who might waive it if he
would. It was said by the counsel for the appellee that the defendant could not
have pleaded it in abatement, because the declaration was joint; but the fact
appeared upon the record, and therefore might have been insisted on by way of
plea if the objection had been maintainable. The defendant however might upon
his part also waive the objection if he would; and by going on to trial without
taking any notice of it, he certainly has done so.

Then as to the question with regard to the propriety of the evidence. The
justice of the defense was impeached; and it was asked whether it was right
that a British subject should lose interest on his debt during the continuance
of the war between that country and this? The affirmative it was said would be
dishonorable to the state; and that it was disgraceful to the people of this
country that the juries had persisted so long in deducting interest during that
period. I am sensible that politics ought not to enter into judicial
determinations, for which reason I have usually avoided them; and I trust I am
an impartial judge upon the present occasion, unless it shall be supposed that
I am under any national prejudices, of which however I am not conscious. Under
these impressions I will endeavor to redeem my country from the grievous
imputation which has been laid upon it; and I cannot say that I think the
verdict wrong upon the justice of the case. I am an enemy to war and all its
consequences; but if we compare the conduct of the two nations the comparison
is evidently in favor of America. Our sequestration laws secured the proceeds
of the property in the public treasury, and waited for the conduct of the
mother country; but did Great Britain meet us on the same liberal ground? I
wish the circumstances forgotten; and it is with an ill grace that those
persons should recall the painful remembrance of them, which were so many
deflections from the modern rules of warfare; and did not in my opinion,
entitle the creditors even to the principal debts themselves, had they not been
stipulated for by the treaty of peace. With which however, I don't find fault;
for although it was unjust and inconvenient in one respect, yet as the other
parts were esteemed beneficial it was right to accept it, for the sake of the
general advantages it contained: and having been entered into it should be
performed, provided Great Britain had fulfilled her part of it. But this
however is now out of the question; it is settled that the debts are to be
paid: and the only point which remains to be considered, is, whether the
creditors are entitled to interest during the war? We were attacked by a great
and powerful nation, who entering our country with force, obliged us to call
forth every resource, and to exert every means of defense; so that the debtor,
instead of providing for the payment of his debt, was constantly engaged in the
protection of his family: and might therefore well be excused for not paying
his debt during a period in which he was prevented from attending to his
private affairs, by the calamities of a war which his creditor was assisting to
excite. According to the modern practice of nations, all that the creditors
could have expected, was to be put in the same situatiom with respect to the
recovery of their debts, as our own citizens were; but the latter besides the
depredations of war, sustained immense losses from various causes which that
had introduced, and are daily subject to the loss not only of interest but of
principal too, and no good reason could be assigned why the other side should
have been put upon a better footing. If a citizen creditor had removed himself
to other parts of the world in the same manner, and left his debtor to fight
the battles of his country, it would have been a sufficient cause for taking
off the interest during that period; and the reason certainly holds with as
much force when applied to those who were on the side of the people with whom
we were contending. This is my opinion, and whether it be right or wrong must
be referred to a more unerring tribunal hereafter!

Then as to the mode of proceeding; the question is, whether evidence of these
facts could be given to the jury on the plea of payment? The argument, that it
could not be done at common law is true; because the whole penalty was
forfeited if only a shilling was due: and therefore it was to no purpose to
offer evidence to diminish the debt; for that did not excuse the penalty. This
drove the defendant into equity to such a discharge by payment of the
principal, interest and costs; where relief upon those terms was constantly
obtained. But this was found to be troublesome and expensive; and therefore the
legislature interfered and passed the act of assembly for that purpose: which
not only allows payments, but discounts too, to be given in evidence at the
trial. Now, if instead of paying interest on the debt, proof can be given to
the jury disclosing a reason why interest should not be paid, why should it not
be received and the court allow the jury to consider of it? I can discern no
good objection to it; nor do I think that any can be offered. I observed that
the act of assembly was founded on the practice of the court of chancery; and
in a court of equity evidence of the circumstances would certainly be received,
and a deduction of interest made or not according to them. The trial here was
fair; even notice of the evidence was given, though that perhaps was not
necessary, and therefore I see no reason to disturb the verdict. The opinion of
the chief justice of the United States in a case before the federal court was
cited; in which he is stated to have delivered to the jury a charge differing
from the opinion I have just expressed; but I cannot concur with him. He is
reported to have said, that interest was question of law; which I do not agree
to: for no law has said in express terms when interest shall commence." The
jury in the case before the federal court deducted the interest; and to them I
think it emphatically belonged to decide whether it should be paid or not. I
concur therefore, with the other judges who have delivered their opinions, that
the judgment in this case ought to be affirmed upon both the points which have
been made in the cause.

Judgment affirmed.

Judge Lion and Judge Roane did not sit in the cause.

The notice referred to by the council and judges in the foregoing case is in
these words:

Archibald M'Call assignee of Robert M'Rendlish us. Reuben Turner. In debt.
This suit now pending in the district court held at king and queen courthouse.
To Mr. Archibald M'Call.
Take notice that on the trial of this cause I shall move the court to be
permitted to give in evidence to the jury, that the plaintiff was absent in
foreign parts beyond seas, and not within the state of Virginia for the space
of eight years, to wit: from the 19th day of April 1775, to the 19th day of
April 1783, and that during that period, he had not any known agent or attorney
within commonwealth, who would receive payment of the debt and give a legal
discharge for the same, on which the above suit is founded. This with a view of
extinguishing the interest claimed by the plaintiff for the above term of eight
years.

C: Braxton, jr. attorney for Reuben Turner in the above suit.
April 21st, 1795. The above notice was delivered to me on the day of the date,
and was by me accepted for my client on that day, but without prejudice, as to
any exception which may be taken to the admission of the evidence proposed.

John Warden, p. 9.



The condition of the bond on which the suit was brought, is in these words;

The condition of the above obligation is such, that if the above bound Reuben
Wright do, and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto said Robert
M'Kendlish, their certain attorney, their executors, administrators or assigns,
the just sum of twenty-seven pounds ten shillings, on or before the first day
of October next, with interest from the date: then the above o^ga^ to be void,
or else to remain in full force and virtue.

The bond was dated the 18th day of January 1774.

To JOHN READ, ESQUIRE, Agent for the United States, relative to claims of
British subjects, under the sixth article of the treaty of 1794, between the
United States of America and Great Britain.
(...) General's office, 2 d April 1798. SIR,
THE claim of William Cunningham and company, contained so many important
principles necessary to be decided by the commissioners, that in preparing an
answer to it, I thought it best to make a thorough examination of the subject
which the treaty has referred to them. The answer you will be pleased to file,
and in other claims which embrace any of the matters that have been here
discursed, it will be convenient and save much trouble to refer in a proper
manner to the arguments which have been urged in this case.

I am very respectfully sir, Your most obedient servant, CHARLES LEE.

THE REPLY OF WILLIAM CUNNINGHAM, and CO. TO THE ANSWER OF THE UNITED STATES TO
THEIR CLAIM AND MEMORIAL.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JAMES HUMPHREYS.

1798.

THE REPLY.
TO THE COMMISSIONERS For carrying into Effect the Sixth Article of the Treaty
of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, concluded between His Britannic Majesty and
the United States of America, the nineteenth Day of November, 1794.
IN Conformity to the following resolution of the Board, William Cunningham and
Co. will proceed to reply to such parts of the answer filed on behalf of the
United States, to their Claim, as shall require replication; and they
respectfully trust and believe, that on a calm, and full investigation of the
different objections urged against their claim, they will be found void of any
solid foundation, either in justice, equity, or even law.

COMMISSIONERS OFFICE,
Philadelphia, April 18, 1798.
In the Case of WILLIAM CUNNINGHAM, and others.
THE Answer of the United States, signed by their Agent, having in this case
been printed and laid before the board, -- Ordered, that the General Agent for
claimants, or Attorney for these claimants, have leave to see and reply to the
same within three weeks; but with the exception of the introductory argument
"to impres^on the Commissioners (as it is there said) the primary importance of
understanding the limits" of their duty, and instructing them, on the authority
of Vattel, and with referrence to a supposed ^e, of manifest and intentional
wrong, in the expediency of taking care that they do not "renew the dissentions
between the two nations," by deciding in a manner so palpably " absurd," or so
clearly proceeding from " corruption, or flagrant partiality," as to entitle "
either nation to disregard the award." The Board make no further animadversion
on the above argument than thus to state its import, and prohibit all allusion
to such topics in future. They know no policy but that of justice, and look
forward to no consequence but the consciousness of having done their duty.

Ordered, that the Reply in this case be printed; that this Order be therein
fully recited, and copies hereof served upon the Agents for both parties.

Extract from the Proceedings of the Board, G. EVANS, SECRETARY.

To WILLIAM MOORE SMITH, Esqr. General Agent for Claimants.
FOR the sake of order and method the Claimants will pursue a different course
of argument in their Reply, from that adopted in the Answer to their claim --
For if the doctrine, (to them so strange) " that no legal impediments to the
recovery of their debts existed in Virginia since the peace" be really well
founded, every other discussion will be vain and useless.

This claim was intended " to submit to the decision of the Board most of the
principles relative to the debts within the State of Virginia, of which payment
may be claimed, under the treaty of 1794, from the treasury of the United
States." In order to bring these forward with as much expedition, and at as
small expense and trouble as possible, the claimants at large, were advised by
their General Agent to select that list of balances which contained the fewest
names, and to class the several debtors agreeably to a form prescribed. -- It
was not thought absolutely necessary, that the list so selected should contain
at least one case under every different head of impediment, especially as a
claim on account of a treasury payment had been filed, and in part argued
before the Board -- The list selected, does embrace nearly every other case
upon which a question of importance can arise. It was therefore expected, and
if the claimants are correct in their recollection, it was agreed, that every
point should be argued, in order, that after the long delay which had
unfortunately though unavoidably taken place, as many principles as possible,
should be settled by a decree in a single claim, which would enable other
claimants so to prepare their different memorials, that all their tenable
demands might be arranged under their proper heads, and the class or classes
which might be determined untenable, abandoned or omitted.

The form in which the Answer in this case appears, and the direction that the
replication have equal publicity, must be the apology for a repetition in many
instances of, instead of a reference to, the arguments in other cases -- the
Answer does not appear to demand very much new matter in the Reply.

The claimants would not have thought it altogether justifiable, for them, in
reasoning upon the plain words of a written instrument, to draw inferences from
the correspondence or conversation of ministers, in order to extend or narrow
down the evident and natural meaning of those words, -- a mode of argument
however which has been adopted in one case on one side, may be pursued in other
cases on the other side -- and as the example has been given, it will be
followed. -- Mr. Jefferson's letter to Mr. Hammond has also been cited with
much approbation, in the Answer on behalf of the United States to this claim;
in that letter the opinions of members of the two British Houses of Parliament
are quoted, to show the idea that nation entertained of the effect of
recommendations of Congress. -- In this Reply the opinions of the most
conspicuous members of several deliberative bodies in the United States will be
resorted to, to show the ideas Americans entertained of impediments --
Decisions in English courts have been relied upon in the Answer -- Decisions in
American courts will be brought forward in the Reply.

It is asserted, " that no legal impediments to the recovery of British debts,
contracted before, existed after, the peace, in the State of Virginia; and, if
some laws of that State bore the complexion of impediments, they were ipso
facto repealed by the treaty.

In order to form a true judgment upon these positions, it is necessary to
examine into the powers of Congress previous to the articles of confederation;
the authorities vested in them by that instrument, and whether they ever
possessed the means of enforcing obedience to resolutions, decrees, ordinances
or compacts, passed or entered into by them, within the undoubted limits of
that authority!

The powers of Congress were revolutionary in their nature, arising out of
events, adequate to every national emergency, and co-extensive with the object
to be attained. Congress was the general, supreme, and controuling council of
the nation, the center of union, the center of force, and the sun of the
political system. To determine what their powers were, we must enquire what
powers they exercised. Congress raised armies, fitted out a navy, and
prescribed rules for their government: Congress conducted all military
operations both by land and sea: Congress emitted bills of credit, received,
and sent Ambassadors, and made treaties: Congress commissioned privateers to
cruise against the enemy, directed what vessels should be liable to capture,
and prescribed rules for the distribution of prizes. Those high acts of
sovereignty were submitted to, acquiesced in, and approved of, by the people of
America. In Congress were vested, because by Congress were exercised with the
approbation of the people, the rights and powers of war and peace. In every
government, whether it consist of many states, or of few, or whether it be of a
federal or consolidated nature, there must be a supreme power or will; the
rights of war and peace are component parts of this supremacy, and incidental
thereto is the question of prize. -- The question of prize grows out of the
nature of the thing. If it be asked, in whom, during our revolution war, was
lodged, and by whom was exercised this supreme authority? No one will hesitate
for an answer. It was lodged in and exercised by Congress; it was there or no
where; the States individually did not, and with safety could not, exercise it.
Disastrous would have been the issue of the contest, if the states, seperately,
had exercised the powers of war. For in such case, there would have been as
many supreme wills as there were States, and as many wars as there were wills.
Happily, however, for America, this was not the case; there was but one war,
and one sovereign will to conduct it. The danger being imminent and common, it
became necessary for the people or colonies to coalesce and act in concert, in
order to divert or break the violence of the gathering storm; they accordingly
grew into union, and founded one great political body, of which Congress was
the directing principle and soul. As to war and peace, and their necessary
incidents, Congress, by the unanimous voice of the people, exercised exclusive
jurisdiction, and stood, like Jove, amidst the Deities of old, paramount, and
supreme. The truth is, that the States individually were not known nor
recognized as sovereign by foreign nations, nor are they now? the States
collectively, under Congress as the connecting point, or head, were
acknowledged by foreign powers as sovereign, particularly in that acceptance
of the term, which is applicable to all great national concerns, and in the
exercise of which, other sovereigns would be more immediately interested; such,
for instance, as the rights of war and peace, of making treaties, and sending
and receiving Ambassadors. Besides, every person must be amenable to the
authority, under which he acts. If he accept from Congress a commission to
cruise against the enemy, he must be responsible to them for his conduct. If
under color of such commission, he had violated the law of nations. Congress
would have been called upon to make atonement and redress. The persons who
exercise the right or authority of commissioning privateers, must, of course,
have the right or authority of examining into the conduct of the officer acting
under such commission, and of confirming or annulling his transactions and
deeds. ( Judge Patterson in the case Penhallow and others against Doane's
Admrs. Sup. Court. U. S. Feb. 1795.)

The following brief state of the case in which the above opinion was
delivered, is abridged from the Judge's statement:

On the 25th Nov. 1775, Congress (1 journ. 259) passed a series of resolutions
respecting captures, and recommended it to the different colonies, to erect
courts for the trial of such as should be made, reserving in all cases an
appeal to Congress, or such persons as they should appoint for the trial of
appeals.

On the 23d of March, 1776, they resolved, that the inhabitants of the Colonies
be permitted to fit out armed vessels to cruise on the enemies of the United
Colonies, and a few days after, they agreed upon the form of a commission to
the commanders of private ships of war, which was to run in the name of the
Delegates of the United Colonies, and be signed by the President of Congress.

On the 3d July, 1776, New Hampshire passed an act for the trial of captures,
and allowed in certain cases an appeal to Congress, and in others to the
Superior Court of the State.

On the 30th of Jan. 1777, Congress appointed a standing Committee of Appeals.

In October, 1777, the brigantine Susanna was captured by an armed vessel
belonging to Penhallow and others, citizens of New Hampshire -- she was
libelled in the Maritime Court of New Hampshire, and a claim filed on behalf of
Doane and others, citizens of Massachusetts -- On the 16th of December, 1777,
she was condemned -- An appeal to Congress was in due time demanded and
refused, because contrary to a law of the State -- An appeal was then prayed by
the claimants to the Superior Court of New Hampshire and allowed -- and in
September, 1778, a judgment of condemnation was also rendered in that court --
The claimants in due time demanded an appeal to Congress, tendered security to
prosecute the appeal to effect, and the same was lodged in Congress within the
proper time after the definitive sentence was pronounced.

On the 9th of October, 1778, a petition from Elisha Doane was read in
Congress, accompanied with the proceedings in New Hampshire, and praying an
appeal -- this was referred to the Committee of Appeals (4 journal, 586.)

On the 26th of June, 1779, the Commissioners of Appeal gave their opinion that
they had jurisdiction of the cause.

By the articles of Confederation dated the 19th of July, 1778, ratified the
1st of March, 1781, Congress were vested with the s^e and exclusive power of
establishing courts for finally determining appeals in cases of capture, and in
consequence thereof they did erect such court, and resolved, that all matters
respecting appeals in cases of capture then depending before Congress, or the
Commissioners of Appeals, should be referred to the newly erected Court of
Appeals, to be there adjudged and determined according to law.

In the month of September, 1783, the Court of Appeals, before whom the parties
appeared by their advocates, did after a full hearing and solemn argument
finally adjudge and decree, that the sentences of the inferior and superior
courts of New Hampshire should be reversed, and the property restored.

Here the cause rested till the adoption of the existing Constitution of the
United States, except an ineffectual struggle before Congress on the part of
New Hampshire, and an unavailing experiment at common law, to obtain redress on
the part of the appellants.

From the foregoing statement, William Cunningham and Co. think, that they are
not going too far in saying, that there the cause would have rested forever,
had it not been for the present judiciary system of the United States. --
Fortunately however, that system was established, the time arrived when theory
could be reduced to practice, when imbecility was succeeded by energy, when
impartial justice could not only pronounce her decision, but enforce its
execution, and in the year 1795, the representative of Doane heard a decree in
his favor from the highest tribunal in America, prefaced with this honest and
correct sentiment -- Judges may die, and Courts be at an end; but Justice still
lives, and though she may sleep for a while, will eventually awake, and must be
satisfied.

Another instance:

In the case of the sloop Active, in the Admiralty of Pennsylvania, the jury
found a verdict which was confirmed by the Judge, and sentence passed thereon
-- An appeal was lodged and referred by Congress to the Committee of Appeals --
the Committee reversed the sentence, making a new decree, and ordering process
out of the Court of Admiralty of Pennsylvania, to carry this their decree into
execution.

The Judge of the Court of Admiralty refused to carry into execution the decree
of the Committee on Appeals, and assigned as the reason of his refusal, that an
act of the Legislature of the State has declared, that the finding of a jury
shall establish the facts in all trials in the Court of Admiralty without
re-examination or appeal, and that an appeal is permitted only from the decree
of the Judge.

This business was agitated in Congress, and it was "Resolved, That Congress,
or such persons as they appoint, to bear and determine appeals from the Courts
of Admiralty, have necessarily the power to examine, as well into decisions on
facts, as decisions on the law, and to decree finally thereon, and that no
finding of a jury in any Court of Admiralty, or Court for determining the
legality of captures on the high seas, can or ought to destroy the rights of
appeal, and the re-examination of the facts reserved to Congress:

That no act of any one State, can or ought to destroy the right of appeals to
Congress in the sense above declared:

That Congress is by these United States invested with the supreme sovereign
power of war and peace:

That the power of executing the law of nations is essential to the sovereign
supreme power of war and peace:

That the legality of all captures on the high seas must be determined by the
law of nations:

That the authority ultimately and finally to decide on all matters and
questions touching the law of nations, does reside, and is vested in the
sovereign supreme power of war and peace:

That a control by appeal is necessary, in order to compel a just and uniform
execution of the law of nations:

That the said control must extend, as well over the decisions of juries as
Judges, in courts for determining the legality of captures on the sea;
otherwise the juries would be possessed of the ultimate supreme power of
executing the law of nations in all cases of captures, and might at any time
exercise the same in such manner, as to prevent a possibility of being
controuled; a construction which involves many inconveniences and absurdities,
destroys an essential part of the power of war and peace entrusted to Congress,
and would disable the Congress of the United States, from giving satisfaction
to foreign nations complaining of a violation of neutralities, of treaties or
other breaches of the law of nations, and would enable a jury in any one State,
to involve the United States in hostilities; a construction, which for these
and many other reasons, is inadmissible.

That this power of controuling by appeal the several admiralty jurisdictions
of the States, has hitherto been exercised by Congress, by the medium of a
Committee of their own Members.

That the Committee who determined the appeal from the Admiralty of
Pennsylvania was duly constituted. The Congress then

"Resolved, that the said Committee had competent jurisdiction to make thereon
a final decree, and therefore their decree ought to be carried into execution."

The powers above claimed by Congress, were most absolutely and essentially
necessary to be vested somewhere in confederated Republics, as well as in
single States and Monarchies. The supreme power of the confederation was the
only place in which they could be lodged. The safety of all the States as well
as of each individual State, irresistibly required it; and the deductions drawn
by Congress from the necessary and acknowledged possession of the power, flow
too palpably to admit of contradiction. All this the Judge of the Admiralty of
Pennsylvania knew, as well as Congress. But there was a collisio legum.
Congress the supreme power of the whole had reserved the right of deciding on
appeals in all cases of capture: The law of Pennsylvania had declared the
finding of a jury to be final. That law was not inconsistent with the
Constitution of the State. The Judge of the State court was bound by his oath,
to decide according to the law of the State: He was not to declare a new law;
he was not to determine whether the partial appeal was politic or impolitic: He
could only say, this act is my authority; my oath and conscience are my
monitors: And this Congress knew as well as the Judge. What then did Congress
do? Had they the means of enforcing the decree of their committee? Could they
compel the inferior to bend to the superior court? They did all in their power.
--

They resolved,

"That the General Assembly of the State of Pennsylvania be requested to
appoint a committee to confer with a committee of Congress, on the subject of
the proceedings relative to the sloop Active, and the objections made to the
execution of the decree of the Committee on Appeals, to the end that proper
measures may be adopted for removing the said obstacles: And that a committee
of three be appointed to hold the said conference with the committee of the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania, (5 journals, 86 to 90.)

Pennsylvania appointed a committee to confer accordingly, and the following
resolutions passed the House of Assembly as directions to that committee.

MARCH 10, 1779. P. M.

Resolved 1st. That "the power of establishing courts for receiving and
determining finally appeals in all cases of captures". is reserved in Congress
by the articles of Confederation: And as the State of Pennsylvania has acceded
to those articles, this house esteem it their duty to adopt such regulations,
consistent with the principles of the Confederation, as Congress may judge
necessary for the due exercise of the said power.

2dly. That by an act of this Commonwealth for establishing a Court of
Admiralty, it is declared and enacted, that the finding of the jury shall
establish the facts without re-examination or appeal; and that the said act is
not repugnant to, but consistent with the resolutions of Congress of 25th Nov.
1775.

3dly. That the proceedings in the case of the sloop Active were founded on the
aforesaid act of Assembly, which, together with the said resolve, form the true
ground whereupon the decision of the contested points should be made, without
involving a consideration of the necessity or propriety of future alterations
or amendments.

It need only be added, that the Legislature the next year amended their
Admiralty law, directed that cases of capture should be decided agreeably to
the law of nations and acts of Congress; that the proceedings should be
according to the course of the civil law, and an appeal in all cases given to
Congress.

From the foregoing cases it is evident, that whenever any difference arose
between the Superior Court of Congress and the Inferior Court of the State, the
advantage was on the side of the State Court; that when in the lower court, a
State law came in opposition to the act, ordinance, or resolve of Congress, the
latter was obliged to yield to the former: In fine, that although Congress
appeared to possess extensive powers, they could carry nothing into effect,
when opposed by the laws and courts of individual States; in theory they had
every thing, in practice nothing.

Were the real powers of Congress increased by the adoption of the articles of
Confederation? -- It is contended their power in making treaties was
diminished. Congress had declared the States independent; -- the States
individually formed Constitutions for themselves; -- the Constituted Authority
in each State sent their Delegates to Congress, to consult and act for the
general good; -- thus sent with undefined powers, the only natural conclusion
was, that their authority must be commensurate to the object of their
appointment: -- "He who wills the end, wills also the means by which that end
should be accomplished." Under the impression of having the fullest powers for
that purpose, Congress entered into and ratified treaties with France; -- but
this power, is (by the strongest implication) considered in a less extensive
point of view in the articles of Confederation. There each State reserves its
own sovereignty, and every power not expressly delegated to Congress; and so
far were the States from allowing that Treaties were the Law of the Land, that
a clause was inserted, that No State should lay imposts or duties to interfere
with any stipulations in Treaties, entered into by the United States, in
Congress assembled, with any King, Prince, or State, in pursuance of any
Treaties already proposed by Congress to the Courts of France and Spain: And in
the 9th article, in which the power of entering into Treaties is delegated, the
power of establishing rules for deciding in cases of capture is given, but with
this remarkable difference, that all the important rights of foreigners,
however secured by Treaty, all the numerous questions on the law of nations
arising out of Treaties, are left to be decided as many different ways as there
may be courts; and in many instances the national faith, character, honor and
peace, committed to the general verdicts of uninformed juries, while a dispute
about a cock-boat could be carried to a Court of Appeals appointed by Congress.

The imperfections of a system formed in a time of general commotion, became
day by day more visible. The public inconveniences arising from them were
severely felt after the peace; amendments were constantly called for, and at
last, the voice of the Continent, upon the subject of the imbecility of the
Confederation, became too loud and powerful to be resisted. A Convention was
called to amend the article. They found it easier to build up a new system than
patch the old one. A new Form of Government was agreed upon, and submitted to
the different States for adoption or rejection.

That valuable instrument had its friends and opponents in all the States. In
none was it more strenuously opposed, or more ably supported than in Virginia;
and to no part of it was the opposition more pointed, than that which made
Treaties the Law of the Land.

The opinions and declarations of some of the ablest characters is the Union on
that important occasion will be quoted, not as authorities to extend or narrow
any word in a Compact, but as irresistible proof of the general sentiment of
America, respecting the po^ of Congress, under the Confederation, and of the
infractions of the Treaty of Peace. The celebrated author of the Federalist, a
work which has been cited with respect in the Supreme Court of the United
States, says, (vol. 1. p. 87.)

In pursuance of the plan which I have laid down, for the discussion of the
subject, the point next in order to be examined, is the insufficiency of the
present confederation to the preservation of the union. It may perhaps be
asked, what need is there of reasoning or proof to illustrate a position, which
is neither controverted nor doubted; to which the understandings and feelings
of all classes of men assent; and which in substance is admitted by the
opponents as well as by the friends of the new constitution? -- It must in
truth be acknowledged, that however these may differ in other respects, they in
general appear to harmonise in this sentiment at least, that there are material
imperfections in our national system, and that something is necessary to be
done to rescue us from impe^ing anarchy. The facts that support this opinion
are no longer objects of speculation. They have forced themselves upon the
sensibility of the people at large, and have at length extorted from those,
whose mistaken policy has had the principal share in precipitating the
extremity at which we are arrived, a reluctant confession of the reality of
many of those defects in the scheme of our federal government, which have been
long pointed out and regretted by the intelligent friends of the union.

We may indeed, with propriety, be said to have reached almost the last stage
of national humiliation. There is scarcely any thing that can wound the pride,
or degrade the character of an independent nation, which we do not experience.
Are there engagements to the performance of which we are held by every tie
respectable among men? These are the subjects of constant and unblushing
violation. Do we owe debts to foreigners and to our own citizens, contracted in
a time of imminent peril, for the preservation of our political existence?
These remain without any proper or satisfactory provision for their discharge.
Have we valuable territories and important posts in the possession of a foreign
power, which by express stipulations ought long since to have been surrendered?
These are still retained to the prejudice of our (...) rests not less than of
our rights. Are we in a condition to resent, or to repel the aggression? We
have neither troops, nor treasury, nor government, (for the Union.) Are we even
in a condition to remonstrate with dignity? The just imputations on our own
faith, in respect to the same treaty, ought first to be removed.

(...), page 140.

(...) which crowns the defects of the confederation, remains yet to be (...)
^iciary power. Laws are a dea^ le^ without courts to (...) ^ing and operation.
The (...) United States, to have any force at all, must be considered as part
of the law of the land. Their true import, as far as respects individuals,
must, like all other laws, be ascertained by judicial determinations. To
produce uniformity in these determinations, they ought to be submitted in the
last resort, to one SUPREME TRIBUNAL: And this tribunal ought to be instituted
under the same authority which forms the treaties themselves. These ingredients
are both indispensible. If there is in each state a court of final
jurisdiction, there may be as many different final determinations on the same
point, as there are courts. There are endless diversities in the opinions of
men. We often see not only differing courts, but the judges of the same court
differing from each other. To avoid the confusion which would unavoidably
result from the contradictory decisions of a number of independent
judicatories, all nations have found it necessary to establish one court
paramount to the rest, possessing a general superintendence, and authorized to
settle and declare in the last resort, an uniform rule of civil justice.

"This is the more necessary where the frame of the government is so
compounded, that the laws of the whole are in danger of being contravened by
the laws of the parts. In this case, if the particular tribunals are invested
with a right of ultimate jurisdiction, besides the contradictions to be
expected from difference or opinion, there will be much to fear from the bias
of local views and prejudices, and from the interference of local regulations.
As often as such an interference was to happen, there would be reason to
apprehend, that the provisions of the particular laws might be prefered to
those of the general laws; from the deference with which men in office
naturally look up to that authority to which they owe their official existence.
The treaties of the United States, under the present constitution, are liable
to the infractions of thirteen different legislatures, and as many different
courts of final jurisdiction, acting under the authority of those legislatures.
The faith, the reputation, the peace of the whole Union, are thus continually
at the mercy of the prejudices, the passions, and the interests of every member
of which it is composed. Is it possible that foreign nations can either respect
or confide in such a government? Is it possible that the people of America will
longer consent to trust their honor, their happiness, their safety, on so
precarious a foundation?"

And in vol 2. page 304.

"If there are such things as political axioms, the propriety of the judicial
power of a government being co-extensive with its legislative, may be ranked
among the number. The mere necessity of uniformity in the interpretation of the
national laws, decides the question. Thirteen independent courts of final
jurisdiction over the same causes, arising upon the same laws, is a hydra in
government, from which nothing but contradiction and confusion can proceed."

Before the Claimants proceed to show from the debates in the Virginia
convention on the adoption of the federal constitution, the sentiments of some
of the best informed citizens of that State, they request permission to refer
to the opinions of two celebrated Jurists in Pennsylvania on the same occasion.
The high character and official stations of the Speakers give great weight to
what fell from them.

Mr. Wilson, at present one of the Judges of the Supreme Court of the United
States, expresses himself in this manner. (Penn. Deb. 36.)

"Need I call to your remembrance the contrasted scenes of which we have been
witnesses? On the glorious conclusion of our conflict with Britain, what high
expectations were formed concerning us by others! what high expectations did we
form concerning ourselves! Have those expectations been realized? No. What has
been the cause? Did our Citizens lose their perseverance and magnanimity? No.
Did they become insensible of resentment and indignation at any high-handed
attempt, that might have been made to injure or enslave them? No. What then has
been the cause? The truth is, we dreaded danger only on one side: This we
manfully repelled. But on another side, danger, not less formidable, but more
infidious, stole in upon us; and our unsuspicious tempers were not sufficiently
attentive, either to its approach or to its operations. Those, w^ foreign
strength could not overpower, have well nigh become the victims of internal
anarchy.

"If we become a little more particular, we shall find that the foregoing
representation is by no means exaggerated. When we had baffled all the menaces
of foreign power, we neglected to establish among ourselves a government, that
would ensure domestic vigor and stability. What was the consequence? The
commencement of peace was the commencement of every disgrace and distress, that
could befall a people in a peaceful state. Devoid of national power, we could
not prohibit the extravagance of our importations, nor could we derive a
revenue from their excess. Devoid of national importance, we could not procure,
for our exports, a tolerable sale at foreign markets. Devoid of national
credit, we saw our public securities melt in the hands of the holders, like
snow, before the Sun. Devoid of national dignity, we could not in some
instances, perform our treaties, on our parts, and in other instances, we could
neither obtain nor compel the performance of them on the part of others. Devoid
of national energy, we could not carry into execution our own resolutions,
decisions or laws."

And again ( ib. 96.) speaking of the judiciary:

"The judicial power extends to all cases arising under treaties made, or which
shall be made, by the United States. I shall not repeat, at this time, what has
been said with regard to the power of the States to make Treaties; it can not
be controverted, that when made, they ought to be observed. But it is highly
proper that this regulation should be made; for the truth is, and I am sorry to
say it, that in order to prevent the payment of British debts, and from other
causes, our treaties have been violated, and violated too by the express laws
of several States in the Union. Pennsylvania, to her honor be it spoken, has
hitherto done no act of this kind; but it is acknowledged, on all sides, that
many States in the Union have infringed the treaty; and it is well known, that
when the Minister of the United States made a demand of Lord Carmarthen, of a
surrender of the Western Posts, he told the Minister, with truth and justice,
The treaty, under which you claim those possessions, has not been performed on
your part: Until that is done, those possessions will not be delivered up. This
clause, Sir, will show the world, that we make the faith of treaties a
constitutional part of the character of the United States; that we secure its
performance no longer nominally, for the Judges of the United States will be
enabled to carry them into effect, let the legislatures of the different States
do what they may."

And in another page (131.)

"I stated on a former occasion one important advantage; by adopting this
system, we become a nation; at present we are not one. Can we perform a single
national act? Can we do any thing to procure us dignity, or to preserve peace
and tranquillity? Can we relieve the distress of our citizens? Can we provide
for their welfare or happiness? The powers of our government are mere sound. If
we offer to treat with a nation, we receive this humiliating answer, "You
cannot, in propriety of language, make a treaty -- because you have no power to
execute it."

And Chief Justice M'Kean gives this as one of his leading reasons for adopting
the Constitution, which he declares to be one of the best Systems the world has
yet seen:

"You will encourage your allies to join with you; nay, to depend that what
has been stipulated, or shall hereafter be stipulated and agreed upon, will be
punctually performed, and other nations will be induced to enter into treaties
with you."

Mr. Maddison, in the Virginia Convention (1 vol. deb. 140) uses the following
strong expressions:

"The Confederation is so notoriously feeble, that foreign nations are
unwilling to form any treaties with us -- They are apprised that our General
Government cannot perform any of its engagements; but, that they may be
violated at pleasure by any of the States. Our violation of treaties already
entered into, proves this truth unequivocally."

Mr. Randolph, (at that time Governor of Virginia, and since Attorney General,
and afterward Secretary of State for the United States) in answer to some
observations of Mr. Henry on the Confederation, says,

"P^ the meeting of the federal convention, says the honorable gentleman, we
rested in peace; a miracle it was, that we were so: Miraculous must it appear
to those who consider the distresses of the war, and the no less afflicting
calamities, which we suffered in the succeeding peace; -- be so good as to
recollect how we fared under the confederation. I am ready to pour forth
sentiments of the fullest gratitude to those gentlemen who framed that system.
I believe they had the most enlightened heads in this western hemisphere: --
Notwithstanding their intelligence, and earnest solicitude, for the good of
their country, this system has proved totally inadequate to the purpose, for
which it was devised: But, Sir, this was no disgrace to them; the subject of
confederations was then new, and the necessity of speedily forming some
government for the States, to defend them against the pressing dangers,
prevented, perhaps, those able Statesmen from making that system as perfect as
more leisure and deliberation might have enabled them to do: I cannot otherwise
conceive how they could have formed a system, that provided no means of
enforcing the powers which were nominally given it. Was it not a political
farce, to pretend to vest powers, without accompanying them with the means of
putting them in execution? This want of energy was not a greater solecism than
the blending together, and vesting in one body, all the branches of Government.
The utter inefficacy of this system was discovered the moment the danger was
over, by the introduction of peace: The accumulated public misfortunes that
resulted from its inefficacy, rendered an alteration necessary; this necessity
was obvious to all America: Attempts have accordingly been made for this
purpose. I have been a witness to this business from its earliest beginning. I
was honored with a seat in the small Convention held at Annapolis. The members
of that Convention thought ^animously, that the control of commerce should be
given to Congress, and recommended to their ^tat^ to extend the improvement to
the whole system. The members of the general Convention were particularly
deputed to meliorate the confederation. On a thorough contemplation of the
subject, they found it impossible to amend that system: What was to be done?
The dangers of America, which will be shown at another time by a particular
enumeration, suggested the expedient of forming a new plan: The confederation
has done a great deal for us, we all allow, but it was the danger of a powerful
enemy, and the spirit of America, Sir, and not any energy in that system that
carried us through that perilous war: For what were its best arms? The greatest
exertions were made, when the danger was most imminent. This system was not
signed till March 1781, Maryland having not acceded to it before: yet the
military achievements and other exertions of America, previous to that period,
were as brilliant, effectual, and successful, as they could have been under the
most energie Government. This clearly shows, that our perilous situation was
the cement of our Union -- How different the scene when this peril vanished,
and peace was restored! The demands of Congress were treated with neglect. One
State complained that another had not paid its quotas as well as itself. Public
credit gone -- for I believe were it not for the private credit of individuals
we should have been ruined long before that time. Commerce languishing --
produce falling in value, and justice trampled under foot. We became
contemptible in the eyes of foreign nations; they discarded us as little wanton
bees who had played for liberty, but who had not sufficient solidity or wisdom
to secure it on a permanent basis, and were therefore unworthy of their regard.
It was found that Congress could not even enforce the observance of treaties."

The same Gentleman, who must be supposed acquainted with the laws of Virginia
and the practice of its courts, and who cannot be suspected of a public slander
upon his native State, says, "The cry of peace is false. It is but a sudden
calm; the tempest growls over you -- look round -- wheresoever you look you see
danger. When there are so many witnesses in many parts of America, that Justice
is suffocated, shall peace and happiness still be said to reign? Candor, Sir,
requires an undisguised representation of our situation. Candor demands a
faithful exposition of facts. Many citizens have found Justice strangled and
trampled under foot, through the course of jurisprudence in this country. Are
those who have debts due to them, satisfied with your government? Are not
creditors wearied with the procrastination of your legal process? A process
obscured by legislative mists."

If the above remarks are founded, (and the Claimants do not observe that they
were contradicted,) if even citizens were thus impeded in the recovery of their
just debts, what must have been the situation of British creditors?

Again, the same speaker says, (1 vol. deb. 84) "The debts due to the British
are also very considerable. These have been withheld contrary to treaty." And
in reply to Mr. Henry, who had answered him, he says, (p. 190) "The honorable
gentleman has past by my observations with respect to British debts. He has
thought proper to be silent on the subject. My observations must, therefore,
have full force." The Claimants do not conceive that any member could
contradict the assertion. The instrument then under consideration was dated
Sept. 17, 1787. The act of Virginia of Dec. 12, 1787, and its suspending
clause, was only six months old, and must have been too fresh in the memory of
every one present, to admit of a contradiction.

Mr. Pendleton, the president of the Convention, says, "It was the spirit of
America, and not the Confederation, that carried us through the war. Thus I prove
it; the moment of peace showed the imbecility of the Federal Government.
Congress were empowered to make war and peace. A peace they made, giving us the
great object, Independence, and yielding us a territory that exceeded my most
sanguine expectations. Unfortunately, a single disagreeable clause, not the
object of the war, has retarded the performance of the treaty on our part.
Congress could only recommend its performance, not enforce it."

Mr. Nicholas, in urging the necessity of adopting the Constitution, says,
(Deb. vol. 2, p. 43) "There is another point wherein this government will set
them right; I mean the Western Posts. They have been withheld from us since the
peace by the British. The violation of the treaty on our part, authorizes this
detention in some degree. The answer of the British Minister to our demand of
surrendering the Posts, was, that as soon as America should show a disposition
to comply with the treaty on her part, that Great Britain should do the same.
By this Constitution, treaties will be the supreme law of the land."

If other proof was wanting, in addition to these strong and uncontradicted
acknowledgments, Congress have repeatedly declared their sentiments on the
subject. It was in vain they asserted, that "a treaty made and published by
them became obligatory on the whole nation." The assertion was a dead letter.
They had no power to inflict penalties on infractions; no courts to carry their
decrees into execution: It was in vain they recommended repeals of existing
laws infringing the treaty; the days of common danger were over; the talisman
that had once ensured respect to their ordinances, had lost its virtue, and
their recommendations sounded as feebly in the south, as the voice of Justice
in the ears of a dishonest and protected debtor.

The reasoning of the Author of the Federalist is so conclusive that the
Claimants must beg leave to adopt it as their own.

"The case of Virginia is still stronger than that of South Carolina. There is
evidence which cannot be disputed, that her courts, in defiance of the treaty,
have constantly remained shut to the recovery of British debts, in virtue of
laws passed during the War.

"An act of her general assembly of the 22d. June, 1784, after suggesting as
breaches of the treaty by Great Britain the carrying off of the Negroes, and
the detention of the posts, after instructing her delegates in Congress to
request a remonstrance to the British court, complaining of those infractions,
and desiring reparation, and after declaring that the national honor and
interest of the citizens of that Commonwealth, obliged the assembly to withhold
their cooperation in the complete fulfillment of the said treaty, until the
success of the aforementioned remonstrance is known, or Congress shall signify
their sentiments touching the premises, concludes with the following resolution:

"That so soon as reparation is made for the foregoing infraction, or congress
shall judge it indisputably necessary, such acts and parts of acts passed
during the late war, as inhibit the recovery of British debts, ought to be
repealed, and payment thereof made in such time and manner, as shall consist
with the exhausted situation of the commonwealth.

"The plain language of this resolution is, that there were acts passed during
the war, which then actually inhibited the recovery of British debts, and that
for the removal of this inhibition, a repealing act by the authority of
Virginia was necessary.

"However unfounded this position might have been in theory, here is conclusive
evidence that the fact in Virginia was conformable to it; that her courts had
been, ever since the peace, then were, and until a repealing law was passed,
were likely to continue to be shut against the recovery of British debts. --
When testimony of this kind was urged by the British Minister, was it possible
for our Envoy to make any solid reply; Who could be supposed to know better
than the legislature of Virginia, the real state of the fact? When that
legislature declared it to be as has been stated, who, or what could contradict
it? With what truth has it been asserted, that "it was at all times perfectly
understood" that treaties controuled the laws of the States?

"Additional proof of the contrary is found in the subsequent conduct of
Virginia. On the 12th of December, 1787, the State passed an act, repealing all
such acts or parts of acts of the State, as had prevented, or might prevent the
recovery of debts due to British subjects, according to the true intent of the
treaty; but with this proviso, that there should be a suspension of the repeal,
'till the Governor, by advice of council, had, by proclamation, notified that
Great Britain had delivered up the posts, and was taking measures for the
further fulfillment of the treaty by delivering up the negroes, or by making
compensation for them. This denotes clearly, that in the opinion of the
legislature of Virginia, there were acts of that State which had prevented, and
might prevent, the recovery of debts according to the treaty.

"It is observable too, that the resolutions of June, 1784, do not even give
the expectation of a complete repeal of the impeding laws, in the event of
reparation of the breaches of treaty by Great Britain. They only promise such a
modification of them as would permit the payment in such time and manner as
should consist with the exhausted situation of the Commonwealth; that is, not
according to the true intent of the treaty, but according to the opinion of the
legislature of Virginia of the abilities of the Commonwealth.

"The complaints of a power, whose treaty with us was, in fact, violated by the
operation of a State law, could never be satisfactorily answered by referring
to a theoretic abstract, or disputed proposition. Such a power might reply with
irresistible force: "It is not for us to concern ourselves about the structure
and meaning of your political constitutions, or the force of legal maxims
deducible from the forms and distributions of power which you have adopted for
your government. It is the act in which alone we are interested; you have
stipulated this and that to us; your stipulation in practice is contravened. It
is your duty to see that there are no impediments from conflicting authorities
within yourselves, to an exact fulfillment of your promises. If you suffer any
such impediment to exist, you are answerable for the consequences."

But it is said that the legislature of Virginia did not know what their own
laws were, or in other words, that the suspending clause in the act of 12th
December, 1777, acknowledging the existence of impediments, and refusing to
repeal the^, " passed under an erroneous opinion that impediments did exist,
and that this opinion was generally prevalent, as much because the creditors
did (...) venture to bring forward their claim^, from an idea of a general
prejudice against them before a court of justice, as for any other reason that
can be assigned." If the members were in the habit of attending the courts of
their respective counties, they would find good reasons for their opinion. This
is the first instance in which the Claimants have ever heard the ignorance of a
legislature used as an argument to do away an unequivocal declaration in a
statute. If, indeed, the laws regulating elections in Virginia, contained a
prohibition similar to that in the writs for the Coventry Parliament, then the
name of Parliamentum indoctum, and the observation of Sir Edward Coke, "that
they never made a good law," might be applied to the Virginia Assembly of 1787.
If any member of that house subscribes to the assertion in the Answer, the
Claimants will refer him to the only reported case they know, in which, and the
terms on which, ignorance of the law was admitted as an excuse.

"In the year 1598, Sir E. Coke, then Attorney General, married the Lady
Hatton, without banns or license, and in a private house, several great men
were present, as Lord Burleigh, etc. -- they all submitted to the censure of
the Archbishop, who granted them absolution from the excommunication they had
incurred. The act of absolution sets forth, that it was granted by reason of
their penitence, and the fact seeming to have been done through ignorance of
the law. N. B. Lord Chancellor Egerton submitted to the censure of the
Archbishop on the same account." (Hardw. 58.)

The Claimants in this case sincerely repent, that they were as ignorant of the
laws of Virginia as the lawmakers themselves are stated to be, in the answer
to their claim; and they trust their ignorance will be their excuse.

But even supposing there were legal impediments in Virginia, and that the
legislature of that State were not in an error when they passed the act of
1787, "it is contended that the treaty of peace abrogated all the legislative
acts of Virginia, which were contrary to it: In this light it was generally
considered throughout the United States; and it is not believed, that any
judicial decision was ever made to the contrary, by the Judges of any court, in
any State: And if, by accident, such a decision was ever made, it may be
pronounced to be erroneous, and would have been corrected, if it had been
carried before a higher tribunal." (Answer, p. 51.)

It is conceived, that enough has already been said to afford a satisfactory
reply to this part of the answer: A very few observations more will be made.

It is a general rule, that a statute ought to be so construed that, if it can
be prevented, no clause, sentence, or word shall be superfluous, void, or
insignificant.

Legislatures are not to be supposed to have used any words unnecessarily; they
are not to be suspected of works of supererrogation. Every law must be supposed
to have been enacted to answer some end, and that the law so enacted was
necessary to answer that end. Ignorance o^ the purpose to be attained by a law,
and of the necessity of attaining that purpose, is not imputable to them. And
when Congress thought it necessary, earnestly to recommend to the legislatures
of the different States to repeal all laws intringing the treaty, it was a
solemn declaration of the United States, that such repeal was necessary, (...)
that the treaty could not be "executed by the vigor of its own authority." When
Virginia passed such a law, but suspended its operation, it is a most solemn
acknowledgment of the existence of impediments: And foreigners coming into a
country are not expected to be wiser and more learned in the laws than the
ruling powers of that country. " Neminem oppertet esse sapientiorem legibus."

The Claimants in this case never contended that the treaty of peace, when
ratified and exchanged, was not binding in a moral sense; but they do contend,
"that the Judges of each State were bound to judge according to the established
laws of that State, and were not bound to regard, or take notice, ex officio,
of the articles of any treaty made by Congress, unless that treaty had become
the law of the State, according to the due form of proceeding in making acts,
statutes, and ordinances in that State. The Claimants also admit, that there
can be no doubt whatever, but that by the law of nations, and general equity,
every particular State (where there are many which compose one whole) is bound
to perform the contract or peace-treaty entered into at a Congress of the
representatives of those States, which form the whole; and that such treaty
must operate as a tie upon each State, to rescind all acts and ordinances
whatever made during the war, which contravent the terms of the treaty. But
they contend, and the Congress of the United States have admitted, that some
act of each particular State (repealing any act or ordinance which might impede
the operation of the treaty, and giving power to the stated Judges of each
State to pronounce judgment notwithstanding such act or ordinance in conformity
to the treaty) would be necessary to warrant the Judges of each State to act in
conformity to the treaty.

It is asserted (Answer, pa. 51) that the treaty was generally considered
throughout the United States as the law of the land and to be obeyed and
executed accordingly; it is acknowledged (pa. 43) that a contrary opinion was
generally prevalent in Virginia, and even adopted and acted upon by the
Legislature.

It is said in the Answer (pa. 51.) that "it is not believed that any judicial
decision was ever made to the contrary by the judges of any Court in any State,
and if by accident such decision was ever made, it may be pronounced
erroneous." One out of many shall encumber this reply -- others will be
produced to the Board in proper time.

At a Court of Quarter Sessions continued and held for Lancaster County,
(Virginia,) 19th. day of March, 1788.

Anthony Warwick, Admr. of Anthony M'Quhaa, v Thomas Gaskins, jr. in debt.

"On this day came the parties by their Attorneys, and upon hearing the
arguments that were offered by the said Attorneys, and all matters of law
arising thereupon, the Court are of opinion that this suit be dismissed, it
appearing to the Court to be a British Debt."

The foregoing is duly certified under the County Seal -- The decision does not
appear from the record to have been made by accident, but upon deliberation and
hearing arguments of Council.

The record of the case of Clerk, Admr. of Russel v Harwood, in Maryland, has
been before the Board as a document in another Claim. A repetition of a few
observations upon that decision, may be proper here. The effect of a payment of
a debt due to a British subject into the treasury of Maryland, was the same, as
a similar payment in Virginia. By the laws of each State it operated as a
discharge of the debt. It is fair to reason from what did pass in Maryland,
whose courts were open immediately after the peace, to what would have passed
in Virginia, had she barely repealed all laws preventing British subjects from
prosecuting suits for the recovery of their debts, without going further and
declaring the Treaty of peace the supreme law of the land.

In the case of Russell's Admr. v Harwood,

The original Writ issued 19th. June 1786 -- Several pleas were put in, but all
of them were afterward relinquished, except that of payment unto the treasury
agreeably to the act of Assembly, and judgment was rendered in favor of the
Plaintiff by the Judges of the General Court, deducting war interest, on the
12th of October 1790. A writ of Error was sued out the 21st. December 1790, and
the judgment of the General Court was reversed in the high court of errors and
appeals, June the 9th. 1795.

The Claimants do not pretend, nor have they, or any other Claimants before the
Board, ever pretended, that the decree of the court of appeals in this Case can
be supported on legal principles -- The judgment of the general court was
rendered after the treaty had been declared the law of the land, by the
Legislature of Maryland, and after it had been solemnly established as the
supreme law of the land, by the adoption of the present constitution of the
United States -- It however establishes undeniably these points -- That the act
authorizing payments into the treasury of debts due to British subjects, and
payments made in conformity to the directions of that act, were in the opinion
of the highest court of Maryland, a bar to the recovery of the debt, and
notwithstanding the federal Constitution, would still be a bar, if an appeal
had not been authorized in the "act to establish the judicial courts of the
United States."

There exists also an impediment which that act itself cannot remove, and which
would entitle the Administrator of Russel to claim compensation of the United
States, if Harwood had became insolvent even subsequent to the 9th. of June,
1795. The bail in error, was bail for the absolute payment of the debt, if the
court of appeals of Maryland affirmed the judgment. By the reversal of the
judgment of the General Court that bail was discharged. Another consequence is
undeniable. If this suit had been brought earlier, and if the final judgment of
the court of appeals in Maryland had been rendered before the 24th. of
September, 1789, the date of the "act to establish the judicial courts of the
United States," the Creditor would have been without remedy, except under the
6th Article of the Treaty of Amity, -- And if all the Creditors in Virginia had
commenced their suits immediately after the peace, and every one had been
dismissed, on the ground that they were for British debts, no courts erected
subsequent to those judgments, and under a constitution adopted subsequent to
them, could possibly re-examine and reverse them.

But it is said that the decision of the circuit Court of the United States in
June, 1796, fully establishes the doctrine, that a treaty controuls all State
laws opposed to it. Could a similar decision of the Judges of the Supreme court
of Virginia since the peace and before the adoption of the federal
Constitution, be produced, it might be of consequence, but it lies not with the
United States to say, "It is true that in 1783, we stipulated, that no legal
impediments should exist to the recovery of debts, the courts in the different
States ought to have decided that that stipulation repealed the laws which the
Judges of those courts were sworn to support; We recommended it to them so to
do; Their obstinacy would not, or their consciences could not, bend to our
recommendations. It is true, that many losses have been sustained in
consequence thereof: It is true that in 1794, we promised compensation for
those losses; but we are released from both stipulations, because, in 1796, the
Judges of our Circuit Court have decided that judgments of State Courts, (not
in our power to reverse,) were rendered on erroneous principles."

But the case cited (Hamilton v Eaton) does not go the full length contended
for in the Answer. The principle there laid down is correct where there is one
sovereign will; but it has been shown, that it is at best extremely doubtful
where there is imperium in imperio; nor was it necessary to decide the point,
for the Chief Justice goes on and says, "If, however, a subsequent sanction of
this State was at all necessary to make the treaty law here, it has been had
and repeated. By a statute passed in 1787, the treaty was declared to be law in
this State, etc. And in 1789, was adopted here, the Constitution of the United
States, which declared, that all treaties made, or to be made, under the
authority of the United States, should be the supreme law of the land, and that
the Judges in every State should be bound thereby; any thing in the
Constitution or laws of the State to the contrary notwithstanding. Surely then,
the treaty is now law in this State." He concludes with saying, "What is most
material to be here noted is, that the right or obstacle in question, whatever
it may amount to, has been created by law, and not by the creditors: It comes
within the description of lawful impediments, all of which, in this case, the
treaty, as I apprehend, removes.

Here the Claimants leave the general points on legal impediments, with this
remark, that if the power of the State legislature of North Carolina A short
statement of facts attending the above case may be necessary. Archibald
Hamilton, and Co. had mercantile houses in Glasgow; they had large stores in
North Carolina and in Virginia; the American concerns of the house for several
years previous to the Revolution, had been under the direction of John
Hamilton, Esquire. In April 1777, the legislature of North Carolina enacted,
that all persons who had traded directly to Great Britain or Ireland, within
ten years last past, should take an oath of allegiance or depart the State;
they were authorized to sell their estates, to export the amount in produce,
and to appoint attorneys to sell and dispose of their estates for their use.
Debts were not mentioned, nor were they required to collect them before their
departure. That was impracticable, as no courts existed. Under the above act
the plaintiffs left North Carolina. In November, 1777, another act passed,
confiscating all their estates, real and personal; and Commissioners were
directed to be appointed to collect all their debts for the use of the State,
and give discharges, which should forever indemnify the debtor. Under this act
very large sums were paid, among others the debt of the defendant. After the
peace, Col. Hamilton returned to North Carolina to endeavor to collect his
debts, but a pos^tive law of the State prohibited him from instituting any
suit. Several suits were commenced against him for sums owing to citizens of
Virginia and North Carolina, and judgments speedily obtained for principal and
interest. In this situation he petitioned the legislature to repeal the
confiscation law, and grant an order on the treasury for the moneys paid in by
his debtors; this was rejected. He petitioned a second time, stating the suits
brought against him, and praying the equal benefit of the laws to recover the
debts due to him, and requesting an order for only so much of the money paid
into the treasury by his debtors, as would enable him to discharge the debts
due by the firm before the war to citizens of America. This, also, was
rejected; and as the federal judiciary was now established, in which suits for
500 dollars and upwards could be commenced, and some were, they ordered the
Attorney and Solicitor General to defend them.
, had not been controuled by the Constitution of the United States; or if the
14th amendment to that Constitution agreed to by the Virginia Convention, By an
amendment proposed by the Virginia Convention, the judicial power of the United
States was not to extend to any case, where the cause of action originated
before the ratification of the Constitution, except disputes between States
about their territory, disputes between persons claiming lands under grants of
different States and suits for debts due to the United States.
had been adopted, it is probable the cases of Hamilton v Eaton, or Jones v
Hylton, would have never been decided.

The Claimants are to prove their Case.
THIS is admitted, but it is contended that in this case, as well as in suits
at law, a title prima facia good, is sufficient until the defendant shows,
either that the plaintiff has been divested of that title, or that the
defendant, or some person else, has a better; or, if it is a demand for money,
that the demand has been legally satisfied. But there are cases even at law
where the fullest proof cannot be expected; and here a legal maxim applies: "No
man is permitted to take advantage of a defect of evidence, when that defect is
occasioned by his own act."

A maxim is cited in the Answer, (p. 5) Melior est conditio defendentis -- This
requires an observation. " Potior est conditio possidentis," is a correct
maxim. In an ejectment the plaintiff must produce a clear title, otherwise the
mere possession of the defendant is sufficient. The maxim cited in the answer
should be, " In pari delictu melior est conditio defendentis." This is founded
on a principle of general policy, which a defendant has advantage of, contrary
to real justice, as between him and the plaintiff; the principle is, " ex dolo
malo non oritur actio." If the cause of action appears to arise ex turpi c^usa,
or a transgression of a positive law, there the court says, the plaintiff has
no right to be assisted; it is not for the sake of the defendant, but because
they will not lend their aid to such a plaintiff, (Cowper 343.) In reply to
this maxim, a claimant can only ask, in the "plaintive motto of a Courtnay, Ubi
lapsus? quid feci."

It is agreed, that the stipulation in the Sixth article of the treaty of Amity
is so " brief and intelligible, that it is difficult by any phraseology to make
it either more concise or plain." (Answ. pa. 7.) But the Claimants do not
entirely acceed to the special description in the Answer. (pa. 8.) within which
it is said, a "remediable claim must be brought;" nor to all the cases (pa.
10.11.) said to be " not relievable under the treaty." They fully agree with
the Answer in this, " that the 6 th. article of the treaty of amity grew out of
the 4 th. article of the treaty of peace" but while they acknowledge the
fundamental principle laid down, (pa. 12.) that no loss or damage is reparable
under the treaty of 1794, that is not grounded on a debt comprehended in the
4th article of the treaty of 1783, and has not proceeded from the violation or
non-execution thereof, to be correct as far as it goes, they respectfully
contend, that the fundamental rule should be in the affirmative, and not the
negative; it should be -- Every loss or damage is reparable under the treaty of
1794, that is grounded on a Debt comprehended in the 4 th article of the treaty
of peace, and has proceeded from a violation or non-execution thereof.

This leads to a short discussion as to the true meaning of both articles. The
Claimants will state the construction which to them appears to arise from the
Words -- The Board will decide between the answer and reply.

" It is agreed, that Creditors on either side, shall meet with no lawful
impediment to the recovery of the full value, in sterling Money, of all bona
fide debts heretofore contracted."

The words Creditors on either side, are to be taken in their most extensive
signification. All British subjects having demands on one side, whether
resident in Great Britain, Ireland, the Indies, or the Continent; and all
American citizens on the other. All distinctions of British subjects taken from
their residence, are blended in the designation Creditors on the side of His
Britannic Majesty. Not a word is said of Debtors; therefore, the first
description in the Answer (pa. 8) is not quite accurate; for, if a British
subject indebted to a British subject before the peace, had absconded with his
property, after the peace, and becoming either a citizen or inhabitant of any
State, had there been protected by a State law from the pursuit of his
creditor, it is not unfair to suppose it a remediable claim. That, however, is
not the case of the Claimants, nor is it known or believed that any such case
exists.

Further. " Creditors of all bona fide debts theretofore contracted," whether
entitled to receive the debts, as creditors by original contract or assignment
before the peace: Whether the debts had been confiscated, sequestered, paid
into the Treasury, or tendered in worthless paper, or in any thing less than
sterling value: Whether the obligations or evidences of the debts had been
seized, destroyed and cancelled, as in several cases they were, under a State
law; or fraudulently or forcibly, or by operation of law, obtained by the
debtor -- Still they are creditors, and are to meet no lawful impediment to the
recovery of the full value in sterling money of all such debts.

A law that is universally beneficial cannot contain exceptions, for such would
make it only beneficial in cases not excepted. The word all, without any
exception annexed to it, is a term of universality, and cannot be restrained,
there being no ambiguity in the expression, and as to the words lawful
impediments to the recovery, they have nothing to operate upon, especially as
connected with the words full value in sterling money, except confiscations,
sequestrations, depreciated paper, depreciation laws, scaleing debts, and laws
at that time in force prohibiting suits; all of which required legislative
interference to remove; in every other case, by the mere return of peace,
without any express stipulation, the war suspended remedy revived. The article
therefore clearly means, that those laws, and all proceedings under them,
should be no impediment to a full recovery. A rule of construction of statutes,
already mentioned, is "to give its force to every word, where it can be done."
And Vattel says, " where an act is conceived in clear and precise terms, when
the sense is manifest and leads to nothing absurd, there can be no reason to
refuse the sense which it naturally presents, -- to go elsewhere in search of
conjectures to extinguish or restrain it, is to endeavor to elude it."

In the treaties made between France, Spain, and Holland, with Great Britain,
about the same time, there is no such provision; because there existed no such
acts in those governments, which rendered necessary a stipulation that their
effects should be of no validity.

Justice, and reciprocal remedies to the subjects and citizens of the two
countries, call for this construction. The intimate connection which had
subsisted between Great Britain and the Colonies, previous to their separation,
strongly require it, in order to make the article completely mutual. No laws
were made in England confiscating debts, or making depreciated paper a tender;
and if a creditor was beyond seas, no act of limitation barred him. If,
therefore, less than all impediments to the recovery of all debts were intended
to be removed, where is the line to be drawn? -- An half, a fiftieth, or a
thousandth part? Or, is a construction to be put, similar to that stated and
severely reprobated by Puffendorf, on the treaty between Fabius Labeo and
Antiochus. in which the Romans stipulated to restore one half the ships taken
from Antiochus. They sawed them all in half, and rendered the whole useless.

The sixth article of the treaty of amity which arose out of the foregoing
article of the treaty of peace, in consequence of alleged infractions,
evidently contains, and must be divided into two parts. Great Britain
complained, "that debts to a considerable amount, which were bona fide
contracted before the peace, still remain owing to her subjects, by citizens or
inhabitants of the United States; that by the operation of various lawful
impediments ^ce the peace, not only the full recovery of the said debts has
been delayed, but also the value and security thereof have been, in several
instances, impaired and lessened, so that by the ordinary course of judicial
proceedings, the British creditors cannot now obtain and actually have and
receive full and adequate compensation, for the losses or damages which they
have thereby sustained."

Within this part of the section, and this only, the Claimants must prove their
case. They come fairly before the Board on the following terms:

They must be British subjects.

Their Debtors must have been citizens or inhabitants of the United States.

Their debts must have been bona fide contracted before the peace; they are to
be proved in that manner which was admissible and sufficient, at the time they
were contracted, if that is now possible; but, if from the unavoidable
accidents that must have happened in a long lapse of time, that is now
impracticable, the next best testimony in their power is to be received and
considered. Their debts must still remain owing to them; legal impediments must
have so operated, that a full recovery has been delayed, or the value and
security impaired and lessened, so that by the ordinary course of judicial
proceedings (that is, the courts which had original jurisdiction, according to
the amount in the State where the debt was contracted, -- for the prosecution
of a five pound appeal, seven hundred miles off, was never contemplated) they
cannot NOW actually have and receive full and adequate compensation for the
losses and damages thereby sustained. No further or other points are to be
proved, and if they cannot now actually have and receive from their Debtor,
they are not to wait the event of hopeless suits or general verdicts, years
after the commission shall have been expended; because, the United States have
agreed, that in all such cases where full compensation cannot, for whatever
reason, be actually obtained, they will make it.

While the Claimants state the above to be all that can be required of them,
and insist that it is sufficient to entitle them to a decree, (they executing
proper assigmnents and releases) for all losses and damages thus proved to be
sustained, if nothing else appears; They admit, that there is a defendant side
to the case, because, when the United States stipulated to make compensation as
above, they required, and it was agreed, and "distinctly understood, that the
stipulation was not to extend to losses occasioned by such insolvency of the
debtors, as would equally have operated to produce such loss if the said
impediments had not existed, nor to such losses or damages as have been
occasioned by the manifest delay, negligence, or wilful omission of the
Claimant."

This part of the article belongs to the United States, and when the insolvency
of the debtor at and ever since the peace is affirmed, the burden of the proof
lies on the party affirming. If an executor or administrator pleads no assets,
or fully administered, it is incumbent upon him to show that nothing was in his
hands, or how he has administered. So where omission or negligence is alleged.

If the foregoing view of the article is correct, short replies will be
sufficient to many observations contained in the Answer.

It is alleged "that it is reasonable that the claimants should be required to
prove the solvency of the debtor at the peace, and his insolvency since,
because he is presumed to know the circumstances of the debtor, and ^ould
naturally from time to time make enquiries concerning his circumstances" etc.
(see Answ. pa. 9.)

With regard to actual solvency, it is not required to (...) p^! -- It is
impossible in one case out of a^ hundred to prove it. In mer^ (...) it is
always allowed, that while debtors are transacting business publicly, buying,
selling, and trading, they are at that time good and solvent debtors; and the
State of Virginia by protecting their debtors from a suit, was like the holder
of a bill of exchange giving credit at his own risk to an acceptor.

If all those debts had been assigned to the United States at the peace for
valuable consideration, with assurances to refund such part as, with due
diligence could not be recovered by reason of insolvency, and Virginia one of
the United States created, or permited impediments to exist for several years,
which were at last removed, but the debtor became insolvent before a suit can
be prosecuted to judgment, -- The remedy over is lost unless clear proof can be
brought of actual insolvency at the time of the assignment. So where the payee
of a bill neglects to give due notice of the non-acceptance, he will lose his
remedy against the drawer, on the principle, that if due notice had been given,
the drawer might have secured himself; this defense however of the drawer will
not avail him, if it is sufficiently proved that he had no funds in the hands
of the drawee. It must therefore be evident, that if, in the case of an
assignment as above stated, the United States could not recover of the
Claimants, without proof of insolvency at the peace, (which is equivalent to
proof of no funds in the hands of a drawee) so neither can they resist their
promise to make full compensation, without that proof.

But the reverse of the allegation is true. The creditors were driven out of
the State by law. The courts were occluded in 1774. At the return of peace,
suits were prohibited. If therefore, there is a defect of proof on this point,
it arises from the act of the State, and not to be taken advantage of. Where
present insolvency, or removal from the State during the existence of legal
impediments, are the grounds on which compensation is claimed, they will be
proved.

It is laid down as a general rule, "that the creditor ought to apply to the
Courts of Justice against the debtor, before he applies to the Commissioner's
against the United States." (Answ. pa. 10.)

In many instances the debtors have sold off their property during the period
of existing impediments, and removed to places beyond the reach or knowledge of
the claimants; it cannot be expected that records of suits shall be produced in
such cases. To sue persons notoriously insolvent, only to produce a return of
"no goods," is to suppose the Commissioners can receive no testimony of facts,
but what arises from record. -- If one such return was had, it might be
alleged, that the claimants had only tried one county; -- that the debtor
might have goods in another of the eighty-two counties, he must be pursued in
each; if the returns are uniform, it may be urged that he has lands; the
claimants must try their elegits, and at last after twenty years delay, and
expense equal to fifty times the debt, they will be able to establish by
records what the board can easily decide upon testimony less expensive, more
easily obtained, and equally satisfactory. -- To bring suits in cases where
there is no other testimony except the books, or even where there is other
proof, if length of time is a bar, would only be adding the costs of ten
thousand fruitless suits to the loss and damage already sustained.

The first case stated (Answ. pa. 10, 11) as not relievable, is admitted; so is
the second, on proof by the United States of the debtors insolvency at the
peace, and at all times since: The third and fourth are contested, for reasons
already given; and because most of the debts are below the jurisdiction of the
Circuit Court of the United States. It would take years to carry those which
are above the final jurisdiction of the inferior court, up to the "highest
court of law or equity of the State in which a decision can be had;" in order
to bring them within the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the
United States; and because the word now, in the sixth article, does not mean
ten years after the Board shall have broken up.

The fifth and sixth are a little at variance -- the former insists upon the
necessity of a tedious and expensive suit for partial relief, before
application for the balance shall be made to the Board; and the latter insists,
that no compensation shall be made where a creditor has accepted, without suit,
as much as he could possibly recover at law; that reasoning is not sound -- "
Interest reipublicae ut finis sit litium." The sixth case however, contains
something to be admitted, and something that will be strenuously denied. Where
the debt has been satisfactorily settled before the peace, there was no debt at
the peace; where ever it has been so settled since the peace, there is no debt
now owing; where it was voluntarily compromised by a new contract before the
peace, and the performance of that contract has been prevented by legal
impediments since, that is strictly within the treaty; where it has been
voluntarily compromised by a new contract since the peace, the original demand
is extinguished, and it is not within the treaty. In making these admissions,
the Claimants understand the words voluntarily and satisfactorily in their
plain sense -- the will must have been unfettered by the certainty that
compromise was necessary, because payment could not be enforced; and the
settlement must have been such, as would have been satisfactory, if access to
the courts had not been denied, and the course of justice had been unimpeded. A
case may arise, where a debtor in affluent circumstances, or the heirs of such
debtor, paid the debt into the treasury of Virginia, and took a receipt, which
by law was declared an effectual discharge from the debt: The estate of the
deceased has passed unincumbered into the hands of bona fide purchasers: The
heirs, in the enjoyment of the personal and the purchase money of the real
estate are, on the return of peace, applied to by the creditor: Their answer is
rigorous, but mixed with honesty, and a regard for character: Your debt (say
they) has been paid according to a law in force: By law we are discharged -- by
law you cannot recover: It is true, that the money paid into the treasury was
worth nothing -- it is true, you have received no satisfaction, and in
conscience and justice you are entitled to it; make us certain deductions, give
us certain terms of instalment, accept our separate engagements according to
the proportions of estate which have respectively descended to us, and we will
give them; but you must take this or nothing. In such a case, the creditor
complying was doing the best in his power for himself, and of course the best
in his power for the United States. But can this be called a voluntary
compromise, a satisfactory settlement? And if one of those heirs became
insolvent before payment could be enforced, can negligence or omission be
imputed to the creditor, or will it be fair in the United States to say, " We
did stipulate that no impediments should exist, but we are discharged from that
agreement, because the creditor has been compelled to submit to impediments
which actually did exist."

The seventh excepted case is admitted, provided the indulgence was granted
since the establishment of the federal court, and the sum was within its
jurisdiction; but it is hoped that no endeavors of a claimant to persuade a
debtor to do justice, no kind expostulations in letters soliciting payment, or
even part payments, at a time when no payment which could not be enforced by
law, will be construed into such indulgence, and in instances where the
Attorney for the creditor was a relation of the debtor, it might have been
hoped, that those expostulations would have had more weight then when
proceeding from a stranger.

The eighth excepted case in the Answer, is by no means agreed to. Judgments of
competent courts before the war, are undoubtedly a bar to any claim, on account
of a debt then determined not to be just; but if non-suits have been ordered,
suits dismissed, or judgments rendered for defendants during the commotions at
the commencement of the war, and in the absence of the plaintiff, it will
require more consideration before claims on that account are abandoned. The
different Claimants have been advised by their General Agent not to bring
forward any very stale claims; but it is by no means admitted, that a debt,
which had been five years due, at the time of the occlusion of the courts in
Virginia, was not a bona fide debt within the meaning of the treaty.

The Claimants acknowledge, if the courts in Virginia had been open to them at
the ratification of the treaty of peace, and all the time between their
occlusion and that ratification had been declared out of the act of
limitations, in that case they would have had no right to complain. If length
of time had then been pleaded, they might have repelled the plea by proof of
subsequent acknowledgments and promises, which is not now within their power.

Here some observations on the book debt law, the act of limitations, the
decisions of courts, and the practice of the bar in Virginia under those acts,
may be properly introduced. Decisions nearly coeval with the date of a statute,
and particularly where an uniform practice conformably to such decisions has
taken place for a length of years, are of such high authority as not to be
shaken; " Contemporanea expositio est fortissima in lege," they restrain, they
enlarge the construction, and sometimes settle a construction contrary to the
letter.

Before the enacting of the act of 1748, the store books of the merchant had
always been admitted as evidence of the debt, and an act (5 Geo. IId. now out
of print) of the same title as the act of 1748, was in force; and it is
believed no complaints ever were heard either against the practice or the law.
But as the state of society advanced, debtors sometimes disputed the accounts,
which threatened destruction to that mutual confidence which had hitherto
subsisted between the merchant and the planter, and which was essential to the
convenience of the inhabitants. However, the exigencies of the people, who were
moneyless a great part of the year absolutely requiring it, (for otherwise,
they could not without the most intolerable inconvenience to themselves have
procured the comforts and necessaries which their families daily stood in need
of,) the legislature, at once to comply with the public convenience, and to
secure the merchant, passed the " act prescribing the method for proving book
debts."

After the passing of this law, (which the claimants never understood to have
been considered as a grievance to the planters) the course of trade was
continued upon the ancient footing, and the planters persisted to take up
goods, as they had occasion for them for the use of their families, and to pay
for them out of the ensuing crop. It frequently happened though, that they over
went the growing crop and anticipated the subsequent one: In which cases, if
the excess was not great in proportion to the usual extent of their crops, it
was customary once a year to call over the accounts in presence of the debtor,
to furnish him with a copy if desired; and to transfer the balance to another
ledger, without demanding a specialty, which would have been considered as a
mark of distrust, and therefore would have been highly offensive, insomuch that
it was never done, except in cases supposed to be perilous, in order to give
dignity to the debt. Nor is there any instance recollected where such transfer
of the balance has ever been made, until the account was approved of by the
debtor. The courts fell in with this disposition of the parties, and took the
law by equity; which they extended beyond the strictness of the letter to cases
which hardly seemed to be within the provisions of it.

Thus, although the first and second sections relate to accounts for store
dealings and transactions altogether, yet accounts between planters, or for
mechanic work, or upon any other account whatsoever, were proved in the same
way, and judgment given on them.

So, although the law speaks of two and three years, yet the County Courts
universally dispensed with the limitations, and allowed the evidence at any
distance of time. Hence it came to pass, that nothing ever prevented a recovery
of an open account thus authenticated, but the general act of limitations
passed in the year 1705; which, at that time, was thought so disgraceful, that
lawyers never insisted on it without directions, and no person of reputation
would require it to be pleaded; and whoever did was held in such dishonor that
very few instances of it ever occurred; and even in those, juries found for the
defendant with such reluctance, that any thing was admitted in avoidence of the
plea. In the General Court too, which at that time was the highest Court of
Judicature in the State such evidence was admitted, where not pointedly
objected to; and the objection either from the integrity of the bar, or the
discountenance shown by the Court, was seldom made, insomuch that it is
believed, that but few cases happened where the plaintiff failed to recover
merely upon the ground of that objection. Nay, such was the encouragement given
by the Courts to this species of evidence, that in cases where the plaintiffs
summoned his clerks or others to prove the account, payment for the witnesses
attendance was disallowed by the Court, as the plaintiff might have proved it
by his own oath and therefore should not have summoned the witness and
unnecessarily have increased the costs of the suit against the defendant.

This conduct generated a mutual confidence between the merchants and their
customers, which induced candor in the planter, and a strict attention on the
part of the merchant to the fairness of his accounts; insomuch that he would
have yielded any debt which was pointedly objected to by the customer, sooner
than have the reputation of his books impeached. And to such length was this
carried, that a wilful false entry in his books would have been as highly
condemned, not only by customers, but by merchants, as if he had committed
forgery; because such practices would, in the long run, have weakened the
testimony, which, while it remained unimpaired, was held as sacred as a bond.
Hence, in the public estimation, few evidences were more respected than a
merchant's books, and none, where it was more essentially the interest of the
party that they should be pure and unexceptionable.

Under this act, therefore, prior to the revolution, the merchants and traders
of all denominations rested perfectly secure, and seldom thought of procuring
any other testimony, except where the claim had grown to any considerable
amount, or all dealings and transactions were broken off betwixt the parties,
when bonds were sometimes taken to give dignity to the debt. The planter
confided in the books, and the merchant relied on them as the only evidence of
his claim, which he trusted would be always sufficient to support it; and
assured of this, from the whole experience of his business, he gave himself no
concern about any other. Which security was not indiscreet, but was founded on
the practice and decisions of the country.

From this temper and disposition of the parties, and the security which the
law and practice of the country afforded the creditor, suits were seldom
brought, unless the delay of payment was unconscionable, or the debtor was
declining in his circumstances: In which cases they were brought, not to
authentica^e the debt, for that was considered as established without, but
merely to enforce payment of the money.

The revolution then, and its consequent regulations, came upon them by
surprise. It was an event which no human wisdom could have foreseen, and
therefore could not be provided against. But even had it been foreseen, and had
the creditors resolved to guard against it, they must have relied upon the
generosity and integrity of the debtors, as it was not in their power to compel
them, from the twelfth day of April, 1774, to this very time. For the costs of
suit in Virginia were ascertained by a temporary law called the F^e Bill, which
expired upon the 12th day of April, 1774, and was not revived again until the
impediments already mentioned in the memorial, began to exist. Hence, in a
variety of instances, the creditor could not have brought his suit, had he
deemed it necessary to do so, within the limitations prescribed by the act of
Assembly; which being an impediment arising from a defect of justice in the
country, the delay of suit ought not to be imputed to the creditor, even had it
been foreseen that such a step was important. But when it is considered, that
no sagacity could have penetrated into the events which afterward took place,
every shadow of carelessness and indiscretion immediately disappears.

In this situation were things then at the commencement of the revolution,
which brought on an occlusion of the courts of justice, paper money, and a
thousand other obstructions, until finally a law was passed which obliged the
creditors, their factors and agents, to depart the country. So that it became
impossible, by this additional act of government, even had they divined the
necessity of it, to obtain further proofs of their debts, which they could not
sue for and reduce into possession -- 1st. Because there was an occlusion of
the courts of justice -- 2d. Because there was an express inhibition to
proceedings in suits brought by British subjects -- 3d. Because the creditor
could only have recovered paper money, which would have been of no service to
him out of America; and here he was not allowed to use or employ it.

Hence if no alteration had been made in the law, it would not have been a
chimerical inference in the creditors, that they would on the return of peace,
have been allowed to prove their debts according to the existing modes at the
time they were contracted. But flattering as this prospect was, it was
afterward blasted for ever; for, in the year 1779, the book-debt law was
repealed; and although the repealing act has an exception with regard to goods
sold before, yet the Courts immediately began to depart from the liberality of
the former practice, and held the plaintiff to the strict letter of the
book-debt law, in all cases previous to the operation of the repealing statute,
and called on him for common law proof in all cases subsequent to that statute.
So that it is now universally holden in all cases before the State courts, that
neither citizen or foreigner can establish his claim by his own oath; and at a
late court of the United States for the middle circuit and district of
Virginia, it was expressly decided, that the plaintiff could not recover in a
suit brought by him upon an open account which was only proved by his own oath,
but that the delivery of the articles to the debtor must be proved by
disinterested testimony. Added to this, in the State court on whom alone the
decision of all causes under five hundred dollars is devolved, and of these
particularly the county courts, who have concurrent jurisdiction in all common
plea cases whatsoever, and exclusive jurisdiction in all cases under one
hundred dollars, the difficulty would be greater still: For even (...) cases
supported by other evidence, the plaintiffs, sometimes from the obstinacy of
the juries, and at other times from the reluctance of the courts, have been
continually delayed, or their claims have been decided against them without
regard to the merits of the case, merely on the ground of their being British
debts.

Hence it has become morally certain, that no recovery can be had of the debtor
for these claims, because the law having been held to be out of force which
allowed the plaintiffs to prove them by their own oaths, and the factors,
agents, and store-keepers who might in some instances have been able to have
proved them having been driven out of the State; and being now dead, or
dispersed into different quarters of the world unknown, in much the greater
part of the cases, to the creditors, it is impossible to prove them according
to the common law rules in a court of justice.

The claimants respectfully contend, that a change of the rules of evidence
after the debts were contracted, ought not to affect the creditor, who only
provided himself with such evidence as the then existing laws and usages
required, and as it was not necessary for them to have witnesses at that time
it ought not now to be required; otherwise the treaty will have done nothing
for them, since although the right to recover is acknowledged, yet the means
are taken away by requiring testimony not foreseen, and impossible to be
procured.

The ninth case stated in the Answer (pa. 12.) as not relievable under the
treaty, would not have been much contested if it had rested at the first
period; but the instance given in the latter part is so contradictory to what
the claimants conceive to be an undeniable maxim, to wit "neither of the
contracting powers has a right to interpret the treaty at his pleasure," and
would go to the entire cutting up of so large a portion of the claims which
were intended to be compensated, that the admission would be making the greater
part of the treaty a dead letter. It is also inconsistent with another part of
the Answer itself. In one case it is insisted, that the creditors must resort
in all cases to the tribunals of the country, where they can only obtain a
partial relief, before they can come before the Board for that part which
cannot be recovered; and here it is insisted, that when they have resorted to
that tribunal, and obtained a verdict for that part of their demand which a
jury may please to allow, they are to be concluded by the verdict, as to the
amount, and can never be permitted to show, that injustice has been done to
them. In other words it is saying, that the courts and juries in Virginia, and
in cases of general verdicts juries alone, the friends and neighbors of the
debtor, with every prejudice, if not resentment against the creditor, are to be
the exclusive judges on the construction of the treaty of peace, that their
ideas of equity and justice is to be binding on the consciences of the
Commissioners, and that if Judges, on a plea of payment to a bond, will admit
evidence of the absence of the creditor, though forced from the country by law,
as a set-off, that the British subject must in all cases submit to it; this (to
use the expressions of Congress already quoted, see pa. 8. anti.) "is a
construction which involves many inconveniences and absurdities, destroys an
essential part of the power of war and peace entrusted to Congress, and would
disable the Congress of the United States, from giving satisfaction to foreign
nations complaining of a violation of neutralities, of treaties, or other
breaches of the law of nations, and would enable a jury in any one State, to
involve the United States in hostilities; a construction, which for these and
many other reasons, is inadmissible."

An instance in which the verdicts of juries has been peculiarly injurious to
British creditors, arises from an act settling a scale of depreciation. It is
true, that the schedules of debts due at the Brunswick store, contain no demand
on this account; but the Claimants stated in their memorial, that they had
several stores, and it was agreed that as many heads of real complaints as
possible should be brought forward for discussion in one claim. Under this
agreement, and referring to it, the Agent of the United States omitted
answering several points in the case of Oswald Dennistown, and Co. to save
repetition before the Board.

The whole of the debts due to the Claimants were contracted at a time of
unsuspecting confidence; when debtor and creditor were subjects of the same
Sovereign, and bound by the same laws, under the faith of which the credit was
given. No depreciation of money was then known. In the year 1777, persons of
their description were ordered, by proclamation, to quit Virginia in forty
days. To collect their debts in that short space was impossible -- they did
what they could. From as many of their debtors as they met, who were willing to
give, they obtained bonds for the balances due to them. In 1781, a law is
passed, by which the sums are directed to be reduced to two thirds of the debt
bona fide contracted, and war interest deducted from that two thirds: Is this
equity and justice? Is this full compensation? Courts and juries may think so,
or be bound to decide so in the United States, but debts due to British
subjects are not to be legislated away, by acts to which they were no party.
(Du Costa v Cole, Skinner, 272) And as such judgments are no compliance with
the 4th article of the treaty of peace, the loss sustained by means of them are
to be redressed under the 6th article of the treaty of amity.

But it is alleged (Answ. pa. 41.) "that by judicial decisions it has been
settled in Virginia, that if a bond dated at any time between the 1st day of
January 1777, and 1st day of January 1782, contains in the condition, or any
part of it, any thing to show the debt was originally contracted before the
date of the bond, the depreciation law shall not be construed to operate on
such a case; but if the bond has no such intrinsic evidence of the time the
debt was contracted, it is is liable to be scaled, and parole evidence is not
admitted to alter the effect and purport of the sealed instrument. Thus then,
if the creditor omitted to take a bond so as to show by something in it, that
it was probably to secure a debt contracted before the war, it was a wilful
omission in him, and if any loss arises from hence, it is a loss not intended
by the treaty of 1794, to be charged on the United States."

The only omission the Claimants can charge themselves with, is, in not having
stated in their memorial, that they are natives of Glasgow only, and not from
the north; and that there, as in America, the maxim obtains, " Nemo tenetur
divinare."

Interest during the War.
Interest is recoverable upon contracts wherein interest is stipulated to be
paid; upon merchandise according to the usage of particular branches of trade,
or of a special agreement; upon goods sold and delivered at a limited credit,
after the expiration of the time of credit; upon money payable at a particular
day, after that day is passed; upon money payable on demand, after demand
proved; upon accounts after final settlement, and even upon accounts where no
time of credit was specified, if the delay has been long, and under vexatious
and oppressive circumstances.

This question of interest will be examined upon general principle, because,
the occlusion of courts prevented a legal demand at one period, the banishment
of the creditors or their factors rendered final settlements in most cases
impossible, the impediments since the peace have been vexatious, the decisions
reducing their bonds bearing interest, have been oppressive, the loss upon
their accounts for which bonds were not obtained, has been nearly total, and
the expense of agents and factors for fourteen years past in endeavoring to
collect their debts, has been more than equal to all recovered.

The Claimants do not think it necessary to go back to the black letter
decisions in the reigns of the Stuarts, to discover whether interest was
recoverable as debt or damages; or to find out how judgments were entered, or
what pleadings were faulty, a century ago. All the cases, therefore, cited in
the Answer from the 13th to the 20th page, will, (except one) be left as they
are. The case in a Ventris, 198, is said in the Answer to be "a judicial
resolution upon the very point, whether interest is recoverable as debt," and
as it was decided upon demurrer, it " therefore is of high authority." The case
is shortly this. A testator borrowed a sum of money, for which he gave his
obligation to repay the same sum with interest; a judgment was obtained on this
obligation against the executor. Another suit, by another creditor, was
afterward brought against the executor, to which he pleaded that judgment, in
which, the debt and interest at the time of the action brought, amounted to
such a sum, etc. ultra quae he had not to satisfy: Demurrer and judgment for
the plaintiff. Lord Hale does make use of the expressions quoted in the Answer,
(pa. 18) but as the real reason for the judgment is omitted in the Answer, it
shall be inserted in the Reply. " It ^rs, that part of the interest accrued
after the testator's death, which is the EXECUTOR's ^PER DEBT, being his own
default to suffer the interest to run on," etc.

From the several cases cited in the Answer, the following conclusion is drawn:
"If it be an axiom of the English law, as it is believed to be, that an action
of debt lies for recovering every debt; and if such an action of debt does not
lie for interest, as has been shown, then it follows, that in the eye of
English law, interest is not debt."

In the eye of the English law, interest is debt; it is demandable as soon as
it becomes due and payable; it is recoverable in an action of debt brought for
interest alone, notwithstanding the case in Ventris: For instance, if a sum of
money was lent for a number of years with interest, payable half yearly, the
interest could not be recovered by assumpsit in damages for not paying the
principal, because the principal might not be due. And Lord Kenyon says, (5
term. R. 556) " The case cited from Ventris ought not to be treated slightly,
or overturned without great consideration, because it has the sanction of Lord
Hale's name. But as at present advised, I confess it appears to me, that the
reasons given in support of that judgment, are strong to show, that the
decision should have been the other way; for if it were rightly decided in that
case, that an action of debt will not lie for interest, great injustice would
be done in a variety of instances that might be put. If by the terms of the
contract, the payment of the money borrowed is to be postponed to a distant
day, and interest be reserved and made payable in the mean time, the leader
would not, acoording to that doctrine, have any men's of enforcing the payment
of the interest, before the principal can be recovered, and in the instance
put, of the security being by deed, the lender could not recover interest at
all, in assumpsit, on account of the deed."

Lord Mansfield says, (3 Burr. 1375) "The interest (even upon sums payable by
instalment) is part of the original debt due upon and secured by the bond."

Lord Hale in the case of Ventris, admits, that interest may be recovered in
assumpsit, and it is a rule, that wherever indebit^t^: assumpfit will lie, debt
will also lie. And lastly, the answer itself admits, that interest since the
peace should be paid;

Nor is the maxim laid down in the Answer, (pa. 19, 20) "that in an action of
debt interest is recoverable for the damage occasioned by detaining the debt,"
more correct than the axiom.

In truth, interest is recoverable both in Great Britain and the United States
in one or the other of all the following forms.

In actions of debt on bonds with penalty, judgment is rendered for the penalty
as the debt, to be released on payment of the principal and interest due, and
if there is a delay of payment beyond the time of judgment, the principal and
interest form a new debt upon which interest is calculated.

In actions of debt without penalty, interest is given for detention, and
judgment is rendered, (to preserve old forms,) for so much debt and so much
damages.

In actions on the case, both principal and interest are called damages, and
judgment rendered for one sum including both; and

Interest is recoverable in an action of debt, by itself, and in an action of
assumpsit by itself, where the principle is not due.

But it is totally immaterial to the Claimants, in what form of action, or by
what name interest is recoverable, or how judgment rolls are made up in
different actions; to them it is sufficient, that interest is money, and that
it is due. Instead therefore of hunting through obsolete cases for what was the
strict meaning of a word, not to be found in the 4th. article of the treaty, to
wit, " interest," the Claimants beg leave to examine into the meaning of a very
important word in that article, debts.

In common parlance all debts must, and do mean, every sum of money a man owes,
whether principal or interest, whether by sealed specialty, bill, note,
book-debt, or promise express or implied; whether recoverable by action of
debt, covenant, assumpit, or even case for a quantum meruit; or against a
common carrier for the value of goods lost. If a note bearing interest is
barred by an act of limitation, a promise to pay the debt will revive the
remedy as to principal and interest. So, directions in a will to pay all the
testator's just debts, has been held to revive the remedy for both principal
and interest of debts which had been barred by length of time. It is in this
common acceptance that the word was used in the treaty. In many instances,
however, of this particular claim, if the strict legal meaning of the word debt
is adhered to, then the award, even deducting interest during the war, will far
exceed the present demand. On failure of payment agreeably to the condition,
the penalty became the debt in every case of specialties with penalty; -- The
penalty was the debt at the treaty of peace -- The penalty is the sum for which
an action must be brought, and for which the Court are obliged to render
judgment; and (bound down to certain forms of proceeding) nominal damages must
be given on that penalty, and if from length of time, the principal and
interest exceed the penalty, the overplus interest is recoverable beyond the
penalty. Formerly, Courts of Equity only could relieve against the penalty;
modern statutes have authorized Common Law Courts to relieve; but how? They
render judgment for the penalty -- to be released on payment of principal and
interest. Courts rendering judgments on other grounds are assuming Chancery
powers not delegated to them.

It is to be wished, that an accurate report of the case of Jones v Hylton, had
been printed, as well as M'Call v Turner. In that cause Chief Justice Jay
presided, and delivered in the most express and pointed terms, the opinion of
the Court, that full interest should be recovered. The jury were sent out more
than once, but persisted in the deduction. In the case of Hamilton v Eaton, the
jury of enquiry found a special verdict, by which the question of war interest
was left to the Court, and decided in favor of the plaintiff.

One circumstance here requires remark. Whenever a Claimant grounds his Claim
upon an impediment, created by the judgment of the highest State Court, the
necessity of an appeal to the dernier resort is insisted upon. Here, however,
the case of M'Call v Turner is relied upon, in opposition to the decided
opinion of the Judges who compose that Superior Court. It belongs not
exclusively to the Courts of either Country to interpret treaties. If they
differ, no inference but what arises from the force, the reason of their
arguments, can be drawn. Where the supreme judicial authority of both agree in
opinion, that opinion is of the greatest weight.

It has been endeavored in the Answer, (pa. 14.) to draw an inference from an
extract of a letter from the American Commissioners to Mr. Hartly, dated Passy,
July 17th. 1783, in support of the position, that war interest should not be
allowed. The Claimant makes no exception to it, but he believes, that if the
present was a discussion before the highest Court of Law of Equity, either in
Great Britain or the United States, the Judges would not listen to such an
argument. The answer would be -- We are bound by our oaths to judge upon the
words of the instrument, as it is before us -- Our consciences are not to be
guided by the correspondence of the Ministers on either side -- If the
Commissioners on both sides were present we could not examine them -- Who ever
heard of legislators being called upon to explain the meaning they affixed to
words? It Is theirs to legislate, to us belongs the interpretation of their
acts. As the letter or extract is before the Board it will be observed upon,
and one undeniable position being ceded, it is thought a conclusion,
diametrically opposite to that of the Attorney General, will be fairly drawn.

The provisional articles which were to form the basis of the definitive treaty
of peace were signed the 30th of November, 1782. They laid the foundation of
peace and reconciliation -- They were to be inserted in and constitute the
treaty of peace. Whatever therefore was meant by the 4th provisional article,
must be the meaning of the 4th article of the definitive treaty. This is the
position not to be denied. These articles were sent over to Congress: They knew
the meaning of the word debt, and that it included interest and principal:
Satisfactory as the articles must have been, still Congress wished for
something more. From the circumstances of the country at the close of the war,
they thought it reasonable that time should be given for payment, and a
deduction of interest agreed to, and instructed their Ministers accordingly.

For what purpose then was the letter of July 17th, 1783, written? To obtain an
amendment of the article. In what points? In order that instalments might be
settled, and a deduction of interest agreed to. Was this amendment obtained?
No. What is the consequence? That instalment laws and deductions of interest
were a violation of the treaty. To recur to the argument on this point. --
"After this, if war interest was meant to be claimed on the part of Great
Britain, some unequivocal terms should have been used, comprehending it; and
the not using such terms, is an acquiescence in the opinion entertained by
Congress, which had been communicated by the American negociators of the
treaty." Let this inference be contrasted by maxims, and it will at once fall
to the ground. If he who can, and ought "to have explained himself clearly and
plainly, has not done it, it is the worse for him; he can not be allowed to
introduce subsequent restrictions, which he has not expressed." To this
authority from Vattel, the Claimants will add a maxim from a writer equally
respectable: "All contracts are to be taken according to the intent of the
parties, expressed by their own words, and if there be any doubt in the sense
of the words, such interpretation must be made, as is most strong against the
grantor or obligor, that he may not by obscure wording of the contract, find
means to evade or elude it."

The Claimants believe the 4th article was, as its terms express it to be "
reciprocal." If the contrary is the case, as contended for, the United States
are the grantors, the obligors, and for the most valuable of all
considerations: Their country was discovered by Britons, peopled by Britons,
and during its infancy and weakness, had been guarded and protected by the
blood and treasure of Britain. It is true, that as the Colonies matured in
strength and vigor, they were in a fair way of repaying, by an almost
exclusive commerce, even if they had not actually repaid, the debt of
protection. But if at the close of a civil war, they demanded and obtained the
acknowledgment of their Independence, and the cession of an immense territory
unoccupied by citizens of the United States, granted by the Aborigines to the
Crown, and in an extensive line joining other possessions of that Crown; and in
lieu of this acknowledgment and cession, they covenanted, that all debts
contracted in a time of mutual confidence, should be paid, the United States
are grantors and obligors for a valuable consideration, and can not by any
subsequent restriction of the meaning of any word in their contract, lessen the
force of their obligation.

There are stronger objections to any argument being drawn against the
Claimants from Lord Carmarthen's conversation, than from the Commissioners
correspondence. Courts of law will not admit parole testimony to contradict a
deed; and surely conversation is not to contradict a treaty. But what is the
purport of it? Two years after the negociators of the treaty had fruitlessly
endeavored to have the fourth article amended, so as to admit of instalments
and a deduction of interest, the same subject is broached, but the expressions
are widely different, and in both cases correct.

While the negotiation was yet open, and there was a possibility of an
alteration being made, the language is, "Congress think it reasonable that the
interest which may have accrued during the war, shall not be payable. In June,
1786, Mr. Jay urges the policy of giving up the interest during the war,
thereby plainly allowing the right to demand it, although the United States may
have thought it impolitic and severe to exert that right. Mr. Jay's decisions
as Chief Justice of the United States, corroborate this construction. Lord
Carmarthen's ideas of treason, do not appear extremely correct; and the
Claimants, yielding in loyalty to none of their fellow subjects, would have
thought it no crime to have received their debts during the war; but his
Lordship's slight expressions concerning the interest, and his wishes that the
courts were open for recovering the principal, were a very mild reproof upon
the instalment and other laws infringing the treaty. As to interest being left
to after consideration, that has been the case. Instalment laws, deductions of
interest, treasury payments, and a variety of other impediments, have been the
subject of after negotiation and treaty.

The first clause only of the sixth article of that treaty, which speaks of
bona fide debts contracted before the peace, and losses and damages occasioned
by impediments and insolvencies, has been inserted in the Answer to the claim
of Cunningham and Company. If the article had rested at the end of the first
clause, it might with as much reason be urged, that no interest at all should
be allowed -- that when the whole debt was lost by insolvency, the original sum
due, should be the full compensation; and where a partial insolvency happened,
the only damage or loss was to be the difference of the sum recovered and the
original debt. Debts bona fide contracted before the peace, and bona fide debts
contracted before the peace, mean one and the same thing -- both include
interest, or neither does.

The general tenor of the interest argument sufficiently accounts for the
omission of, and total silence upon, a latter clause of the 6th article of the
treaty of amity, in the Answer to Cunningham's claim: As it contradicts
nothing, but supports every thing advanced in this Reply, the same reason for
silence does not apply. It will be observed upon.

The said Commissioners in examining the complaints and applications so
preferred to them -- (for what? For debts lost or impaired by legal impedime^
-- are empowered and required in pursuance of the true intent and meaning of
(...) article, to take into consideration all claims, whether of principal or
interest, and balances of principal and interest, to determine the same
respectively, according to the merits of the several cases, due regard being
had to the circumstances thereof, and as equity and justice shall appear to
them to require.

The construction on the 7th article of the treaty of peace formerly contended
for, has been abandoned, and the true construction of the 4th article, has been
solemnly settled by negotiation. All questions on the former being now at rest
for ever, it will here be only remarked, that however proper the subject was
for discussion between Mr. Jefferson and Mr. Hammond in 1792, there was no
necessity for any allusion to it, either in the decision of M'Call v Turner, or
in the Answer to the memorial of the Claimants. Not the most distant imputation
is meant to be made upon the integrity and virtue of the Judges who decided
that case; but the legality and propriety of the decision may be canvassed and
denied without a shadow of disrespect to them. The great Lord Hardwicke, after
full argument, and long consideration, decided an important cause; another
hearing was afterward had, and having taken a twelvemonth's time to consider,
he reversed his own decree, concluding with this observation: " These are the
reasons which induced me to alter my opinion, and I am not ashamed of doing it;
for I always thought it a much greater reproach to a Judge to continue in his
error than retract it." Many remarks might be made upon the decision in M'Call
v Turner, but they will (except one) be avoided. President Pendleton, after
declaring, that interest during the war ought to be deducted, says, " The
opinion of the Chief Justice of the United States in a case (Jones v Hylton)
before the Federal Court, was cited, in which he is stated to have delivered to
the jury a charge differing from the opinion I have just expressed, but I
cannot concur with him." In the Answer (pa. 38) the case of Jones v Hylton is
mentioned, and this remark is made: " To this judgment all the Inferior Courts
are bound in duty to conform, and it is believed actually do conform." Juries
are sworn to give verdicts according to their evidence; the opinion of the
Court is their evidence what the law of the land is; -- They disregard it.
Inferior Courts are bound in duty to conform to the judgment of Superior
Courts, but they cannot concur.

The observations in the Answer, (pa. 25 and seq.) do not require reply.
Damages done in war, and interest occurred during a war, are too widely
different to be compared together, or to have inferences drawn from the law of
nations respecting one, applied to the other; in the authorities cited, they
are opposed to each other. On a peace, damages done in war, whether to public
or private property, are to be buried in oblivion, these being the effects of
war; but debts retain their full force.

Here the Claimants rest the question of interest during the war, with only one
remark, That however disposed they might themselves have been to indulgence and
some allowances, if they could have obtained payment of their debts at the
peace, it is not reasonable to expect them now -- nor are they to be bound by
what others have done, " Quilibet potest renunciari jure pro se introducto."

THE Claimants respectfully trust and believe, that they have clearly
established the following points:

1. That in Virginia there existed legal impediments to the recovery of all
British debts contracted before the peace, from the time of the occlusion of
the Courts in 1774, until the establishment of the Federal Judiciary.

2. That the treaty of peace did not, of itself, by its own mere power, repeal
those impediments; and that the Legislature of Virginia, who alone had the
power, refused to repeal them.

3. That even if the plausible theory of the repealing power of the treaty was
as correct and sound, as it is unsound, or at most, doubtful; yet, as the
general opinion of the Legislature and people of Virginia, and the practice of
the Courts was the other way, no fault is imputable to the Claimants.

4. That there are impediments yet existing, which even the Federal Courts
cannot remove, as they are obliged to determine according to the laws of the
State: These arise from the lapse of time, which is against the Claimants,
although the Courts were shut to them, so that in every instance, where their
books are all their evidence, judgment must be given against them; in cases
where other evidence can be produced, the act of limitations is a bar, although
it would not have been a bar, could the Claimants have sued at the peace; and
in all cases, where bonds were taken in 1777, for debts due years before, they
are reduced by a scale, which the Claimants could not foresee, and which was
passed several years after taking the bonds. That as full compensation cannot
in the ordinary course of judicial proceedings be actually had for such losses,
the United States have agreed to make it. That the General Government is alone
answerable for any violation of treaties; and that if the State Governments
suffered legal impediments to remain, and in consequence, the claims of
creditors have been delayed, and the common law evidence to support such claims
lost by the delay, or statutes of limitation had run against them, the General
Government cannot avail itself of these circumstances; because this would be
first to violate a compact by delaying a claim till the evidence of it was
lost, and then to avail themselves of that act which they had created.

5. That proof of the actual insolvency of debtors at the peace, would, in
almost every instance, be impossible, and that it is not required of the
Claimants.

6. That where insolvency, omission, or any other cause, is alleged to have
equally operated to produce the loss, that is the defense of the United States
and must be supported by proof.

7. That the claimants are entitled to full interest on their demands, and that
they are not to wait the event of suits until years after the Commission shall
be broken up.

It remains now to be shown, how each particular class of demands annexed to
the memorial in this particular claim, comes within the true intent, spirit and
meaning of the treaty of amity, and on what grounds the Claimants demand
payment of the several sums set forth in the several lists. In the Answer on
behalf of the United States, (pa. 60.) a remark is made upon the list of debts,
which might have been spared; The Claimants are not hurt by it; Conscious of
their own integrity, they do not believe any imputation was intended to be cast
upon them; indeed the whole tenor of the Answer forbids them to entertain an
idea of the kind. It is said while such demands furnish a proof of the extreme
care with which the Claimants have been gleaning their books and papers, they
are liable to this objection, that the two nations never contemplated such to
be subjects to the awards of the Commissioners The Claimants have been gleaning
no books and papers -- It was the constant practice with the resident factors
of the mercantile houses in Scotland who had retail stores in Virginia, to make
out once in every year and transmit to their employers, correct lists of all
outstanding debts, divided into three classes, bad, doubtful, and good -- The
factors knew every individual in the neighborhood of the stores, and the
statements thus made could be relied upon. If they could ever have been
disposed to dishonesty, they would have added to the bad from the doubtful, and
to the doubtful from the good, because they had allowances for bad and doubtful
debts, bringing forward this list therefore, omitting only those which were bad
in 1775, and those who have paid since the peace, is acting in the fairest and
most candid manner. The lists also furnish full proof of the industry of the
factor in collecting, and the punctuality of the neighborhood in paying before
the war -- No old longstanding debts appear -- none barred by the act of
limitations; none which could not be proved agreeably to the book debt law --
But it is said the demands are too small to be subject to the award of the
Board -- that the maxim de minimis non curat lex, and the honor and dignity of
the nations dictate their exclusion. -- If this is so, the Claimants must be
the sufferers; for they cannot fabricate books for large debts, when only small
ones are due. -- But the answer itself affords the Claimants the best Reply,
"The principles of equity are the same whether the debt be one shilling or one
hundred pounds" -- And although, if burdensome and expensive proof of every
small claim could be required of the Claimants, they might think it beneath the
dignity of a great nation to insist upon the production of that proof, and if
insisted upon, might in many instances abandon, rather than pursue the demand,
they also think, that the burden of the proof is on the other side, and that
it is more consistent with the dignity of a nation to pay than contend for
trifles. -- As there is no power in the Board to listen and agree to
compromises, the Claimants must contend for principles.

LIST A. THIS List contains debts, the only evidence of which are the store
books of the company. None of these had been two years due at the time of the
occlusion of the Courts, and at no time since the peace, could any suits be
maintained for them in any Court of Virginia. Claimants who immediately after
the peace sent out, and at great expense have ever since kept Agents in this
country, exerting every industry to collect their debts, cannot be supposed
guilty of any wilful omission. In this list no complaint is made of the
insolvency of the debtor, but of the impediments occasioned by law, and the
decisions of Courts.

LIST B. This list contains debts due from persons believed solvent at the
peace, but who became totally insolvent during the existence of legal
impediments.

LIST C. Contains debts due from persons whose estates are yet reputed solvent
and from whom a recovery in part may be expected. The claim for these is filed
at present, both to avoid the lapse of the 18 months, and because they think,
agreeably to the treaty, that as full compensation cannot NOW be obtained from
the debtor, they are strictly entitled to an award on assigning their vouchers
to the United States. They were well disposed to be at the trouble of
prosecuting the debtors, and they were advised by their General Agent, in all
cases of debts evidenced by specialty, if the debtor would pay as much as he
could be compelled to pay, as the Law is now administered, to receive the
money. They were also advised in all cases of book accounts, where the debtor
refused making any new promise or acknowledgment of the debt, to accept the
principal if he would pay it; this they were told was aiding the United States.
But as they cannot compel a debtor ^o confess a judgment for their full demand,
as they cannot compel special verdicts, as it is contended that general
verdicts are conclusive as to the amount of their demand, and that a compromise
will exclude them from any claim, they are at a loss how to act until these
points are decided.

LIST D. Contains debts due from persons who were reputed solvent at the peace,
but who left the State during the existence of laws preventing the creditor
from prosecuting them.

LIST E. Is a statement of losses occasioned by deductions of interest, and the
difference of currency. Their accounts were kept in pounds, shillings, and
pence, and at present, a less number of dollars make one hundred pounds than at
the time the debts were contracted; this is an impediment to a recovery of the
full value, and creates a loss and damage in the debtor. The first question of
interest has been fully argued. All arguments that could apply to losses
occasioned by the depreciation law, will apply to difference of currency.
Instead of swelling this Replication with further observations, the Claimants
will content themselves with referring to Dr. Hutchinson's excellent treatise
on Moral Philosophy, Book II. chap. 12. s. 4.

The short time allotted for preparing and printing this Reply, and the
necessity of being punctual, will, it is hoped, be an apology for
incorrectness; the numerous deficiencies arising from the inability of their
General Agent, will undoubtedly be supplied by the candor, abilities, and
impartiality of the Board.

The Claimants it is admitted are British subjects. They will produce the best
proof the nature of the case will admit of, that their debts were bona fide
contracted before the peace, and that their debtors were citizens or
inhabitants of the United States.

The debts claimed are still due and owing; full compensation cannot now be
actually had, in the ordinary course of judicial proceedings; and the loss they
have sustained, without any manifest delay, negligence, or wilful omission on
their part, has been occasioned by lawful impediments, "For every such loss,
(to use the words of the Answer) full and adequate Compensation is promised by
the United States;" and God forbid, that a promise so just, and so honorable,
should not be fulfilled with exemplary fidelity.

WILLIAM MOORE SMITH, General Agent for Claimants.
Chesnut-street, Philadelphia, May 9 th, 1798.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE PART OF THE UNITED STATES, BY THEIR AGENT, TO THE REPLY OF
DANIEL DULANY.

UNDER THE SIXTH ARTICLE OF THE TREATY OF AMITY, COMMERCE AND NAVIGATION,
BETWEEN HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

To the Commissioners for carrying into effect the 6th Article of the Treaty of
Amity, Commerce and Navigation concluded between his Britannic Majesty and the
United States of America, on the 19th November, 1794.
OBSERVATIONS On the part of the UNITED STATES by their AGENT, to the reply of
DANIEL DULANY.
THE agent for the United States regrets that he finds himself under the
necessity of again troubling the board upon the subject of the claim of Daniel
Dulany. The reply contains some positions and observations not before urged,
which are of real importance and ought not to go unanswered. It contains
others, which, whether true or not in themselves, need not and therefore will
not be controverted.

The material facts in this case, according to the allegations of the claimant,
to be found in his original claim and subsequent reply, may be stated as
follows:

Ann Tasker, some years before the commencement of the revolution war, departed
this life, possessed of a very considerable estate, of which a principal part,
to the value of L42,000 sterling was in credits, evidenced by bonds and
otherwise. By her will she devised various pecuniary legacies of the value of
L28,000 sterling, appointed Daniel Dulany the elder, sole executor, and his son
Daniel Dulany the younger, residuary legatee. The debts were all contracted and
payable in the then colony, now state of Maryland, where Ann Tasker, as well as
the debtors and executor, resided. The executor undertook the trust, and died
in opulent circumstances in the year 1796. The residuary legatee was and always
has been a real British subject, and the debtors to Ann Tasker, as well as her
executor, became citizens of the state of Maryland when the separation of the
two countries took effect. During the war the debtors fully paid to the
executor, their debts in the lawful money of the state, which was depreciated
at the time of payment, in so much, that upon the sum of L12,559 1 8 sterling,
which was thus received, the loss was L10,344 8 7 sterling, the real value of
the money being L3655 11 5, according to the scale of depreciation afterward
established by law in that state. For this difference L10,344 8 7 sterling, the
residuary legatee now applies for payment from the United States, alleging it
ought to be awarded to him under the treaty of 1794, in as much as no recovery
can be had of it, either from the executor, or from the original debtors, who
have received acquittances in full from the executor. An act of the state of
Maryland was in full force at the time of payment, making the money a legal
tender. The necessary proofs for establishing this statement to the
satisfaction of the board, the agent for the United States insists should be
produced by the claimant. If these proofs shall be produced he then contends
the case is not relievable under the treaty of 1794.

In the answer to the claim of William Cunningham and Company, the agent for
the United States discussed a variety of propositions, some of which concern
the present claim; such as that the jurisdiction of the arbitrators was
limited, and that the claimant is bound to prove every matter essential to his
case to bring it within the relief of the treaty. He also endeavored to lay
down the true interpretation of the 4th article of the treaty of peace, and the
6th article of the treaty of amity, to explain their connection with each
other, and to prove that the latter was confined to compensation in such cases
only where losses had happened by reason of the operation of legal impediments
contrary to the former. Upon these several heads as well as relative to
interest during the war, he begs leave to refer the board to the arguments
which have been there used. The case which has been stated presents for
consideration these positions;

1st. That the claimant was always, and is now a real British subject.

2dly. That he was the residuary legatee of Ann Tasker, and for the actual
residuum, which existed in out-standing debts was a creditor until the debts
were paid.

3dly. That the residuum was L14,000 sterling.

4th. That the debts were contracted in Maryland, where, when a colony, a
legislative power over its internal affairs was exercised, and where the laws
regulated the mode of fulfilling and discharging contracts there made as in an
independent state.

5th. That Ann Tasker, the creditor, as well as her executor, and all the
debtors were inhabitants of Maryland when the debts were contracted, and so
continued always.

6th. That the debts were fully paid by the debtors to the authorized agent of
the creditor, who accepted the money in payment, gave acquitances, and
delivered up the bonds.

7th. That the acceptance of the money might have been refused, and if it had
been the legal effect of the refusal would have been a legal question.

8th. That the executor, unless he committed a breach of trust in receiving the
payment, cannot be charged with the loss by depreciation, nor the debtors who
have fully and legally discharged their debts, so that this loss must remain
with the claimant unless the United States under the treaties of peace and of
amity shall be made responsible.

9th. That the difference between the sterling value of the money in which the
debt was contracted, and the sterling value of the money in which it was paid,
forms the sum which is claimed from the United States.

The agent for the United States contends that such a claim cannot be
maintained before the board, who have no authority to award payment by the
United States in a case so circumstanced, and therefore any such award will be
void. The principle on which the defense of the United States rests, against a
claim of this description is, that whenever a debt is completely satisfied
according to the laws of the country where the debt was contracted, and to be
paid, by the payment of the debtor to the creditor, or his authorized agent
which has been accepted, it is a final discharge. This, as a general principle,
cannot be denied. In the case reported by Brown 376, it is expressly affirmed
by the Lord Chancellor that if a transaction is legally satisfied in the
country where it arose nothing is left for equity to do. This adjudication
related to a contract made before the war in South Carolina, evidenced by bond,
and afterward satisfied there by a payment in paper money at the legal nominal
value in that state during the war. Whether the creditor was or was not a real
British subject does not appear, and though he were, the principal of lexloci,
as to contracts, has the same operation. If a British subject will go into
Russia, and there make a contract with a Russian, and the contract is satisfied
according to the laws of Russia, the satisfaction is final and conclusive
according to the jurisprudence of England. Before the revolution, if any
Englishman or Scotsman should have gone from London or Edinburg into the colony
of Maryland, and there given a credit, or contracted a debt, a satisfaction
there according to the local laws of the colony, would have been deemed a
complete satisfaction in every court at Westminster. Under the colonial system
as well as since the independence of Maryland, the legislature could make a
paper money current and a tender in payment, of debts contracted within its
limits. In many colonies before the war, such as Pennsylvania, Virginia, New
Jersey, Massachusetts, etc. etc. there was a paper currency. The 4th, 5th, 6th,
7th and 8th particulars above recited, deserve to be well considered, as they
contain the grounds of the defense in this case; and the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 9th
are submitted, with such proofs as may be offered concerning them.

The 4th article of the treaty of peace is the basis of the 6th article of the
treaty of Amity. The former never meant to annul or set aside, in whole or in
part, any complete payments which had legally been made to, and excepted by the
creditor.

A manifest difference exists between payments to a state and payments to a
creditor. If the former assumed authority to receive payment it also abrogated
what was so done by the provision in the treaty. In all adjudications
respecting confiscations or payments into the state treasuries, it was taken as
a foundation, that the creditor had never accepted the payment, and was not
bound by it. But if a creditor is not bound by his own act in accepting payment
according to the laws of the place, where the contract was made, and where it
was to be fulfilled, what is there can bind him? It was by the acts of debtor
and creditor that the debt was originally contracted, and it has since been
paid by the one and accepted by the other; the contracts are equally valid,
that which incurred the debt and that which discharged it. It is not therefore
to be supposed that the 4th article of the treaty of 1783 was intended to set
aside payments accepted by the creditors themselves, under an idea that such
payments were legal impediments. The impediment arising from the receipt of the
creditor is an impediment of fact, an impediment which could not have been
without his concurrence. Can it be reasonably supposed that this article was
intended to open and unsettle the numberless liquidations and payments to which
the parties, debtor and creditor had agreed? By the 6th article of the treaty
of 1794 the United States can be liable in no case whatever, unless the loss
has arisen from some legal impediments which have prevented a due recovery of
the debts in pursuance of the treaty of peace, and losses of this special
description only are referred to arbitration. This is fully illustrated in the
case of Cunningham and Company, to which the agent of the United States prays
leave to refer.

If this view of the two treaties be correct, and if payment to, and acceptance
by a creditor according to law, be not a legal impediment intended to be
removed by the 4th article of the treaty of peace, it follows that in cases
where payments in paper money have been accepted by creditors, the losses, if
any, are not reparable under either treaty, but must lie as they have fallen.

According to this doctrine, if in the present case, the bonds had been
assigned to the claimant by the executor, and if the claimant had accepted
payment in paper money he would not be relievable under the treaty of 1794.

There is no difference between the acceptance of the creditor himself and the
acceptance of an authorized agent. The executor received full authority by the
will of the testatrix, who died before the war, to receive payment of these
debts, and he alone was legally authorized to receive payment. -- When
received, the executor held the money paid to him in the character of trustee
for the legatees. If in the hands of the trustee, the money depreciated without
his fault, the loss will fall on the cestuique trust for which he has no
remedy, and which properly may be termed a misfortune.

But if the executor has committed a breach of trust either in accepting
payment as the claimant, in his reply, seems to intimate, by declaring him
particeps criminis, or by any other act, then the executor was responsible for
it, and his representatives may now be made to repair the wrong in the ordinary
course of judicial proceedings in Maryland, for let it be recollected that the
claimant represents him as having died fully sufficient and solvent to make
good the loss here claimed from the United States.

There is a manifest and essential difference between the confiscation of a
debt belonging to an enemy by a sovereign, and the payment of a debt by a
debtor to an enemy creditor, which he accepts. The hazard that is run of losing
the debt entirely, by the laws of war, as it may be taken away during the war
by confiscation, and may not be restored by the terms of the peace, may induce
the creditor to accept specific commodities at an over-rated value, or a
depreciated paper currency in payment. If under such circumstances, the
creditor or his agent accepts in full payment a thing not one half the value of
the debt, it is his own contract that ought to bind him in reason, and
therefore in equity also.

Confiscation is a lawful appropriation to public use of the property of an
individual who offends the state, or who is an open enemy. This property may be
restored by the sovereign without interfering with the rights of a third
person. In the case of debtor and creditor where payment has been accepted, a
restoration cannot be made without infringing directly or indirectly private
rights. Though then it be admitted that the 4th article of the treaty of peace
sets aside the confiscation of debts, it does not also follow that it sets
aside payments accepted by the creditor or his authorized agent, in a
depreciated current money.

The state of Maryland confiscated no part of the debts due to the testatrix,
Ann Tasker, but in the confiscation laws, the debts were expressly excepted.
This exception proves the sense of Maryland, that a debt paid in depreciated
money, was not considered as a confiscation. The claimant seems to contend that
there is no difference between payment in depreciated paper and a confiscation;
that the former is a confiscation in another form. The difference, it is hoped,
has been shown; the former cannot take place without the participation of the
creditor or his agent; the latter is effected independently of such
participation. In the former case, when the money is received according to law,
the debtor is discharged, and it does not concern him whether a profit or a
loss is made out of it by the creditor. The debt is paid according to the laws
of the country, where, by the original contract, it ought to have been paid;
and relative to payments so made, the laws bind an alien as firmly as a
citizen. In whatever light, therefore, the claimant may be considered, whether
as an alien or as a citizen of Maryland (and in one or other of these lights he
must be considered after the 4th day of July, 1776) the tender law made in 1777
by Maryland, must operate on the debts contracted and payable there. It is
hoped it will not seriously be disputed that Maryland was an independent state
in the year 1777, for even the Lord Chancellor and the master of the Rolls of
England have openly affirmed it. Wright and Nutt Henry Blackstone's reports
154. This was a case between a British subject and a citizen of South Carolina.
The same opinion is declared by Lord Loughborough, in the case of Folliott and
Ogden. Henry Blackstone's reports 135. A civil war breaks the bonds of society
and government, or at least suspends their force and effects. It produces in
the nation two independent parties, considering each other as enemies, and
acknowledging no common judge; therefore, of necessity, these two parties must
be considered at least for a time, as forming two separate bodies, two distinct
people. etc. Vattel, B. 3d. Sect. 293.

But when a nation becomes divided into two parties, absolutely independent,
and no longer acknowledging a common superior, the state is dissolved, and the
war betwixt the two parties, in every respect, is the same with that of a
public war between two different nations. Vattel B. 3. Sect. 295.

It has been said by the claimant, that upon the severance of an empire into
two parts, if one subject adhere to one part, and another to the other, neither
part can annul the contract between the two individuals. It is however
asserted, that each part having become a sovereign independent state, has
complete power, if a war subsists, to appropriate the contract to its self, by
the rights of war, and to make laws that reach all contracts made and to be
fulfilled within its limits, as well those between its own subjects as aliens.

The claimant need not have taken any trouble to assert that if one empire is
subdivided and forms two, the debts contracted, prior to that event, still are
to be satisfied. This is fully answered by the fact of the case, for the debts
have been satisfied according to the laws of the country where they were to be
paid, and this satisfaction is valid every where. Nor though it be admitted
that such debts could not be confiscated or extinguished by a legislative act
of the state, does it follow that payments made and accepted in the money of
the country, declared a legal tender, shall not avail as complete satisfaction.

It is asserted by the claimant, that the state of Maryland was bound in good
faith, so to modify its laws, as to enable him to recover the difference here
claimed, and as that has not been done, and perhaps cannot constitutionally be
done, that he is now entitled to compensation under the 6th article of the
treaty of amity. To this it is answered that no such modification was
necessary, because the treaty of peace not only repealed all legal impediments
which had been created to the recovery of the full value in sterling money, of
debts theretofore contracted, but was always considered in that state as the
supreme law of the land, which no act of the state, either before or since the
peace, could contravene or invalidate. Therefore, this cannot be a sufficient
ground for demanding compensation from the United States under the treaty of
amity. If however, a payment accepted by the creditor, be a legal impediment
within this treaty, which is not admitted, but denied on the part of the United
States; and if it has been annulled, recourse should be had to the original
debtors, who are still solvent for the difference in value between the money
due and the money paid.

The agent for the United States acknowledges that he expressed himself
inaccurately when he said that the treaty of 1794 contemplated no remedy,
except what was given by the treaty of 1785; he meant to have said that the
treaty of 1794 contemplated no remedy except for a loss that had been
occasioned to the creditor in consequence of the operation of some legal
impediment, contravening the treaty of 1783, and without any fault or laches on
his part. Admitting that the treaty of peace shall be construed to annul the
confiscations of debts as being a kind of legal impediment meant to be removed;
if there is a real difference between debts confiscated and debts paid to the
creditors or their agents, duly authorized, which it is hoped has been
satisfactorily shown, any argument concerning the former is to be considered as
irrelative to the latter.

It is also asserted by the claimant, that however the state might pass laws to
bind its own citizens, it could not pass laws to bind a subject of Great
Britain. To these an answer has been given, and here it is repeated, that a
state, by the laws of nations as recognized by the English law, has a right to
pass laws that shall govern all contracts made and to be fulfilled within its
territory; and such laws bind all persons, as well the subjects or citizens as
foreigners or aliens. A law of this kind is compulsory on all, and foreigners
have no right to expect a different law concerning their contracts made and to
be fulfilled in the state, than the subjects enjoy in the like cases.

Against this proposition, nothing urged by the claimant will be found to
militate. But it will be obvious that it has been avoided, and that the
arguments as well as the authorities, on which the claimant has relied, are
beside, and do not meet the principle on which the defense of the United States
has been placed.

The claimants seem to rely on a decision in the circuit court of the United
States, which he has cited as applicable in his favor. The contract was made
in the state of Pennsylvania, for a sum of money to be paid in France, where
the parties intended payment to be made in specie and not in paper medium
called assignats. It was decided that the creditor was not bound to accept the
paper. This decision is legal and just, but in two points the facts of this
case differ from the case of the claimant. 1st. The contract was made in one
state, to be performed in another. 2d. The assignats were not accepted in
payment.

Suppose the assignats had been accepted in payment by the holders of the bill
in France, let it be asked whether the drawer would not have been forever, and
every where discharged. Undoubtedly he would.

The like doctrine is established in the other case cited by the claimant, Da
Costa, us. Cole Skinner 272, which is consequently entitled to the like answer.
There too, payment was not actually accepted in the lessened money of Portugal,
but payment was refused because the parties did not contemplate any change in
the value of the money, and the drawer and payee were both British subjects.

The question in this case was not on the validity of a payment accepted in
lessened money, but how the payments ought to have been made.

The claimant has also quoted the sentiments of Judge Sitgreaves, in the case
of Hamilton, us. Easton, in the circuit court of North Carolina, which need not
be questioned on the present occasion, and perhaps on no other. They seemed not
to furnish any opposition to the present defense.

It is thus the agent of the United States has endeavored to answer those
observations of the claimant which have appeared to him most material, and to
support the proposition that a loss arising from the payment, by a citizen, of
a debt due to a British subject, before the war, in a depreciated currency, the
lawful money of the state where the debt had been contracted, and was payable
when a colony, which payment the creditor or his agent, has accepted, is not a
loss that can be awarded to be paid by the United States, under the treaty of
1794, and with great deference his arguments are submitted to the consideration
of the commissioners.

JOHN READ, JUN. AGENT GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES.
AGENT GENERAL'S OFFICE, United States, April 17 th, A. D. 1798.
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE, PHILADELPHIA, MAY 7, 1798.
In the Case of Daniel Dulany.
FOR the purpose of having a subject of so much importance, as the general
question which occurs in this case, maturely considered, on full discussion and
argument,

Ordered, that the agent for the United States have leave, within eight days,
to lay before the Board such further argument as he may think proper, for
obviating the points suggested in the following questions.

1st. It has been stated on the part of the United States, See Answer, etc. in
Hanbury's case.
that the effect of the " concession" made by the treaty on their part was " to
revive" debts which were held to be satisfied; and in the case of payments into
the treasury, before the peace, it never has been disputed that the creditor is
entitled to a remedy under the treaty, although it was adjudged in the last
resort, and held to be a law, that by such payments into the treasury, pursuant
to an act of the state declaring the debt to be thereby extinguished, it was
accordingly so extinguished and satisfied at law. Is it not, therefore, clearly
understood by both parties, as a principle, that a discharge or extinction of
the debt at law before the treaty, is not of itself a bar to the remedy thereby
provided; but that it must also appear to have been such an extinction and
discharge as proceeded from the free concurrence and voluntary act of the
creditor, and not from the effect and operation of law; such operation of law,
in bar of all legal remedy, being on the contrary relied on as the main
foundation of a right to claim under the treaty?

2dly. By the "Tender law" of Maryland, passed in April, 1777, it is enacted
that the paper money in question shall pass current and be received in payment
and discharge of all manner of debts. Do the United States contend that any
individual living within the state of Maryland, whether British subject or
American citizen, was at liberty to disrega^ this law, and ought not to have
obeyed it? If not, is the loss arising from his obedience ascribable under the
treaties, to his own free concurrence and voluntary act, or solely to the act
of the law itself? Having it in view that the question here raised, refers, not
to an implied concurrence, necessarily connected with all obedience, by fiction
or maxim of law, but to that true meaning, purpose, and understanding of the
party, acting upon choice and fair alternative, which arbitrators in equity are
bound to require.

3dly. But supposing it to be argued on the part of a public government that an
individual was at at liberty, and ought to have disobeyed a precise and
positive law of the state in which he lived, would he as a creditor, or the
person for whose benefit he acted, have been in a better situation in
consequence of his disobedience? In obeying the law, he received something; by
refusing to obey it, he would have forfeited all -- for it is also thereby
enacted, that if the creditor refuse to receive the paper money tendered, as a
satisfaction, the whole debt or demand shall be forever extinguished, and if
any suit shall be commenced for the recovery of such debt or demand, after
tender and refusal as aforesaid, the defendant may plead payment, and give this
act and the special matter in evidence. -- And further it is thereby provided
that it shall, in that case, be lawful for the debtor to demand the bond or
contract; or a discharge of the debt and if the creditor shall refuse to
deliver up the same or give such discharge, it shall be lawful for such debtor
to sue him for damages, to the extent of the debt, with costs of suit. -- How
it is to be maintained that a debt was voluntarily given up when it could not
be saved? Or that a claim under the treaty is to be less admissible or just for
compensation on account of his having been deprived by the above law of only
part of his debt, than it would have been, if, in consequence of his
disobedience, he had been thereby deprived of the whole? Was the extinction
less complete, or remedy more attainable, under the law, in the latter case
than in the former?

4thly. To place the same subject in another point of view -- It has been
argued in this case, on the part of the United States, that by the 4th article
of the treaty of peace it was not intended to set aside payments accepted by
the creditors themselves under the idea that such payments are lawful
impediment. -- But ought it not rather to be considered and discussed how far
the effect given by law to those payments, being full value of the debt in
paper money, though but a small part of the full value in sterling money, as a
complete satisfaction for the debt, and a lawful bar or impediment to all
further recovery, shall be available not to the debtor (who is here out of the
question) but to the nation who made the law, and who, in opposition (as it is
argued) to their own stipulatton that creditors should meet with no lawful
impediments to the recovery of full value in sterling money of all bona fide
debts theretofore contracted, without any distinction or reserve whatever,
suffered that law to remain in existence and force as a perpetual bar or lawful
impediment to the recovery of what was "still owing" under the treaty, of the "
full value in sterling money" so secured?

7thly. May it not be urged, not as a necessary argument, but as confirming an
interpretation favorable to the claim of a British creditor, who received
paper money in obedience to the law, that such interpretation is manifestly
consonant with justice to both parties -- to the British creditor, in as much
as it saves him from the loss of the greater part of a just debt in consequence
of his compliance with a public law, binding upon him at the time; but from
which, being a British subject, he could derive no participation of benefit --
and to the Unite States, in as much as they are only thereby called upon to pay
for the loss sustained by an alien, in consequence of their own laws, for their
own benefit; and from which los^ they derived a benefit accordingly?

Extract from the Proceeding of the Board, G: EVANS, Sec'ry.

In the Case of Daniel Dulany.
THE agent for the United States, respectfully offers the following
observations, upon the several points suggested by the commissioner, in their
order of the 7th instant.

UPON THE FIRST POINT.
When the agent for the United States, in the course of his argument in
Hanbury's case, represented the effect of the treaty on debts that might have
been deemed to have been paid before the peace, he had in view those debts only
which had been paid into a state treasury. The Board will be pleased to
recollect that in Hanbury's case the debtor had made payment into the treasury
of Maryland, pursuant to a law of that state, and that it was only with respect
to the operation of the treaty on treasury payments that the agent had occasion
to make any observations; and he therefore trusts they will be applied to
treasury payments only as they were intended. With respect to payments accepted
by the creditors, whether in paper money, in lands, in houses, in public
securities, or in any other commodity, the validity of either of these, to
which both parties, the creditor and debtor had agreed was not imagined to be
questionable.

After the supreme court of the United States had decided in the case of
Hylton, that the payment of the debt into the treasury of Virginia, in
pursuance to the laws of that state, was not a bar to the action of the
plaintiff, because the fourth article of the treaty of peace had annulled such
a payment, and had placed the creditor and debtor in the same situation, as if
it never had been made; the agent for the United States would not presume to
controvert the operation of the treaty on such payments, though he well knows
that many learned and able jurists avow their dissent from that decision. This
has however established, that a treasury payment is by the operation of the
treaty of peace to be considered as no payment, to which adjudication not only
the courts, but the states of America have conformed.

In Virginia an act was lately passed, authorizing her treasurer to re-pay to
the debtor the value in specie, of the paper money he had paid into the
treasury, and the same has accordingly been repaid when demanded, so that
treasury payments are null and void to every intent and purpose. They form no
impediment either in law or equity, to the recovery of any debt, bona fide,
contracted before the late war, and due from a citizen of the United States to
a British subject. The debtor is liable in like manner, as if he had made no
such payment, and from him the creditor is bound to use all reasonable means to
obtain payment, before he can have under any circumstances whatever any just
ground to apply to the United States. The construction given by the supreme
court to the fourth article of the treaty of peace, was supposed most liberal,
and to extend it further seems inadmissable. If the treaty of peace had not
been construed to annull the treasury payments, the creditors would have lost
those sums by the laws of war, by confiscation; but the American courts have
been so liberal as to interpret the treaty to restore debts paid into the
public treasury. The principle upon which this interpretation rests has been
fully explained in the former argument in this case, where it has been
contended that there is an essential difference between a payment into a state
treasury, and the acceptance of payment by the creditor in any commodity,
whether paper money, lands, or public securities.

Upon this occasion the agent for the United States ought not to omit to
observe, that the treasury payments having been made without the privity or
consent of the creditors, might have been considered by them only as
extinguishing the legal remedy for a time, which was restored by the treaty, in
which cases the treaty might be construed to remove any impediments of that
description without interfering improperly with private transactions, or
without occasioning general inconvenience. But the agent for the United States
does not admit, that it was ever understood by him, or by the United States, as
a general principle, that the discharge or extinction of the debt at law before
the peace was a legal impediment, which the treaty of peace removed, and
consequently that every adjustment, and payment between the debtor and
creditor, before that period, was liable to be re-examined and unsettled. On
the contrary, the agent denies such a principle, and contends that the Board
has no power to make examination into any matter that has been settled by the
debtor and creditor, according to the laws of the land. The jurisdiction of the
commissioners is conceived to be confined to claims against the United States,
in cases where the debtor and creditor have not so settled, and which are
attended with all the other circumstances requisite to bring those cases within
the treaty of 1794. Upon this subject, and the true interpretation of the
treaties he prays leave to refer to the argument in the case of Cunningham and
Company.

ON THE SECOND POINT.
As a general rule, it is lawful for a creditor to refuse money tendered to
him, in payment of a debt, and the consequence of such refusal is a discharge
from interest and costs from the time of the tender, 3d Blac. Com. 303. Ld.
Raym. 254. The United States therefore do contend, that according to common
law, it was in the power of any individual creditor, if he pleased, and that it
is at this day, in his power to refuse a tender, whether made in paper or
specie, the lawful current money of the country; and at common law such refusal
is not a public offense. So too, when a statute declares a thing to be money,
and shall pass, and be received as such, if a creditoe refuses to take it under
particular circumstances, he is not chargeable as an offender, with disobeying
the law, for if this disobedience was a public offense if would be
punishableable as such. To refuse paper declared money by statute is no more a
public offense than to refuse metal declared money by statute. If therefore a
creditor accepts a tender, which he might refuse, and a loss accrues in
consequence thereof, it is to be imputed to his own act, and not solely to the
statute which made the money a tender, and it is contended, neither treaty had
in view any losses which arose in whole or in part from the conduct of the
creditor.

Though it be admitted that it was desirable on the part of the United States,
that the paper currency should have passed freely as specie from hand to hand,
yet many persons, from disaffection to the American cause, created
difficulties, made objections, and thereby occasioned a depreciation. These
causes of depreciation, or any other, did not proceed from the will of the
constituted authorities.

May it be permitted here to ask, whether on the part of his Britannic Majesty,
or of his subjects it is contended, that a British subject ought to have
received, or was obliged by duty to receive in payment, during the late war,
the paper currency emitted by any of the United States? Rather was it not an
offense, for which by the laws of Great Britain, he was punishable, as all
intercourse was prohibited by his King? And shall he now claim a merit for
receiving paper money which the laws of his country try required him to refuse?

As to the power of arbitrators in equity, it cannot be better decided than by
the maxims of equity which are established in the high courts of equity in
Great Britain and America.

ON THE THIRD POINT.
Supposing a British subject had refused a tender in paper currency, which he
might have done without committing a public offense, it is contended that he
would have been in a better situation with respect to his right to recover his
debt under the laws of the land and the treaty of peace, than he is after
accepting it. 1st. Let it be observed that there is scarcely an instance
between citizen and citizen, where the validity of a tender in paper money has
been litigated that it has been maintained. There has been some defect, either
in the quality of the bills or in the time, or in the place, or in the person,
or in some other material thing, or as the tender might relate to the contract,
for which the tender has been adjudged insufficient. The doctrine of tenders
was little understood here, 'till after the peace, when a number of lawsuits
brought the subject before the American courts. Hence it may be inferred, that
on legal grounds, the tender would have been unavailing, 2dly. The effect of a
tender and refusal is always a matter of legal construction. It is not a
payment of the debt at common law under any circumstances. It is not a payment
of the debt even under the statute of Maryland, which has been quoted; but the
utmost operation of that statute would have been to extinguish the remedy of
the creditor, but not his right, or even supposing the right to be extinguished
'till the treaty of peace was made, this treaty would have set aside the effect
of the tender and refusal, would have revived the right of the creditor upon
the like principles, that debts paid into the treasury may be recovered from
the debtors by the creditors, which having been the solemn judgment of the
court of the United States, is the law of the land.

Thus then it is not admitted that the creditor might not have saved his debt,
so as to recover the full value thereof in sterling money from his debtor. On
the contrary it is contended, that by refusing the tender, this would have been
in his power under the laws of the country and the treaty of peace. If by the
act of the creditor, the debtor has been discharged, the United States are not,
according to any stipulations with Great Britain to be held liable. If the
creditor had refused the tender, he might have recovered the whole from the
debtor, the principal as well as the interest, to which justice would have
entitled him. The inadmissibility then of this claim against the United States,
rests not on the idea that the creditor could have had a better title to
recover from the United States the whole, if he had refused the tender, than a
part since he accepted the tender, but it rests on the principle that the
creditor has done an act which has forever discharged the debtor, which act
might not have been done, and if omitted, the debtor would have been
responsible for the debt.

UPON THE FOURTH POINT.
It has been insisted by the agent for the United States, that by the fourth
article of the treaty of peace, it was not intended to set aside payments
accepted by the creditors themselves, under the idea that such payments are
lawful impediments. To prove the truth of this proportion nothing new will be
attempted here, but the agent prays leave to refer to his former arguments in
this case. If true, there seems no room for controversy, for unless the treaty
of peace did contemplate payments accepted by the creditors, as legal
impediments, which it intended to annul; there is no contravention of the
treaty in maintaining their validity; consequently from this cause, no
complaint can exist against the United States, for which they are to make
compensation.

But to consider this point in the view presented by the board, it may be
contended that the debtor is not discharged, merely by the effect given by
statute to payments, where the creditor has accepted in full satisfaction, a
commodity of less than the full value, but the discharge arises from the acts
of the creditor, who has accepted satisfaction, and given an acquittance. If a
creditor received public securities of the United States, or land, or any
specific commodity, in satisfaction of his debt, and gave an acquittance in
full, the debtor is discharged, though there is no statute giving such an
effect to a transaction of that kind. Here it may be remarked, that British
creditors have received in satisfaction of their debts, many things which have
suddenly appreciated in their hands: are these willing to unsettle their
liquidations, and to restore to the debtors the immense gains which have
accrued from this source? Would it be reasonble to demand it? Or ought such
gains to be paid to the United States?

With this view of the subject then, it is urged, that the United States do not
act in opposition to the treaty of peace, when they maintain the efficacy of
payments in paper money, accepted by the creditors; nor are they chargeable
with a breach of that treaty by suffering such payments to remain a perpetual
bar to any demands of British creditors in full satisfaction of which they have
been accepted.

UPON THE FIFTH POINT.
There doubtless, are cases in which the creditors who accepted depreciated
paper money in payment, may have sustained losses, but these losses arising
wholly or in part from their own act, are not entitled to retribution from any
quarter; if from any it should be from the debtors. A claim of this kind only
concerns the debtor and creditor; a nation not being answerable for the losses
which accrue to individuals from their dealings with one another, either by the
principles of reason and justice, or by the usage of nations. Therefore, any
argument arising from the justice of making a nation responsible for any losses
of this kind, it is hoped will not weigh with the Board.

The agent for the United States has endeavored to confine his observations
strictly to the matters suggested in the order of the Board, and he trusts that
they will obviate and remove all doubts that a claim for compensation from the
United States, on account of payments accepted by British creditors in
depreciated money, is not by the treaty of amity, submitted to the jurisdiction
of the commissioners.

JOHN READ, JUN. AGENT GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES.
AGENT GENERAL'S OFFICE, United States, May 14 th, A. D. 1798.

