On the Alien Act.

A CHARGE TO THE Grand Juries of the County Courts of the FIFTH CIRCUIT OF THE
State of Pennsylvania, At December Sessions, 1798; By ALEX. ADDISON, PRESIDENT
OF THOSE COURTS.

Published at the request of the GRAND JURIES OF THE Counties of Allegheny,
Westmoreland, Somerset and Green.

WASHINGTON: PRINTED BY JOHN COLERICK. 1799.

A CHARGE, etc.
IN circumstances of extraordinary danger or alarm, extraordinary measures must
be adopted: for ordinary means are incompetent for extraordinary occasions.
Though I may not kill a man, while I am in no danger from him; yet if he be in
the act to kill me, or I find him breaking into my house, in the nightime to
rob me, I may put him to death. This results from the general law of
self-defence. The sacred right of property will not forbid us, when a house is
on fire, to pull down the adjacent buildings, to save the rest of the town. --
Nor will the right of personal liberty restrain the magistrate from committing
to gaol a man who has actually done no mischief, if another is justly afraid of
mischief being done by him. All these are extraordinary cases, to which the
ordinary rules of property, or of personal liberty and safety, are not
applicable: and the violation of those rules, in such cases, is, in true
construction, no violation of them: for they were never meant to be applied to
such cases, but only to the ordinary and peaceful state of society, and must
yield to the great law of self-preservation and common welfare.

Nations, like individuals, are also bound, by the law of self-preservation, in
times of danger, to adopt measures, which would be altogether unjustifiable in
ordinary times. They may destroy an hostile army. If a hostile army be suffered
to march through a neutral country, to attack another nation, this nation may
also enter that country, and oppose its enemy. If fields, gardens, houses, or
towns, shelter its enemy from the full force of attack, they may be destroyed.
If it be necessary to weaken the enemy by want, the corn, cattle, and all kinds
of provision may be carried off, and the frontier made, as it were, a d^^art.
Such things are, in times of danger, justifiable by the law of self-defence;
though, in ordinary times they would be unlawful and inhuman. On the same
principles of self-defence, to prevent a dangerous communication of
intelligence, or any measure unfavourable to its safety, when a nation is, or
is likely to be, engaged in war, it may order any aliens, who may be suspected
of promoting or favoring the designs of its enemy, to depart out of its
territory. -- This may be always, and has been generally done. And, unless
where this right is regulated by treaty, this may be done at the discretion of
the government under which the aliens reside. For every government must be sole
judge of what is necessary to be done, for its own safety or advantage, within
its own territory Vattel. L. of N. Prel. sect. 17, 20. B. 2, sect. 94.
. And, even with respect to their own subjects, most governments have reserved
a right, without being required to show any cause, to commit to close custody
any subject suspected as dangerous to the peace or welfare of the community. In
England, this right is restrained by the writ of Habeas Corpus, which gives to
every subject imprisoned an opportunity of requiring the cause of his
commitment, and of obtaining, in all proper cases, his enlargement. When,
therefore, the King of Britain's ministers find it necessary, for political
reasons, to restrain the personal liberty of any subject, without showing any
cause for it, a law must be obtained from Parliament, suspending the privilege
of the writ of Habeas Corpus; and Parliament may, whenever it pleases, pass
such a law.

Conforming to the principles of liberty inherited from our ancestors, the
privilege of the writ of Habeas Corpus is established, as a principle, in the
government of this State and of the Union U. S. Corst. Art 1, sect. 8. Penn.
Constable. Art. 9, sect. 14.1 U. S. L. 101.2 St. L. 241.
. And, though Congress or the General Assembly may, respectively, like the
British Parliament, by law, suspend this privilege; yet they cannot, like the
British Parliament, pass such law whenever they please. For the Federal and
State Constitutions have declared, that "The privilege of the writ of Habeas
Corpus shall not be suspended unless when, in cases of rebellion or invasion,
the public safety may require it." So that, in this country, no citizen can be
deprived of his liberty, without an avowed and sufficient cause, unless, in
case of rebellion or invasion, the legislature think the public safety requires
it, and suspend the privilege of the writ of Habeas Corpus. But here the
Constitution leaves aliens, as in other countries, to the protection of the
general principles of the law of nations, or of the particular provisions of
treaties made between the United States, and the government whose subjects or
citizens the aliens severally are.

Congress, in its last session, found the United States in extraordinary
circumstances of peril, unequalled since their Independence was solemnly
acknowledged. France, having, without any respect to the principles of liberty,
the law of nations, or the rights of individuals, plundered the land to the
utmost reach of her grasp; extended the same unprincipled rapacity to the
ocean, and plundered indiscriminately friends and foes. Of all nations and
governments none had with more affection regarded the revolution of France,
none had more assiduously cultivated her friendship, none had more scrupulously
observed the rules of neutrality, or, consistently with those rules, partially
indulged the views of France; than the nation and government of the United
States. And if neutrality, justice, affection, and gratitude, could have
exempted any government and nation from injury from France, the nation and
government of the United States might justly have claimed this exemption. But
what weight has justice, with a government without principle, without religion,
and without an interest in the prosperity of the people over which it is
placed! If the French government had regarded only the interest of France, it
would have cultivated the affections of America. But the French government,
like the false mother indifferent to the life of the child, regarded not the
interest of the French nation, but the indulgence of its own passions, and the
triumph of its own pride, which, exalted by success, beyond the bounds of
moderation, sought to humble all authorities in universal prostration at its
feet. She commenced and prosecuted spoliations of our trade to an extent that
threatened its ruin: and the dismal effects are displayed in the bankruptcies
of our merchants, and the languishing state of our commerce and agriculture.
The American government patiently and peacefully sought redress by negotiation;
but the presumption and rapacity of France rose in proportion to the patience
and peace of America; and, with unexampled insolence, she repeatedly drove away
our ambassadors sent to claim only an exemption from injury, and apayment of
just debts; required us, by an ignominious tribute and bribe, to double the
damage we had suffered; and threatened us, if we refused this, with war and
ravage on our coasts, burning of our towns, and even dissolution as a nation.

What could have swelled the insolence of France to this pitch of extravagance?
Had we done her any injury? She can show none. Was it her great success, and
mighty power? We are at a distance to defy her power. How then dared she thus
to insult and injure us? She accounted us a divided people, split into
factions, among which she had zealous partisans. In this state, she knew, we
must be an easy prey: in this state, she knew, we could make no resistance.
And, while we remained in this state, she might safely persist in her proud
oppression: and she d^^ so. For men, without regard to religion and justice,
will do whatever they can do: and nothing but resistance and force will
restrain them from injuring others. France had long known and promoted
divisions and factions among us. And had sent spies into all parts of our
country, to procure information of our circumstances and opinions. -- These
traveled through America, under various pretexts, of curiosity, of philosophy,
or of avoiding tyranny or persecution at home. This Talleyrand, who demanded
the bribe and loan from our ambassadors, traveled through America as an
emigrant; and, after his return to France, was appointed minister of foreign
affairs. From its spies and other agents here, the French government received
constant intelligence of the sentiments of the citizens, and the measures of
the government of America; and was thus prepared to promote its own views, and
defeat ours.

If ever there was a time in which it was proper for any government, to order
aliens to depart out of its territory, it was proper for the American
government to do so at this time. In other countries, this would have been done
by a proclamation of the Executive. This was a new case under the American
Constitution, and proper for the interference of the legislature. -- Congress,
therefore, passed a law 25th June, 1798 -- 5 U.S.L. 143.
, the substance of which, in its own words, I shall here state, --

"It shall be lawful for the President of the United States, to order all such
aliens, as he shall judge dangerous to the peace and safety of the United
States, or shall have reasonable grounds to suspect, are concerned in any
treasonable or secret machinations against the government thereof, to depart
out of the territory of the United States, within such time, as shall be
expressed in such order. -- Which order shall be served on such alien, by
delivering him a copy thereof, or leaving the same at his usual abode, and be
returned to the office of the secretary of state, by the marshal or other
person to whom the same shall be directed."

But " if any alien so ordered to depart shall prove, to the satisfaction of
the President, by evidence to be taken before such persons as the President
shall direct, that no injury or danger to the United States will arise, from
suffering him to reside therein, the President may grant a license to such
alien to remain within the United States, for such time as he shall judge
proper, and at such place as he shall designate. -- And the President may also
require of such alien to enter into bond to the United States, in such penal
sum as he may direct, with one or more sufficient sureties, to the satisfaction
of the person authorized by the President to take the same, conditioned for the
good behavior of such alien during his residence in the United States, and for
not violating his license; which license the President may revoke whenever he
shall think proper.

" And if any alien, sc^rdered to depart, shall be found at large within the
United States, after the time limited in such order for his departure, and not
having a license from the President to reside therein; or having obtained such
license, shall not have conformed thereto; every such alien shall, on
conviction thereof, be imprisoned for a term not exceeding three years, and
shall never after be admitted to become a citizen of the United States.

This law further enacts, "That it shall be lawful for the President of the
United States, whenever be may deem it necessary for the public safety, to
order to be removed out of the territory thereof any alien who may be in prison
in pursuance of this act; and to cause to be arrested, and sent out of the
United States, such of those aliens as shall have been ordered to depart
therefrom, and shall not have obtained a license as aforesaid, in all cases,
where, in the opinion of the President, the public safety requires a speedy
removal. And if any alien, so removed, or sent out of the United States by the
President shall voluntarily return thereto, unless by permission of the
President of the United States; such alien, on conviction thereof, shall be
imprisoned as long as, in the opinion of the President, the public safety may
require."

But it is provided, "That it shall be lawful for any alien, who may be ordered
to be removed from the United States, by vritue of this act, to take with him
such part of his goods, chattles, or other property, as he may find convenient;
and all property left in the United States by any alien who may be removed, as
aforesaid, shall be subject to his disposal."

One would have thought, that a law so reasonable in itself, so conformable to
the law of nations, and the practice of all governments, and, while it is
altogether consistent with the Constitution, so necessary to the safety and
defense of the United States; if it did not obtain all praise, would, at loast,
have escaped all censure. Yet this law was not only vehemently opposed in
Congress; but, even since it was passed, has been reprobated by ignorant, or
wicked and seditious men; and, for their vile and selfish purposes has been
held up to detestation, as unconstitutional and tyrannical. In many parts of
the Union, it has been used as a pretext and instrument, to inflame the
passions of the people, disturb the peace of the country, destroy respect for
the laws, and relax the authority of the government; and, in one State, to
produce such a commotion, as threatens an insurrection, if not a separation
from the Union.

It is proper for men in all stations, and peculiarly in my station, to
endeavor to counteract such mischievous passions, and miserable consequences.
With this view, I shall examine the objections, which I have observed to have
been offered against this law solemnly established by the authority of the
United States.

1. It is objected to this law, that it is contrary to the express words of the
Constitution.

We perhaps ought not to wonder, that this objection is made. Added to the want
of sense and knowledge in some or the objectors, of modesty in most of them,
and the general disposition, from prejudices excited and nourished by slander,
to believe every act of administration wrong; the habit of opposition prepares
their minds to make and receive it. For a habit of opposing every thing makes
dreadful havoc, not only on the feelings and conscience, but on the
understanding itself.

This objection is made on two grounds.

The first is, that the Constitution declares, that "the migration or
importation of such persons, as any of the States now existing, shall think
proper to admit, shall no^ be prohibited by Congress, prior to the year one
thousand eight hundred and eight; but a tax or duty may be imposed on such
importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person Art. 1. sect. 9.
." From this it is inferred, that, as Congress cannot yet prohibit such
migration or importation, they cannon remove the persons, who have migrated or
been imported for this, it is said, would be, in effect, prohibiting the
migration or importation.

It is well known, that the prohibition in view, respected only slaves. This
was universally understood, at the time of the publication of the Constitution,
during its discussion, and ever since. All the members of the Convention know
this. The Speaker of the House of Representatives of Congress, who was a member
of the Convention, did, in the argument on this bill, in a committee of that
house, expressly declare this to have been the avowed sense of the Convention,
on this clause of the Constitution; and no man, of any knowledge of the
subject, has ever seriously entertained a doubt of this. The Convention was so
averse to the traffic in human beings, that they would not directly name
slaves, slavery, or the slave trade. The southern members thought their States
not yet prepared for the prohibition of this traffic. The other members agreed
to give those States twenty years to think of it. In that space, they would
probably abolish the slave trade themselves; or, after that, Congress might do
it. In the mean time, the Convention would not give slavery the sanction of
being expressly named. Instead of the word slaves, the word persons was used;
and, to correspond with this, the word migration, and explanatory of this, the
word importation, as more properly applicable to slaves, or persons considered,
not as aliens, but as property. Or considering this prohibition as respecting
only slaves, we find another reason for this construction, in the power
reserved to Congress "to impose a tax on such importation;" while no such power
is expressed as to migration; and thus for construing those words as meaning a
different manner of introducing slaves. Congress is restrained from prohibiting
their importation by sea, or their migration by land, into any of the States;
but may say a duty on their first. importation, not on any subsequent
migration; the duty in that case being presumed to have been paid before. --
While the prejudices or necessities of the State then existing were thus
indulged; the Convention confined this indulgence to them, and did not restrain
Congress from prohibiting the migration or importation of slaves into any State
thereafter to be established; but left them to the discretion of Congress.
Whatever reason may be assigned for it, this is certain, that it was the plain
meaning of (...) Convention, and has been the uniform construction of the
Constitution, that the restraint laid on Congress, by this clause of the
Constitution, applies only to the prohibition of introducing slaves.

But supposing this not the true construction of this clause of the
Constitution, and supposing that Congress is thereby restrained from
prohibiting the migration or importation of any aliens whatever; it does not
follow, as a just consequence from this, that Congress can make no law to
remove such aliens. A rule will not be extended beyond the strict words, if
this extension will promote mischief; especially if it endanger the safety of
the people, which is the supreme law. I would ask whether this restraint,
supposing it to respect aliens generally, must not be limited to times of
peace; and whether it must govern in extraordinary times of danger, or must
then give way to the great rule of self-defence and general welfare? Let us try
this construction by the rules of reasoning. It is a rule, that, if an argument
prove too much, it is unsound. -- Suppose a body of Frenchmen to arrive at
Boston, with arms and ammunition, which men may carry for their own defense,
and tell the people there, that they are persons who have migrated, to settle
peaceably in the country. Another body of such emigrants, with the same tale in
their mouths, arrives at New York; another, at Philadelphia; another, at
Norfolk; and another, at Charleston. Must the State Legislatures of
Massachusetts, of New York, o^ Pennsylvania, of Virginia, and of S. Carolina,
be convened, to order those several bodies of emigrants to depart out of their
several States? Well; the Boston emigrant march peaceably into Connecticut; and
the South Carolina emigrants into North Carolina; and so of the others till
they all meet peaceably in Maryland; and then declare that they are come, by
order of the Directory, to settle there, and to prevail on the President and
Congress, to give the tribute demanded by the Directory. All this they may do;
and yet, if Congress had proceeded to make a law to prevent their landing, or
effect their rem^^^l, we should be told, that Congress cannot prohibit the
migration o^ importation of aliens! This seems a strange absurdity. And yet the
absurdity of this case is only altered, it is no removed, by substituting the
case on which Congress has acted. Spies are, at all times dangerous; they are
generally not less, and they are often more dangerous, than open enemies; and
those who corrupt our opinions, and pervert our duties, are the most dangerous
of all enemies. A^ power to make such law is clearly necessary, for the general
defense and welfare of the United States; the care of which is properly
deposited with the Government of the United States.

For "the People of the United States, in order to form (...) more perfect
union, insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote the
general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to themselves and their
posterity U. S. Constable. Pream.
"; established a Constitution, by which objects of general concern to the
nation are properly submitted to the management of the General Government. And
this Government is expressly bound to "guaranty to every state in the union a
republican form of government, and to protect each of them against invasion and
domestic violence Constable. Art. 4. sect. 4.
"; and has "power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for
carrying into execution all the powers vested by the Constitution in the
government of the United States, or any department of office thereof Constable.
Art. 1. sec. 8.
" The restraint or expulsion of aliens, in times of war or danger, has, by
almost all nations, been considered as a necessary measure of protection and
self-defence: and, from the nature of the case, the law of nations, and the
general constitutional authority of the government, I cannot permit myself to
doubt, that a power to restrain or expel them necessarily exists in the
government of the United States, as in every government charged with the
general welfare the common defense, and protection against invasion and
domestic violence. If this be a necessary and proper mean of accomplishing any
object, with which ^he government of the United States is charged; the power of
exerting it is clearly vested in that government. The difficulty of obtaining
the universal consent of the individual States to any measure, however
salutary, was sufficiently experienced, as the great evil to be remedied by the
Constitution. And a construction of this Constitution, were it admissible, will
not be favored, which would leave the general defense of the nation at hazard,
on the caprice of a single State.

But this law is said to be contrary to the express words of the Constitution,
because the Constitution declares, that "the trial of all crimes shall be by
jury." Constable. Art. 3, sect. 2.


There is one general observation, which applies to all the objections to this
law drawn from the Constitution. It is this; that aliens are not pa^ties to
this instrument, and, therefore, can claim no benefit under it, unless they are
expressly named. The Constitution is made by "the people of the United States."
Constable. Preamble.
And for whose benefit? For the benefit of the people of the United States
surely. It is the charter of the privileges of the citizens of the United
States, to which none but citizens of the United States can thereby claim
title. The people of the United States therein limit the power of their
government over themselves; but lay no restraint on the power of their
government over aliens. This was not in their view at all. Until aliens become
citizens, they are in the power of the ordinary legislature. The legislature
may receive them, and admit them to become citizens; or may reject them, or
remove them, before they become citizens. When they come here, they know, that
they come at the discretion of the ordinary legislature, can claim no
privileges as citizens, and have no reason to complain, if this legislature
remove them, before they become citizens. The legislature may refuse to admit
them to become citizens, by enacting, that citizenship shall be acquired only
by birth. If the legislature receive them, retain them, and admit them to
become citizens; then, and not before, have they a right to claim the benefit
of the Constitution made for citizens. This is clear reasoning. The citizens,
who made the Constitution, bargained for themselves, and all who, after them,
should become citizens; but did not bargain for aliens. Would an American
citizen, removing into France, claim, as a citizen, the benefit of the French
Constitution, against an act of the legislature? Would a man received, under
the laws of hospitality, into the house of another, tell the master of the
house, when he orders him to depart, because he suspects him of ill designs; "I
will not go, you have a lease of this house, you have admitted me, I will
continue in it under your lease?" Aliens are tenants at will, and may be
removed at the discretion of the owner. When they become citizens, they become
tenants on fixed terms, and cannot be removed, but according to those terms:
they are freeholders, and cannot be deprived of their rights, but on a known
forfeiture regularly ascertained.

If, therefore, aliens have no right to remain, it is no deprivation of right
to order them to depart; and, if it be no deprivation of right, it can be no
punishment; and, if it be no punishment, this order may be made, without any
crime, on the mere suspicion or arbitrary will of the legislature, which, with
respect to them, is sovereign, as, with respect to citizens, the Constitution
is sovereign. Even a citizen may be deprived of his right to personal liberty,
without any actual crime, on the mere suspicion of another, on which a
magistrate deems it necessary to require security of the peace. So may an alien
be deprived of our indulgence to remain among us, on the mere suspicion of the
legislature, that his residence here is dangerous to the public peace. This,
being no deprivation of right, but a mere denial of a favor; is no punishment,
but a mere exercise of the right of self-defence, which the government of the
United States, like that of every other nation, may exert at discretion,
without any crime or any trial.

All that is said of a right to trial by jury is out of the question. That
refers to an investigation of offenses previous to punishment, or a deprivation
of a right. -- Here there is no offense, but a suspicion, alleged: and, as,
even in the case of a citizen, he may be imprisoned, for the security of an
individual; so, in the case of an alien, he may be removed, for the security of
the nation. And, in this, there is no punishment, because there is no
deprivation of a right. It is neither an injury nor a punishment; it is a
measure of self-defence, inherent in every owner of a house, to turn out of his
house a stranger, whom he does not choose to entertain longer.

I will again put the case of a stranger admitted, under the laws of
hospitality, into a house. The owner thinks he has reason to suspect, that this
stranger intends to rob or murder him; or to assist a gang of thieves, whom he
suspects of this intention. He tells the stranger, that he has such suspicion;
and desires him to depart. If the stranger say, "Your suspicions are wrong, you
must prove them, carry me before a magistrate, and let me be tried and
convicted, before you take upon you to turn me out of your house;" would this
be an answer? Shall the master of the house, in order to give the stranger the
privilege of being tried and convicted, give him and his associates an
opportunity of accomplishing the wicked purposes suspected? Suppose the master
of the house reply, "I am not well acquainted with your character, but,
whatever it be. I have a right to turn you out; go to my steward, and, if you
can so explain yourself to him, as that he choose to permit you to remain, I
agree; but, if he order you to depart, you must go;" would not this be
reasonable? Would this be any punishment of the stranger? No; it is the right
of self-defence. But, as a right to exercise this power will not authorize the
master of the house wantonly to beat the stranger, or violently to take his
money from him; so a right, to remove an alien from our territory, does not
authorize a power to punish him without a trial by jury.

That aliens, before they can be punished, or deprived of any right, for an
offense, must be tried by a jury, results not from the express words of the
Constitution, which refer not to them, but to citizens. It results from this,
that our Courts know no other mode of trial, and have no authority to adopt any
other.

2. But, if this law should not be contrary to the express words, it is
objected, that it is contrary to the principles, of the Constitution, which
distributes the legislative, judicial, and executive powers into three
departments; while this law confounds them all in the Executive; and this, it
is said, establishes despotism.

I might rest the answer to this objection, of a confusion and accumulation of
powers being a violation of the Constitution, on the observation already made,
that this law operates upon none, for whose benefit the Constitution was
established, or whom the Constitution was intended to affect; and cannot,
therefore, be a violation of the Constitution. It operates only on aliens. No
citizen has any despotism to fear from this law. Any citizen may,
notwithstanding this law, plot as many "treasons, stratagems, and spoils," as
he pleases; and, if he can escape the judiciary, may bid the President defiance.

But, the fact is, there is no confusion of powers in this law, but such as
convenience or necessity, consistently with the principles of the Constitution,
introduces into many other laws, to which no man would dream of objecting.

The Constitution has not established, and no human constitution can establish,
a perfect, but only a modified, separation of powers. What work of Man is
perfect? -- It is very common, and it is convenient and necessary, for the
legislature to pass a law fixing certain principles, and leaving it to some
other part of the administration, the executive or judiciary, to ascertain the
cases to which such principles shall be applied, to detail the minute
modifications, which no foresight can suggest, and experience alone can
disclose; or to pass a law, which shall operate on a certain contingency,
leaving it to some other part of the administration, to declare when this
contingency occurs, and the law begins to operate. This lessens not the
authority of the legislature; for such discretion cannot be exercised by any
other part of the administration, without the authority of the legislature; may
be restrained, corrected, or suppressed, whenever the legislature thinks fit;
and is, therefore, altogether under the control of the legislature. The
legislature, therefore, only determines something, which it is necessary for
them to determine; and leaves it to some other part of the administration, as
cases shall occur, to determine something else respecting this, which the
limited powers of man, the principles of just discrimination, and public
convenience, render it impossible for them to determine. Were the legislature
to take upon them to modify their laws to every case, they must be constantly
in session; and human capacity would render it impossible for any one body of
men, to discharge their task. Therefore, the legislature wisely contents itself
with establishing general rules, and leaves, to some other part of the
administration, authority to ascertain the modifications and exceptions. Thus
the legislative power determines, that certain actions shall be punished; but,
as there may be degrees of such actions, more or less aggravated, leaves it to
the judiciary to ascertain the degree of punishment; and, as, in some cases,
all punishment may be dispensed with, leaves it to the executive to pardon, at
his discretion. All this is necessary for the sake of humanity, justice, and
public convenience; and it seems absurd to say, that the principles of the
Constitution are thereby violated.

On such principles this Alien Act is framed. It establishes an authority in
the President "To order all such aliens as he shall judge dangerous to the
peace and safety of the United States, or suspect are concerned in any
treasonable or secret machinations against the government thereof, to depart
out of the territory of the United States." But, as a general exertion of this
authority may not be necessary, it provides, "That if any alien, so ordered to
depart, shall prove, to the satisfaction of the President, that no injury or
danger to the United States will arise; from suffering such alien to reside
therein; the President may grant a license to such alien to remain within the
United States." What more prudent or proper method could the legislature have
adopted? While they were in session, and a war was in view; must they wait,
till there was a declared war, or an actual invasion, before they established
the principle, that aliens might be removed, in a certain manner? When they
established this principle, were they obliged to establish it without any
exception? Or must they sit or be convened, to decide on every case proper as
an exception? This would seem, if not absurd and impracticable, at least, very
inconvenient. Surely the legislature die better. Congress has, by this law,
declared, that aliens are removeable; just as that offenders are punishable;
and has said, that the President may choose, out of all, what aliens shall be
removed, just as he may choose out of all what offenders shall be punished. The
President may tell any alien, " I will permit or license you to remain; as he
may tell any offender, "I will pardon you." And, in doing this, Congress has
violated no principle of the Constitution.

3. Lest this law, when' tried by the words, and by the principles, of the
Constitution, should appear unexceptionable, and escape censure; it has been
endeavored to excite a clamor against it, by drawing a melting picture of the
distress of aliens, who may thus be ordered to depart out of the country, at
the will of one man.

This is all work of imagination. It cannot be denied, that there is a right in
the United States, as in every other nation, to remove aliens; and that there
may be cases, in which the safety of the nation will render it necessary to
exert this right. -- And, I think, it cannot be denied, that, in the last
session of Congress, the United States were, of any nation ever was, in a
condition that required it, as it solemn duty, to exert this right. The rights
and safety of individuals must never be put into competition with the rights
and safety of a nation. Aliens have but an imperfect right, the right of
hospitality and civility, to remain in any nation, to which they are not bound
to permanent allegiance. And if the rulers of the nation, in which they have a
temporary indulgence to reside, suspect any danger to the nation, from their
residence, and order them to depart, they have no right to remain. The United
States were threatened with danger from France, and by the same means which
France has uniformly adopted, to bring danger and destruction on other
countries; intestine divisions. Aliens having the least interest in the
prosperity of this country, and owing the least duty, only a temporary ^uty, to
it, were the most likely to yield themselves the ^eadiest agents of France. And
the little respect, which, ^n this country, is paid to the rights of election,
gives them, here, an opportunity of mischief, which they could, ^n no other
country, enjoy. Though some of our own ^itizenamay be base enough to yield
themselves as instruments of a foreign power, the Government of the United
States has no ^uthority to remove them. But it has, like ^^e^y other
government, in time of danger, authority to expel aliens; and the right and
duty of common defense and protection against invasion and domestic violence
required, that this right of expulsion should be exerted Nor was the exertion
of this right proper only against French aliens. The principles professed by
the government of France have excited through the world an enthusiasm, which
nothing, but experience of their destructive consequences, can correct. There
is, in all nations, (...) number of warm speculative men, combined together to
promote the diffusion and prevalence of this theoretic liberty. Many of these,
either expelled or flying from their own country, reside in the United States;
and are here, it seems, systematically united, not in support of the principles
of our government, but, of an imaginary political millennium, a government
which never existed, and while man remains as he is, never can exist; in
support of the fanciful principles, which, in the progress of its revolution to
anarchy and despotism, have brought so much misery on France, and on every
country where the art and arms of France have prevailed. These dogmatists
invincible by reason or experience, united in princples however dispersed in
place, as a nation of themselves, ar^ enemies to all governments; and, like the
preachers of new, religion, think all other rights and duties ought t^^ yield
to the great duty of establishing their principles To this duty, they will
sacrifice all other considerations and, nothing, however cruel or destructive,
that can promote this, will, in their eyes, be a crime. Such men will be
dangerous to any country, in which they reside. Instigated by the zeal of
proselytism, the apparent benevolence in their principles will give them an
irresistible influence on the young and unexperienced. And no country, in which
such men prevail, can hope for safety againsts the arts of France. Nor can any
Frenchman more earnest^ promote the views and success of France, than any
nativ^ of any country, who, by adopting her principles, ha^^ brought himself
within the pale of this new political church. Insensible of error, and deaf to
instruction, the are borne forward with the courage of conscience, the ardour
of inspiration, and the obstinacy of impenitence by an impetuous enthusiasm, ^o
all the mischiefs, which guilt could effect. -- And, wherever there is no hope
of conversion, while we are in danger, the exertion of the ^ight of expulsion
becomes a duty, which the rulers owe to the safety of the nation.

If there may be cases of humanity, which may make this exertion, where not
absolutely necessary, favor of severity; the question is, with whom the power
of indulgence nay be best lodged, so as best to accomplish the great object,
public safety, and most to favor humanity.

As a measure of national defense, this discretion, of ^x^^lsion or indulgence,
seems properly vested in the branch of the government peculiarly charged with
the direction of the executive powers, and of our foreign elations. There is in
it a mixture of external policy, and of the law of nations, that justifies this
disposition.

It was never known, that a numerous and complex body ^f men had a more tender
conscience, than an uptight individual. Where many do wrong, each can cast the
ensure from himself upon others. But a responsible individual must take all the
burden of the blame. Any man, with any claim to tenderness, would rather risk
the success ^f that claim to an impartial and humane individual, than ^o a
numerous body of men.

It remains, therefore, only to determine, whether the ^haracter of the
President be such, as to render him a ^roper depositary of this power of
indulgence. Ha^ the President no feelings of humanity? Is a life of piety and
^^stice no ground of confidence? The character of the President is well known.
And no alien, who meddles not with politics and plots, who favors not the
views of our ^nemies, and injures not the peace, safety, or defense, of ^he
country, has any thing to fear from this law. Even with respect to dangerous
aliens, Congress has provided, that the rights of humanity (so far as,
consistently with the ^preme law, the safety of the people, they can) shall be
^cured to them. For it is enacted, that it shall be lawful ^or any alien, who
may be ordered to be removed from the United States, to take with him his
property; or, if he leave any of it, (...) at it shall remain subject to his
order and disposal.

But is all our pity to be extended to strangers, a^ shall we extend no care to
ourselves, our wives, and (...) children? The French have threatened us with
pillag^ plunder, and massacre. Such threats they have carried in execution in
other countries. They have threatened with a party among ourselves, which will
promote the views. Some of them, it is said, have told us, that (...) dare not
resent their injuries; for there are Frenchm^^ enough among us, to burn our
cities, and cut our throa^ And, it seems, we dare not remove those gentle lamb
Gracious Heaven! are we an independent nation, a dare we not do this? Shall our
Constitution, intended a shield to defend, become a sword to wound us? Ha^^ we
made a Contribution, to restrain our administrati^^ from oppressing ^^^selves,
and so restrain it, as to sub^^ our cities to alien ^^^ondiaries, and our
throats to ali^ assassins?

Vain is all our defense against our enemies without, we guard not against
enemies within If we leave Achan in the camp, can we hope for victory? If we
lea^ a band of traitors in the fort, can we hope to defend i^ If we suffer
French spies to stroll through our cities, (...) harbors, our shores, and our
country, and give information of all our strength, and all our weakness; how
(...) we be guarded against attack? If we suffer them to main here, to give
information of every ship that sails, t^^ it may fall into the hands of French
privateers; how (...) we protect our trade? If we suffer French agents remain
here, to corrupt the minds of our citizens, (...) printers, and our officers,
to pry into our counc^ purchase our arms and ammunition, influence our opini^^
and elections, render our people careless, and our adm^^stration weak; what
have we to expect, but all the h^^rors of a French invasion? What have we to
expect, to see our houses in flames, and our families in blood

I trust in God, that this will not happen. I trust, measures adopted by our
administration, with cordial un among ourselves, will preserve us from this
calamity. B^ if it should come upon us, we will curse those, who h^^ lulled us
with a sweet song of security, and gentle fratern^^ of the French; who,
professing motives of economy, have ^ndenvo^^ed to (...) up the hands of the
administration from effectual measures of defense; and, under the pretense of
v^^ing and seeking peace, do, in the surest manner, invite war,

We are, a^ present, in a perilous state, and it is to be eared, on the brink
of some calamity. Menaced with ^he resentment of a foreign nation, we are
distracted among ourselves. In proportion to our dissentions, will ^e our
danger; and our safety lies in love to our Constitution, and confidence in our
administration. If the people will cordially unite in supporting active
measures of the administration, France will change her tone, from resent^ent to
complacency. But experience of her conduct awards all other nations must
convince us, that it is her ^eans only, and not her object, that she will
change. Her object will remain the same, to reduce us to a subjection (...) her
will. Let us beware, therefore of supposing, that, ^hen she speaks peace, she
means peace. She will speak peace, while we support our administration; and
again ^ar, whenever she can persuade our people to oppose the administration of
their government. Divide and subdue is (...) maxim.

With a view to lessen the grounds ofdistrust in our ministration, so fatal to
our own interest; and to en^ease that confidence in it, so essential to our
safety; I ^ve endeavored, with candor and care, to examine the ^^inciples of
a law, which has been made a pretext for ^hement clamor. I have, I think shown
that it is ^nstitutional and necessary. I have said (what is well ^own) that
there is such ground of confidence in the ^esident, that there is no fear that
he will suffer it to ope^^e against any alien, who comes and remains honestly
^^d innocently among us; and that he will exercise his authority only against
aliens, who use the opportunity of ^^eir being here, for the purpose of
disturbing our peace, ^^enating the minds of our citizens from our government,
^traying our situation, corrupting our measures, or weak^ing our defense. And,
I hope, it will appear, that, if ^^r rulers had not exerted this authority, we
should have ^^d just reason to say, that they had betrayed their trust.

O! if the people would but love their Constitution, and confide in its wise
and honest administration, and turn away from those who harrass their minds
with vain suspicions; how happy might we be! May the God of Wisdom open our
eyes to the excellence of our Constitution, and the purity and prudence of our
administration; and to the folly, madness, and wickedness of those demagogues,
who mislead this people from their interests and duties, and glory in their
guilt. May he wean us from all partialities and prejudices toward any foreign
nation; unite our hearts in love, and support of our government; and preserve
us from the machinations of a government, ambitious, desperate, faithless, and
corrupt; which flatters only to deceive; and caresses only to destroy.

FINIS.

