A CHARGE TO THE GRAND JURIES OF THE COUNTY COURTS OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT, OF THE
STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA.

BY ALEXANDER ADDISON, PRESIDENT OF THOSE COURTS.

VERGENNES: PRINTED FOR SAMUEL CHIPMAN. 1799.

LIBERTY OF SPEECH, AND OF THE PRESS, etc.
IT is of the utmost importance to a free people, that the just limits of their
rights be well ascertained and preserved for liberty without limit is
licentiousness; and licentiousness is the wor^ kind of tyranny, a tyranny of
all. To preserve ourselves against this, (...) maintain true liberty, a line
must be drawn between the rights of each so well marked, as that it be known by
all, and so well guarded, as that it cannot be passed by any with impunity.
Thus every man will be free; for every man may exercise his rights to the
extent of their just limits and cannot go beyond those limits and encroach on
the rights of others My right to enjoy implies that no man shall disturb my
enjoyment. -- And it is no restraint on my liberty, that in the exercise of my
rights I am restrained from infringing the rights of others. The rule is So
(...) your our rights as not to ^^ure those of others. Invasion of the rights,
of others (...) tyranny, and if this invasion may be made by every one, it
(...) tyranny of the wor^^ kind, for in proportion to the number of oppresso^^
will be the desire and opportunity of oppression. The true friend of liberty
therefore, is he who will set such strong limits round the rights of every man,
that, in the exercise of them, no man can interrupt the rights (...) any other.
And they are not friends of liberty, but promoter^ of li^^^^ ^^^^ousness,
tyranny, and oppression, who contend, that every ma^^ ought to have an
unlimited exercise of his own rights, without any regard to (...) rights of
others. I can have no right to injure the rights of another; and if I c^^im
this, I am a tyrant and oppres^or.

Reputation, character, good name or opinion is a kind of property or
possession, which every man, who has hones^ly acquired it, has a right to
enjoy, Penn. Constable. Art. ix. Soc. 11.
L^^ke any other possession or property, it cannot be taken away from us, but
by our own acts. The man who invades the reputation invades the right of
another. And not only individuals, but more expecially men in public station,
branches or departments of the government, the whole administration, and the
principles, constitution, or system of government, and the principles or system
of public religion and morals, have a right, for the sake of the benefits we
receive from them, to reputation, good name and opinion; and the invasion of
the reputa- of either of these is an invasion of right, a lessening of our
comfort, and motives to duty.

But man is endued with faculties of communicating sentiments, of investigating
principles, and of forming opinions and judgments. The exercise of those
faculties is a source of pleasure and instruction. A knowledge, and a just
judgment of principles, of facts, and of characters, may be useful for the
improvement of our minds, and the regulation of our conduct. The exercise of
those faculties of opinion, reasoning, judgment, and communication is part of
our natural rights. Penn. Constable. Art. ix. Sec. 7
But the principles of liberty require, that this right, like all our other
rights, be limited so that it never infringe the right of reputation. It must
not represent a solemn truth or exercise of religion as false or ridiculous, an
established and useful principle or form of our government, as odious and
detestable; a regular and salutary act or motive of the administration as
unlawful, pernicious, or dishonest; or an upright man as corrupt. For this
would be exercising our right of opinion or communication, so as to infringe
the right of reputation, and be violating the principles of liberty and natural
right.

The principles of liberty, therefore, the rights of man, require that our
right of communicating information, as to facts and opinions, be so restrained,
as not to infringe the right of reputation. Unless it be so restrained, there
is no liberty; for there is no just enjoyment of our rights. And if every man's
right of communication be unrestrained, every man's right of reputation is
unguarded; and there is in this respect, universal licentiousness, and each man
is at the mercy of every man; the most precarious and oppressive of all states.
Therefore the freest governments, which have the most regarded and cultivated
the principles of liberty, as they have so described and limited other rights,
that none should infringe any other, have been careful so to define and limit
the rights of reputation, and of communication of sentiments, that the right of
either should not infringe that of the other.

We communicate our sentiments by words spoken, written, or printed, or by
pictures or other signs. The restraints laid on the exercise of this right so
as it may not infringe the right of reputation, differ, according to the way in
which the right of communication is exercised. If the right of reputation of a
private citizen be infringed by words, spoken no indictment will lie for this
injury, which is only a ground for a civil action to recover damages. -- "In
soro conscienti^e," says a learned author, before the tribunal of conscience,
"it is no excuse, that the slanderous words are true; for if a man has been
guilty of any thing, which the law prohibits, he is liable to answer for it, in
a legal way; but it can answer no purpose for a private person to accuse him
thereof; there is a degree of cruelty in so doing, and it must create ill
blood. Yet the law does, in compassion to man's infirmities, allow it to be a
justification in an action for words spoken, that they are true 4 Bac. Abr. ^80.
." But when slanderous words are spoken of the constitution, or administration,
or any of its acts or officers, they are ground for an indictment; as a
misdemeanor, or breach of the duty of a citizen Ib.
. The reason of this is evident; for, as for any injury affecting an
individual, the remedy is by action, so for an injury affecting the public, the
remedy is by indictment.

With respect to libels, or slander expressed by words written or printed, or
by pictures or other signs, and infringing the right of reputation; "they
have," says the same author, "at all times, and with good reason, been punished
in a more exemplary manner than slanderous words: for having a greater tendency
to provoke men to breaches of the peace, quarrels, and murders, they are of
much more dangerous consequence to society. Words which are frequently the
effect of a sudden gust of passion me soon be buried in oblivion. But libels,
besides that the author is actuated by more deliberate malice, are for the most
part so lasting, as to be scarce ever forgiven." Ib.
For this reason, a libel affecting the reputation of even a private citizen,
is restrained by being considered as a public offense, and subject to an
indictment. But whether, on the trial of such indictment, the truth of the
libel may be given in evidence, will depend on the nature of the libel.

Justice Blackstone defines libels, "taken in their largest sense, to be
writings, pictures or the like of an immoral or illegal tendency, and in a more
particular sense, any malicious defamations of any person, and especially a
magistrate, made public, by either printing, writing signs or pictures, in
order to provoke him to wrath or expose him to public hatred, contempt or
ridicule. It is immaterial with respect to the essence of a libel, whether the
matter of it be true or false; since the provocation, and not the falsity, is
the thing to be punished criminally. Therefore in a criminal prosecution, the
tendency, which all libels have to create animosities, and to disturb the
public peace, is the whole (...) the law considers 4 Comm^^ ^0.1.
.

The constitution of our state provides "That the printing Presses shall be
free to every person who undertakes to examine the proceedings of the
legislature, or any branch of government: and no law shall ever^^^ made to
restrain the right thereof. The free communication or thoughts and opinions is
one of the invaluable rights of man and every citizen may freely speak, write,
and print on any subject, being responsible for the abuse of that liberty. In
prosecutions for the publication of papers investigating the official conduct
of off^cers, or men in public capacity, or where the matter published is proper
for public information the truth thereof may be given in evidence. And in all
indictments for libels, the jury shall have a right to determine the law and
the facts, under the direction of the court, as in other cases." Constable. Art.
ix. Sec. 7.


From this statement of the law respecting libels, the following deductions
seem evident.

1. This right of free communication of thoughts and opinions is, like all
other rights, limited by responsibility for its abuse; and laws to punish its
abuse, are not, in a constitutional or just sense, restraints on the liberty of
the press. 2. The general rule is, that, in indictments for libels, truth
cannot be given in evidence. 3. This rule is excluded only from the cases
mentioned in this section of the constitution, and remains yet applicable to
all other cases. 4. It is only in so far as the paper charged as a libel
investigates the official conduct of officers, or men in a public capacity, or
where the matter published is proper for public information, that the truth
thereof can be given in evidence. In all other cases, truth is no
justification; for it is the provocation which constitutes the offense. 5. As
grand juries hear evidence only in behalf of the prosecution, and in
indictments for libels, as in other cases, the jury determine the law and the
facts under the direction of the court (that is, conforming to this direction
in point of law, have a right to give a general verdict) the grand jury,
generally speaking, cannot ascertain whether the libellous matter be true or
not; but, if the making or publishing of the libel be proved, they will find
the bill, and on the trial before the traverse jury, the court will direct,
whether evidence of the truth be admissible or not, and whether the matter be
libellous or not; and, under the direction of the court, the traverse jury will
determine the law and the facts. If a traverse jury should determine that a
paper is a libel, which is not, and convict a man who has committed no offense,
the court has a control over their verdict, by granting a new trial, or
arresting judgment. But if the jury determine that a libel is no libel, and
acquit a man really guilty of an offense, the court has no control over this
verdict: for a man acquitted of a criminal charge, can never be tried again on
the same charge.
Such seems to be the state of the right of communication of thoughts and
opinions, according to the law of Pennsylvania. Any thing may be spoken, in
terms of decency proper to the subject, of the government, an officer, or an
individual, provided the speaker can prove it to be true. But all truths are
not useful or proper for publication, therefore all truths are not to be
written, printed, and so uttered or published. And therefore, except in the
case of papers investigating the official conduct of officers, or men in a
public capacity, or where the matter published is proper for public
information, if any man write, print, utter, or publish a libel, he may be
indicted, convicted and punished, whether the libellous matter be true or not.

Congress, in its last session, has passed a law 14 July, 1798.
, enacting, that if any persons shall unlawfully combine together, with intent
to oppose, any measure of the government of the United States, or impede the
operation of any law of the United States, or to prevent any person holding any
office under the government of the United States from performing his duty: or
shall, with such intent, advise or attempt to procure any insurrection, riot,
unlawful assembly or combination; they shall be deemed guilty of a high
misdemeanor, and be punished by a fine not exceeding five thousand dollars, and
by imprisonment, for not less than six months nor more than five years; and may
further be holden (...) sureties for good behavior. And it further enacts,
that if any person shall write, print, utter or publish, or shall cause or
procure to be written, printed, uttered or published, or shall knowingly and
willingly aid in writing, printing, uttering, or publishing, any false,
scandalous, and malicious writing against the government of the United States,
or either House of Congress, or the President of the United States, with intent
to defame the said government, or either House of Congress, or the President,
or to bring them, or either of them, into contempt or disrep^^^; or to excite
against them, or either of them the hatred of the people of ^he United States;
or to excite unlawful combinations therein, for opposing or resisting any law
of the United States, or any act of the President of the United States done in
pursuance of any such law, or of the powers vested in him by the Constitution
of the United States; or to oppose or defeat any such law or acts; or to aid
encourage, or abet any hostile designs of any foreign nation against the United
States, their people or government, such person shall be punished by a fine,
not exceeding two thousand dollars, and imprisonment not exceeding two years.

This act, which seems to be best known by the name of the Sedition Bill,
provides, "That if any person shall be prosecuted under it, for writing or
publishing any libel, it shall be lawful for him on the trial of the cause, to
give in evidence, in his defense, the truth of the matter contained in the
publication charged as a libel. And the jury who shall try the cause shall have
a right to determine the law and the fact, under the direction of the court, as
in other cases." This clause, clearly borrowed from the section already quoted
of the constitution of Pennsylvania, confirms, so far as concurrent expressions
of different persons on the same subject can, the construction which I put on
that section, that the time for giving in evidence the truth of the libellous
matter is at the trial of the cause by the traverse jury.

No law seems to have been resisted in Congress with more vehemence and
passion, by those who opposed al^ the measures adopted as measures of defense
against the hostile spirit of France. And, out of doors, it has been attacked
with sullen rancour, as a death-wound to the progress of that detestable system
of slander, which has been pursued, with such malignant industry, and
calamitous success, against every measure of the administration. And yet,
strange as it may seem, this law does not create any new offense; for every
thing forbidden by it appears to me to have been, before, an offense at common
law. The combinations and attempts therein forbidden are misde^^^anors. Any
writing of an immoral or illegal tendency is a libel 4 Comm. 150.
. And slanderous words spoken of the government, o^ its acts or authority, are
punishable by indictment 4. Bac. 480.
.

It may be said then, why was this law made? Several reasons may be given for
it.

1. It is no uncommon thing for a legislature to make an act declaratory of the
common law. At this time, it was peculiarly proper to make such an act as a
solemn admonition to wicked or unthinking men to abstain from practices, which
spread slanders and falsehood, foment divisions and seditions among the
citizens, weaken the energy of the government, and, thus rendering the nation
defenseless, encourage France, by a prospect of impunity and success, to
measures of aggression and hostility.

2. A doubt had been suggested whether the courts of the United States had
cognizance of any offenses not expres^ly declared by the constitution, or some
^aw, or treaty of the United States. -- I do not think this doubt well founded.
The judicial power of the U. States extends to all cases arising under the
constitution, the laws and treaties of the United States Constable. Art. iii. Sec.
2.
. Hence results a jurisdiction to try and punish, as misdemeanors, all acts
tending to violate or weaken the authority of the constitution, or of any act
or measure of the government of the United States. For it cannot be supposed
that such misdemeanors, should pass unpunished, or that the government of the
United States should be obliged to beg protection from the individual states.
The doubt however existing, it might be thought proper to remove it.

3. It might be thought proper to pass this law, in order to limit the extent
of punishment which might be inflicted on the offender; and to give him the
advantage of proving the truth of the libel in his defense.

Whatever may have been the motive for making this law, it was opposed on two
grounds: 1, as unconstitutional, and, 2, as inexpedient.


1. It was said to be unconstitutional, because the constitution declares, that
"the powers not delegated to the United States by the constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the sta^es respectively, or to
the people;" U. S. Constable. Add. Art. xii..
and more expressly, that "Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of
speech or of the press. To. Art. iii.
"

The constitution, like every other instrument, must be construed by taking the
whole together. Among the powers which the constitution delegates to Congress
is a power "to make all laws, which shall be necessary and proper for carrying
into execution all powers vested by this constitution in the government of the
United States, or any department or office thereof U. S. Constable. Art. i. Sec. 8.
." It is evident, that the attempts and writings, declared punishable by this
law, have a direct tendency, differing only in degree from force, to prevent or
obstruct the execution of the powers vested by the constitution in the
government of the United States. Therefore a law declaring that such attempts
and writings are punishable, is constitutional as necessary and proper for the
execution of the powers of government.

If the clause of the constitution which prohibits Congress from making any law
abridging the freedom of speech or of the press, is to be construed as
prohibiting Congress from making any law declaring libels against the
government, acts, or measures of the United States, to be punishable; then by
the same construction of the constitution of Pennsylva^ia, which declares, that
no law shall ever be made to restrain this right, the most false and malicious
libels might be published, against the government, acts, or measures of this
state (and of course of the United States) and the assembly would have no power
to make any law, declaring such libels punishable; and thus absolute impunity
for them would be established. This is a construction too absurd to be received
as true. Nor will it justify such construction of the Constitution of the U.S.
to say, that it was intended by that constitution, that the authority of
passing laws against libels should be left to the individual states: for this
would be supposing that the government of the United States must, unless the
individual states choose to afford it, be without defense against the most
dangerous enemy that can attack it, slander; against which, if unrestrained, no
government can support itself. This, therefore, would only remove one absurdity
by another, and some other construction of this clause of the constitution must
be sought for.

When the press was abused by being made a vehicle of slander, governments laid
restraints on it. Books were to be printed only in certain places, only of a
certain nature, and only by license of certain persons. In England, these
restrictions were imposed first by the authority of the King, part of whose
prerogative the regulation of printing was considered; then by the
Star Chamber, an organ of executive authority; and in the time of the
Commonweal^h, and after the restoration, and after the Revolution, by the
Parliament. The law restraining the liberty of the press expiring in 1694, was
not renewed, and the press became free. Hume's England. App. James i. vol. 4.
p. 318. -- 1 Comm. 151.2.
For freedom of the press consists in this, that any man may, without the
consent of any other, print any book or writing whatever: being, in this, as in
all other freedom of action, liable to punishment, if he injure an individual
or the public.

For thus understanding the liberty of the press, I shall quote the respectable
authority of Sir William Blackstone. "Where blasphemous, immoral, treaso^able,
schismatical, seditious, or scandalous libels are punished, the liberty of the
press, properly understood, is by no means infringed or violated. The liberty
of the press is indeed essential to the nature of a free state; but this
consists in laying no previous restraints upon publications, and not in freedom
from censure for criminal matter when published. Every free man has an
undoubted right to say what sentiments he pleases before the public: to forbid
this is to destroy the freedom of the press: But if he publishes what is
improper, mischievous or illegal, he must take the consequence of his own
temerity. To subject the press to the restrictive power of a licenser, as was
formerly done, is to subject all freedom of sentiment to the prejudices of one
man, and make him the arbitrary and infallible judge of all controverted points
in learning religion and government. But to punish any dangerous or offensive
writing, which, when published, shall, on a fair and impartial trial, be
adjudged of a pernicious tendency, is necessary for the preservation of peace
and good order, of government and religion, the only solid foundation of civil
liberty. Thus the will of individuals is still left free; the abuse only of
that free will is the subject of legal punishment. -- Neither is any restraint
hereby laid upon freedom of thought or inquiry: liberty of private sentiment is
still left; the dis^eminating or making public of bad sentiments, destructive
of the ends of society is the crime which society corrects. A man may be
allowed to keep poisons in his closet, but not publicly to vend them as
cordials. -- And the only plausible argument heretofore used for the
restraining of the freedom of the press, that it was necessary to prevent the
daily abuse of it, will entirely lose its force, when it is shown (by a
seasonable exertion of the laws) that the press cannot be abused to any bad
purpose, without incurring a suitable punishment. So true it will be sound,
that to censure the licentiousness is to maintain the liberty of the press. 4
Comm. 151 3.


Such is the liberty of the press which the people of the states of America,
for its greater security, have made part of their fundamental law. In their
state constitutions, they provided, that their legislatures should not make any
law restraining the liberty of the press, that is, should lay no previous
restraints on the press; or as the Pennsylvania constitution expresses it, that
"every citizen may freely speak, write, and print on any subject, being
responsible for the abuse of that liberty." Art. ix. Sec. 7.
The same principle was afterward adopted into the Federal Cons^itution; and
the section establishing it there is to be construed in the same manner. So
that the liberty of the press is precisely as stated by Sir William Blackstone,
its being free from all previous restraints, but, as all other rights or
liberties are, subject to correction for abuse. -- On this liberty of the press
in England, Parliament may, at any time, impose previous re^traints; but here a
constitutional provision pute it out of the power of any legislature to do so.

This law then is no abridgement of the freedom of apeech, or of the press, and
is therefore no infringement of the constitution. So far from this, that, as it
makes no new offense, it is no alteration of the criminal code, only as it
enlarges the bounds of defense limits the punishment, and (if this be an
alteration) gives express jurisdiction to the federal courts. It is not
injurious either to the constitution, or to the liberty of the press, but is
intended and adapted for the support of both: for it cannot be too often
repeated, that "to censure the licentiousness is to maintain the liberty of the
press.

To restrain the abuse of my right, or such an exercise of it as shall encroach
on a right of another, is no re^traint or abridgement of my right: for I can
have no right to lessen the right of another. And to claim such an unlimited
use of my right, as to encroach on the right of another is to claim, not
liberty, but tyranny; not right, but oppression. "I may freely speak, right,
and print, on any subject;" but "I am responsible for the abuse of this
liberty." Unless I may speak, write, and print, my right will not be
sufficiently secured: and unless I be responsible for the abuse of this
liberty, the rights of others would not be sufficiently secured. Therefore to
secure all, and establish true liberty, I must be free to speak write, and
print, but be also responsible for the abuse of that liberty. This is a sound
principle, and applies to all rights whatever. -- It applies to our right of
action, as well as to our right of expressing our sentiments in every way. I
may ride a horse, but I must not ride over a man. I may walk where I please,
but not on my neighbor's garden. I may use my cane, but not to strike any ^an I
meet. Such is the liberty of speech or of the press. A law that my printing
press should be locked up, and the key kep^ by a cer^ain officer, or that no
book should be printed without permission from a certain officer, would be a
law abridging the liberty of the press. A law, that a man should not speak
without permission, should speak only on certain subjects, or should have a gag
put in his mouth, not to be taken out but by a rertain officer, would be an
abridgement of the freedom of speech, would be indeed a gagging-law. But
because the constitution denies the legislature any power to make a law like
this, or to make any law laying a previous restrain on speech or the press, to
claim therefore a right from the constitution, to speak, write, or print
sedition, impiety blasphemy, or any falsehood, however gross, indecent, and
dangerous, is claiming not liberty but licentiousness. Will any one say that my
right of freedom of speech entitles me to propagate with impunity any slander I
please upon all my neighbors? What character would be safe, and what life
would be free from misery, were this liberty of speech to be indulged? There is
no such liberty. A liberty to destroy reputation would be as unjust, as liberty
to destroy life. Every man is free to speak, but he speaks at his peril, and is
answerable for all he says, if it tend to the injury of another. It is not his
opinion of its being proper or true, that will justify him. -- When he utters
it, he is answerable for its truth and propriety; and the opinion of a court
and jury, not his opinion must decide on its truth and propriety. Every
repeater of the tale is, in like manner answerable as the author. So of libels
or written or printed slander, with this difference, that, as the provocation
by them is more dangerous they are less indulged; and except in the case of
matters proper for public information, the proceedings of government, and the
official conduct of officers, or men in a public capacity, truth is no
justification. Even in cases where truth is a justification, the truth must be
made out to the satisfaction of a jury. -- That the libeller may have thought
it true, though it may extenuate, will not justify the offense: for no man is
to be judge in his own cause, and my opinion will not justify me in doing an
injury to my neighbor, in his reputation, any more than in his person or
property, Every man, therefore, writes and prints, as he speaks, at his peril;
and the publisher of a libel it answerable, in like manner as the author. And
both are answerable, as in any other offense, to the judgment of a court and
jury, by whose opinion, and not of the offender, must the guilt or innocence of
the action be determined. And such restriction, if I may so call it, or
correction of the abuse, of freedom of speech and of the press, is not only
perfectly consistent with the principles of civil liberty in general, and with
the rules of our constitution: but is necessary for maintaining the genuine
liberty of speech and the press, For, of all enemies to liberty, licentousness
is the greatest.

2. I think, the expediency of the law can be as clearly shown, as its
constitutionality: and, if so, there will be not only duty, but pleasure in the
obedience we yield to it.

Speech, writing, and printing are the great directors of public opinion, and
public opinion is the great director of human action. Of such force is public
opinion, that, with it on its side the worst government will support ifself;
and, with it, against it, the best government will fall. -- All governments are
supported by it; and, without it, can no government be supported. What is the
force in the power of any government, compared to that of the people, governed
by it, if the people choose to resist? And will they not choose to resist, if
their opinions be set against the government, their passions roused to
enthusiasm, and an opportunity offered for success. And all this may be done by
means of clubs, societies, and the press. -- Give to any set of men the command
of the press, and you give them the command of the country for you give them
the command of public opinion, which commands every thing. -- Let therefore,
clubs, societies, and the printing presses attack any government, however free,
and however strong, they will infallibly destroy it. It will not be pretended
that the old government of France was good, nor denied that it needed
reformation; but, in so far as it possessed strength, and as it was supported
by the prejudices of the people in its favor, it is a proper instance of what I
have stated. The French revolution was accomplished by a gradual operation on
public opinion. For many years before, the seeds of insurrection had been
busily sown in the minds of the people. Clubs, and societies, under various
names and pretexts, were established through the kingdom. The printing presses
were occupied. Pamphlets and books were dispersed. New princple were broached,
supported and established. Under the sanction of philosophy and reason, all
prejudices in favor of religion and government were gradually sapped, to make
way for liberty, equality, and the rights of man; fine words, which as they
were little understood, were the more admired. All were men, and priests and
princes were no more. All respect for office ceased: and an insult to a bishop
or a king was no more than an insult to an equal. Religion was but a state
trick, and its author and ministers but imposters. Public opinion, the great
pillar of this, as of every other government, being thus withdrawn, the mighty
fabric of the monarchy, which, supported by public opinion, had stood the
blasts of ages, was touched by a slight shock, and in a moment crumbled to
pieces.

What was the consequence? Not satisfied with reformation, public opinion,
directed by clubs and the press, was employed to lead the nation to excess,
anarchy and slavery. The desperate succession of tyrants, which has since
ruled France was supported by public opinion, directed by clubs and the press,
till it acquired an enormous armed force. When disgusted by its cruel and
unprincipled oppression, public opinion began to revolt and the printing
presses to speak against it; even this tyranny, with all its vast armed force,
felt that it could not resist public opinion, and, to silence it, shut up the
presses; and now extorts, from an unhappy nation, a sullen and reluctant
submission, by its armed force, and an enslaved press.

The same seeds of dissolution were sown in most of the governments of Europe,
by the corruption of public opinion effected, y a combination of clubs and the
press. Many have fallen sacrifices. And nothing but the dreadful example, which
the French revolution furnished, of the fatal danger of substituting abstract
principles instead of the maxims of experience, could have preserved many other
governments.

One would have thought, that the United States of America, blessed with the best
practicable model of republican liberty, which human wisdom has yet been able
to suggest, would have escaped this greates of all plagues, the corruption of
public opinion; and that all men would have united in approbation of a system
of government which must be acknowledged excellent, and of an administration,
which must be acknowledged eo have been wise, enlightened and honest. Yet,
unfortunately, this plague has reached us also; and our government has been
assailed with the grossest slanders, by many who perhaps believed, and by many
who surely could not believe the slanders which they uttered. The tongue, the
pen, and the press; conversations, letters, essays, and pamphlets, have
represented our truly republican and balanced constitution as a system of
tyranny; and our upright and wise administration as mischievous and corrupt.
Our wisest and best public officers have had their lives embittered, and have
been driven from their stations by unceasing and malignant slander. And thus
has it been attempted to withdraw, from our excellent government, the only
effectual support of any government, public opinion; and thus to withdraw all
reverence from station and authority, deprive the constitution, the laws, and
the administration, of all respect and efficacy, and surrender the nation a
prey to any invader.

France saw our condition, and attacked us: for France attacks a nation only
when she has rendered it defenseless, by dividing the people from the
government, and withdrawing from the government the support of public opinion.
In this condition any nation is an easy prey. To our complaints she pretended
no justification, and replied to our resentment, that she had a party among
ourselves. She rested on the influence of clubs and the press, and on the
devotion to her, which they had produced among us. Some of our presses seem to
have been constantly devoted to her views. Many of our citizens, and of our men
in public stations, seem to have favored those measures, on which France must
have depended for success against us. -- And our government was threatened with
the loss of its best support, the hearts of its citizens, by means of
falsehood, misrepresentation, and the vile arts of foreign enemies, and
discontented, factious, and seditious men. In this situation, in which no
government can longer stand, and threatened with a war from France, was it not
the duty of our government, to disarm France of that weapon, by which she could
most effectually injure us, the power of spreading slander and sedition against
the government, and alienating from it, its true support, the affections of its
citizens? It was its duty, and it would have been inexcusable, if it had
omitted this duty. Without suppressing slander and sedition against the
government, the support of public opinion can of be preserved to it: and
without the support to it of public opinion all other defense against France is
vain.

On these grounds it appears evident to me, that this law is not only
exped^ent, but necessary. And it may be laid down as a general rule, that it
will be impossible to prevent the corruption of public opinion, or to pres^rve
any government against it; unless there be laws to correct the licentiousness
of speech and of the press. True liberty of speech and of the press consists in
being free ^o speak, write, and print, but being as in the ex^^cise of all our
other li^e^ti^^, responsible for the abuse of this liberty. And whether we have
abused this liberty or not, must like all other questions of right, be left to
the decision of court and a jury. This is the universal test, by which the
exercise of all our rights, must be tried. Nor is the subjection of our right
of freedom, of speech and of the press to this test, any more a restraint on
that right; than the subjection of our rights of life and of property to the
same test, is a restraint on those rights. By this test must the exercise of
all our rights be tried, or no man could enjoy any right whatever. If while our
right to life and to property is submitted to this restriction, we yet believe
we are free, shall we think our liberty infringed, by subjecting to the same
restriction, our right to speak and print?

This law takes from no man any liberty but a liberty of doing mischief. And so
far is it from being true, that this law is any violation of liberty, that, it
may be safely averred, without such laws, for punishing the abuse of the
freedom of speech and of the press, liberty cannot be preserved; every man will
be a slave to the malignant passions of every other, truth and justice will be
banished, the authority of government destroyed, and malice, anarchy, confusion
and every evil work established.

Our constitution is excellent, our administration is wise and honest, and has
no interest separate from that of the people. On the support of such an
administration such a government depends our liberty. But, let me repeat, no
administration or government can stand against the corruption of public
opinion; and let me therefore solemnly admonish you, as you value the peace and
liberty of yourselves and your posterity, seriously to reflect on the truth of
this. We have seen an insurrection promoted by the corruption of public
opinion. And invasion is invited by it -- How many shocks of this kind our
government is doomed to stand, only the Ruler of the world knows. Let us take
warning from our own experience, and the fate of other nations. Let all friends
to liberty and order unite in suppressing slander: for, where it prevails,
there will be no happiness, no government. Of all slanders those of the press
are most dangerous. Presses established to run down the government are the most
destructive of all treasons. -- This ought to be well considered; for every one
who encourages such presses, or contributes to their support, is a partner in
their guilt. Every one who reads their productions with approbation, sucks in
disease upon his mind: and every one who repeats them to others spreads the
infection. What would we think of a set of men, who should agree to hire a
number of persons to run through the country, and report falsehoods and
slander? Precisely ^^ch, and more dangerous, is the guilt of those who
contribute to the support of a slanderous Press. They are wounding their own
country's peace, and undermining the government.

But you will say, We desire to hear both sides, that we may know the truth. My
friends, truth has but one side: and listening to error and falsehood is indeed
a strange way to discover truth. Take the representations which its friends
have made of the conduct of government; have you ever found falsehood in them?
Take the contradictory statements made by its enemies -- have you ever found
truth in them?

You may yet say, We have not the means of knowing on which side the truth
lies; and we, therefore, give no preference to any but hear all. -- What would
you think of a Protestant who should say thus? The Lutherans and Calvinists
differ in opinion, the Catholics from both, and the Mahometans from them all; I
know not on which side the truth is; I will, therefore, pay a Lutheran
minister, a Calvinist minister, a Catholic priest, and a Turkish dervis; and
then, I shall be sure of knowing the truth. Would we think that this man had
any regard to truth or religion? Instead of acquiring knowledge, would he not
confuse his mind, and lose sight of both truth and duty? As in religion, so in
government, a sincere enquirer after truth will always find means of
discovering it. And it is only their enemies, and hypocritical pretenders to
sincerity, who, under pretense of searching for truth, wander through the
endless varieties of error, and affect to think, there is no certainty.

There is hardly any part of government, which, as of religion, has not been
misrepresented by its enemies. Now, though of all its parts, the people
generally have not had an opportunity of being fully satisfied, yet of some,
they have had this opportunity. And wherever they have had such opportunity,
they must be satisfied, that the conduct of government has been right, and the
misrepresentation of it false and malicious. No part of the conduct of our
government has been more misrepresented, than its conduct with respect to
France. Yet, when fairly stated, in a way that the greatest slanderers dare not
contradict, how honest, wise, and praise worty does it seem! Ought we not
therefore to believe, that, if we understood all the test, as well as this
part, the whole would appear as unexceptionable? This would be our duty between
man and man; and it is also our duty between citizens and the government.

Another duty, and a mean of information, is to search at the best sources of
information. You ought never to believe a slander on government, merely because
it is stated in a newspaper or a pamphlet, or reported by those on whose
judgment, veracity, and opportunity of knowing, you have not confidence. As if
the thing concerned your own house or estate, or the character of your friend,
go to those in whose veracity and judgment you would confide in matters of the
greatest importance. For, be assured, no matter is of greater importance, than
a just confidence in government. The men, who endeavor to rob you of this, are
the worst enemies of your peace. If they can succeed in robbing your minds of
this confidence, they rob you of your liberty; for they deprive government of
its authority, and government without authority is anarchy; and anarchy is the
worst tyranny. No crime, therefore, is greater, than that slander, which,
diminishing the people's confidence in the government, diminishes their
security, and destroys their liberty. And no crime more deserves the vigilant
and severe animadversion of a Grand Jury.

ON THE ALIEN BILL.
IN circumstances of extraordinary danger or alarm, extraordinary measures must
be adopted: for ordinary means are incompetent for extraordinary occasions.
Though I may not kill a man, while I am in no danger from him; yet if he be in
the act to kill me, or I find him breaking into my house in the nightime to
rob me, I may put him to death. This results from the general law of
self-defence. The sacred right of property will not forbid us when a house is
on fire, to pull down the adjacent buildings, to save the rest of the town. --
Nor will the right of personal liberty restrain the magistrate from committing
to gaol a man who has actually done no mischief, if another is justly afraid of
mischief being done by him. All there are extraordinary cases, to which the
ordinary rules of property, or of personal liberty and safety, are not
applicable: and the violation of those rules, in such cases, is, in true
construction, no violation of them; for they were never meant (...) be applied
to such cases, but only to the ordinary and peaceful state of society, and must
yield to the great law of self-preservation and common welfare.

Nations, like individuals, are also bound, by the law of self-preservation, in
times of danger, to adopt measures, which would be altogether injustifiable in
ordinary times. They may destroy an hostile army. -- If a hostile army be
suffered to march through a neutral country, to attack another nation, this
nation may also enter that country and oppose its enemies. If fields, gardens,
houses, or towns, shelter its enemy from the full force of attack, they may be
destroyed. If it be necessary to weaken the enemy by want, the corn, cattle,
and all kinds of provision may be carried off, and the frontier made, as it
were, a desert. Such things, are, in times of danger, justifiable by the law of
self-defence; though in ordinary times they would be unlawful and inhuman. On
the same principles of self-defence, in prevent a dangerous communication of
intelligence, or any measure unfavorable to its safety, when (...) nation is,
or likely to be, engaged in a war, it may order any aliens, who may be
suspected of promoting or favoring the designs of its enemy, to depart out of
its territory. This may be always, and has been generally done. And unless
where this right is regulated by treaty, this may be done at the discretion of
the government under which the aliens reside. For every government must be sole
judge of what is nenecessary to be done, for its own safety or advantage,
within its own territory. Vattel. L. of N. Prel. sect. 17, 20. B. 2, sect. 94.
And, even with respect to their own subjects, most governments have reserved a
right, without being required to show any cause, to commit to close custody any
subject suspected as dangerous to the peace or welfare of the community. In
England, this right is restrained by the writ of Habeas Corpus, which gives to
every subject imprisoned an opportunity of requiring the cause of his
commitment, and of obtaining in all proper cases, his enlargement. When,
therefore, the king of Britain's ministers find it necessary, for political
reasons, to restrain the personal liberty of any subject, without showing any
cause for it, a law must be obtained from Parliament, suspending the privilege
of the writ of Habeas Corpus; and Parliament may, whenever it pleases, pass
such a law.

Conforming to the principles of liberty inherited from our ancestors; the
privilege of the writ of Habeas Corpus is established, as a principle, in the
government of this State and of the Union. U. S. Constable. Art. 1, sec. 8. Penn.
Constable. Art. 9, sect. 14, 1 U. S. I. vol. ^ St. L. 241.
And, though Congress or the General Assembly may, respectively, like the
British Parliament, by law, suspend this privilege; yet they cannot, like the
British Parliament, pass such law whenever they please. For the Federal and
State Constitutions have declared that "The privilege of the writ of Habeas
Corpus shall not be suspended unless when, in cases of rebellion or invasion,
the public safety may require it." So that, in this country, no citizen can be
deprived of his liberty, without an avowed and sufficient cause, unless in case
of rebellion or invasion, the legislature think the public safety requires it,
and suspend the privilege of the writ of Habeas Corpus. But here the
Constitution leaves aliens, as in other countries, to the protection of the
general principles of the law of nations, or of the particular provisions of
treaties made between the United States, and the government whose subjects or
citizens the aliens severally are.

Congress, in its last session, found the United States in extraordinary
circumstances of peril, unequalled since their Independence was solemnly
acknowledged. France, having, without any respect to the principles of liberty,
the law of nations, or the rights of individuals, plundered the land to the
utmost reach of her grasp; extended the same unprincipled rapacity to the
ocean, and plundered indiscriminately friends and foes. Of all nations and
governments none had with more affection regarded the revolution of France,
none had more assiduously cultivated her friendship, none had more scrupulously
observed the rules of neutrality, or, consistently with those rules, partially
indulged the views of France; than the nation and government of the United
States. And if neutrality, justice, affection, and gratitude, could have
exempted any government and nation from injury from France, the nation and
government of the United States might justly have claimed this exemption. But
what weight has justice, with a government without principle, without religion,
and without an interest in the prosperity of the people over which it is
placed! If the French government had regarded only the interest of France, it
would have cultivated the affections of America. But the French government,
like the false mother indifferent to the life of the child, regarded not the
interest of the French nation, but the indulgence of its own passions, and the
triumph of its own pride, which exalted by success, beyond the bounds of
moderation, sought to humble all authorities in universal prostration at its
feet. She commenced and prosecuted spoliation of our trade to an extent that
threatened its ruin: and the dismal effects are displayed in the bankruptcies
of our merchants, and the languishing state of our commerce and agriculture.
The American government, patiently and peacefully sought redress by
negotiation: but the presumption and rapacity of France, rose in proportion to
the patience and peace of America; and, with unexampled insolence, she
repeatedly drove away our ambassadors sent to claim only an exemption from
injury, and a payment of just debts; required us, by an ignominious tribute and
bribe, to double the damage we had suffered; and threatened us, if we refused
this, with war and ravage on our coasts, burning of our towns, and even
dissolution as a nation.

What could have swelled the insolence of France to this pitch of extravagance?
Had we done her any injury? She can show none. Was it her succes, and mighty
power? We are at a distance to defy her power. How then dared she thus to
insult and injure us? She accounted us a divided people, split into factions,
among which she had zealous partisans. In this state, she knew, we must be an
easy prey: in this state, she knew we could make no resistance. And, while we
remained in this state, she might safely persist in her proud oppression: and
she did so. For men, without regard to religion and jutice, will do whatever
they can do: and nothing but resistance and force will restrain them from
injuring others. France had long known and promoted divisions and factions
among us. And had sent spies into all parts of our country, to procure
information of our circumstances and opinions. -- These traveled through
America, under various pretexts, of curiosity, of philosophy, or of avoiding
tyranny or persecution at home. This Talleyrand, who demanded the bribe and
loan from our ambassadors, traveled through America as an emigrant; and, after
his return to France, was appointed minister of foreign affairs. From its spies
and other agents here, the French government received constant intelligence of
the sentiments of the citizens, and the measures of the government of America;
and was thus prepared to promote its own views, and defeat ours.

If ever there was a time in which it was proper for any government, to order
aliens to depart out of its territory, it was proper for the American
government to do so at this time. In other countries, this would have been done
by a proclamation of the executive. This was a new case under the American
Constitution, and proper for the interference of the legislature. Congress,
therefore, passed a law, 2^th June, 1798 -- 5 U. S. L. 143.
the substance of which, in its own words, I shall here state. --

"It shall be lawful for the President of the United States, to order all ^^^h
aliens, as he shall judge dangerous to the peace and safety of the United
States, or shall have reasonable grounds to suspect, are concerned in any
treasonable or secret machinations against the government thereof, to depart
out of the territory of the United States, within such time, as shall be
expressed in such order. -- Which order shall be served on such alien, by
delivering him a copy thereof, or leaving the same at his usual abode, and be
returned to the office of the secretary of state, by the marshall or other
person to whom the same shall be directed."

But "if any alien so ordered to depart shall prove to the satisfaction of the
President, by evidence to be taken before such persons as the President shall
direct, that no injury or danger to the United States will arise, from ^ffering
him to reside therein, the President may grant a license to such alien (...)
remain within the United States, for such time as he shall judge proper, and at
such place as he shall designate. -- And the President may also require of such
alien to enter into bond to the United States, in such penal sum as he may
direct, with one or more sufficient sureties, to the satisfaction of the person
authorized by the President to take the same, conditioned for the good
behavior of such alien during his res^dence in the United States, and for not
violating his license; which license the President may revoke whenever he shall
think proper.

"And if any alien, so ordered to depart, shall be found at large within the
United States, after the time limited in such order for his departure, and not
having a license from the President to reside therein; or having obtained such
license shall not have conformed thereto; every such alien shall, on conviction
thereof, be imprisoned for a term not exceeding three years, and shall never
after be admitted to become a citizen of the United States.

This law further enacts, "That it shall be lawful for the President of the
United States, whenever he may deem it necessary for the public safety, in
order to be removed out of the territory thereof any alien who may be in prison
in pursuance of this act; and to cause to be arrested, and sent out of the
United States such of those aliens as shall have been ordered to depart
therefrom, and shall not have obtained a license as aforesaid, in all cases,
where, in the opinion of the President, the public safety requires a speedy
re^oval. And if any alien, so removed, or sent out of the United States, by the
President shall voluntarily return thereto, unless by permision of the
President of the United States; such alien, on conviction thereof, shall be
imprisoned as long as, in the opinion of the President the public safety may
require."

But it is provided, " That it shall be lawful for any alien, who may be
ordered to be removed from the United States, by virtue of this act, to take
with him such part of his goods, chattles, or other property, as he may find
convenient; and all property left in the United States by an alien who may be
removed, as aforesaid, shall be subject to his disposal.

One would have thought, that a law so reasonable in itself, so conformable to
the law of nations, and the practice of all governments, and while it is
altogether consistent with the Constitution, so necessary to the safety and
defense of the United States; if it did not obtain all praise, would, at least
have escaped all censure. Yet this law was not only vehemently opposed in
Congress; but, even since it was passed, has been reprobated by ignorant, or
wicked and seditious men; and, for their vile and selfish purposes has been
held up to detestation, as unconstitutional and tyrannical. In many parts of
the Union it has been used as a pretext and instrument, to inflame the passions
of the people, disturb the peace of the country, destroy respect for the laws,
and relax the authority of the government; and, in one State to produce such a
commotion, as threatens an insurrection, if not a separation from the Union.

It is proper for men in all stations and peculiarly in my station, to endeavor
to counteract such mischievous passions, and miserable consequences. With this
view, I shall examine the objections, which I have observed to have been
offered against this law solemnly established by the authority of the United
States.

1. It is objected to this law, that it is contrary to the (...) the
Constitution.

We perhaps ought not to wonder, that this objection in made. Added to the want
of sense and knowledge in some of the objectors of modsty in most of them, and
the general disposition, from prejudices excited and nourished by slander, to
believe every act of administration wrong; the habit of oppo^ition prepares
their minds to make and receive it. For a habit of opposing every thing makes
dreadful havoc, not only on the feelings and consciences but on the
understanding itself.

This objection is made on two grounds.

The first is, that the Constitution declares, that "the migration or
importation of such persons, as any of the States now existing, shall think
proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by Congress, prior to the year one
thousand eight hundred and eight; but a tax or duty may be imposed on such
importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each persons." Art. 1, Sect. 9.
From this it it inferred, that, as Congress cannot yet prohibit such migration
or importation, they cannot remove the persons, who have migrated or been
imported; for this, it is said, would be, in effect prohibiting the migration
or importation.

It is well known, that the prohibition in view respected only slaves, This was
universally understood, at the time of the publication of the Constitution,
during its discussion and ever since. All the members of the Convention know
this. The Speaker of the House of Representatives of Congress, who was a member
of the Convention, did in the argument on this bill in a committee of that
House, expressly declare this to have been the avowed sense of the Convention,
on this clause of the Constitution; and no man of any knowledge of the subject
has ever seriously entertained a doubt of this. The Convention was so averse to
the trafic in human beings, that they could not directly name slaves, slavery,
or the slave trade. The southern members thought their States not yet prepared
for the prohibition of this traffic. The other members agreed to give those
States twenty years to think of it. In that space they would probably abolish
the slave trade themselves; or, after that, Congress might do it. In the mean
time, the Convention would not give slavery the sanction of being expressly
named. Instead of the word slaves, the word persons was used; and, to
correspond with this, the word migration, and explanatory of this, the word
importation, as more properly applicable to slaves, or persons considered, not
as aliens, but as property. Or considering this prohibition as repecting only
slaves we find another reason for this construction, in the power reserved to
Congress "to impose a tax on such importation; while no such power is expressed
as to migration; and thus for construing these words as meaning a different
manner of introducing slaves. Congress is restrained from prohibiting their
importation by sea, or their migration by land, into any of the States; but may
lay a duty on their first importation, not on any subsequent migration; the
duty in that case being presumed to have been paid before. -- While the
prejudices or necessities of the States then existing were thus indulged; the
Convention confined this indulgence to them, and did not restrain Congress from
prohibiting the migration o^ importation of slaves into any State thereafter to
be established; but left them to the discretion of Congress. Whatever reason
may be assigned for it, this is certain, that it was the plain meaning of the
Convention, and has been the uniform construction of the Constitution, that the
restraint laid on Congress, by this clause of the Constitution, applies only to
the prohibition of introducing slaves.

But supposing this not the true construction of this clause of the
Constitution, and supposing that Congress is thereby restrained from prohibing
the migration or importation of any aliens whatever; it does not follow, as a
just consequence from this, that Congress can make no law to remove such
aliens. A rule will not be extended beyond the strict words, if this extension
will promote mischief; especially if it endanger the safety of the people,
which is the supreme law. I would ask whether this restraint, supposing it to
respect aliens generally, must not be limited to times of peace; or whether it
must govern in extraordinary times of danger, or must then give way to the
great rule of self-defence and general welfare? Let us try this construction by
the rules of reasoning. It is a rule that, if an argument prove too much, it is
unsound. Suppose a body of Frenchmen to arrive at Boston, with arms and
ammunition, which men may carry for their own defense, and tell the people
there, that they are persons who have migrated to settle peaceably in the
country. Another body of such emigrants, with the same tale in their mouths,
arrive at New York; another, at Philadelphia; another, at No: folk; and
another, at Charleston. Must the State Legislatures of Massachusetis, of
New York, of Pennsylvania, of Virginia, and of South Carolina, be convened, to
order those several bodies of emigrants to depart out of their several States?
Well; the Boston emigrants march peaceably into Connecticut; and the South
Carolina emigrants into North Carolina; and so of the others, till they all
meet pec^e^bly in Maryland, and then declare, that they are come, by order of
the Directory, to settle there, and to prevail on the President and Congress,
to give the tribute demanded by the Directory. All this they may do; and yet,
if Congress had proceeded to make a law, to prevent their landing, or essect
their removal, we should be told, that Congress cannot prolubit the migration
or importation of aliens! This seems a strange absurdity. And yet the absurdity
of this case is only altered, it is not removed by substituting the case on
which Congress has acted. Spies are, at all timer dangerous; they are generally
not less, and they are often more dangerous than open en^imes: and those who
corrupt our opinions, and pervert our duties, are the most dangerous of all
enemies. A power to make such law is clearly necessary, for the general defense
and welfare of the United States; the care of which is properly deposited with
the government of the United States.

For "the people of the United States, in order to form a more per^ter union,
insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common desence, promote the
general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to themselves and their
posterity;" U. S. Constable. Pream.
e^tablished a Constitution, by which objects of general concern to the ration
are properly submitted to the management of the general government. And this
government is expressly bound to "guaranty to every state in the union a
republican form of government, and to protect each of them against invasion and
domestic violence;" Constable. Art. 4. sect. 4.
and has "power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for
carrying into execution all the powers vested by the Constitution, in the
Government of the United States, or any department or office thereof." Constable.
Art. 1. Sec. 8.
The restraint or expulsion of aliens, in times of war or danger, has, by
almost all nations, been considered as a necessary measure of protection and
self-defence: and, from the nature of the case the law of nations, and the
general constitutional authority of the government, I cannot permit myself to
doubt, that a power to restrain or expel them necessarily exists in the
government of the United States, as in every government charged with the
general welfare, the common defense, and protection against invasion and
domestic violence. If this be a necessary and proper mean of accomplishing any
object, with which the government of the United States is charged; the power of
exerting it is clearly vested in that government. The difficulty of obtaining
the universal consent of the individual states to any measure, however
salutary, was sufficiently experienced, as the great evil to be remedied by the
Constitution. And a construction, of this constitution were it admissible, will
not be favored, which would leave the general defense of the nation at hazard,
on the caprice of a single State.

But this law is said to be contrary to the express words of the Constitution,
because the Constitution declares, that "the trial of all crimes shall be by
jury." Constable. Art. 3. sect. 2.


There is one general observation, which applies to all the objections to this
law, from the Constitution. It is, this; that aliens arenot partics to this
instrument, and, therefore, can claim no benefit under it, unless they are
expressly named. The constitution is made by "the people of the United States"
Constable. Preamble.
And for whose benefit? For the benefit of the people of the United States
surely. It is the charter of the privileges of the citizens of the United
States to which none but citizens of the United States (...) title (...) The
people of the United States therein limit the power of their covernment over
themselves; but lay no restraint on the power of their government over aliens.
This was not in their veiw at all. Until aliens become citizens, they are in
the power of the ordinary legislature. The legislature may receive them, and
admit them to become citizens; or may reject them, or remove them, before they
become citizens. When they come here, they know, that they come at the
discretion of the ordinary legislature, can claim no privilege as citizens, and
have no reason to complain, if this legislature rem ve them, before they become
citizens. The legislature may refuse to admit them to become citizens, by
enacting that citizenship shall be acquired only by birth. If the legislature
receive them, retain them, and admit them to become citizens; then, and not
before, have they a right to claim the benefit of the Constitution made for
citizens. This is clear reasoning. The citizens who made the Constitution,
bargained for themselves, and all who, after them, should become citizens; but
did not bargain for aliens. Would an American citizen removing into France,
claim, as a citizen, the benefit of the French Constitution, against an act of
the legislature? Would a man, received under the laws of hospitality, into the
house of another, tell the master of the house, when he orders him to depart,
because he suspects him of ill designs; "I will not go, you have a lease of
this house, you have admitted me, I will continue in it under your lease?"
Aliens are tenants at will, and may be removed at the discretion of the owner.
When they become citizens, they become tenants on fixed terms, and cannot be
removed but according to those terms: they are freeholders, and cannot be
deprived of their rights, but on a known forfeiture regularly ascertained.

If, therefore, aliens have no right to remain, it is no deprivation of right
to order them to depart; and, if it be no deprivation of right, it can be no
punishment; and, if it be no punishment this order may be made, without any
crime, on the mere suspicion or arbitrary will of the legislature, which, with
respect to them, is sovereign, as, with respect to citizens, the Constitution
is sovereign. Even a citizen may be deprived of his right to personal liberty,
without any actual crime, on the mere suspicion of another, on which a
magistrate deems it necessary to require security of the peace. So may an alien
be deprived of our indulgence to remain among us, on the mere suspicion of the
legislature, that his residence here is dangerous to the public peace. This,
being no deprivation of right, but a mere denial of a favor; is no punishment,
but a mere exercise of the right of self-defence, which the government of the
United States, like that of every other nation, may exert at discretion,
without any crime or any trial.

All that is said of a right to trial by jury is out of the question. That
refers to an investigation of offenses previous to punishment, or a deprivation
of a right. -- Here there is no offense, but a suspicion, alleged: and, as,
even in the case of a citizen, he may be imprisoned, for the secutity of an
individual; so, in the case of an alien, he may be removed, for the security of
the nation. And, in this, there is no punishment, because there is no
deprivation of a right. It is neither an injury nor a punishment; it is a
measure of self defense, inherent in every owner of a house, to turn out of his
house a stranger, whom he does not choose to entertain longer.

I will again put the case of a stranger admitted, under the laws of
hospitality, into a house. The owner thinks he has reason to suspect, that this
stranger intends to rob or murder him; or to assist a gang of thieves, whom he
suspects of this intention. He tells the stranger, that he has such suspicion
and desires him to depart. If the stranger say, "Your suspicions are wrong, you
must prove them, car^y me before a magistrate, and let me be tried and
convicted, before you take upon you to turn me out of your house;" would this
be an answer? Shall the master of the house, in order to give the stranger the
privilege of being tried and convicted, give him and his associates an
opportunity of accomplishing the wicked purposes suspected? Suppose the master
of the house reply, "I am not well acquainted with your character, but whatever
at be, I have a right to turn you out; go to my steward, and, if you can ^^
explain yourself to him, as that he choose to permit you to remain, I agree;
but if he order you to depart, you must go;" would not this be reasonable?
Would this be any punishment of the stranger? No; it is the right of
self-defence. But, as a right to exercise this power will not authorize the
master of the house wantonly to beat the stranger, or violently to take his
money from him; so a right to remove an alien from out territory, does not
authorize a power to punish him without a trial by jury.

That aliens, before they can be punished, or deprived of any right, for an
offense, must be tried by a jury, results not from the express words of the
Constitution, which refer not to them, but to citizens. It results from this,
that our courts know no other mode of trial, and have no authority to adopt any
other.

2. But, if this law should not be contrary to the express words, it is
objected, that it is contrary to the principles of the Constitution, which
distributes the legislative, judicial and executive powers into three
departments; while this law confounds them all in the Executive; and this, it
is said, establishes despotism.

I might rest the answer to this objection, of a confusion and accumulation of
powers being a violation of the Constitution on the observation already made,
that this law operates upon none so: whose benefit the Constitution was
established, or whom the Constitution was intended to affect; and cannot,
therefore, be a violation of the Constitution. It operates only on aliens. No
citizen has any despotism to fear from this law. Any citizen may,
notwithstanding this law, plot as many "treasons, stratagems, and spoils," as
he pleases; and, if he can escape the judiciary, may bid the President defiance.

But, the fact is, there is no confusion of powers in this law, but such as
convenience or necessity, consistently with the principles of the Constitution,
introduces into many other laws, to which to man would dream^ of objecting.

The Constitution has not established, and no human Constitution can establish,
a perfect, but only a modified, separation of powers. What work of man is
perfect? -- It is very common, and it is convenient and necessary, for the
legislature to pass a law fixing certain principles, and leaving it to some
other part of the administration, the executive or judiciary, to ascertain the
cases to which such principles shall be applied, to detail the minute
modifications, which no foresight can suggest, and experience alone can
disclose; or to pass a law, which shall operate on a certain contingency,
leaving it to some other part of the administration, to declare when this
contingency occurs and the law begins to operate. This lessons not the
authority of the legislature; for such discretion cannot be exercised by any
other part of the administration, without the authority of the legislature; may
be restrained, corrected, or suppressed whenever the legislature thinks fit;
and is, therefore, altogether under the control of the legislature. (...) The
legislature, therefore, only determines something, which it is necessary for
them to determine; and leaves it to some other part of the administration, as
cases shall occur, to determine something else respecting this, which the
limited powers of man, the principles of just discrimination, and public
convenience, render it impossible for them to determine. Were the legislature
to take upon them to modify their laws to every case, they must be constantly
in session; and human capacity would render it impossible for any one body of
men, to discharge their task. Therefore, the legislature wi^ely contents itself
with establishing general rules, and leaves, to some other part of the
administration, authority to ascertain the modifications and exceptions. Thus
the legislative power determines, that certain actions shall be punished; but,
us there may be degrees of such actions, more or less aggravated, leaves it to
the judiciary to ascertain the degree of punishment; and, as, in some cases,
all punishment may be dispensed with, leaves it to the executive to pardon, at
his discretion. All this is necessary for the sake of humanity, justice, and
public convenience; and it seems absurd to say, that the principles of the
Constitution are thereby v^ olated

On such principles this Alien Act is framed. It establishes an authority in
the President "To order all such aliens, as he shall judge dangerous to the
peace and safety of the United States, or suspect are concerned in any
treasonable or secret machinations against the government thereof, to depart
out of the territory of the United States." But, as a general exertion of this
authority may not be necessary, it provides, "That if any, alien so ordered to
depart shall prove to the satisfaction of the President. That no injury or
danger to the United States will arise, from suffering (...) alien to reside
therein; the President may grant a license to such alien to remain within the
United States." What more prudent or proper method could the legislature have
adopted? While they were in session, and a war was in view; must they wait,
till there was a declared war, or an actual in -- was on, before they
established the principle, that aliens might be removed, in a certain manner?
When they established this principle, they were obliged to establish it without
any exception? Or must they sit, or be convened, to decide on every case proper
as an exception? This would seem, if not absurd and impracticable, at least,
very inconvenient. Surely the legislature did better. Congress has, by this
law, declared, that aliens are removable; just as that offenders are
punishable; and has said that the President may choose, out of all, what aliens
shall be removed, just as he may choose out of all what offenders shall be
punished. The President may tell any alien, "I will permit or license you to
remain;" as he may fell any offender, "I will pardon you." And, in doing this,
Congress has violated no principle of the Constitution.

3. Lest this law, when tried by the words, and by the principles, of the
Constitution, should appear unexceptionable, and escape censure; it has been
endeavored in excite a ^lamour against it, by drawing a melting preture of the
di^^^^^ of aliens, who may thus be ordered to depart out of the country, at the
will of one man.

This is all work of imagination. It cannot be denied, that there is a right in
the United States, as in every other nation, to remove aliens; and that there
may be cases in which the safety of the nation will render in necessary to
exert this right. -- And, I think, it cannot be denied, that, in the last
session of Congress, the United States were, if any nation ever was, in a
condition that required it, as a solemn duty, to exert this right. The rights
and safety of individuals must never be put into competition with the rights
and safety of a nation. Aliens have but an imperfect right, the right of
hospitality and civility, to remain in any nation, to which they are not bound
to permanent allegiance. And if the rulers of the nation, in which they have a
temporary indulgence to reside, suspect any danger to the nation, from their
residence, and order them to depart, they have no right to remain. The United
States were threatened with danger from France, and by the same means which
France has uniformly adopted, to bring danger and destruction on other
countries; intestine divisions. Aliens have the least interest in the
prosperity of this country, and owing the least duty only a temporary duty, to
it, were the most likely to yield themselves the readiest agents of France. And
the little respect, which, in this country is paid to the rights of election,
gives them, here, an opportunity of mischief, which they could, in no other
country, enjoy. Though some of our own citizens may be base enough to yield
themselves as instruments of a foreign power, the Government of the United
States, has no authority to remove them. But it has, like every other
government, in time of danger, authority to expel aliens; and the right and
duty of common defense, and protection against invasion and domestic violence,
required that this right of expulsion should be exerted. Nor was the exertion
of this right proper only against French aliens. The principles professed by
the government of France have excited through the world an enthusiasm, which
nothing, but experience of their destructive consequences, can correct. There
is, in all nations, a number of warm speculative men, combined together, to
promote the diffusion and prevalence of this theoretic liberty. Many of these,
either expelled or slying from their own country, reside in the United States;
and are, here, it seems, systematically united, not in support of the
principles of our government, but, of an imaginary political millennium, a
government which never existed, and, while man remains as he is, never can
exist; in support of the fanciful principles, which, in the progress of its
revolution to anarchy and despotism, have brought so much misery on France, and
on every country where the arts and arms of France have prevailed. These
dogmatics, invincible by reason or experience, united in principles, however
dispersed in place, as a nation of themselves, are enemies to all governments;
and, like the preachers of a new religion, think all other rights and duties
ought to yield to the great duty of establishing their principle. To this duty,
they will sacrifice all other considerations; and nothing, however cruel or
destructive, that can promote this, will, in their eyes be a crime. Such men
will be dangerous to any country, in which they reside. Instigated by the zeal
of proselytiss them apparent benevolence in their principles will give them an
irresistible influence on the young and unexperienced. And no country, in which
such men prevail, can hope for safety against the arts of France. Nor can any
Frenchman more earnestly promote the views and success of France, than any
native of any country, who by adopting her principles, has brought himself
within the pale of this new political church. Insensible of error, and deaf to
instruction, they are borne forward with the courage of conscience, the ardor
of inspiration, and the obstinacy of impenitence, by an impetuous enthusiasm,
to all the mischiefs, which guilt could effect. And wherever, there is no hope
of conversion, while we are in danger, the exertion of the right of expulsion
becomes a duty, which the rulers owe to the safety of the nation.

If there may be cases of humanity, which may make this exertion, where not
absolutely necessary, savor of severity; the question is, with whom the power
of indulgence may be best lodged, so as best to accomplish the great object,
public safety, and most to favor humanity.

As a measure of national defense, this discretion, of expulsion or indulgence,
seems properly ^^^^ted in the branch of the government peculiarly charged with
the di^^^tion of the executive powers, and of our foreign relations. There is
in it a mixture of external policy, and of the law of nations, that justifies
this disposition.

It was never known, that a numerous and complex body of men had a more tender
conscience, than an upright individual. Where many do wrong, each can cast the
censure from himself upon others. But a responsible individual must take all
the burden of the blame. Any man, with any claim to tenderness, would rather
risk the success of that claim to an impartial and humane individual, than to a
numerous body of men.

It remains, therefore, only to determine, whether the character of the
President be such, as to render him a proper depository of this power of
indulgence. Has the President no feelings of humanity? Is a life of piety and
justice no ground of confidence? The character of the President is well known.
And no alien, who meddles not with politics and plots, who favors not the views
of our enemies, and injures not the peace, safety, or defense of the country,
has any thing to fear from this law. Even with respect to dangerous aliens,
Congress has provided, that the rights of humanity (so far as. consistently
with the supreme law, the safety of the people, they can) shall be secured to
them. For it is enacted, " That it shall be lawful for any alien, who may be
ordered to be removed from the United States, to take with him his property;
or, if he leave any of it, that it shall remain subject to his disposal.

But is all our pity to be extended to strangers; and shall we extend no care
to ourselves, our wives, and our children? The French have threatened us with
pillage, plunder, and massacre. Such threats they have carried into execution
in other countries. They have threatened us with a party among ourselves, which
will promote their views. Some of them, it is said, have told us, that we dare
not resent their injuries; for there were Frenchmen enough among us, to burn
our cities, and cut our throats. And, it seems, we dare not remove those gentle
lambs Gracious Heavens are we an independent nation, and dare not do this?
Shall our constitution, intended as a shield to defend, become a sword to wound
us? Have we made a constitution, to restrain our administration from oppressing
ourselves, and so restrain it, as to submit our cities to alien incendiaries,
and our throats to alien assassins?

Vain is all our defense against our enemies without, if we guard not against
enemies within. If we leave an Achan in the camp, can we hope for victory? If
we leave a band of traitors in the fort, can we hope to defend it? If we suffer
French spies to stroll through our cities, our harbors, our shores, and our
country, and give information of all our strength, and all our weakness; how
can we be guarded against attack? If we suffer them to remain here to give
information of every ship that sails, that it may fall into the hands of French
privateers; how can we prosect our trade? If we suffer French a^cuts to remain
here, to corrupt the minds of our citizens, our printers, and our officers, to
pry into our councils, purchase our arms and ammunition, influence our opinions
and elections, render our people careless, and our administration weak; what
have we to expect, but all the horrors of a French invasion? What have we to
expect, but to see our houses in flames, and our families in blood?

I trust in God, that this will not happen. I trust, the measures adopted by
our administration, with cordial union among ourselves, will preserve us from
this calamity. But if it should come upon us, we will curse those, who have
lulled us with a sweet song of security, and gentle franternity of the French;
who, professing motives of economy have endeavored to tie up the hands of the
administration from essectual measures of defense; and, under the pretense of
valuing and seeking peace, do, in the surest manner invite war.

We are, at present, in a perilous state, and it is to be feared, on the brink
of some calamity. Menaced with the resentment of a foreign nation, we are
distracted among ourselves. In proportion to our dissentions, will be our
danger; and our safety lies in love to our Constitution, and confidence in our
administration. If the people will cordially unite in supporting active
measures of the administration, France will change her tone, from resentment to
complacency. But experience of her conduct toward all other nations must
convince us, that it is her means only, and not her object, that she will
change. Her object will remain the same, to reduce us to a subjection to her
will. Let us beware, therefore, of supposing that, when she speaks peace, she
means peace. She will speak peace, while we support our administration; and
again war, whenever she can persuade our people to oppose the administration of
their government. Divide and subdue is her maxim.

With a view to lessen the grounds of distrust in our administration, so fatal
to our own interest: and to increase that confidence in it, so essential to our
safety; I have endeavored, with candor and care, to examine the principles of
a law, which has been made a pretext for vehement clamor. I have, I think,
shown that it is constitutional and necessary. I have said (what is well known)
that there is such ground of confidence in the President, that there is no fear
that he will suffer it to operate against any alien, who comes and remains
honestly and innocently among us; and that he will exercise his authority only
against aliens, who use the opportunity of their being here, for the purpose of
disturbing our peace, alienating the minds of our citizens from our government,
betraying our situation, corrupting our measures, or weakening our defense.
And, I hope, it will appear, that, if our rulers had not exerted this
authority, we should have just reason to say, they have betrayed their trust.

O! if the people would but love their Constitution, and confide in its wise
and honest administration, and turn away from those who harrass their minds
with vain suspicions; how happy might we be! May the God of Wisdom open our
eyes to the excellence of our constitution, and the purity and prudence of our
administration; and to the folly, madness, and wickedness of those demagogues,
who mislead this people from their interests and duties, and glory in their
guilt. May he wean us from all partialities and prejudices toward any foreign
nation; unite our hearts in love and support of our government; and preserve us
from the machinations of a government, ambitious, desperate, faithless, and
corrupt; which flatters only to deceive; and caresses only to destroy.

FINIS.

