AMERICAN LIBERTY and INDEPENDENCE.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT WATERTOWN, ON THE Fourth of July, 1798.

BY THE REV. ISRAEL B. WOODWARD, A. M.

PRINTED AT LITCHFIELD BY T. COLLIER.

WATERTOWN, 4th JULY, 1798.
AFTER the exercises of the day were concluded, the Committee for the day met,
and appointed ELI CURTISS, Esquire. YOUNG L. CUTLER, and WM. J. PUNDERSON, to wait
on the REV. ISRAEL B. WOODWARD, and return him the thanks of the Committee, for
his truly sentimental and patriotic DISCOURSE, pertinent to the Liberty and
Independence of America; -- and in behalf of themselves, and at the desire of
the Audience, request a Copy for publication.

AMASA PARKER,
Chairman of said Committee.
AMERICAN LIBERTY, and INDEPENDENCE.
IT is no uncommon thing, that the inhabitants of these United States are
addressed upon the Anniversary day of American Liberty and Independence. This
day has been periodically observed, and very suitably celebrated, by some of
the first towns in this and in each of the States. It is a day, on which have
been exhibited the ablest performances of the accomplished Scholar, the zealous
Patriot, and the profound and sagacious Politician. It is not, therefore, with
a vain desire, or the least expectation of any thing extraordinary, that this
humble Village has devoted a few hours to this Anniversary Celebration; nor is
it to serve the immoral purposes of extravagance, pride, and dissipation; --
but it is to manifest that attachment to the best interests of our country,
which is as sensibly felt in the smallest town, as the greatest city.

The occasion of our assembling will not be misimproved, if we rightly consider
those subjects, which the day will naturally call to our remembrance.

What is better calculated to excite becoming thoughtfulness, and even
seriousness, than to turn our attention back to the memorable Fourth of July,
1776, -- when the bloody sword of tyranny was unsheathed against an infant and
inoffensive country, -- when a dreadful necessity was laid upon us to teach a
King and Nobles that we prized our just rights dearer than life, -- when from
the peaceful shades of domestic retirement, the father and the son were called
to bid adieu to an affectionate wife and sister, and hurry away to the field of
battle? A recollection of these things come nigh the heart; and while we
contemplate upon them, we feel resolved to be Free and Independent.

If any thing more be requisite to awaken your sobriety, turn a thought to the
present treachery, ferosity and inhumanity of the Five-headed Monster of
France. Consider that you are called at this day, to brave the insults and
depredations of a new enemy; -- that the magnanimity of the American hero must
once more be roused up, against an arm grown haughty by repeated successes, and
against a policy that has become selfish and unjust, by principles of
Infidelity and Atheism. To provoke you to becoming resentment, take an
imaginary prospect of the renewal of the bloody scenes of war, of your cities
laid in ashes, of your brethren slain with the sword, of your wives and
daughters ravished by beastly, disordered Frenchmen, and of the rising hope of
posterity blasted. Behold the war worn patriot, with his dusty brow, and
numerous scars, arraying himself again for the fight. See him abandoning his
companion, children, and home, leaving the enjoyment of that peace which, in
years past, he won by his fatigue and bravery. See his wounds, long since
healed, bleeding afresh, and his life hazarded to the uncertainty of battle,
that he, that his country, may continue to enjoy the sweets of a free and
independent people.

The attention and candor of this respectable Auditory, is now particularly
invited to a few general observations upon American Liberty and Independence.
-- I speak of a Liberty and an Independence peculiar to America; because these
terms are never to be understood without some limitation; especially is their
signification vague, when the slave of a tyrant* and the meanest ingredient of
a mob, claim them in common with the inhabitants of the United States. The
English style themselves a free and independent people; the French claim an
only prerogative to this appellation; but the east is not farther from the
west, than the sentiments of either from those of true Americans.

The Liberty enjoyed by the people of the United States, regards the privileges
which their own government and laws secure to them, and does not consist in no
government at all, but in that which contributes most to the national interest
and happiness.

It is not the genius of our Union, although it has been charged with it by the
partisans for French policy, to advocate the leading principles of the English
government*

Long before the Independence of the American colonies, even while they
recognized allegiance to the Crown, the dawn of Liberty was visible among them.
From the first settlement of this country, not only its local situation, but
the measures pursued by its inhabitants, presaged its future liberation from
the British government. It was not indeed a spirit of lawless revolt and
revolution, that induced our fathers to abandon their native shore, to trust
themselves to the mercy of a boisterous ocean, and finally to an uncultivated
wilderness: It was the fullest conviction, that any restraints imposed upon the
conscience, by arbitrary power, were wholly unjust and insufferable. The penal
laws, enforcing conformity, which disgraced the persecuting reign of James the
First, appeared more terrible to them than all the sufferings and dangers
attendant upon an emigration to the wilds of America, inhabitated by savage
tribes more wild than the country itself. This liberty of conscience, in
matters and Religion, is always intimately allied to civil liberty, and it
could not be that they should long be kept separate. The regulations and
bylaws, which, from time to time, were enacted by these first settlers,
however imperfect and absurd, (as it must be confessed many of them were) are a
standing proof that they were averse to royalty, and many things in the English
government.

Since the Independence of these States, through the rapid progress which they
have made in science, politics, and Religion, never have they expressed a
desire to return to the leeks and onions of monarchy. The title of King, and
the reproachful epithet of Tyrant, have vibrated in their ears the same sound,
and in their measures of government, they have not approximated toward that
fatal point, where the Supreme Executive of a nation is confined to an
hereditary succession, and posterity are irretrievably bound to adore a man,
and a man too in whose undeifyed, deifyed promotion, they could have no
suffrage.

They have also justly dreaded those orders of Lords and Nobles, which, in
Great Britain, are bowed down to, as are the inferior Gods of the Heathen. Nor
have they suffered their watchfulness to abate against a proud and factious
Aristocracy. That unnecessary distinction between the rich and the poor, the
great and the small, which aggrandizes a few, and enslaves the rest of mankind,
as far as the wide limits of monarchy extend, has ever been the abhorrence of
Americans. The least attention to these things, furnishes a proof how widely
these United States differ, in respect to their liberty, from Great Britain.

But it is an unhappiness to which this imperfect world is liable, to hasten
from one baleful extreme into its opposite. The dread of tyranny, has driven
thousands inconsiderately to abuse all power, and to plunge themselves down
from the miseries of despotic government, into the deeper distresses of anarchy
and confusion. This conduct savours more of folly, than of wisdom, and
resembles nothing so much as that of the French nation.

The American States have with equal care avoided this extreme. They have
shunned the most prominent features in French policy; not simply because such
policy was Gallic, but because they deemed it incompatible with real liberty
and happiness.

The Speaker pretends not to understand much of the policy and civil
institutions of France. That government, if such it may be styled, varies so
often, and appears in so many shapes, there is no comparing of it to any thing
in nature. It is a baloon-like-Machine, lighter than ethar, and carried, no one
knows where, by the gas of popular breath. It is quite camelion colored and
undiscribable, deceiving the eye of every beholder. Nothing can be more unlike
to this, than the government of the American States. The Constitution adopted
1780, bears testimony to the partial fondness of these States, for an energetic
government; and this reasonable partiality is further witnessed by the
New-Constitution, formed 1788. As an evidence of the regular and uniform
attachment of these States to government, -- look to the highest Chair in the
Union, and you will find it filled by a Man, who has ever been the confidence
of his country -- The man who was beloved in 1776, is beloved, revered, and
honored in 1789. It is not so in France, with those men who were the principal
agents in the revolution. They have first reared a Guillotine to support their
political principles, and then have they taught the world, the injustice of
their conduct, by being the first whose necks came under the ax. So dreadful
have been the consequences of many a faction, and so despotic the measures of
an ungovernable populace, in different ages of the world, that Americans can
never consent to sacrifice their government, for the French hue and cry,
Liberty and Equality. They would prefer the despotism of Charles the First, to
that anarchy, which attended his decapitation, and prepared the way for a
fraudulent Usurper.

The liberties of the American and French nations, are grounded upon totally
different and opposite principles. In their matters of civil government, they
adopt this general maxim, that mankind are virtuous enough to need no
restraint; which idea is most justly reprobated by the more enlightened
inhabitants of the United States, who denominate such liberty, licentiousness;
and the fruit of it, corruption; to whom it appears as ominous of national
mortality, as the most established consumption does of bodily death.

Building upon such principles, they have struck a most revengeful blow at the
foundation of all Religion. They have taken the most effectual method to remove
from the mind of man every restraint, which a belief in God, and a future
state, must necessarily impose; and to destroy from his breast, all sense of
propriety, with every conscientious tie. Assuming to themselves the character
of the fool, described by King David, they decree -- NO GOD. -- On the gates of
their burying grounds, and on the doors of their vaults, they order this
impious inscription to be written in capitals -- DEATH IS AN ETERNAL SLEEP. --
To such the liberty, rather the blasphemous licentiousness of the American
government! This country abhors that fell Monster, falsely named Liberty. She
believes that such policy is totally inconsistent with the freedom of any
nation; as it destroys national confidence; as it leads to injustice,
oppression, and cruelty; as it opens a door for tyrannical usurpation, and as
it renders the liberties, properties, and lives of her citizens more insecure,
than if respited at the option of a tyrant. What liberty, what safety can there
be to that people, who are artfully cajoled into the idea, that there is no
meritorious distinction between an honest man, and a knave?

As national character may go a great way to illustrate the wisdom, or folly of
national policy, we need only take a view of the manners and conduct of the
French people, in order to be satisfied how great the difference is, between
their professed, and our real liberty. If we view them in common life, under
the present administration of their government; insurrection, riot, and murder,
mark their footsteps. If in the cabinet; treachery, intrigue, and violence. If
in their intercourse with foreign nations; the violation of the most sacred
treaties, piratical depredations upon commerce, and the most arbitrary
usurpations of other rights. It is needless to say before this Audience, that
such conduct is reprobated by every American, as inconsistent with real
liberty, policy, or justice. Nor shall I pay an undue compliment to my country,
by saying, that she scorns to violate the sacred laws of nations; disseminate
principles of Atheistical madness over the world; and conduct like the whole
political body of that disjointed nation.

It is not pretended, that the government of these United States is perfect: --
A perfect human government was never known: -- It is probable, such a
government never will exist. That which best promotes the public welfare, must
ever secure the greatest desirable Liberty to any people, let their government
pass by what name it will. We boast not that every American is free -- meaning
that every villain in America is suffered to act out whatever his wicked heart
suggests -- This would be to glory in our own shame. Nor do we boast of being a
free people, when dependant on a tyrant's will: This would be glorying in
imaginary freedom. But when all the principal officers in government are filled
by the suffrages of the people, -- when all participate in the privilege of
free and frequent elections, -- when law restrains injustice, and encourages
virtue and industry, -- when learning, and every useful art and science are
promoted; -- when every man may enjoy all that peace, liberty, and property,
which is his just and unalienable right, -- when men may serve God according to
the dictates of their own conscience, provided they disturb not the public
tranquillity -- Then (...) a people possessed of all that liberty, which the
nature of man, and the condition of this world can well admit; and considering
the imperfection of both, perhaps the government of these American States,
approaches as near to the zenith of real liberty, as it is possible it should.

But ever I am aware, I shall trespass upon those observations, which this day
demand should be made upon American Independence. American Independence regards
the rights, which these States claim in respect to a foreign power. It is of a
more extensive signification than Liberty, -- as it embraces and protects
liberty, and all our civil and religious privileges. It implies, -- "that we
have full power to levy wars, conclude peace, contract alliances, and do all
other acts and things, which of right, belong to any people," without being
responsible* or tributary to any power on earth.

So often have your minds been lead to a consideration of the cause of the
separation of the American States from Great Britain, that even a brief
narration of the facts, relative to that separation, would be tiresome and
improper, did we not deem it important never to forget, and never to suffer
posterity to forget so glorious an event. This, therefore, is all the apology I
would offer, for relating before you, a few of those facts, which ought to be
familiar to the mind of every youth.

A few years since, a daring attempt was made by Great Britain, to subject
these States to her lawless dominion, and render them tributary to the Crown.
The arbitrary motives of the British parliament, were first openly displayed in
the famous, rather infamous Stamp Act, passed 1765. These motives were
afterward confirmed, by duties laid upon several kinds of merchandise, to be
paid by the Colonies. -- These repeated aggressions upon our just rights, soon
roused the indignation of a people, who could make reply to the Crown in the
spirited language of the Apostle to the chief Captain, -- I was born free --
Murmuring soon arose among the Colonists, that they were taxed by a government,
in which they had no representation. The discontents of the people soon reached
the British government; and notwithstanding arbitrary measures were pursued,
yet America was not destitute of friends, who modestly espoused her cause, and
prophesied unsuccessfulness to their proceedings.

However, the British Cabinet inflamed at opposition, hurried on by avarice,
envious at our increasing prosperity, and jealous of a growing power, attempted
to enforce its arbitrary measures by use of arms. This brought matters to a
precipitate crisis. America was Federal in an instant. She ceased to
remonstrate at a court, where every proposition was scorned, and a deaf ear
lent to every complaint. By a solemn appeal to the Ruler of the universe, for
the rectitude of her intentions, she made the following Declaration, July 4th,
1776: -- "In the name, and by the authority of the inhabitants of the United
Colonies, we are, and of right ought to be, free and independent States; and
are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown; and all connection
between us and the King of Great Britain, is totally dissolved."

This declaration was not the result of passion, or the soon extinguished blaze
of enthusiasm. It arose from the deepest conviction, that the parliament was
tyrannical in her public measures, and aimed at nothing so much as the
subjugation of these States, to her authority. Governor Pownal, a man well
acquainted with the feelings of the American people, said publicly in the House
of Commons, that the adherence of the Colonies to their native rights -- "was
not to be understood as though it were only the pretenses of party leaders, and
demagogues; as though it were only the visions of speculative enthusiasts; as
though it were the mere ebullition of a faction that must soon subside; as
though it were only temporary or partial: -- It is, said he, the cool,
determinate, principled maxim, of every man of business in the country."

This address, disregarded as it was, was verified by the event. Upon the
declaration of American Independence, ensued a long, expensive, and bloody war,
in which thousands of lives were lost -- the British nation disgraced -- and
the Independence of America secured. The war terminated in 1782, since which
time, every patriotic American has held this Independence dear, and I trust,
still holds it so.

While we commemorate the birthday of the liberty and glory of our country, if
not of the whole world, -- let none suppose, that we would sooner be enslaved
to a popular than a regal government. The same noble and generous heart, that
animated our brave countrymen to resist the arbitrary demands of one nation, is
still inherent in every American. The reason why resistance was made to the
measures of the English government, was not because that government was regal
-- but because it was oppressive. -- Oppression will as soon be resisted if it
come from any other quarter. Independence is a fire in every American, that
will burn equally well -- whether it be kindled by an easterly, or a westerly
wind; -- whether a cruel King, or a ferocious Populace endeavor to destroy it.

That the Independence of the United States is again threatened, I need not
urge before an Audience, whose breasts burn with just indignation against the
barbarious treatment of the French Directory. It has become a matter of but too
general notoriety, what ungrateful returns she has made to us, for the fond
attachment we cherished for her in a day of adversity. It is not long since the
combined powers of almost all Europe were leagued against her. They were ready
to "swallow her up alive, or whole as they that go down to the pit." At that
time we did not scruple to exchange with her terms of the most cordial,
reciprocal and sincere friendship. Animated with the fond hope, that the
liberty of young America was giving freedom to millions, who had for centuries
groaned under the iron chains of despotism. Vive la Republique, was the ardent
desire and general voice of every American. But behold the duplicity, the
fickleness, and above all, the ingratitude of that inconstant nation! They have
violated the most sacred Treaty; -- they have repeated their depredations upon
our commerce; -- they have insidiously endeavored by spies, and intriguing
characters, to sound the principles of our policy, and the feelings of our
countrymen, and carry home news. Their Ambassadors, leaving the man of probity
and honor behind them, have acted the part of dictators and disturbers of the
general peace, rather than that of the principled agents of a foreign power.
They have not only treated our Envoys with coldness and disesteem, but have
fastidiously endeavored to warp their steadfast integrity. -- They have
bantered them with all the lowlived round-about of a jockey-club, imperiously
demanding, for their own use, such a seaport as they should name, and such a
President as they should see fit to put at the head of our government; and
finally money, and a great deal of money, as the only terms upon which they
would make other proposals equally as unjust and extraordinary. Such you are
sensible is the threatening aspect of French policy toward these American
States.

Such a day as this, my Audience, calls up anew, the spirit of 1776. -- That
spirit* like the fire of Vesta, will never be extinguished. The sound of
oppression has for more than two and twenty years, and will for ages to come be
succeeded with the old Declaration, -- "We are, and of right ought to be, a
Free and Independent people." It is ever laudable to go back to the origin of
our Independence, and celebrate that distinguished day; but thrice laudable
must it be considered in the present important era in our public situation. As
a willing mind, and heroic disposition, with the blessing of God, was all the
preparation necessary to maintain our Independence against the claims of a
King, the same invincible armoury will defend it still, against the wicked
encroachments of a popular assembly.

But the observations that have now been submitted to the attention and candor
of this brilliant Assembly, might lose the effect they are designed to have,
were they not duly enforced. I trust we are not bigoted in our estimation of
American Liberty and Independence, or enthusiastic in our endeavors to support
them. If they be not maintainable upon a rational foundation, let them fall.

What is admissible in a discourse like this, to show how excellent our
Constitution and laws are in theory, is already aticipated under the article of
Liberty. Let it suffice to say, that we verily believe our government to be the
best possible for our country, and essential to its interest, and happiness --
And it being our just right, we ought inviolably to support it. -- Shall we
then, abandoning it, plunge ourselves into the dark abyss of visionary
speculation? -- Shall we barter it away for the dangerous consequences of
revolutionizing? This would be the height of folly; it would be French madness
in the extreme.

But theories are visionary, -- we must appeal to experiment. And have not the
smiles of an auspicious Providence beamed their brightness upon us since we
have been a Free and Independent people? Under what government in the known
world have a people ever enjoyed both civil and ecclesiastical privileges,
equal to these United States? What infant nation is delineated upon the pages
of history, that has made such rapid advances in literary and useful
improvements? I should not particularize an individual among the literati of
America, did not justice to this Town demand it, which is acknowledged to have
given birth to one, whose Mc'Fingal has exposed the madness of a day; whose
matchless wit and satire has clothed with sickening shame the brazen brow of
vice, and lighted up a joyful smile upon the fair face of conscious virtue. Let
the improvements that have been made in agriculture, commerce, and navigation,
speak for themselves. Experience has already proved, that every thing in which
our national interest consists, is promoted by that freedom which we possess.
"Why" (asked an English nobleman in former time) "are the inhabitants of the
rich plains of Lombardy, where nature pours her gifts in such profusion, less
opulent than the mountains of Switzerland?" -- The answer was, -- Because
Freedom, whose influence is more benign than sunshine and zephyrs, -- who
covers the rugged rock with soil; drains the sickly swamp, and clothes the
brown heath in verdure; -- who dresses the laborer's face with smiles, and
makes him behold his increasing family with delight and exultation. FREEDOM has
abandoned the fertile fields of Lombardy, and dwells upon the rugged mountains
of Switzerland. If such an encomium was passed upon the Liberty of the Swiss
Cantons, how much more may we pass a panegyric upon the government of United
America? Shall we not then be attached to it, as to that in which consists our
national honor, respectability, and glory.

The deplorable consequences which must follow from the sacrifice of our
Liberty and Independence, form another motive of attachment to it. On the the
one hand, Tyranny sways his iron scepter, and the drawn sword is pointed at the
vitals of liberty. On the other, the destroying system reaches forth her
tremendous jaws, as if greedy to absorb the universe. England, and every
monarchy in the world, doubtless hope, and probably expect, that the French
government will work its own ruin. France entertains as full a persuasion that
the reign of Kings is nearly ended. While the United States observe a happy
neutrality, it is certain that they will be the jealousy, if not the envy of
both. But should they, leaving their own government, side with either, what
American can anticipate the consequences without trembling? It seems an adopted
opinion, that the present extraordinary commotions in Europe, must finally
terminate in the firmer establishment of despotism, or in the more extensive
spread of disorganization and licentiousness. The one must make the world a
Bastile; the other a Chaos. It is needless to say which state would be the most
miserable: -- Heaven avert from these States the miseries of either. This view
of the state of our Union, ought to convince us of the necessity of adhering
strictly to our own Constitution, while we do not unnecessarily intermeddle
with that of England or France. Never was there a time since the establishment
of our government, when a steadier hand was needed to direct it, or firmer
patriots to support it. This vessel, with Sylla on the one hand, and Carybdis
on the other, requires the eye of an eagle to watch its motion, and the
dexterity of a skilful pilot to vary the rudder with the current, and the sails
with the wind.

An additional motive of attachment to our happy government must arise from the
consideration, that it is the production of American wisdom. The politicians
and legislators of Monarchies, either court the favor, or dread the frowns of
a tyrant; -- those of democracies -- that of the populace. Under these
temptations and embarrassments, it would be a miracle for them to form a
system, which Americans would deem only tolerable. But the wisdom exercised in
forming our Constitution and laws, was not adulterated with such poison.
Washington, Adams, Franklin, Hamilton, and not to forget Sherman, Elsworth and
others, who have done immortal honor to their memories in the Cabinet; have
been peculiarly free from motives of corruption. Being born and educated in
this land, they could but be acquainted with its genius, numbers, local
situation, and strength; and what is more to be desired, would naturally be
attached to its interests. They are men, whom a country burdened with riches
and luxury had not corrupted, -- and whom an ignorant and barren country had
not debased. They are men, whose views of things were extensive, and whose
dispositions were apparently benevolent. United and persevering in their
opinions, they have recommended that form of government, under which we live to
our approbation and acceptance. In such men, we believe, that real political
wisdom must reside. If the great body of the people, who are but slightly
versed in politics, complain of this government, where will they go to find a
better? Will they seek national repose upon the icy bed of tyranny, or upon the
burning coals of democracy? Permit me to speak with warmth. Those men who labor
to excite dissatisfaction among the people on account of the present
government, or its administration, or loosen the ties of attachment to it, are
a disgrace to the American name. -- They have not a feeling of that patriotism
which signalizes the sons of freedom; nor a spark of that benevolence which
desires the reformation of the world.

Consider further, American Liberty and Independence have been maintained by
our country's valor. Had they come to us without a price, we might expect,
that although they were taken from us, their return would be easy and
expeditious. But they have been grasped at by tyranny, and required the most
distinguished heroism to retain and establish them. They are now grasped at,
threatened, undermined by a furious democracy. When we reflect with what toil
and magnanimity -- with what perseverance and greatness of spirit they have
been purchased; -- shall we desire to forsake them, and hazard the experiment
of changing them for a constitution, that is not recommended by a trait of
American valor? -- Turn up an eye to the pinnacle of fame: -- There sits
Washington, who, in the establishment and maintenance of our government, has
afforded an example of heroism to the world. He has wisely projected, bravely
fought, and gloriously conquered. His name, his character, his achievements,
his virtues, will live in the remembrance of the world, and the praises of the
virtuous, till tradition is lost, and the pen of the poet and historian forget
to move; or till a degenerate world, seduced by the licentious principles of
the European ILLUMINATI, despise all sense of propriety, and cease to
distinguish between the worthy and the base. Look also at the politic, the
steadfast, the worhty ADAMS, who, as a reward for his well proved bravery and
patriotism, is invited to dignify the first seat in government. To enumerate
all those who survive the late American war, in which they did immortal honor
to their country, would be to count the luminaries of the heavenly world. In
these men do we see that heroism by which the Union of the American States has
been consolidated, -- and their government established? Shall we then suffer
our attachment to government to abate? -- Shall we be guilty of such
ingratitude to men who have done, and suffered so much for us? We may
relinquish our pleasures, we may sacrifice our property, but never may we
squander away the services of our countrymen.

Lastly, let it be remembered, that the Liberty and Independence of America,
has been maintained by the blood of her citizens. This day the remembrance of
Warren, at Bunker-hill; of Montgomery, at the fortifications of Quebec; of
Mercer, on the plains near Princetown; of Worster, and of many other gallant
officers from the several places, where it was destined by Heaven, that they
should fall -- demand a sigh and a tear, the choicest, the most becoming
tribute we can pay to their memories. -- And when this Town remembers one of
her sons to have been instantly severed before the cannons mouth, and his own
brother at another time, to have expired by the tortures of unfeeling Britons,
-- she will not withhold a sympathetic tear, although in fighting for the
common cause of their country, they held but a private station. Should we
disregard the government of the U. States, and fondly cherish the newborn
Monster of French revolution, -- would not the blood of the deceased, testify
to our ingratitude, and upbraid our guilt? Should we not be beset by a Host of
the accusing spirits of those friends to our country, who, in the late war,
sealed their attachment to it, by their wounds and death? Justice, humanity,
and Heaven forbid, that in the future history of our country, such an event
should be recorded, -- so black a page should ever be found.

Let us then rally round the standard of government in defense of our lives,
liberties, and properties; in support of our peace, honor, and happiness. Let
us keep unfurled the banners of independence. -- Let us now and forever have
laid up in our hearts, an offering of attachment to our country, freely to be
bestowed in an hour of danger. Let this offering have in it no ingredient of
base selfishness, treachery, and cowardice; but let it be the pure offering of
love, and a generous magnanimity, that will sacrifice property, repose, and
life itself, for the public good.

To effect this patriotic, and truly benevolent purpose, it is indispensibly
necessary that we be united, stable, wathful in all our public concerns, and
especially careful to maintain public and private virtue. -- Unanimity is the
strength of a nation: -- While it continues one, in sentiment and affection, it
has nothing to fear from within; but parties and divisions make a war at home,
and bring it into our own houses. If we are united, we have nothing to fear
from without; like a bundle of rods, while bound together by the general
attachment to government, we shall never be broken. Let our Union be once
separated, and where are we? It is but too well known to all, what advantage
has already been taken of us in consequence of that party spirit, and those
party men, which have disgraced America. The old spirit of whig and tory, has
been revived in the modern government and democratic parties. The French,
intent upon intrigue, bribery, and seduction, have artfully sown the seeds of
discontent, and revolution, in several parts of our Union. Blessed be God,
their despotic and haughty conduct of late, seems at once, to have opened the
eyes of those men, who, but lately, advocated their cause with so much warmth.
Is it not with pleasure, that we can now announce the triumph of unanimity?
Doubtless we have enemies to government, who long to see the United States
overrun, and plundered by a shagged banditti of the Sans Culottes. But these,
few in number, dejected with the prospect of ill success, and oppressed with
guilt and shame, make but a miserable figure, or none at all. With how great
satisfaction can we speak of the late political regeneration of the Southern
States; who are now joyfully embracing the right hand of their sister
New England. Their zeal is now founded on knowledge, and the prevalent
disposition from New Hampshire to Georgia, promises a lengthy enjoyment of our
national felicity. All, some base and impotent individuals excepted, are
united, and ready to suffer, bleed and die, rather than to see America trampled
under foot by a haughty, imperious, and infidel populace, who know no right but
their own fickle and arbitrary will.

But no more necessary is unanimity than stability; especially, when on one
day, we are courted and beset with bribes, and on the next, threatened and
assaulted, -- when two powerful, artful, and unfriendly nations, are contending
to draw us over to their interests. The surprising change that has taken place
in the feelings of this people, toward France and Great Britain within a short
period of time, evinces above all things, the necessity of stability in all our
public measures. The other day, success was drank to the arms of France; but
now the general voice is an execration against that miserable and pitiable
people. Mankind vary in their feelings, as the pendulum of a clock vibrates,
even when these vibrations are hazardous in the extreme. The ebb and flow of
popular opinion, is often very great; and as the stream is now rapidly retiring
from the coasts of France, there is danger lest it flow too copiously toward
those of England. Happy would it be for the nation, were she more stable and
uniform. A careful and unvarying adherence to government only, will carry us
safely through the present storm of national uproar and confusion.

If we are friends to our country, we shall certainly be watchful over its
interests. Nothing could be more impolitic in us, while we are attached to our
government, than to disregard the character and conduct of our rulers. The
rulers of a people ought to be watched with a jealous eye, in every government;
and there is no reason why prudence should not dictate this, as well to
Americans as Europeans. Mankind are naturally selfish, aspiring, and
treacherous. Political information is, with the utmost difficulty, diffused
among the great body of the people. Sinister ends are often easily effected.
Watchfulness is therefore indispensible. The utmost attention should be paid
to the characters of those whom we annually qualify to fill the first seats in
government. Carelessness in respect to such men, might endanger all our civil,
and religious privileges, and eventually reduce us to a state of complete
vassalage, or anarchy. Nothing, in a day like this, will apologize for any
inattention to the motions of any foreign nation toward us. It would be worse
than stupidity itself, not to put ourselves in a posture of defense, when the
most threatening preparations are making against us. Of all the injuries done
us, none ought to be so quickly resented, or so severely punished, as an injury
done to our country. The interests of our country, not only comprise our own,
but the interests of a growing and mighty nation; the man, therefore, who seeks
to injure his country, is guilty of the blood of millions. What then must we
think, or say of those wretches, who play the accursed part of an Absalom,
despising government, and speaking evil of dignities? Who cherish and stir up a
spirit of revolt from the government of the United States? Who rob their
country of its peace, and throw its prosperity into the bosom of a stranger? --
While we inspect the character and conduct of such, -- while our hearts are
filled with a just indignation against them, -- let us adorn, with a wreath of
laurel, those patriots, heroes and statesmen, whose public virtues, and whose
patriotic integrity, have remained pure and unshaken amidst a flood of
temptation.

Above all, -- the support of public and private virtue, is necessary to the
maintenance of our happy government. Never did a basely immoral people love
government, or sit peaceably under it. In the view of people, whose ideas are
contracted, and whose ambition is supremely aimed at self aggrandizement,
government is ever hateful. However inestimable may be our civil and religious
rights, if we are a people destitute of virtue, benevolence, and piety, they
cannot be perserved. A want of virtue is the source of corruption among every
class of men: -- Avarice will prompt to violence, intrigue, bribery, and
seduction: -- Luxury will brutalize and corrupt the appetites and passions, and
sap the foundation of public confidence: -- Vanity, and a love of ostentation
being indulged, lead a people to abandon substance, for show, -- and a reality,
for an empty sound: -- Selfishness, or a want of benevolence, conducts to a
life of dishonesty, knavery, and oppression: -- Impiety, implying a prayerless,
undevotional frame of spirit toward God, and a cold neglect, or open contempt
of his word and ordinances, opens a door for the free indulgence of every evil
passion, and for the boundless exercise of those numerous corruptions, which
prognosticate the inevitable ruin of such a people.

"In a world like this, (says a modern eloquent, and very judicious writer)
when the depravity of man is proclaimed by every law, is engraven on the altars
of every religion, and is written with a pen of adamant on the iron page of
history, -- how desirable is it, that this great motive to duty, this great
sanction of moral obligation, should, instead of being lessened by sophistry,
ridicule, and neglect, be preserved and strengthened to the utmost, to save
society from those numerous evils, of which it is the only remedy, -- and to
prompt men to those indispensable duties, to which it is often the only
effectual motive."

Not as a minister only, but as a man, and especially as an American, which
name we all venerate, I would insist upon the cultivation of religious virtue,
as the only sure defense we have against foreign or domestic evils; being under
the fullest conviction, that our future Washingtons' and Adams's, are to be
reared up in this way only; and that in this way only, we shall meet with the
protection of the great Ruler of the universe. To this, more than to any other
cause, (with humility be it spoken) may we impute the undeserved favors, which
the Great Eternal has, in years past, bestowed upon us. Possessed of a hope,
though not unallayed with fear, that this will be the case with the people of
America, I can address them in the animated language of the good, the pious
Hezekiah, -- Be strong and courageous, be not afraid, or dismayed, for the king
of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him, -- for there be more
with us than with him; with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our
God, to help us, and to fight our battles.

It belongs not to man to foretell the future prosperity and glory of the
United States. Such have been the wonderful changes in many nations and
kingdoms, within the compass of history, that the most extensive reading,
accompanied with the most judicious application, checks the rashness of
precipitate opinion, and teaches us to doubt. But this should by no means
lessen our attachment to our present Liberty and Independence, or abate our
endeavors to support them. In doing this, we shall at least, act an innocent
part. It is just, that we should use the means, and submit the event to God. In
such a conduct we may hope, but no otherwise could we even hope. It must be no
small encouragement to maintain inviolably, our civil and religious rights, to
anticipate the blessings we are thus ensuring to posterity. Those who are now
upon the theater of action, look forward to the growing hope of millions. Their
joys or sorrows must be commensurate with the favorable or the unfavourable
prospects which they entertain. It would be enough to becloud every face with
sorrow, and fill every heart with grief, to have in prospect the loss of our
just rights, and the oppression of a foreign enemy. The best, the only way we
can fortify ourselves, is to defend, even to the risque of life, those
republican and religious principles, which long experience has taught us, are
highly salutary and useful.

But, my Audience, the Christian Religion assures us that the time approaches,
when all governments shall be destroyed, and all their imperfections
annihilated in that grand system, which the Almighty shall introduce, to
conclude the great drama of all political establishments. This important era
will doubtless be ushered in by human means. Should we unnecessarily yield
ourselves a prey to the dominion of a foreign nation, a nation, the first
article of whose creed, -- "There is no God," -- is the pillar of blasphemy,
must we not fall a prey to His vengeance, who will yet dismantle himself of his
enemies? Are we not as a people exposed to an awful extinction? But by a firm
and vigorous attachment to government, by a strict adherence to our laws, and
by a patriotic and religious defense of our just and unalienable rights, as
men, and as Americans, we shall be happily subservient under the auspicious
smiles of Heaven, in promoting the felicity of our country, -- the Liberty and
Independence of nations, and the glory of the world. Pursuing the road which
God and our own conscience points out, we shall contribute not a little toward
introducing the glories of the latter Day.

And unto thy rule and protection, O thou sole Proprietor of all the earth, do
we commend ourselves, our government, and our country. Under thy protection, we
are safe, -- under thy smiles, we are happy, -- and under the merciful
bestowment of a Savior's purchase, we are, and must be glorious forever.

FINIS.

