Ambrose and Eleanor, OR THE ADVENTURES OF TWO CHILDREN DESERTED On an
Uninhabited Island. (TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.)

"Providence is their Pilot."

TO WHICH IS ADDED Auguste and Madelaine, A REAL HISTORY.

By Miss HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.

BALTIMORE: PRINTED FOR THOMAS, ANDREWS, AND BUTLER, NO. 184, MARKET STREET. BY
WARNER AND HANNA, HARRISON STREET. 1799.

PREFACE.
THE Publishers of the First American Edition of Ambrose and Eleanor, feel a
pleasure in presenting to their Country, a work replete with originality and
entertainment; which, from the correctness of the style, the chastness of the
ideas, and its containing an interesting account of the life of Two Children,
whose fortitude in adversity, and moderation in prosperity, peculiarly adapts
it for academies, schools, and private families, where it may serve the double
purpose of entertaining the elder, and instructing the younger branches. -- Its
also having been written by the author of a Visit of a Week, lately published
in Philadelphia, we think, will be an additional recommendation to those who
have read that pleasing and useful performance.

AMBROSE and ELEANOR.
A Clear sky, and prosperous gales, announced a happy voyage to the vessel in
which Colonel Carlton had embarked for England: it was returning from Jamaica,
leaving on the left the Isle of Cuba, and on the right the superb forests of
the ancient Bayti. S^. (...), so called (...) the (...) of the (...).
The pilot steered toward the Bermuda Isles; and the Colonel in a few weeks
hoped to embrace a wife and child, endeared to him by an absence of twelve
months; but these delightful prospects soon vanished; the rolling of the vessel
increased, a tremendous water-s^out approached, and threatened instant
destruction. This being, by the advice of the pilot, broken by a discharge of
cannon, all that remained to be done was to lower the sails, shut (...), and
abandon the vessel to the mercy of the waves. The Heavens were soon filled with
flashes of lightning; thick darkness succeeded day; the thunder rolled, and the
vessel, the sport of all the various revolutions of the boisterous waves,
presented only to the unfortunate passengers shipwreck or death; this soon
followed, for the point of a rock forcing an entrance into the vessel, in a few
minutes, precipitated it into the bosom of the vast ocean. In this moment of
danger, the Colonel, ever calm and collected, seized a plank, upon which he
committed himself to the waves: his example was followed by a few others, and
by his faithful domestic Peter.

Having long floated at random, and contended with the fury of the waves, the
Colonel found himself near land; but such was the violence of the sea, that at
the moment his hopes were strongest, he was frequently carried by an
overwhelming wave to the greatest distance: at length, after various e^^orts,
he gained a coast covered with rocks, over which he with difficulty climbed to
an extensive plain, where he sunk down, wholly deprived of sensation. In this
state he remained nearly two hours, when his senses by degrees returning, he
discovered two children, half-naked, on their knees, at his side, who, by their
innocent gestures, expressed the most lively interest in his situation. One of
them perceiving that he breathed, exclaimed, in a jargon he could just
distinguish to be English, "He is not dead, sister; he is come to take ^s home
-- are you not father?"

His first questions were, "Where am I? What country do you inhabit?" But
finding that he was not clearly understood, he looked round for some person to
whom he might address himself. Not seeing any one, he attempted to rise; but
exhausted with fatigue, sunk down, uttering involuntary sighs and groans,
forced from him by the weakness of his condition.

"He is hungry, brother," said one of the children, "I will go and ^etch him
some food;" and immediately she fled across the plain.

"Who do you belong to?" said the Colonel, recovering himself, "have you no
friends? no father, no mother?"

"Are not you our father?" asked the boy.

"I! my child," said the Colonel, "I do not know you."

"Will you not then love us?" said the child.

"Yes; but are you alone?"

"O yes," returned he, "we are all alone; nobody but Eleanor and Ambrose; we
see only the great beasts, and they frighten us very much."

"And who brought you into this country, Ambrose?" said the Colonel.

"A great house," replied the child, "that went ^on the water."

"And have you never seen one like it touch here?"

"O never," said the child; "there are only great men, all black, that come
sometimes in little boats. When we see them we hide ourselves for sear they
should eat us."

"Well!" said the Colonel with a sigh, "I am then lost without resource! I must
end my days here, far from my wife, my friends, my country."

"You will stay with us, will you not?" said the boy.

"Alas, my child! I have no choice."

"Oh," returned he, "we will love and caress you, as we used to do Derley."

"Derley! who was he?"

"Our good friend," answered the child; "but he is dead; we have wept a great
deal for him." As he said this, his sister returned with some tortoise and
colibri eggs; she brought also some dates and a large shell filled with a
liquor, which to the taste seemed that which flows from the palm tree. This
simple repast proved very salutary to the Colonel; his strength returned, he
thanked his little hosts for their solicitude, and reflecting anew upon his
adventure was astonished to conceive it possible that two children, so young
and so delicate, should provide for all their wants at an age when others
scarcely know how to walk or think: he wished to discover by what means it had
been effected, but they expressed their ideas very imperfectly; he could only
guess at their little jargon, and judge from it that they were English. He
resolved, nevertheless, while he awaited the return of day, to interrogate
them, that he might, from their answers, form some conjectures upon their
condition, and the cause of their being deserted at so early an age. "How old
are you?" said he. "We do not understand you," replied Ambrose; but when he
repeated, "I ask how many times you have seen the cold and hot seasons?"
Eleanor said, "We cannot tell; but since the time our good friend died, we have
at every sun made a mark with a stone on that great tree you see there. The
Colonel admited the ingenious expedient the children had employed, and going
toward the tree, by the light of the moon added all the marks, and counted
1528, which made four years two months and eight days since they had lost
Derley. "But," said he, "did he die as soon as you came here?"

"O yes," replied the children, "his blood slowed like the spring at which we
drink."

"He was wounded then?" said the Colonel.

"Very much," they replied.

"But," said the Colonel, "who brought you hither in the wooden house?"

"Mama, with a great many men; one of them was a very bad man; he beat Derley,
and gave him a great many ^uts with a knife, and then put him with us into a
little boat that brought us here."

"And do you," said the Colonel, "recollect where you lived before you went
into this ship? (for the wooden house you speak of is called a ship.)"

"Yes, in great houses, where there were many fine things; then we used to see
our dear father sometimes, and he used to kiss and love us."

"And was your father in the ship?" said the Colonel.

"No; before we went into it, he and mama (...) very much; and then we saw him
no more."

"In what place," said the Colonel, "was the ^^eat house in which you lived?"

"In a place where there were a great many others," replied Ambrose. "Do you
remember, sister, that a woman used to carry us often into a fine garden, where
there was a great river, and roads of trees, where fine women and men used to
walk, while we played upon the grass with little girls and boys?"

"Yes," said Eleanor, "I remember it very well."

From these answers the Colonel could draw little information; all that he
conjectured was that his little hosts were the victims of some sort of
treachery, and that Derley was their friend; and he thought it possible that
the fine garden of which they spoke might be St. James's Park; but all this was
not sufficiently clear; he hoped that time, by strengthening their reason,
would afford him a more satisfactory explanation.

No sooner had the morning sun inflamed the horizon, than he arose, and taking
the young pupils of Nature, who were henceforth to be his own, by the hand, set
out to take a view of the land which Providence had destined, for some time at
least, to be his abode. He discovered that it was an island, surrounded by
steep rocks, and accessible only on one side to vessels; it was not very
extensive, but was covered with mountains, woods, little hills, and cool and
fragrant valleys; here an embowering sorest invited the traveller to taste in
its religious enclosure the sweets of solitude: there a mountain slowly rising,
covered with fern, discovered from its top an extensive ocean, strewed with an
infinity of little islands, which appeared only like the points of so many
rocks. Farther on a spring of water escaped trembling from the hollow of a
cave, and ran meandering over beds of reeds to water a smiling plain, enamelled
with all the various beauties of vegetation. A thousand succulent vegetables
and blooming flowers, a thousand fruits and odoriferous trees, contended for
the shade and land; the cocoa, the casia, the palm and the banana tree, the
leaves of which were, according to the Indians, the vestments of our first
parents; the fig, the white cotton tree, in a word, all the most curious and
useful productions of America. No traces of men were, however, visible, but
those of different animals, such as otters, flags, goats, and the anta, a small
animal which resembles the elephant, though much smaller, and is common to
Peru. Among the birds was the sou, a little inoffensive ^owl, which has the
habit of clinging to the masts of vessels; the Edolio, so called from its
repeating, without ceasing, in a low melancholy ^one, ' edolio; and the (...),
a bird of an exquisite flavor.

"Well," said Ambrose, having led the Colonel over the island, "do you find all
this so frightful? Eleanor and I sleep when it is no longer light, and when the
sun shines, we run into the woods to seek food. We throw stones at the high
trees, and the fruits fall, and we eat them."

"But you had not always strength to do so," said the Colonel.

"No," replied Eleanor, "it is only since the dry weather that Ambrose thought
of it. O me! before we were not tall enough, and we only eat the fruits that
the trees let fall, or some eggs that the great fish brought to the side of the
water: but we are near our cabin; come, in father, you shall see it; take care
you do not hurt your head." It was' a kind of subterraneous cave, at which the
arrived through a deep valley, overgrown with palm trees. The Colonel readily
entered; but was instantly alarmed by a faeted smell, that nearly stifled him:
he advanced to discover the cause; but what was his horror and astonishment,
when, at the further part of the cave, he saw a disfigured corpse! it was
partly dry, and partly putrified and was covered with different aromatic leaves
"Do not be freightened," said Eleanor, observing the impression it made upon
the Colonel, "it is he!"

"He! my child, who!" "Poor Derley," she replied, "who fell dead in this
corner." -- "And have you, my children," said the Colonel, "inhabited a cavern
where -- " "Oh, we never left it," interrupted Eleanor, "that we might be
always with him." "Yes," said Ambrose, "we look at him every sun, and cover him
with fresh leaves." "Good creatures!" exclaimed the Colonel; "but, my little
friends, he can no longer hear you." "Oh! we know very well," said Ambrose,
"that he cannot hear us; for if he could, he would speak to us, but we would
not part with him for all that." "But, my dear children," said the Colonel,
"you expose yourselves to the danger of becoming sick, and dying likewise."

"Ah," said Ambrose, having remained thoughtful a moment, "once as we were
looking at Derley, Eleanor's face turned quite white, and she fell upon the
ground. I thought she was going to die; for I called, and she did not answer
me; Eleanor I said, my dear Eleanor, will you leave Ambrose all alone? but she
did not speak. Then I turned to the Sun, and begged he would give me back
Eleanor, or burn me with his fire. He heard me, for she got up and walked."

"Not the Sun, my child," said the Colonel, but God heard you."

"God! who is God?" "That Great Being, my child," said the Colonel, "who has
placed you upon the earth; who watches over you, who has miraculously preserved
your life: but I shall explain this hereafter, at present we must think of
taking hence this inanimate corpse."

"Oh, no," exclaimed the children at the same instant. "Suffer me to remove
it," said the Colonel, "I know where God would have it put."

"Pray, pray," said Eleanor, holding her little hands toward him, "do not take
it away: we shall die if we do not see poor Derley."

By dint of argument and entreaty, the Colonel, however, at length prevailed;
he drew from them a reluctant consent, and drawing the corpse of the
unfortunate Derley from the cavern, he began to examine it, hoping to form from
it some conclusions relative to the fate of the two little strangers.
Disfigured as it was, it appeared to be that of a man about thirty years of
age, tall and well ma^e: his clothes, upon being touched, fell into rags; but
the Colonel picked up a watch ^et with diamonds, and a gold snuff box, in the
inside of which was set the portrait of a woman: the damp had almost wholly
defaced it, but it was easy to distinguish that the principal features were
handsome. The box, he observed also, had a double bottom, in which he found a
letter, which he opened precipitately, but it was so macerated, that among
others entirely defaced, he could only distinguish the following words --

LONDON.
I have only -- to depart -- your children -- of Derley -- Dep -- four years
that -- union, this -- the first -- to God --

-- in Picadilly, at twelve --

Finding nothing more upon the corpse, excepting some guireas, a kni^e,
scissars, and a pocketbook absolutely in ashes, ^e resolved to inter it. "But,"
said he to the children, who, with eyes bathed in tears, and fixed upon Derley,
seemed buried in the most profound apathy, "how was it that you did not touch
the jewels your unfortunate friend possessed?" "Oh," they replied, "we loved
him too much to take any thing from him, and then we did not know he had all
these pretty things."

"You have never then searched him?" said the Colonel."

"Never," said Ambrose, "we only looked at him and then wept."

"What respectful tenderness!" exclaimed the Colonel. His thoughts then
reverted to the interment of the corpse. He had observed in an adjacent vale, a
little mount which rose covered with myrrh trees, and overshaded by four palms.
To this spot he immediately repaired, and having with a branch of the Bischalo,
the hard wood of which the negroes use for the construction of their cabins,
dug a grave, he deposited in it the remains of the unfortunate Derley, while
his two little friends beheld the mournful ceremony bathed in tears.

He then struck fire from a neighboring rock, a wonder which much surprised
the children, and burnt upon the grave the clothes of the deceased, adding a
quantity of mint, cloves, and other fragrant herbs that grew near, to purify
the air. Ambrose and Eleanor could not depart without casting many a lingering
glance toward a spot which contained in their eyes an inestimable treasure.
They walked -- stopped -- walked -- and would again retrace the same steps to
bid an eternal adieu to their good friend.

In the mean while the sun inclined toward the West, and the sea, as they
ascended the valley, reflecting his crimson rays, appeared a vast plain of
^ire. Arriving on the shore, the Colonel stopped to admire the glories of the
scene, and the children, forgetting their grief, walked hand in hand toward the
rocks, and amused themselves with collecting shells and sea-weeds. For some
minutes the Colonel lost sight of them, but Eleanor soon returned out of
breath, to t^ll him that her brother and she had discovered a great thing which
they believed to be a fish. "Come and see it, ^ather," said she; "it is dead,
so do not be afraid." Saying this, she led him among the rocks, where they
found Ambrose attentively examining something which the Colonel soon discovered
to be a large bundle of hammocks which the returning tide had driven on shore.
This suggesting to him the idea of recovering from the wreck some articles that
might soften the severity of his misfortune, an idea which had not till this
moment occurred to him, he began to search diligently among the rocks, and with
inexpressible joy, discovered two large chests, three small casks of brandy,
and some tubs of salt provision, besides several copper utensils and other
articles. These treasures were by degrees conveyed from the rocks, and
deposited i^^ a subterraneous cave which the children pointed out. The Colonel
then impatient to examine the contents of the chests, forced one of them open,
and found in it several suits of clothes, a quantity of shirts, stockings,
handkerchiefs, and some gold and jewels. The other which was the carpenter's
chest, contained a variety of different tools, and was considered by the
Colonel as a greater treasure than ^ll the rest.

The fatigues of the day at length rendering rest and refreshment necessary, ^e
kindled a fire, and roasted some pieces of salt meat. Then seating himself with
his young companions on the sea beech, he shared with them a meal of which
hunger made the chief dainty: and he was not a little diverted to see them,
with sparkling eyes, palate the flavor of meats, the relish of which they had
long lost, and tenderly incite each other to partake of a feast which to them
appeared delicious.

"You do not eat, brother," said Eleanor; "nor you, sister," returned Ambrose;
and then they both fell greedily upon their meats, which presently disappeared.
Their good friend smiled; and congratulated himself upon the power of
contributing to their happiness. The repast being ended, they all three
repaired to the cavern where Ambrose and Eleanor soon sell asleep. It was not
so with their friend: a thousand painful reflections kept him long from tasting
the same refreshment. He could not forbear contrasting his situation and
prospects the preceding day with those of the present moment. What a change
had a few hours wrought! Flushed with hope he was returning to his country to
enjoy with a wife and child whom he tenderly loved, all the conveniences and
the elegancies of life. He now saw himself the solitary inhabitant of an
unfrequented tract, obliged to renounce his wife, his friends, all he held
dear. These reflections, in spite of his fortitude, bedewed his cheek with
tears; but when he c^lled to mind the dangers from which he had escaped, that
his life, among numbers the waves had swallowed, had been preserved, be
acknowledged the goodness of the Being who had protected him, and with
cheerfulness and resignation committed his fate into his hands. His thoughts
then turned upon his little companions in whose f^te it was impossible not to
be interested, abandoned to themselves on an uninhabited island, at the early
age of three years and a half; for the marks upon the great tree forming four
years two months and eight days, the whole amounted to no more than seven
years, two months and eight days. Their preservation, he thought, could have
been effected by little less than a miracle, and viewing them as the objects
signally pointed at by Providence in his shipwreck, he resolved henceforth to
be to them a father, guide, and friend.

The rising sun awoke him from a short repose, and he looked round to salute
his fellow-citizens; but he was surprised to find that they had left the cave:
at first he concluded they would soon return, but an hour nearly elapsing, he
grew alarmed and having sought them without success in the cave they had
formerly inhabited, he repaired to the seashore which he traversed in the
utmost anxiety, calling them repeatedly by name. He knew not what to think, and
began to form a thousand horrid conjectures concerning wild beasts, that for
any thing he knew to the contrary, might inhabit the island, when the idea
occurred to him that they might be at the place where Derley was interred. To
this spot their affectionate hearts had in truth conducted them; he met them
returning through the wood, their eyes still wet with the tears they had shed
upon the grave of their friend. The Colonel chid them gently for the alarm they
caused him, and taking them by the hand, "I am pleased my little friends," said
he, as they walked through the wood, "with the gratidude and affection you
discover toward your unfortunate good friend; it convinces me that your hearts
are good; nevertheless you must cease to regret him; God has, I doubt not,
taken him from you to bellow on him a happiness that nothing can interrupt.

"How is that, father?" said the children, "we do not understand you."

"I will explain it to you, my little friends," said the Colonel, "I ought to
do so, but necessity engages me at present to defer this duty. We cannot
inhabit the gloomy cave we now occupy; we must endeavor to construct a more
agreeable retreat; a cabin that will shelter us from the injuries of the air,
and serve us as an asylum against all alarms. The children were delighted; they
jumpt round their good friend, exclaiming in an extacy, "We will help you,
father! we will help you!' He resolved, however, before he began his
operations, to visit the rocks, judging that the influx of the tide might,
during the night, have brought other articles from the wreck on shore. Nor was
he deceived; he found a cask of oil, a second (...) of salt provisions, and a
chest containing, besides linen, a variety of books, among which were some of
the best Latin and English authors. It contained also a case of mathematical
instruments, and a small mariner^s compass. The books were damaged by the wet,
but he hoped soon to dry and render them fit for use. Besi^es, these he found
several other articles scattered along the shore.

Having secured these new treasures, he turned his thoughts upon the grand work
of constructing a cabin, between two hills that rose near the sea coast, was a
cool valley, in the midst of which a spring of water, gushing from a rock,
formed a basin, bordered with a thousand odoriferous flowers. This valley was
shaded by palm trees, and exposed to the rising sun, was a stranger to the
burning heats of noon. It o^^ered an agreeable retreat to the philosopher, and
was on one side bounded by the whole extent of the ocean, and on the other by
an embowring forest. Here, at the entrance of the forest, the colonel resolved
to erect his new habitation, and with this design collecting the precious
instruments he had taken from the wreck, hewed two of those trees called
Bischalos, and shaped four stakes fifteen inches thick, and eight long; these
he drove into the earth at the distance of twenty feet from each other,
planting between each six smaller: this done, he filled the intermediate space
with flints, cementing the whole with a whitish sort of earth, very much
resembling that in Europe called marne, and which mixed with water formed a
cement to which the rays of the sun soon gave a hardness equal to stone. He did
not forget previously to leave in this little edifice a door, narrow, that he
and his companions might the better defend themselves, in case of an attack,
against the wild beasts. A large chimney was also formed, and two windows to
establish a current of air necessary in so confined a place occupied by three
persons. The l^teral parts thus finished, a covering was next to be thought of,
and this did not a little puzzle our architect, who having neither tiles nor
the tools necessary to saw planks, was embarrassed how to defend his house
against the rain and hail, the size of which is prodigious in North America. At
length, etc;cedil;alling to mind the manner in which the Africans roof their
dwellings, he placed seven or eight joists horizontally upon the building, and
then having raised others into a point, he formed the whole into a carcass,
with tenons and mortices, and covered it with the leaves of the palm tree
interwoven into a sort of mat, in the manner of the negroes on the gold coast:
he next made a partition, which separated the interior of the cabin into two
parts, and formed for Eleanor a little chamber, about eight feet square, the
entrance of which communicated with that which ^e designed for himself and
Ambrose. Three stools and a billet, serving for a table, were next produced;
also some plates, spoons, and drinking cups, made with the leaves of a tree
called the Balizeir, which are used by the natives of Madagascar for the
covering of their houses, and which, if well dried, will remain, it is said,
undecayed five or six years. It is impossible to describe the zeal and activity
of the Colo^el; alternately carpenter, mason, (...), and joiner, he pursued his
operations with a degree of vigor and perseve^^nce that removed every
obstacle. Ambrose and Eleanor, on the other hand, assisted him as much as their
strength would permit; they went in search of the earth of which their cement
was formed, moistened it, presented the tools, carried away the chips, gathered
the palm leaves (for they climbed the highest trees with the greatest agility)
joined them together under the conduct of their friend; in a word, united all
their endeavors to alleviate his fatigue, and accomplish a work of which they
felt, as he did, all the utility. At the end of a month the little edifice was
completed, and all that he had gained from the wreck, chests, tools, linen,
clothes, etc. conveyed into it: as for beds, he made three very commodious of
some hammocks, spread with mats composed of palm leaves dried in the sun. The
chimney concealed his kitchen utensils, which were hung upon hooks, driven into
the wall for that purpose: in short, every thing was complete, and the Colonel
and his little friends took possession of their new habitation. The children
knew not how to express their joy; they ran, wept, laughed, examined ^ll, and
leaping by turns on the neck of their friend, called him repeatedly their
father, their de^r Carlton, for he had taught them to express his name: then,
suddenly quitting him, they re-examined all, seated themselves twenty times
upon the benches, touched, and removed all the furniture, and then returning,
again threw themselves into his arms. The Colonel made them, at length, sit
down, recommended silence, and spoke to them in these terms. "It is time, my
children that I think of the great work to which God has appointed me; that of
your education: the forming of your hearts will not, I think, cost me much
trouble; they are good and susceptible: with respect to your intellects, I
believe them to be sound and comprehensive, but I shall form a better judgment
when I am more particularly acquainted with the manner in which you have
conducted yourselves since your residence in this island: it is necessary,
therefore, Ambrose, before I detail to you my plans, that you recount to me in
the most exact manner that your memory will permit, what you did upon first
coming out of the ship that brought you hither, and acquaint me with the means
you have employed since that time to preserve your existence, and to provide
for all your wants: arrange your ideas, my child, as well as you are able, and
do not omit the most trivial circumstance; the detail will be more interesting
to me than you may suppose."

The Colonel ceased, and Ambrose, who during a month had learned to reflect a
little, and to express his ideas in a more intelligent manner, was silent a few
minutes to recollect himself, and then gave, without interruption, the
following recital.

"We lived, as we told you, father; in a wooden house that went upon the water:
we had slept in it a great many times, and every morning Derley used to come
and take us up, and carry us to mama, who used to kiss us and cry, this made us
cry too. Once as she was kissing us and crying, a man came into the cabin, and
talked a great deal to her: it was that naughty man I told you of: mama cried
very much, and would have taken us in her arms, but he took us away from her
and threw us upon the ground. Then Derley was very angry, and seized that
naughty man by the throat, but he drew a very long great knife, and run it into
his belly. Then several ugly men came in, and put us and Derley into a little
boat, that went upon the water much faster than the wooden house. Derley
groaned very much, and we were all covered with his blood; but the men in the
boat laughed, and set us all three upon this land, father. Then Derley fell
down, and lay along time upon the ground: at last he got up very softly, and
took us by the hand, and walked to the cave, where you know we lived, father,
till you came; but as soon as he got in he fell down again, and dragged us upon
him. We cried, and spoke to him, but he did not answer, he only groaned. He
groaned all night, and we cried, and when the sun came again, he breathed no
more. We took him by the hands, but they were quite cold; then we spoke to him
again, but finding he did not answer, we went out of the cave, crying, and
running about up on the seashore. Eleanor soon fell down; I ran to her, and
fell too, for I felt as if I was going to fall asleep. While we were sitting, a
goat passed by with a young one sacking: at that moment it came into my mind to
drive away the young one, and suck some of the milk; so drawing myself under
the goat, the good creature let me (...) as much as I would, without going away
or hurting me. This g^ve me strength; I got u^, and led her to Eleanor, who
sucked some (...) milk, smiled, held out her hand to me, and got up; but the
go^t was going away, and we were afraid she would not come back to us. "What
shall we do:" said I to Eleanor. "Let us lea^^ (...) to Derley," she replied:
so we took her by the horn, and led her to the cave, the young one following
all the way. Still Derley did not speak, so we began again to cry, and call
him: Derley!!' we said, "Derley, speak to us, are you angry? we will do so no
more. Answer us, Derley, it is Ambrose, it is Eleanor; do you not love us?" Our
uneasiness increased every instant, we were so happy with mama! and now we were
in a frightful cave, all dark! This made us on a sudden thoughtful; we ceased
crying, and looked at each other, without speaking or stirring at all. In this
time we forgot our goat, till seeing she was gone, we run out of the cave to
seek her. In our way something fell from a hightree as we passed it, and
frightened us very much; we ran away as fast as we could, but at last venturing
to look back, and seeing nothing to alarm us, we returned on tip toe, to see
what had fallen from the tree, and found a fruit shaped like a very large green
pear: I was so hungry, that I could not help tasting it, and found that it was
very good: so I gave it to Eleanor, who eat half, and left me the rest. We then
went again in search of the goat, but seeing as we passed, a great tree that
water came out of it, being very dry, I put my mouth to the tree, and sucked
some. Eleanor did the same, and we both thought it was much better than the
water we had before drank. At last, thinking we should not find the gentle
beast which had given us her milk, we went back to the cave, which we were a
long time in finding. The sight of our good friend made us again cry very much,
till no longer seeing any light, we fell upon the ground, and slept till a new
sun. When we awoke, we kissed Derley, and being very hungry, ran to the tree at
the foot of which we had found the great pear; but there were no pears; so we
run to the seashore, crying, and repeating the prayers mama used to make us
say morning and night. "O, Eleanor, do you remember how frightened we were!"
There was a great beast upon the sands, just like a spider; Eleanor, who saw it
first, screamed out, and taking me by the hand, ran to our cave, where we hid
ourselves; for we thought the great beast was coming after us. We staid there
till the heat of the day, crying and screaming dreadfully; but finding it did
not follow us, we grew calm, and I began to think of the great pear which had
frightened us, and afterward proved so good: so I said to Eleanor, "Let us go
and see if the great beast is there." "Ah!" she replied, "it will eat us."
"No," said I, "if it wants to eat us, I will throw a great stone, and kill it."
-- Eleanor consented, and we went softly to the place where we had seen it, and
in its room found several yellow eggs. We did not much like the looks of them,
but I was so hungry, that I soon took courage to break one, and Eleanor and I
swallowed them one after another, and found them nicer than the eggs we had
eaten with mama. It was very lucky, father, that we found them, for we (...) as
if we should fall and die for want of food; but after we had eaten the eggs we
grew strong again, and began to speak of what had happened to us. Still we
called upon Derley, hoping in time to awake him, and at last got so weary and
sick, that we lay ourselves down to sleep till another sun. This too we spent
in crying, and seeking food. A very pretty little bird, with along be^k, and
black and blue f^^^^ers, let its ^est fall from a tree, and we found in it some
eggs, whole and broken, but much smaller, and more yellow than those which the
great beast had left on the sands. We divided them, and at the same time, I saw
lying on the ground two of the same large apples which had before f^llen from
the tree. "Here, sister," said I, "is one for you and one for me." We ate them,
and then went to the tree which gave the water, and sucked till we were no
longer dry. In this manner, father, we lived for several suns, and were only
sorrowful when we entered the cave where poor Derley continued to sleep without
speaking: still we hoped he would wake, and a thought one sun came into my
head, as we stood on the seashore, looking at the great fire which shines in
the heavens. "What shall we do, sister," said I, "to count the suns Derley
shall have slept, that we may tell him when he awakes?" We both thought a good
while; but at last, Eleanor took a flint, and said, "Let us make a stroke upon
this great tree every time the sun comes back to us; Derley knows how to read,
and he will tell when he awakes." Since that time we have not passed one sun
without making a stroke on the tree; you have read them, father, and know how
many there be."

Here the Colonel could no longer retain his admiration: he embraced his two
little friends, addressed some exclamations to heaven, and desired Ambrose to
continue his recital, which he did in these words. --

"We every day found food, and began to forget our griefs, when I thought to
myself, if these trees should not let fall any more apples, nor these birds
their nests; if those great beasts should not bring us any more eggs, what must
we do? We must try to get something to eat, if all this should happen. Then I
took some stones, and threw them with all my strengh at the trees, and a great
many apples and nests fell at our feet. Eleanor and I gathered them up, and
carried them to the cave, where we hid them under some leaves of the same
trees, which are very large. We did this every sun, and were never in want of
food; but sometimes we were very much frightened indeed! for those great beasts
you have seen, father, in the woods, would come by night almost into our cave;
but we always hid ourselves behind Derley, and they went away without biting
us. One night there came a horse that had a long neck, and a great lump upon
its back; the sight of it frightened us so much, that we fled out of the cave,
and ran screaming violently, till coming to a tree, I set my feet and hands
against it, and grasping it it very close, climbed quite to the top, calling to
my sister to do the same. She followed my example, and the crooked horse
finding he could not get at us, went away directly, and when he was a good way
off, we came down. Ah, father, we should have been very glad, if we had known
the secret you have shown us, of getting fire out of the stones, for we were
sometimes cold. Our clothes got torn, and when they were very bad, we threw
them away, and for some ^u^s remained quite naked; but at last, we found the
skin of a beast, which we divided between us: here it is still; what do you
call it?"

"It is the skin of an otter," replied the Colonel. "Well, then," continued
Ambrose, "this country is full of these otters. We will try to get a skin for
you when your coat is worn out.

"Is this all that has happened, Ambrose?" said the Colonel. "Yes," said
Ambrose, "all." -- "But," returned the Colonel, "you have not yet spoken of the
large black men you saw." "Oh," said Ambrose, "I forgot: in truth, we must take
care of them." "Well," said the Colonel, "but how came you to see them?" "Why,"
said Ambrose, "one day when it was very bad weather, I left Eleanor in the
cave, and went out to seek food, and when I came back, she came running to me,
quite frightened, crying, "we shall be eaten, -- we shall be eaten -- I have
seen -- " I asked her what? "Great ugly black men," said she, "there -- look --
do you not see them?" -- While she was speaking, I saw a^ar of a great many
black men, running one after the other. I directly let f^ll all that I had
brought, and taking my sister by the hand, we both ran to a dark cave that is
under ground: if you stand where I do, father, you may see it: there, on that
side where the sun appears: we ^id ourselves at the bottom of it, very much
terrified; but not hearing any thing, came out from time to time, to see if the
black men were still there: at last we did not see them at all, and running to
the side from whence they came, we saw them a very great way off, in a little
boat that went very fast upon the water. They have been here since, but we saw
no more of them than we did at first; they never come this way, it is only in
the great gardens which you call woods, that we see them; when they are gone,
we find large large animals there skinned, trees quite destroyed, and the
feathers of birds, which makes us think that these black men come here to kill
the beasts, and to take the birds and apples. This, father, is all I can
recollect: we have lived, as I have told you, from the time you see the marks
upon the tree, without doubt, through the goodness of the God whom you tell us
of: till now we have said the prayers mama taught us to the sun, who walks in
the heavens, thinking he was God; but if you have another, we will pray to him,
and be very good, that he may love us."

Ambrose ceased speaking, and the Colonel was silent a few minutes, to admire
the hand of Providence in the preservation of these innocents! The green pears
of which they spoke, he found no difficulty in judging to be Carasols, a fruit
common to North America; the great beast on the shore a tortoise, the eggs of
which are delicious, and commonly deposited by this creature on the sands: the
bird with black and blue feathers, he determined to be the colib^i, and the
water which flowed from the great tree, the sap of the palm; but more
especially did he acknowledge an overruling Providence in the succor they had
received from the goat: he had read of bears, and even lionesses, having
suckled infants, but till now had justly considered such stories as fabulous.
At length, taking Ambrose by the hand, "The desire you express, my son," said
he, "of knowing that powerful and beneficent Being, who has miraculously
preserved you amidst these deserts, shall be gratified: too great to ^ender
himself visible to his weak creatures, know, my child, that, from the height of
Heaven, he watches over the conduct of all men: nothing escapes him, he knows
all, sees all, hears all, and with a glance of his eye, comprehends the whole
earth." "The earth!" interrupted Ambrose, "do you mean the country where we
live?" "The earth, my children, I need not tell you," said the Colonel, "is the
ground on which we tread, but it consists not only of this island, it extends
beyond the seas, and contains four great countries, which are called EUROPE,
ASIA, AFRICA, and AMERICA, which last is the part of the world we are now in."

"Then this Island," said Ambrose, "is America?"

"No," replied the Colonel," but it makes a part of it."

"We do not," said the children, "understand you." "When you are further
instructed," said the Colonel, "when I shall have taught you to read and write,
you will perfectly comprehend all this: at present it will be sufficient to
acquaint you that this great Being, who is called God, created all things: the
Sun, which has hitherto been the object of your adoration, and which
communicates light and heat to all nature, was formed by his word: he has
furnished the earth with thousands of beautiful plants and animals: we can
behold nothing that does not speak his praise and almighty power: to him, my
children, you owe your being: his word called you into existence, and his mercy
renders that existence a blessing: you must look up to him as the author of all
good, and to please him, be humble, meek, and endeavor to imitate his
perfections, by diffusing happiness to every creature around you."

Ambrose and Eleanor listened to this discourse with an attention from which
their friend drew the happiest presage: the day passed insensibly away; they
supped in the new cabin, and afterward prepared to occupy their hammocks.
Eleanor busied herself for some time about her chamber: she walked in it a
great while, and did not go to sleep till she had twenty times examined and
changed the place of the little furniture it contained. The Colonel and
Ambrose, neighbors to each other, discoursed for some time: then resigning
themselves to the powers of sleep, they enjoyed an uninterrupted repose. The
rising sun at length enlightened the cabin, when the Colonel, finding that his
pupils were still buried in a profound sleep, took them gently by the hand, and
with pleasure saw them open their eyes, stretch first one arm, then the other,
raise their heads, and smile on him with an inexpressible grace. "You should
give an example to your sister, Ambrose," said he, "and be before hand with the
Sun." "Forgive me, dear father," said Ambrose, but we have slept in such a good
bed!"

"It is enough, my son," replied the Colonel, "but tomorrow, and every future
day, you must at daybreak repair both of you to the sea shore, and over your
thanks and prayers to the Being who has preserved you during the night." This
the children assured him they would not fa^^ of doing.

Having erected and furnished his little dwelling, the Colonel was resolved to
visit the interior part of the Island, that he might more particularly examine
its vegetable productions, and execute the projects he had formed: he
accordingly set out, and had not advanced far before he discovered plains
covered with rice and maize, and manioque. These were the principal objects of
his pursuit: with the assistance of the children, about two bushels of maize
was gathered, and conveyed in (...) to the cabin. Some handfuls of this was
spread upon the turf, and exposed to the scorching heat of noon, which soon
dried it sufficiently to grind. The Colonel then made, in a rock, a hole in the
form of a mortar, and with a pestle of wood broke the grains, and reduced them
to powder, It was then necessary to winnow it, that the chaff might be
separated from the grain, and this he performed by shaking it violently in a
cloth, which Ambrose and Eleanor held extended: afterward it was ground into
flour between two stones, and diluted with water. A little brandy being mixed
with this paste, by way of leven, it was put to bake upon flints strongly
heated by the fire, and thus a bread, very light and agreeable to the palate,
was made. While the children watched the bread, the Colonel returned to make
fresh discoveries: he found, as he proceeded into the island, a great deal of
millet, but different from that of Europe, and fine potatoes, which he knew
would afford them excellent nourishment; he discovered also some green figs,
and a variety of wholesome and delicious fruits common to America; but for
these it was necessary to go far into the island, which became an
inconvenience: to remedy it, therefore, with the assistance of his little
pupils, he dug up and sowed a piece of land, near the cabin, which extended
from the sea shore to the forest, which served as its boundary. This sort of
orchard in the end, furnished them with maize, rice, millet, potatoes, and all
the most useful and delicious productions of the soil.

The Reader having now seen our islanders furnished with the first necessaries
of life, will not, perhaps be displeased to learn in what manner they employed
their time. In the morning the Colonel took Ambrose into the woods with him to
hunt, having for this necessary purpose fabricated a bow about three feet and a
half long, the string of which was a gut twisted, and the arrows a stick
furnished with two feathers, and terminated by a flint sharpened: with these
they killed the different animals that inhabited the woods, such as stags,
goats, does, and among the birds, the duck and the foken, which furnished them
with excellent food. During this time Eleanor was employed in baking the bread,
or in other little offices of domestic economy. On returning, they busied
themselves in collecting the eggs which were deposited by different fish upon
the sea beach, but especially by the tortoise and alligator: the last mentioned
is so singular that a short description of it may be deserving the attention of
the Reader. The alligator is a sort of crocodile common to America: its head is
large, and its jaws furnished with strong teeth, two of which especially are
extremely long; it has four legs, which are very short, and terminate by large
feet, and its back from the head to the tail is covered with strong scales, as
also two large lumps which are over the eyes; its stomach is furnished with
four glands, and its tail always drags on the ground. This animal lives
indifferently on land or water, and is not mischievous but when provoked: its
eggs are esteemed a great dainty. The cultivation of their field next engaged
the attention of the Colonel and his pupils, after which they dined, and spent
the afternoon in study or in gardening.

Nothing could exceed the attention of Ambrose and Eleanor to the lessons of
their friend, who had found the means of teaching them, not only to read, but
to write. He had discovered in the woods a tree much resembling the fimpi of
the Isle of Madagascar: its bark, after being exposed to the sun, became as
white as paper, and though ^t smelt a little of musk, this was easily weakened
by exposing it to the fumes of aromatic herbs: at the foot of this flowed a
sort of gum, much like that of the Indian fig tree, the sap of which is used by
the Indians to color their vessels black. Being thus furnished with paper and
ink, he soon added pens; he shaped them with his knife, and put them into the
hands of his young pupils, who were soon able to write and read, and
consequently to feel the value of those books (for among them were some of the
best authors) which had been taken from the wreck. "Pray, father," said Ambrose
one day, laying down a book, "explain to me why they have kings in the
countries I read of." "Men living in society, my son," said the Colonel, "in
which there are good and bad, it is necessary to establish rulers, that order
and peace may be maintained."

"I do not understand you," said Ambrose. -- "I will endeavor," replied his
friend, to explain myself more clearly; suppose, now, for example, there were
in this island a great many men and women who lived together in common, can you
not conceive that one would wish for the field of his neighbor, that another
would cut the throat of his enemy without pity; that this man would enter our
cabin to seize upon our food, and that drive us from it to establish his own
residence in it?

"How!' exclaimed the children with astonishment, "are men capable of this?'

"I am ashamed, my children," said the Colonel, to reply that they are; and
that, unfortunately, the number of the wicked surpass that of the good." "Ah,
Eleanor," exclaimed Ambrose, "let us stay in our isle!"

"Hear me to an end," interrupted the Colonel; "what I have said granted, you
will see that it is necessary to establish laws to render our habitations and
property secure, and also to invest certain individuals with a power to enforce
those laws: this power is not, however, always invested in one man, but
sometimes in a certain number chosen by the body of the people; this form of
government is called a republic; the other, where a king governs, a monarchy."

"I comprehend very well what you say, father," said Ambrose, but is it not
strange that men should be so wicked as to render these laws necessary?

"It is a melancholy proof, my son," replied the Colonel, "of the depravity of
human nature: from pride, envy, ambition, and avarice, vices, which are the
more dangerous in community, as opportunities of calling them forth more
frequently occur, spring all the various evils and miseries of life."

"Pray, father, said Ambrose, "what is avarice?"

"An inordinate desire of possessing more than we can enjoy," said the Colonel:
"you will scarcely believe, my child, that there are beings who possess great
wealth, and bury, without employing it."

"In what, then," said Ambrose, consists the riches of your country, father?"

"Alas, my son!" returned the Colonel, "it is those miserable pieces of gold
and silver which constitute all the happine^s and misery of life."

"What! those," exclaimed the children, "that you found upon Derley?

"The same," replied the Colonel; those pieces stamped with the image of the
ruling power are divided into small and great coin, each of a proportionate
value, and with these are procured all the commodities of life."

"What," said Eleanor, do men agree to pay one another for things that belong
alike to every one? I do not understand -- "

"Oh, I understand very well,' interrupted Ambrose, and I could willingly
pardon them for selling the works of art; if one man is wiser or more skilful
than another, he deserves a recompense: but to assume a right over grain, wood,
and all the common productions of the earth, that is indeed unreasonable."

"You do not reflect, Ambrose," said the Colonel, "that all these productions
of the earth require culture, conveyance, and a thousand little cares which
equally deserve reward: is the man who tills a field, sows it, and watches the
vegetation of its produce, who gathers and carries it afterward into cities,
obliged to take upon himself this trouble? No, surely: if ^e consider gold an
equivalent, has he not a right to receive it? These are the people, my child,
who deserve payment, and not those who by their multiplied depredations ruin
and oppress their country."

"Your observation, my dear father," said Ambrose, "is very just; I did not
consider.'

In this manner the Colonel endeavored to inform the minds, and rectify the
judgment of his young pupils: toward sunset, they were at liberty to run,
jump, and take the exercise necessary to strengthen their constitutions, and
render their nerves supple; but in the evening, rational and attentive, they
listened, on the seashore, to the lessons of their good friend on morality,
physics, or religion. One evening when the sky was clear, and strewed with
s^^^s, Eleanor observed that phenomenon which we generally express un^er the
name of "a falling star." "What is that, father?' said she, "I have many times
forgotten to ask you why we see the stars fall so often?" "That, Eleanor,' said
the Colonel, which appears to you a star, is not one; it is a spark of
elementary, or rather electrical f^^e, which shines in the ethereal region, and
evaporates by the shock of a current of air."

"I do not," said Eleanor, "understand what you mean by electricity."

"Be attentive then, said the Colonel. "ELECTRICITY is a matter of fire
invisible to our eyes, but which nevertheless exists; penetrates all bodies;
gives to one vegetation, to another trepidation, to another impulsion, etc."

"Explain this more clearly, dear father," said Eleanor.

"ELECTRICITY," continued the Colonel, "causes the vegetables to grow, agitates
the air we breathe, drives the winds with more or less violence, penetrates our
bodies, and gives them strength, nay, health; fortifies, and even preserves in
us the vital principle; it ren^ers our blood active and warm, quickens, and is,
perhaps, the cause of its circulation."

"I understand this very well," said Eleanor.

"Well then," said the Colonel, "this electrical matter, the element of every
thing that exists, opposed by a current of air, kindles itself, and produces
the appearance you have observed This opinion is supported by the Abbe
Bertholon, in his work entitled Physic des Methores.
: from this cause also proceeds those spontaneous fires which we often see on
the banks of morasses or lakes.

"I comprehend this very well," said Eleanor: "so then all those stars that we
see in the heavens are sparks of electrical fire?"

No, Eleanor," replied the Colonel, "those stars are bodies of surprising
magnitude; they are globes like the earth we inhabit, but much larger; it is
their distance only that makes them appear less. Among an infinity of there is,
there are six called planets, which revolve, without ceasing, round that
wonderful body of light, the Sun, which is computed to be upwards of a million
of times as large as the earth. The distance of these globes from the Sun,
which dispenses light and he^t to them all, is so immense, that numbers can
scarcely convey an idea of it, and their velocity is no less amazing. MERCURY,
which is the planet nearest to the Sun, is about thirty-seven million of miles
distant from it, and moves at the rate of a hundred and five thousand miles
every hour, completing his course round the sun in less than three months.
VENUS, which is the next planet above Mercury, is sixty eight millions o^ miles
from the Sun, and by moving seventy-six thousand miles every hour, performs its
revolution in twenty-three days and twenty two hours. The next planet above
Venus is the EARTH upon which we live: its distance from the Sun is ninety-five
millions of miles, and by traveling at the rate of fifty-eight thousand miles
every hour -- "

"How!' interrupted the children, does the earth move?"

"Yes," said the Colonel, it turns once in twenty four hours quite round; and
by this motion occasions the apparent motion of the Sun and all the heavenly
bodies, from east to west, in the same time: its revolution round the Sun is
completed in three hundred and sixty-five days and something less than six
hours, or the space of a year, which causes the variation of the seasons: but I
shall explain this more fully hereafter.

"Above the Earth's orb is MARS, whose distance from the Sun is a hundred and
forty-four millions of miles; it travels at the rate of fifty five thousand
miles an hour, and goes round the Sun in something less than two of our years.

"JUPITER, the largest of the planets, is still further removed from the Sun;
it is twenty times the size of our Earth, and travels at the rate of
twenty-nine thousand miles an hour, completing its journey in something less
than twelve years. Still higher in the system, about nine millions of miles
from the Sun, is SATURN, who, by traveling at the rate of twenty two thousand
miles an hour, finishes his course in about twenty-nine of our years and a half.

Besides these which are called PRIMARY PLANETS, there are in our system
others, called secondary planets, or satellites, which move round the planets
in the same manner as their primaries do round the sun. The first of these is
the Moon, which accompanies the earth in its annual progress round the sun,
completing its circuit round the earth in the space of twenty nine days and
twelve hours. As the moon receives its light from the sun, and presents only
one side to us, in the course of its monthly journey, we see more or less of
its enlightened side, according to its different position with respect to that
part of the earth we inhabit, and hence arises the different appearances which
we express under the name of a new and full moon, etc. Four of these satellites
or moons attend JUPITER, and five Modern astronomers have discovered two more
of these moons which attend Saturn.
SATURN; besides these five moons, a broad flat luminous circle called his
ring, encircles without touching the body of SATURN at a distance nearly equal
to the breath of the ring, which is about twenty one thousand miles. Some
astronomers have thought, that this ring is ^omposed of a vast number of moons
or satellites, which, being seen at such an immense distance, may, by means of
their blended light, give the whole the appearance of one continued body; upon
this an eminent astronomer, whose works I lament not being able to put into
your hands, says, "when we consider the remote situation of Saturn, and
consequently how much the sun's light must be weakened before it can reach him,
such a glorious assemblage of moons does not appear an unnecessary appendage to
this planet."

In this manner the Colonel began his astronomical lectures. The two children
looked up astonished at the prodigious magnitude of those globes he had been
describing, and were desirous of traveling into the planets, especially into
Saturn, whose ring and five moons astonished them; but when in due time their
worthy instructor spoke to them of the fixed stars, each of which he told them
was a sun supposed to enlighten other systems of worlds, they were lost in the
stupendous contemplation, and could only in silence adore the great Being who
formed and animated the whole. The Colonel was delighted to see their young
minds gradually expand, and was studious to render even the most trifling
incidents subservient to their improvement. One day as Eleanor entered the
cabin, ^he excl^imed in an extacy, "Oh father! if you had but seen what I have!"

"What was it, Eleanor?" said her friend, smiling. "As I was gathering
vegetables,' she replied, "upon the great rock, I saw two of those little
creatures you, I believe, call lizards, crawl to a hole in the rock, each
bearing a small stalk full of seeds. -- They laid down their provision at the
entrance, and went in, but directly came out accompanied by an old lizard, much
larger than they were; he began to eat the seeds, and the two little ones
looked at him without stirring; but the noise I made frightening them all
three, the old one, in attempting to get away, fell down. I took it up, and was
surprised to see that it was blind. While I was examining it, I observed that
the two little ones were searching for it with the greatest une^siness, so I
put it on the edge of the hole, and directly they all three went in, as if they
were rejoiced to have escaped so great a danger. The little lizards must
certainly have been the children of the great one."

"Perhaps they were," said the Colonel.

"I was quite delighted,' said Eleanor, "to see them carry food to their poor
blind Father, who could no longer seek it for himself."

"You see, Eleanor," said the Colonel, "that the pure sentiment of filial
tenderness is given alike to animals and to men."

"Animals have then a soul?" said Eleanor.

"Why do you presume that they have?" returned the Colonel.

"They have, at least, reflectio^," said Eleanor.

"Upon what do you found your conclusion?" said the Colonel.

"Why," said Eleanor, "is it not evident that the lizards must have reflection?
They, without doubt, say to themselves, our father is blind and old, he cannot
seek food for himself; it is, therefore, our part to carry it to him, that he
may live the longer."

"I am pleased with your argument, Eleanor," said the Colonel, as it springs
from the goodness and simplicity of your heart; but I will teach you to account
more rationally for what you have seen; many celebrated naturalists have given
examples equally striking of the seeming rationality of animals. The
intellectual faculties may be divided into two kinds, soul and instinct. The
soul is that portion of us, which reflects, foresees, examines and compares.
Instinct is that natural sentiment which leads us to preserve our being, to
tremble at the sight of a wound, and to compassionate an unfortunate being.
Some philosophers have given to this last faculty the name of SYMPATHY.
Whatever it be, it is that alone which animates animals, and dissolves with
their machines. INSTINCT serves them instead of reflection. The lizards do not,
as you imagine, say, "Let us comfort ou^ father." They do not know him under
that character: they are ignorant that they owe their life to him, but they
love and comfort him because nature prompts them to it. Do you think, my child,
that ferocious animals reflect when they fall upon you? No; neither, by the
same rule, would those that are gentle, should you treat them ill, resolve to
retaliate. They have passions, but they owe them only to the organization of
their machine, and to the nature of their instinct. Had they REFLECTION, they
would feel grief, inquietude, and melancholy, sensations which they experience
only when sick or wounded. Su^rance is the only sentiment they prove, and this
alone can e^^ect their spirits or their faculties. So you ^ee, ^leanor, that
animals have no soul; but they have an instinct so acute, so subtle, that it
is easy mistaken. There are, my children, three sorts of existence. The first
passive and insensible; the second active and sensible; and the third, active,
sensible, and rational. A celebrated naturalist said formerly Linnaeus.
, "That stones grew, vegetables grew and lived, and that animals grew, lived*
and fell*."

"How!" exclaimed Eleanor, "have trees life?"

"Undoubtedly," replied the Colonel, "the sap is their blood, and the
elementary or electrical fire, the principle of their life."

"They must then, said Eleanor, "feel pain when we cut them."

"No," said the Colonel, "their life is only passive; they have neither
passions nor affections; but in other respects, they are subject to the same
vicissitudes that animals are; they exist, they grow, they decrease, and are
subject to sicknesses, as we are."

"It is very singular," said Eleanor.

"The more you study nature, my child," said the Colonel, "the more will it
ex^lt your ideas of that great Being, who with a single word created so many
wonders."

"We will never," said the children, cease to adore him, we will love, obey,
and pray to him that our soul, which you have taught us is immortal, may live
with him for ever, when our bodies are like poor Derley^s."

This conversation led to digressions on morality and metaphysics, which
furnished discourse for more than eight days.

During four years which the colonel had now resided in the island, he had had
time to make observations on its soil and temperature. By the help of his
compass, and knowledge of physics, he discovered that it was situate near the
22d degree, 30 min. north latitude, and about 301 degrees W. longitude. The air
was extremely, mild, ice and snow being equally unknown. During summer, which
began about November, and continued till April, neither clouds, vapors, nor
exhalations were to be seen. The atmosphere was so clear, that not only the
rising and setting of the sun, but the increase and wane of the moon might be
seen even in full days. At this season the drought was so great that the leaves
fell from the trees, every plant drooped, and even the animals withdrew into
the woods or the hollows of rocks to seek the coolness necessary to their
preservation; but when the sun approached the tropic of Cancer, the vapors it
exhaled from the sea and marshes, condensed into thick clouds, from whence
issued lightning and thunders, accompanied with tone ^s of rain, which
continued during eight or ten days: these rains which cooled the air, induced
the Colonel to distinguish this season by the a^^^ll^tion of Winter: though
very ^i^erent from the Winters of Europe it produced in Nature the most
favorable change. Scarcely does the month of May di^^use her sal^tary coolness
through the air, when the trees recover their former ver^^re. The forests
ex^ale a thousand (...); the animals, more agile ^escend from the mountains o^
(...) from the h^les of rocks; the bi^^s ^^em to revive to a new being and
renew their concerts; (...) change their shells; ^^^^iles (...) skins; and the
fish, quitting (...) and see^ to present themselves (...) to the (...).

There was in the island a sort of tree from which flowed a whitish gum so
ductile that it might be drawn out into threads: of this Eleanor made nets,
with which they caught the most delicious fish, such as thornback, mullet,
doree, etc. Tortoise^s of all kinds were so abundant during Winter, that they
furnished our islanders with food for the Summer, a season when these
amphibious animals do not appear, on account of the aridity that reigns. In the
course of May, large yellow and red serpents, eight or ten feet long, were
found in the morasses: the heads of these creatures were in the form of a
triangle, and their jaws furnished with long sharp teeth; but they were not
dangerous. About this time also, large gray snakes, tufted, and spotted with
black, descended with a great noise from the mountains: their heads were about
the size of one's hand, flat, and armed with eight teeth about an inch long.
These reptiles were perfectly ino^^ensive, and having no sort of venom, made
war only upon the ants, which surprising their enemies when asleep, came in
battalions to prey upon their eyes.

The Colonel, who was formed equally for the pleasures of a contemplative as he
was for the active scenes of a military life, spent the Winter in studying
nature, and the Summer, when the heat was intense, in philosophical
reflections; but these could not banish from his remembrance a wife and child,
who possessed his fondest a sections, and to whom he had now lost all hope of
returning: their image was present in every pursuit; and in spite of his
fortitude, he was at times melancholy and dejected. On these occasions Eleanor
and Ambrose endeavored, by their innocent caresses, and a thousand little
tender cares, to dissipate his sorrows and restore him to (...): their
a^^ection called forth on his part an equal return: with delight he saw their
young minds (...) instruction, and their susceptible hearts expand with every
virtue: then calling to mind the hopeless state in which he had first
discovered them, and beholding himself in the hand of Providence, an instrument
of their happiness, he lost, in the pleasing contemplation, the remembrance of
his sorrows: nay, hope itself once more revived, and st^ttered him with one day
restoring them to society, and being himself reunited to all he (...) dear. He
was one day indulging these ple^sing reflections, when the children, who had
been in the wood amusing themselves with a thousand little games, returned to
him, pale, trembling, and scarcely able to speak.

"What is the matter, Ambrose?" said he: "Speak, Eleanor; what has happened?"

"They are come!" faultered the children; "they are in the island!"

"Whom do you mean?" said the Colonel.

"The great naked men," they replied.

"Well," said their friend, "do not alarm yourselves; we must retreat to some
place of safety."

"They will not come on this side," said the children.

"No matter," said the Colonel, it is necessary that we conceal ourselves:"
saying this, he began to strip the cabin, and, assisted by Ambrose and Eleanor,
carried the most precious movables to a subterraneous cave, the entrance of
which was accessible only to those acquainted with its windings. Here they
remained some time, when the Colonel, not hearing any thing, and wishing to see
the extremity of the danger which threatened them, as also whether the savages
bent their steps toward his beloved cabin, went out, accompanied by his little
friends, who refused to be le^t behind, and lying flat on his stomach, on the
summit of a mount that overlooked the isle, beheld the savages, to the number
of about forty or fifty, quit their canoes, and advance into the island. Their
skins were painted of such a deep red, that being almost naked, in the sun they
more nearly resembled boiled lobsters than men; and to add to their grotesque
appearance, round their bodies, on all sides, hung plates of metal, the form of
which the Colonel, however, could not perfectly determine. The women,
distinguishable by their children, which they carried on their backs, wore a
pagne or camisa round their waist, closer than that of the men, and about two
or three inches deep. Having taken from their canoes hammocks, arms, and
different utensils, they penetrated further into the isle, entered the forest,
and began to hunt. This exercise continued the whole day and part of the night,
during which the Colonel and his pupils, not daring to descend from the mount,
were witnesses of all that passed. They saw them toward morning issue from the
wood, carrying with them the beasts they had slain, goats, otters, antas, and a
great number of parrots and other birds. Immediately the quadrupeds were
skinned, the flesh out up, and the bones separated. A fire was then kindled, in
the manner of the negroes, by rubbing two pieces of wood violently together,
and they set about dressing their meats. A large vessel, containing a quantity
of crabs, was then brought, and smaller ones of palm wine, brandy, camphire,
etc. after which they began their repast. It was a sight truly comic, to see
all these colored savages squatted, like so many monkies, in a circle,
devouring with an excessive appetite, and picking with as much agility as
eagerness, even the smallest claws of the crabs, which are considered among
them as a great dainty. Having drank repeated draughts of palm wine and brandy,
they began to shout, sing, and burst into fits of excessive laughter, opening
an enormous mouth, and discovering the whitest and most beautiful teeth in the
world: but soon growing intoxicated, they rose, leaped, gambolled, and
committed a thousand extravagancies; till this noisy feast being ended, they on
a sudden overturned their utensils, carried them away, and ran half mad to
their canoes, which, swift as an arrow, conveyed them from the island. When
they were at some distance, the Colonel and his two pupils descended from the
mountain, and replaced in their cabin the movables they had for safety
deposited in the subterranean cave, exhausted with fatigue and hunger, they did
not that night go to reconnoitre the place where the savages had been feasting,
but the next morning early they set out, and arrived at the field of action.
They found there baskets, knives, and wooden cups, which the savages, in their
haste and intoxication, had left behind them, besides plenty of good cheer.
They took from among the utensils such as appeared to them the most useful and
curious, and having rested and refreshed themselves, again set out for their
cabin. Their way was through a wood, which they had hitherto but little
frequented, and they slopped to admire a grot upon which Nature seemed to have
lavished all her beauties. Concealed by cotton shrubs, and bananas, the shade
of which gave a religious aspect to the place, they gained the entrance by a
path hollowed out of the rock, and bordered by a thousand aromatic plants. The
entrance, arched and ruinated, was enlightened only by a reflection which the
light threw on a rivulet that issued from the grot: the banks of this stream
being moreelevated, formed a natural foot way through the grot, at the bottom
of which our travelers observed a faint light, which appeared to shine through
the chinks of the rock. This induced them to enter, but scarcely had they
advanced many paces, when deep groans seemed to proceed from the further part
of the grot. The Colonel stopped: -- and the children alarmed, in vain
endeavored to articulate founds which fear froze upon their lips. They
advanced a few paces farther; the groans became more distinct, and in a few
minutes they heard these words repeated in a melancholy voice: -- "Oh, Death,
when will thou come to my succor." -- "Heavens!" cried the Colonel, "what
prodigy is this? The accents are English!"

"Whosoever thou art?" returned the voice, "in pity -- "

"Where are you?" interrupted the Colonel, still advancing; "who are you?"

"An unfortunate dying man," returned the voice.

The Colonel still proceeded: the voice seemed familiar to his ear, but he
could see nothing. At length, his eyes becoming more accustomed to the gloom,
he discerned on the ground a body almost naked, which, on a closer view, he
found to be wounded. Shocked at a sight of so much horror, he knelt down, and
taking the hand of the stranger, "Unhappy man," said he, "what barbarian has
treated you thus inhumanly?" -- He was continuing, when the stranger grasping
his hand to raise himself a little, on a sudden exclaimed, "Merciful Heaven! do
I deceive myself -- that voice -- my honored master -- Colonel Carlton -- "

"What do I hear?" cried the Colonel. "Peter! Is it possible, Can it be?"

"Thank Heaven!" said the dying man, "I die content: my dear master lives! -- "

"Talk not of dying, my faithful Peter," said the Colonel, raising him, and
endeavoring to stanch the blood with his handkerchief, "Providence has not
restored you to take you from me so soon. Eleanor, Ambrose, run to the cabin,
refreshment is necessary." -- The children disappeared in an instant, and
presently returned with some goats milk, tortoise eggs, and palm wine. The
stranger took a little of this nourishment, and was much revived; but the
Colonel found that he was not in a state to be removed: he conveyed therefore
to the grot, hammocks, mats, and such things as were necessary to render it
commodious, and attended him there, till finding, in the course of a few days,
that his patient had gained a little strength, he determined to remove him to
the cabin. It was an interesting ^ight, to see this worthy man bearing his old
domestic upon his shoulders, Eleanor and Ambrose holding each of them a leg, to
case the sick man, and lighten the burden of their protector. The cabin was at
some distance from the grot, but, atlast, they arrived at it, and Peter being
laid in a hammock, enjoyed soon after a comfortable repose The Colonel, during
his abode in the island, had had sufficient time for the study of botany, to
know thoroughly the properties of the different simples it produced: this
knowledge he applied so successfully, that in less than eight days Peter was
out of danger, and at the end of a month was perfectly restored to health.

The Reader will conclude that the Colonel, during this time, had put many
questions to him concerning his misfortunes, the particulars of which he now
wished to hear in the order as they had occurred; Peter, one day, therefore,
gave his master the following recital.

"At the instant, Sir," said he, "that the vessel foundered, I followed your
example; seized a piece of wood to assist me in swimming, and threw myself into
the sea. I struggled long against the violence of the waves, but at length my
strength failed me: I swooned, I believe, and let go the friendly oar that
supported me, for I remember no more till I found myself stretched in a canoe,
and surrounded by five or six naked men of the most frightful color. My ideas
were confused: I knew not what to think: I cast my eyes on the vast plain of
waters, ^^lightened by the moon: then I looked round for you, my dear master,
but not seeing you, and recollecting the fatal events that had happened, my
heart sunk, and persuaded that you were swallowed in the waves, an involuntary
cry of horror and grief burst from me; this terrified the savages who
surrounded me so much, that they would have thrown me into the sea, had I not,
seeing their design, softened them by my prayers and tears. One of them at
length addressed me in a jargon, composed of English, Dutch, and French, of
which I comprehended, " From whence come you, White?"

"A vessel," I replied, "in which I ^ailed has been wrecked, and I should
without doubt have perished, had you not preserved me."

"What is your name, White?"

"Peter -- "

"Have you any knives or scissars about you, Peter?"

"I have only a knife."

"Give it me, White."

"There it is," said I, giving it to him.

"Come," returned he, "I will love thee: thou shall be slave to the Grand
Cacique."

"Oh, Heaven!" I exclaimed, "where do you mean to take me?"

"To Friz," answered the negro, and you will be very happy."

"I now felt the full extent of my misfortune: I was condemned, I saw, to serve
the negroes, who, from their serocious aspect, I doubted not were cannibals;
but lamentations were vain! Our canoe rapidly cut the waves, and at break of
day we arrived at the port of our destination. My guides showed me in triumph
to an innumerable tribe of inhabitants, who, bursting into sits of laughter,
presently surrounded me, and increased my distress by their importunities. One
cut my coat, another tore my waistcoat; in short, they divided my clothes among
them, and in a few minutes I was naked as my hand. In this situation I was
conducted to the Grand Cacique, who is Governor of the Island. He was seated
with great state upon a hammock, in a cabin raised above the rest, and having,
as I found, heard my story, received me with much kindness. "White," said he,
"thou shall be my slave; serve me faithfully, and the soul that is in thy heart
The Carribes imag^ne that every human being has as many souls as he has pulses
in his arteries, and that the principal of these resides in the heart.
will enjoy in Heaven all the happiness that awaits those who have done well: I
forbid thee to do three things, White: to drink my brandy, to rob me, and
especially to see my wives. If thou do any of these, I shall kill thee, and
thy great soul will float upon the ocean, and mix with the spirits who di^^use
evil upon the earth."

"The Cacique ceased; and I, surprised at this singular harrangue, could only
bow in sign of submission, shedding abundance of tears. His gre^^^ess then took
me by the hand, and ordered one of his attendants to fill me a cup of brandy to
dispel my sorrow.

The next day I began my labor, which was to turn up the savannas, to plant,
weed, clear, and cultivate them: these, and a thousand other services which
were added, I performed without intermission during four years that I remained
with these barbarians, known in Europe by the name of Carribes, or Cannibals."

"How?" interrupted the Colonel, "are these the Carribes, inhabitants of the
Antilles?"

"The same, Sir," said Peter, "I was myself ignorant of their name during a
year, but I learnt it after from a French slave who lost his life in their
service. The isle we now inhabit, Sir, is no other than one of the Antilles,
which apparently has not yet been discovered."

"Ah, my good Peter," said the Colonel, what do you tell me? Am I so near Cuba,
St. Jago, St. Domingo, Porto Rico?"

"You undoubtedly are, Sir," said Peter, "but you must observe that the islands
of which you speak form the Great Antilles, whereas this we now inhabit is in
the Little Antilles. There are also other countries of the Carribes; but that I
have left is so savage and barbarious, and so little commercial, that it is to
be presumed it has little connection with the Europeans established in the Great
Antilles."

"Your observation is just, Peter," said the Colonel; but gracious Heaven! a
possibility remains -- Hope once more revives -- I shall again see England!
Yes, my children, I shall conduct you to the abodes of men -- to the bosom of
my country." -- Such was the flattering prospect with which the vicinity of
cities inhabited by civilized men furnished Colonel Carlton; he did not reflect
that he was, nevertheless, separated from them, and that during four years
which he had resided in the island, he had never seen a human being except the
Carribes land upon it. The transports to which these hopes gave birth being, at
length, somewhat calmed, Peter, at the request of his master continued his
narrative.

"The Carribes with whom I lived, Sir, have very little commerce with the
Europeans; they put to sea every year, and came into this island to kill
buffaloes, otters, birds, etc. after which they go to the coasts inhabited by
Europeans, and barter the skins of these animals, baskets, lizards, and
different sorts of eggs, for knives, scissars, hatchets, arms, European linen,
and especially brandy. The day fixed upon for their last voyage, my master
ordered me to bring into the canoe his hammocks, arms, and household utensils:
then having, according to the custom of these idolaters, made libations to the
good spirits, we embarked to the number of fifty, as many women as men, and at
the end of two days arrived at this island. As it was the first time during
four years, my master had made me the companion of his voyage, I drew from it
the happy presage of soon seeing an end to my captivity: for I doubted not
meeting, on some of the coasts at which we should touch, Europeans whom I
should find means to soften in my favor and prevail on to assist me in my
escape. Alas! I foresaw not the issue of that unhappy day. At the end of their
brutal repast, my master, intoxicated with brandy, ordered me to fill him
another glass: I imprudently ventured to represent to him mildly the injury he
would do himself; but instead of taking this as a mark of my good will, he
seized me by the throat; "Ah, dog of a white," said he in a rage, "thou have
without doubt robbed me -- Die, and may thy thousand souls go to the seas, to
increase the storms, and form the fires of Heaven!" Saying this, he g^ve me
several stabs with a knife; but none of them were happily directed to the
heart. I had sufficient strength to retreat; and notwitstanding the effusion of
blood, gained a cave, in which I sunk down exhausted, and must have perished,
had not Heaven in mercy conducted you, my dear master, to the spot."

Eleanor and Ambrose who had listened very attentively to Peter's narrative,
were highly incensed against the Cacique, and expressed their indignation in
very forcible terms; but Peter endeavored to moderate it, by observing that
the Carribes, though capricious and cruel, were only so when contradicted.
"They cannot," said he, "bear to be dictated to; their pride upon this point is
inconceivable; but they are humane, and have great compassion for women and
children."

This led the Colonel to make some enquiries concerning the laws and manners of
the Carribes, and, especially, whether they were as sanguiuary and fond of
feeding upon human flesh, as they were represented by Europeans.

"Nothing, Sir," said Peter, "can be more false; they are certainly
anthropophagi, or man-eaters, but it is from accident, not national taste; if
they devour their enemies, it is in the transport of fury, in the heat of
conquest, and even upon the field of battle. They do not like to be called
savages; -- this name, they say, belongs to beasts of prey: they equally detest
that of a cannibal, which is with them equivalent to man-eater; but they are
very fond of the title of Carribes, because in their primitive language, this
word signifies a good warrior, a courageous man. The Carribes are in general
tall and well proportioned; they have agreeable features except the forehead,
which is flat and much sunk, a defect which gives them a ferocious air, and
arises from a custom they have of pressing the heads of their infants with a
little board, tied fast behind, and left there till the fore head has taken the
form they wish, and is become so flat, that without raising the head they can
see almost perpendicularly above them.

"This custom," said the Colonel, "is not peculiar to the Carribes; it is
common to the savages in other parts of America, and it is said to render the
skull so hard, as frequently to have broken the swords of Europeans when they
made the conquest of Peru."

"The Carribes, Sir," said Peter, 'dye their skins red, not only for ornament,
but to preserve them from being injured by the intense heat of the sun, and
also, to defend them from the mus^ettoes and other infects, which have an
antipathy to the smell of the oils, and different mixtures they use. The women,
who are shorter than the men, and have a more sprightly air, decorate
themselves with bracelets, earings and necklaces of glass beads and blue
stones; from the age of twelve they wear also a sort of cotton buskins, which
reach about five or six inches above the ancle bone, and are wrought so closely
to the leg that it is impossible to take them off. -- The ornaments of the men
are feathers and small plates of a metal they call caracoli; these they wear at
their ears, nose, and under lip. The houses of the Carribes are called carbets,
and like those of the Indians of Guiana, are of a singular form; the lateral
parts are of reeds, and the covering of palm leaves: the roof descending to the
rafters, gives to the whole the form of a hive. At the distance of ten paces is
another carb^t, half as large, separated into two parts by a pallisade of
reeds. The large carbet serves to lodge the chief of the family, and the small
one, as a kitchen, and for the accommodation of the women and children, who
never enter the great carbet but when the master wishes to receive them. The
furniture of the women's carbet is baskets and hammocks; of the men's, bows,
arrows, zagayes A long dart.
, tied to the rafters, and hammocks; ne^r which is generally a coffer, musket,
sabre, pistol, and cartouch, effects which they exchange with the Europeans for
the productions of their country. The women are very dexterous in a sort of
wicker work, of which they make their hammocks, and very curious caskets. In
these caskets, which are so neatly wrought that no water can enter, they
enclose their jewels and attire, and when they go to sea, fasten them to the
edge of their canoes, that they may not lose any thing should they turn over,
which very frequently happens. The Carribes, who took me out of the sea, had
encountered, as we had, all the violence of the tempest, but without any alarm,
tied like their caskets to their canoes, they follow the revolutions of the
waves, turn with them, and continue their rout when the danger is past. They
have among them a sort of religion; the sun and moon have all their adoration,
but they have neither temple nor form of worship. Some of their laws announce
very good sense; such, for example, as the not electing a grand Cacique, till
he has distinguished himself in war, and is chosen by a plurality of voices; he
must also have borne away the prize in swimming, strength, and fortitude.
Surely, Sir, such a people ought not to be compared to savage beasts."

The Colonel agreed with Peter, that such a comparison was by no means just;
and then added; "I^ has often surprised me that the children should, upon their
arrival in the island, have found otter skins, nay, I myself," said he, "found
some very fine ones when I made my researches the day after the Carribes had
been feasting."

"Do not the Carribeans," said he, "carry them away, or is it an act of
forgetfulness?"

"The latter, Sir, sa^d Peter, "appears to be the reason. A minutia would
div^^t a Caribe from the most important occupation: they frequently take a deal
of trouble to accomplish an enterprise, and if they are attracted by another
object, abandon the former, at the moment often in which they are on the point
of succeeding."

Peter had nearly completed three score years, but he was still active and
vigorous; his health being perfectly re-established, he assisted at the
tillage, grinding of corn, and at the most laborious occupations. He was
extremely attached to the Colonel, in whose and his father's service, he had
passed his youth; he was therefore treated by him rather as a faithful friend,
than a domestic, especially now that one common misfortune united them. Peter
soon became attached to Eleanor and Ambrose: he would sometimes take them upon
his knee, and give them lessons of morality which experience alone had taught
him; and sometimes he would play with them like a little child; sing them
Carribe songs, and gambol in the manner of the savages. In the mean while,
under their indefatigable preceptor, they made a considerable progress in
history, geography, the mathematics, poetry, and even music. The description
which Peter had given them of a musical instrument called the bala^o, used by
the Carribes, had excited their industry; they had invented and executed under
the direction of their friend, one less complexed and barbarous: upon this they
accompanied songs, of which they composed both the words and music themselves.
The subjects were either their gratitude to the Supreme Being, their affection
to each other, or the beauties of their island, and the happiness they enjoyed
in it with their dear Carlton and honest Peter.

Three years had revolved since the arrival of Peter, and seven since his
shipwreck, when the Colonel was one night alarmed by confused cries or rather
shouts near his cabin. He started from his hammock, opened the door softly, and
went out, but the night being extremely dark, he could not see any thing. The
shouts still continued, but seemed at a much greater distance: he knew not what
to think; but unwilling, till urged by necessity, to alarm Peter or the
children, who were all three buried in sleep, he ascended a hill that bounded
his enclosure to the north, and looking down, perceived an enormous cloud of
smoke through which flames of every color soon found a passage. The forest
that bounds his enclosure is on fire! "Oh heavens!' exclaimed he, seeing the
sparks carried toward his cabin, "my children -- Peter' -- and suddenly
darting from the hill he awakened Peter, took Eleanor in one hand, Ambrose in
the other, and flew with them to the seashore, while Peter, informed of all by
the flames and smoke he saw in the air, carried a few of the most valuable
effects of the cabin. He would have returned for what remained, but the wind
blowing from the north, carried so many lighted brands upon the little
dwelling, that wholly dried by the Sun, it became in a few minutes a prey to
the flames. It is impossible to form a just idea of the grief and consternation
of the Colonel and his three companions: the children ran -- screamed -- and
seemed ready to throw themselves into the flames to preserve their beloved
abode, while the Colonel and Peter beheld the fatal catastrophe buried in a
stupid dejection. The Colonel, however, at length recovering his usual
firmness, bent his steps, followed by his little friends and Peter, toward the
summit of a neighboring rock, from whence, casting his eyes round, he
endeavored to divine the cause of a conflagration so fatal and unexpected. On
one side they beheld only a vast plain of fire, but looking toward the sea,
they saw a crowd of Carribes carrying off their e^^ects, and embarking
precipitately in their canoes. The flames threw a reddish reflection upon the
savages, and rendered them visible at the distance of half a league on the sea,
their arms extended, and their eyes fixed upon the burning forest. Little doubt
remained but that the disaster originated with them, and Peter, somewhat
recovered from his terror, suggested a very probable cause. "It is evident,
Sir," said he, "that the Carribes have, as usual, landed to hunt in the forest,
and it appears to me very probable tha^ this accident may have happened through
the stratagem they make use of to catch the parrots, which, among other things,
they barter with the Europeans.

"Why," said the Colonel, "do they use fire?"

"Yes, Sir," said Peter, "They observe in the evening the trees upon which
these birds perch, and when it is dark, tie to some of the lower branches an
earthen pot in which they put lighted wood, and upon it gum and pemento; the
thick smoke which arises, renders the parrots so giddy, that they fall down
intoxicated, and become an easy prey to their pursuers, who immediately seize
them, tie the feet and wings, and recover them by simply throwing water upon
their heads."

The mystery was now unravelled; it was no longer difficult to account for an
accident which had proved so fatal to our islanders; but alas! the discovery of
the cause did not diminish the calamity.

At break of day they descended from the rock, and returned to the spot where
once their beloved habitation had stood. Instead of it they beheld a heap of
smoking ashes! no furniture! no books! no shelter! they must forego all.

In the mean while the fire raged with violence in the forest; at the end of
twelve days it was not extinguished, and would undoubtedly have consumed the
whole island, had the forest been adjacent to others; but it was absolutely
alone, forming a sort of thicket in the midst of an immense plain: besides, the
wind blowing from the north, carried the flakes of fire upon the cabin only,
and consequently toward the sea.

During these twelve days, the Colonel was revolving in his mind different
plans, and was undetermined which to pursue. He saw plainly that he must build
another habitation if he remained in the island: but he did not stop here: the
idea of making his escape from it had long been the favorite subject of his
meditations; he had conceived a project which he believed to be practicable
though hazardous, and nothing had prevented his putting it into execution, but
his affection for Eleanor and Ambrose, whose extreme youth had hitherto
rendered them less able to encounter the dangers and fatigues that must
unavoidably attend the enterprise; but now that he was stripped of all, that he
found himself once more on the island without habitation, without furniture,
without any thing to render his abode in it desirable, he began again to
revolve his favorite project. "If it were possible," said he to himself, "to
construct a canoe. My tools cannot be consumed, I shall find them among the
ashes. If, I say, it were possible in this canoe to gain the islands inhabited
by Europeans! The Antilles form a half circle, so that if we missed one we
should unavoidably arrive at another; Cuba, St. Domingo, Jamaica, any of those
islands would facilitate our return to England. What a delightful reflection!
But, may we not," said he, recollecting himself, "fall into the hands of the
Carribes, by whom we are to all appearance surrounded? My own life I have a
right to risk, but ought I to expose to slavery, to the dangers of shipwreck,
two unfortunate children, for whom Heaven has rendered me responsible? The
Colonel rested some time on this idea; but the hope of seeing England, and of
restoring to society two beings whose hearts and manners he had formed, in the
end prevailed, and he resolved to hazard all rather than give up an enterprise
that flattered him with such pleasing prospects.

His plan well digested, he communicated it to Peter; but this wary domestic,
far from approving, remonstrated with his master upon the danger of the
enterprise. "Ah, Sir," said he "reflect, consider, I beseech you, what will be
the consequence, should we again expose ourselves to the fury of an element
that has already proved so fatal to us."

"But, Peter,' said the Colonel, you have seen the construction of a canoe; you
have even guided one?"

"I agree, Sir," said Peter, "that I have; I know very well how to work a
canoe; I hope I should not sink you: nay, I could perhaps shun the rocks -- but
still it is necessary to know where to steer to."

"Do not be alarmed about that, Peter," said the Colonel: we can steer toward
St. Domingo, or should we miss that, we shall find other of the Antilles
inhabited by Europeans."

"But the Carribes, Sir," said Peter, "think, should we fall into their hands!"

"True, Peter," said the Colonel, "but you know the Isle of Friz: we can avoid
that."

"But, Sir," said Peter, "we are undoubtedly surrounded by the Carribes."

"Heaven," interrupted the Colonel, "will protect us; deprived of all that has
hitherto rendered our abode in this island tolerable, we have only a melancholy
alternative." More he said to this purpose, till Peter, overcome at length by
arguments and importunities, consented to embark in an enterprise of which he
clearly foresaw all the dangers; -- more perhaps than really existed, for being
himself ignorant of geography or navigation, he beheld the success of the
voyage as much more uncertain than the Colonel.

The children leaped for joy; the pleasure of going on the sea, of seeing
strange countries, rendered them blind to the perils they were to encounter;
they saw only the end of the voyage, without bestowing a thought on the
accidents that might interrupt it.

The enterprise being resolved upon, they began to remove the ashes, and seek
for their tools, which they happily found in a state fit to make use of,
excepting that it was necessary to whet them, and to make new handles, which
was the business of three days. The next object was to ^ix on a tree calculated
for the purpose of constructing a canoe; and after much deliberation, the
cocoa-tree, of all the island produced, was preferred; not only on account of
its enormous size, but the nature of it^s wood, which is soft, porous, and easy
to work. One of those trees was without loss of time rooted up, the trunk out
to about the length of fifteen feet, and the bark stripped of. It was then put
upon the stocks, and with the help of fire and hatched ^ollowed, a work that
was very long and laborious. The bottom remained flat, and the sides four feet
high and fifteen inches thick, inclined rather inward. The two extremities,
lengthened into a point, turned up a little, that the vessel might the more
easily tack about. Our workmen then scraped the surface with flints, and thus
completed their canoe, which when finished was fifteen feet long, ^ix wide,
and four deep. A mast and rigging was next to be added, but this was not the
most difficult part of the work: a strong branch was the mizen m^st; rushes
woven into a mat made sails, and the leaves of the palm tree twisted became
strong and solid cordage. As our carpenters had neither iron nor nails, the
whole was joined with teno^s and mortises, and fixed with wooden pegs. Peter
did not forget to remind his master that the negroes fasten to the sides of
their canoes strong cables, that may be stretched horizontally in case of need.
"To these, Sir," said he, "as I have before told you, they tie themselves, that
when the tempest agitates the canoe, or causes it to turn over, they may follow
the revolutions of their barks. The Colonel took the same precaution, and at
the end of a month the little bark was finished, and nothing remained but to
launch it; a work which was performed with great ease; for the Colonel, having
taken care to fix rollers under his stocks, by means of a capstan the whole was
gradually moved to the sea, where the rollers were lost and the bark swam.

Destitute of tools necessary for the undertaking, our reader must judge of the
activity that was employed to root up, cut, shape, hollow, and polish a tree of
an immense size. The possibility of effecting it might even be doubted, were i^
not known that diligence and resolution are great masters which surmount
obstacles, smooth difficulties, and render every thing possible to the man who
is enterprising and persevering.

Their departure was fixed for the eighth day of the month of May. On the
evening that preceeded it, the Colonel made the two children sit down at his
side and spoke to them in these terms.

"Tomorrow, my dear pupils, we shall leave our island; tomorrow we shall
resign ourselves to a capricious element in pursuit of man: alas! you may,
perhaps, one day regret the peaceful country in which you have till now lived
so happy. You may one day reproach me with having caused you to forsake it. No
matter; I do my duty, if, as I trust, my confidence in this enterprise is a
secret counsel of that benign Being who has hitherto watched over you. Man, my
children, is not formed to live alone; he must carry his imperfections into
society, that he may feel them, and learn that humility which can alone arise
from a sense of his weakness. Excluded from the world, we are apt to ascribe to
ourselves a perfection which does not belong to human nature, and forget that
we are called upon by the great author of our Being to combat and to conquer
passions, of the influence of which we are alone insensible, because strangers
to the objects that would excite them. Can we, for example, assure ourselves
that we are exempt from the sordid passion of avarice, when no object is
presented to excite our cupidity? Can we ascertain the conquest we have gained
over ourselves, our progress in patience and forbearance before we are
contradicted? No, my children; it is in society alone that we can form a just
estimate of ourselves; self-love may indeed delude us, but a cool and impartial
examination of our actions, and the motives from whence they spring, will
secure us from yielding implicitly to its dictates. In society, my children,
you will meet with contradictions, anxieties, and a variety of cares from which
a life of solitude would exempt you; but be not discouraged; you will
experience equivalent pleasures; your hearts will dilate in the thought that
you do not exist for yourselves alone; they will expand in love to all around
you, and in proportion as your opportunities of communicating happiness
increase, your own sources of enjoyment will multiply; but let me not, while I
draw this inviting picture, forget to remind you, that the success of our
purposed voyage is uncertain: we are on the point of committing ourselves to
the caprice of the ocean, in a bark, the work of our unskilful hands: -- our
rout is by no means certain. The Antilles, it is true, are numerous; if we miss
one, I trust we shall arrive at another; but many of them are inhabited by the
Carribes, and I need not repeat the consequence, should we fall into their
hands. I do not make these observations, my children, to discourage you; no, my
own hopes are strong; they are besides founded upon rational and solid grounds;
but I would recall to your young minds, too soon elated with the prospect of
success, the necessary reflection, that our enterprise is in the hands of God,
to whose decrees, whether they tend to prosper or frustrate it, it is our duty
to submit with pious and cheerful resignation."

Ambrose and Eleanor listened with attention to the discourse of their friend,
and in silence lifted up their hearts to the Supreme Being, and implored his
protection. They then with renewed vigor set about conveying on board their
little bark, the few articles that had been preserved from the conflagration.
Among these were their tools, and a Carribe casket, containing some jewels, and
the letter and articles found upon Derley. These last the Colonel had so much
at heart, from the hope that they might one day lead to a discovery of Ambrose
and Eleanor's parents, that he secured them about his own person, in case of
shipwreck or other accident. They laid in also a store of rush matting and
cordage made of palm leaves, and thus having completed their little cargo,
retired to rest in expectation of the next day, which was to be that of their
departure. The Colonel could not close his eyes all night; the success of his
approaching voyage, which at a distance hope had represented nearly a^ a
certain^y, now appeared doubtful; he feared, not for himself, but for those who
were to accompany him, especially for the children; "they," said he, "have
scarcely entered the morning of life, and I presume to expose them to the
caprices of the waves! to the dangers of shipwre^k! Gracious God," said he,
looking with fervor toward heaven, "protect them! but if they must perish,
suffer me to perish with them; let me share the punishment of a crime of which
I alone shall be guilty." These reflections were nevertheless counterpoised by
others more pleasing: he still flattered himself with arriving at a port of
safety, and the thought of returning to England, once more lulled him in a
pleasing delusion. From this he was, at length, roused by the return of light:
the Sun gilt the tops of the mountains, and he arose in haste; but the children
and Peter had been before hand with him and were amusing themselves with
carrying into the vessel different forts of grain, salted fish, and other
provisions that were previously prepared, and, undoubtedly, very needful to
undertake a voyage, the term of which was uncertain. One thing, however, which
had till now escaped their recollection, caused some embarrassment: this was
means to carry fresh water, which was equally necessary as the other part of
their stores. The difficulty was, however, soon furmounted by Peter, who
presently formed with planks, in the bottom of the vessel, a reservoir for the
purpose* To prevent the filtrations, he stopped the joints with leaves dipped
in a sort of resinous gum which had the property of being impenetrable to the
water, and when filled, closed it very exactly, to defend it again the motion
of the bark, which he feared might drive out the water.

In two hours all was ready, and nothing was thought on but setting sail, when
on a sudden, Ambrose seeming to recollect himself, entreated the Colonel for a
few minutes to delay their departure.

"With all my heart, Ambrose," said the Colonel; "but tell me, do you leave
your island with regret?"

"No, father," said Ambrose, "we have nothing to regret, since we take you with
us; but we have forgotton -- Eleanor, you know what I mean -- come with me --
quick, quick." Saying this, he took her hand; and without further explanation,
set off across the plain, and was out of sight in an instant. If the Reader is
desirous of knowing whither Eleanor and her brother were running with so much
precipitation, he need only ask his heart, and he will strongly suspect it was
to the tomb of their good friend Derley. "Oh yes," said Eleanor, as they ran
across the plain, "indeed, we forgot; it was very ungrateful in us not to think
of taking a last farewell of him." They presently arrived at the grave, upon
which, as a small memorial, they had placed large stones something in the form
of a tomb. Here, with full hearts, they prostrated themselves, hand in hand,
and began several phrases which they could not finish. "Farewell, farewell,
Derley," said they. "Poor Derley! we shall never see you more, but we will
always think of you. Poor Derley! There he lies, sister." -- "Yes, brother, he
will be always there -- Farewell, Derley, farewell, we will always remember you.
-- Yes, Eleanor and Ambrose will keep you always in their hearts!"

Having thus given free course to their gratitude, they rose to return to the
seashore, when on a sudden they started back, struck with a noise entirely new
to them, they looked at each other; the noise was repeated: "It is only a clap
of thunder, brother," said Eleanor. "No," returned he, "it is not thunder." The
noise was repeated a third time; their knees bent under them, and Eleanor sunk
without sense or motion on the turf. While Ambrose was supporting her, and
endeavoring to recall her senses, confused sounds of distant voices, caught
his ear, "Ambrose, Eleanor,' was repeated more than once: he knew not what to
do; he would have run from the spot, but affection to his sister withheld him.
"Rise, rise, my dear Eleanor," said he, "we are called, it is the voice of our
father;" but some time elapsed before her senses returned. At length,
supporting her as well as he could, he ran precipitately toward the seashore;
but instead of going to that side from whence the voice proceeded, by a natural
impulse he took a path that led to that part of the shore where they had left
the Colonel and Peter. They arrived at the spot, but they were not there; their
vessel was still on the waves, but no other trace of their friends remained.
Ambrose and Eleanor were too much alarmed to form any settled ideas; they ran
here and there, repeatedly calling Father! Peter! and invoking Heaven to hear
and pity their anxiety. A cluster of rocks at length set some bound to their
despair. "Brother," said Eleanor, "it strikes me that we shall ^^nd them among
these rocks." "Heaven grant that we may," said Ambrose. The path they took
winding, by degrees brought them to an eminence, from whence their view
comprehending a larger extent of the ocean, they discerned a small vessel
sailing from the island with the greatest rapidity. This sight increased their
grief; they doubted not but that their friends were in the vessel, and that the
Carribes, or other enemies, had forced them from the island. Immovable with
grief, their eyes swimming in tears, they remained upon the rock till the bark
had totally disappeared, and then bursting anew into a flood of sorrows,
descended with heavy steps by a winding path, which brought them imperceptibly
to a part of the shore at some distance from that where they had ascended: but
what a spect^de of horror struck their sight! a disfigured corpse, covered with
blood, lay on the sands! the upper jaw and skull had been carried away; but the
height and clothes corresponding, they doubted not but their generous protector
lay extended before them. Eleanor shrieked, and again fell senseless on the
ground, and Ambrose reduced almost to the same state, had scarcely strength or
courage to search for proofs to destroy or confirm their dreadful suspicions.
His heart revived, upon observing that the hands of the unfortunate victim were
small and soft, whereas those of his friend were hard, and much sunburned; the
Colonel wore no stockings, the deceased did; and upon close examination, he
found that their clothes in many particulars differed. As for honest Peter, he
had no fears on his account, as besides being much smaller, he was habited in
skins. Convinced that it was neither the Colonel nor Peter, he flew to Eleanor,
who began to revive, and communicated the joyful intelligence; but the idea of
its being their friend, had so strongly impressed her mind, that it was not
till after she had repeatedly questioned her brother, and examined the proofs,
that she could be persuaded her suspicions were unfounded. For further
satisfaction, Ambrose searched the pockets of the deceased, and found in them a
pocketbook, knife, pipe and other articles, which they well knew their friend
did not possess. This removed every doubt: tears of joy mingled with those of
woe were shed on both si^es; it was not their friend -- the dreadful certainty
of his being no more was removed; and hope, if it did not speak peace to their
hearts, at least suspended the violence of their grief. They began to discourse
with more c^lmness on what had happened, and attem^ted to form some conjectures
on the cause of their misfortune. At the side of the deceased they found a
weapon, which, by the description they had heard, they judged to be a pistol.
This they concluded had deprived him of life, but all beyond was a mystery they
could not pe^etrate. Tired with co^jecture they were turning from the
melancholy spot, when Ambrose observed to his sister, that it was necessary, in
some way or other, to dispose of the unfortunate man before them. "Whether he
were a friend or an enemy, Eleanor," said he, "we owe him the duties of
humanity: this was a lesson taught us by our dear father, and shall we neglect
to practice it?" He then went in pursuit of a wooden spade, and presently
returning, dug a hole in the sand, in which, assisted by Eleanor, he with
infinite toil and difficulty deposited the corpse. They then, hand in hand,
took their way along the shore: the sight of their little bark, at length,
recalled the remembrance of their friend, and renewed the violence of their
grief; they stopped to give vent to their tears, and then sitting down on the
point of a ro^^, they for some minutes were lost in melancholy reflections: at
length Eleanor broke silence: "I am persuaded," said she, "that the Carribes
have forced them from the island." "There is more reason," returned Ambrose,
"to think that it was other enemies; the man whom we have just buried is not a
Carribe; (...) is dressed like our father."

"True," said Eleanor, "but a thought has struck me; perhaps, like Peter, he
has been made prisoner by the Carribes; it is very possible that he may have
lost his life in the defense of our dear father."

Ambrose paused a moment upon this idea. "What you suggest, sister," said he,
"is certainly possible; the unfortunate man we have seen may have lost his life
in defense of our father, but the vessel we saw was certainly very different
from the canoes of the Carribes."

"It certainly," said Eleanor, "appeared very different; but the distance was
great, our eyes might deceive us; for my part, I scarcely knew what I felt or
what I saw."

"That is true," said Ambrose; "but yet I am satisfied, from the description I
have heard from my father, that what we saw was a European vessel."

"But the Carribes," said Eleanor, "are so accustomed to land upon this island
-- "

"Well," interrupted Ambrose, "Carribes or Europeans, would to Heaven they had
taken us with them! For my part, I would rather have endured slavery, nay,
death itself, than what I now feel."

"And so would I," faid Eleanor. "Oh, Ambrose, our dear father! can we ever
forget him! Peter too -- '

A burst of sorrow concluded. The day was spent in lamentations and vain
conjectures, and at night they returned with slow and heavy sleps to the cave,
which, since the conflagration had served them as an abode. Here every object
reminded them of their loss, and renewed the violence of their grief; here
their dear protector had discoursed with them; here they had partaken with him
the last meal; they wept, they recollected a thousand instances of his
kindness, which did but aggravate their sorrow. At length, nature exhausted,
called for repose; Eleanor sunk into an uneasy slumber; Ambrose did the same,
but presently started from it, and began again to ponder upon the dreadful
events of the preceding day; his thoughts hurried from one thing to another,
till an idea occurred which fixed effectually his attention, and revived his
hopes. He impatiently waited for the return of day, that he might communicate
it to his sister, who no sooner awaked than he addressed her in these words:
"What can it avail us, sister, to remain in an island where every object
reminds (...) of the happiness we have lost? Our ba^k is, you know, ready, it
is rigged, stored, every thing is complete. What hinders us from putting to
sea? If we remain here, we must for ever give up the hope of seeing our dear
father again; whereas, if we venture to sea, it is possible we may arrive at
some island, where we may hear tidings of him."

"But," said Eleanor, starting at so daring an enterprise, "we do not know how
to guide a canoe -- and then the Carribes -- "

"As to the guiding of a canoe," said Ambrose, "I have heard Peter describe it
so often, that I have no fears upon that head; and as to the Carribes, we must
avoid them; we, as well as my father, know the islands that are inhabited by
the Europeans, and can easily steer toward them."

"Yes," said Eleanor, "we know them very well upon the map, but when one is
upon the great ocean' --

"Well sister," said ambrose, "I do not desire to force you, but for my part,
as I have told you before, I would rather endure slavery, or even death, than
this dreadful uncertainty upon our dear Carlton's fate."

"I would risk every thing," said Eleanor, "were there a hope of discovering
him; but our success is very uncertain; we may never reach the islands
inhabited by Europeans, and if we do, may not -- "

"Well," interrupted Ambrose, provoked at the obstacles his sister raised to a
project upon which his imagination, already began to be much heated, "I see
that you are averse to what I propose."

"You cannot surely think, brother," said Eleanor, "that I am averse to any
thing that can afford a reasonable hope of seeing again our dear father. But we
in our certain danger in this enterprise, and after all, our success is very
uncertain; if we escape the Carribes, and the dangers of the sea, we may not
gain the information we wish.." --

"I agree, my dear sister," said Ambrose, "that it is possible our enquiries
may not prove successful: but on the other hand, there is rational grounds to
suppose that they may. The vessel which conveyed our friends from the island,
was undoubtedly European; it is therefore highly probable, that among Europeans
we may find them. Cuba, St. Domingo, Porto Rico, and the other islands
inhabited by Europeans, lie near to, and without doubt, have a communication
with each other; if we reach one, we shall easily extend our enquiries to
others, and it will be hard indeed if we do not somewhere gain the intelligence
we seek. Courage and perseverence, sister, are necessary to every enterprise;
without these, our dear father has often told us, nothing can be effected, and
with them, that few things are impossible." --

"And do you really think, brother," said Eleanor, half persuaded to listen to
a project, which though it at first alarmed her, held out the soothing hope of
recovering their lost friends, "Do you really think we may reach the islands
you speak of?"

"I am persuaded that we may," said Ambrose, "I do not pretend to suppose that
we are not to encounter dangers and difficulties; but, my dear sister, had
circumstances been reversed, had my father's fate been ours, and he left to
lament our loss, do you think dangers or difficulties would have retarded his
pursuit? No, be assured his affection would have surmounted every obstacle; and
shall we, who owe all to his goodness, fear to encounter the perils of the sea,
or, perhaps, slavery, (for this is the worst that can happen) when the
delightful hope, however distant, is afforded of seeing him and sharing, if we
cannot alleviate, his misfortune? Recollect, my dear sister, with what
tenderness he has watched over our infancy, how studious he has been to
cultivate our minds, and train our hearts to virtue! Reflect upon the many -- "

"Say no more, brother," interrupted Eleanor, upon whose feelings this last
argument operated more powerfully than all the rest, "I am ashamed of my fears,
and will from this moment be wholly guided by your advice. God will, I trust,
grant us his protection, and guide us to our dear father, our best, our only
friend."

Such was the discourse of Eleanor and Ambrose before they left the cave. They
then fell upon their knees, implored the protection of the Supreme Being, and
walked toward the sea shore, discoursing upon their project. The Sun was by
this time ri^en, and the sea calm, and reflecting, in its various undulations,
the purple colors of the firmament, seemed to invite their confidence, and
engage them to embark, They stopped a few minutes; entered the vessel, and out
the cable that fastened it to the shore. In an instant^^^ shot away like an
arrow. Eleanor, seeing the shore fly from her, shrieked, and would have
returned to the island; but Ambrose, affecting the greatest fortitude, employed
all his eloquence to encourage his sister, and at last succeeded. A wind
presently arising from land, drove them into the open sea, and their beloved
isle soon vanished from their view. The sun, in the mean while, had run more
than half his course, and the weather, which had till now been favorable, on a
sudden changed: thick clouds obscured the air, the sea ran high, and some drops
of rain threatened an approaching storm; all nature seemed to prepare for a
great revolution. Ambrose, though alarmed, endeavored, by every argument he
could suggest, to encourage and persuade his sister there was no danger, but
the horror, which, in spite of his efforts to appear serene, was impressed on
his countenance, and the gulf, which from time to time opened and threatened to
swallow them, spoke too forcibly not to be understood. Eleanor, nevertheless,
encouraged by the example of her brother, summoned all the resolution she was
mistress of, and resolved, if it were the will of God that they should perish,
to meet death with fortitude. The weather, however, which continued foul till
the middle of the night, at length cleared, and gave place to the Moon, which,
reflecting her silver disk upon the waves, somewhat re-anim^ted the courage of
our poor voyagers, more embarrassed on the liquid elements, than were,
heretofore, the first navigators. But on a sudden a new object excited their
terrors. On the top of their mast shone a light, which to their troubled
imagination, seemed fire descending from heaven to consume their vessel. This,
though an appearance familiar to mariners, and the natural consequence of a
heated and damp atmosphere, struck them with inconceivable horror. They clasped
each other closely, and fixing their eyes upon the electric flame, had neither
power to weep nor to speak. Nor was this all; the sea ran high. Sometimes their
little bark rose upon the billows, and then again seemed to sink, never to
rise, into the depth of the vast ocean. Death every instant presented itself to
their view, and they could only wonder that they had not already met it in the
waves.

Thirty hours they remained in this anxiety, scarcely daring to stir, and only
from necessity taking a little of the nourishment their vessel afforded, At
length, near the close of the day, the wind changing carried them toward a
coast, which, on the first view, appeared to be desert; but on approaching it
they distinguished men running on the sands, to examine their bark. Their
hearts rebounded at the sight of land; they perceived by the dress and color
of the islanders, that they were not Carribes, and far from being alarmed, were
inspired with the greatest confidence. They rejoiced at the prospect of being
once more safe upon land, and hoped soon to hear news of the colonel and Peter,
as if, (such was was their simplicity) all the world was obliged to know them.

When they were near land, a little boat took them on board, and carried them
on shore; but the astonishment of the islanders upon finding two children
habited in skins, alone, in a bark ingeniously constructed and furnished with
different sorts of provisions, is not easy to be described; a thousand
questions were in an instant put to them, to which they answered in English,
have you seen Colonel Carlton or Peter? Where are they? In pity tell us, we are
seeking them, etc.

The islanders, who were Spaniards, understood nothing of all this; but one
among them, who knew English, acted as interpreter, and answered by assuring
them that they knew nothing of the persons of whom they spoke.

The noise of their arrival, and the singular circumstances that attended it,
soon reached the ears of the Governor, to whose palace they were conducted
amidst a crowd of people, whom curiosity had drawn together.

The Governor viewed them with surprise, put several questions to them, and
seemed to be much pleased with their youth and simplicity. Ambrose and Eleanor,
giddy with all they saw and heard, answered only in monosyllables, or by
something in which the Colonel or Peter always made a part. The Governor, who
spoke English, in vain assured them he did not know their friends: solely
occupied with the idea, they would absolutely insist upon his knowing them, and
giving them the information they wished. At length, after repeated questions,
the Governor made them sit down, and addressed them to this (...). "My
children, you appear to me to be (...) and wise.; I am a sovereign of this
island which is called St. Verado, one of the Lacaye isles; I made a discovery
of it twelve years si^ce, and have established in it a colony, of which I am
chief. You shall remain at my Court, and shall have no reason to regret the
country you have left. As for this Colonel, who seems to interest you so much,
I will cause him to be sought; Do not make yourselves uneasy, you shall have
news of him shortly. Poor children! how old are you?

Do you know?

Ambrose replied, "We are almost fifteen."

"And what is your name?" said the Governor."

"I am called Ambrose."

"And you?"

"Eleanor."

"Well, Eleanor, "said the Governor, "come near me: are you afraid? have I an
ill look?

"No," said Eleanor. "Well then," continued he, "draw near: you will be very
happy here, and you too, Ambrose."

A superb supper was now served up, during which the governor lavished on his
young g^ests the most flattering attentions, especially upon Eleanor, with
whose beauty and artless graces he appeared much delighted. Eleanor and Ambrose
eat but little; though much comforted by the governor's promises in behalf of
their friend; they could not forget that they had lost him; besides, their
attention was wholly engrossed by the objects that surrounded them: the wax
lights, the plates, the meats, the furniture, and then the clothes of the
islanders! all struck them with wonder and delight. They could only gaze and
admire, they had not leisure to eat* and scarely to attend to the questions of
the Governor. Supper being at length ended, and a few hours having in some
measure familiarized the surrounding wonders, the Governor requested Ambrose to
acquaint him more particularly with his adventures. He complied, and acquitted
himself with the best grace imaginable; omitted no circumstance that was in the
least interesting; spoke in the highest ^erms of their obligations to Colonel
Carlton; extolled the fidelity of Peter, and concluded with describing the
manner in which they were deprived of their friends, their grief, and the
happiness they should experience could they be restored to them.

The Governor thanked Ambrose for his narrative; and observing that rest was
necessary after the fatigues they had undergone, ordered each to be conducted
to a separate apartment. The thought of a separation, situated as they were
among strangers, and in a strange land, excited a painful sensation, but
propriety rendered it necessary, and they submitted. In the morning however, at
day break, Ambrose hastened to his sister^s apartment; she was already up, and
when she saw her brother, melted in tears?

"What is the matter, my dear sister?" said he; "why are you in tears?"

"I don't know," replied Eleanor; "but every thing here alarms me: I am afraid
we shall be very unhappy."

"Why do you think so?" said Ambrose.

"I don't know," returned Eleanor, "but there is something in this Governor
that terrifies me very much. He is not like our dear Carlton."

"True, Eleanor," said her brother; "but what do you apprehend?"

"I don't know," said Eleanor; "but whenever he speaks, or looks at me, I
cannot help trembling."

"Nay, my dear sister," said Ambrose, "that is absurd; there is at present no
cause for alarm; the Governor treats us with kindness, and gives us hopes of
seeing our dear father; what (...) we desire more? Besides, let the worst
happen, if we are not happy here, we can embark again in our vessel."

"I am, indeed, very foolish," said Eleanor, drying her tears, "but you most
allow that there is something very forbidding in the countenance of this
Governor."

"I agree with you sister," said Ambrose, "that Don Lescar has neither the
co^^enance nor manners of our dear Carlton; but we are not on that account to
conclude that he is base or treacherous; how often has our father described to
us the diversity which reigns throughout human nature; he has told us that a
corrupt heart is frequently hid under a pleasing set of features; and may we
not equally infer, that a good o^e may be concealed by an unpromissing
countenance?

In this manner, though himself not prepossessed in favor of their ^ost, did
Ambrose endeavor to (...) the fears of his sister. While he was thus engaged,
a servant came to conduct them to Don Lescar, who received them with great
kindness* and excited their confidence by a thousand flattering promises:
Eleano^'s tranquillity was restored; but the Governor observing on her^s, as
well as her brother's countenance, the traces of (...) and dejection, ordered
one of his office^s (...) show them the city, wishing to dissipate their (...),
and at the same time to impress them with an exalted idea of his magnificence.
They accordingly let out under the conduct of their (...) and were much amused
with observing the variety which reigned in the persons, (...), and buildings
of the (...): every thing was to them new and interesting. The houses, only one
story high, were built with wood and bricks made of a sort of reddish earth
found in the mountains? the streets long, spacious, and regularly built, formed
a star, the center of which was a spacious square, describing an exact
pentagon. No shops were to be seen in the island; the inhabitants, to the
number of about four hundred, as many men as women, lived upon the produce of a
little field, which each cultivated behind his house. At the side of Don
Lescar's palace was a chapel, in which was an old Dominican, who was held in
great veneration by the whole island, presided. With respect to the morals and
customs of this Baytian colony, the reader will soon learn them from the mouth
of an inhabitant, who will play an interesting part in the sequel of this
history.

The island was situated about the 25th degree 15 minutes north latitude, and
57 degrees 11 minutes west longitude. It might be in length about six leagues,
and in breadth three: nothing was wanting to neatness, convenience, or utility:
the houses were built along the seacoast to the east, where a port was formed,
well fortified with a tower and ramparts. Here Eleanor and Ambrose stopped,
while the officer, their guide, withdrew to converse at some distance with a
friend whom he had met. They sat down, and fixing their eyes upon their little
bark, which remained chained in the basin, began to call to their remembrance
the happy hours they had spent with their protector, when a little old man with
a long white beard, came and seated himself beside them: he looked steadfastly
on them for some minutes, and then broke silence: -- "Amiable, interesting
children," said he, "suffer an old man, whose head is white with age, to behold
and converse with you: from the first moment! saw on the port, your youth, your
innocence, your misfortunes interested me: As I view you, my heart expands:
speak, amiable children, who gave you birth?"

"We are ignorant," replied Ambrose; "in our infancy we were deserted in an
uninhabited island: God sent us a father a protector; he brought us up and
instructed us; but we have just lost him, and set out determined to seek him
all over the world, when chance brought us to your country."

"How I pity you, my good children!" said the old man, "how! lament that you
must reside among men so wicked as those which inhabit this island!"

"What do you tell us!" exclaimed Eleanor and Ambrose, alarmed.

"I tell you, my children," replied the old man, "a melancholy truth; nothing
but unbridled licentiousness reigns here; vice and folly divide the wretched
inhabitants of St. Verrado."

"But Don Lescar -- " inter^upted the children: "the has loaded us with
kindness -- he has promised us his protection."

"Ah! my children," ^ail the stranger, "his promises are (...) but to deceive
and entangle you in his snares; fated experience has rendered me wise; suffer
me then to warn you of your danger; it was for this I watched a favorable
moment to accost you."

Ambrose and Eleanor thanked the old man for the friendly interest he took in
what concerned them, and assured him of their readiness to attend to his
counsels; at the same time they could not forbear expressing their surprise
that he should continue to reside among such wicked people. "Alas! my
children," said the stranger, necessity not inclination detains me: would to
Heaven I could abandon this detested place! but fate has rendered it my
prison." -- Here the old man seemed for some moments overwhelmed with grief;
then recollecting himself, and observing, by the intelligent countenances of
his young auditors, the impression his discourse made upon them, he resumed: "I
see, my young friends, that my discourse surprises you: you know not what to
think of it; but the history of our Governor, with which a residence of some
years in this island has fully acquainted me, will throw a full light on my
subject. Don Lescar was born of a good family at St. Domingo: being destined
from his youth to the service of his country, he was sent by the Governor of
the island upon an expedition, in which he disgraced himself by the most
unheard of excesses; nothing withstood his rapacity; unawed by any principle of
justice or honor, by nature avaricious and cruel, he preyed upon the substance
of the people he was sent to de^end: his depredations were at length made known
to the Governor; he was tried, and condemned to p^y the forfeit of his life;
but before the sentence was executed, George Blake, the captain of an English
vessel, one of his most zealous partisans, and some others, partly by force and
partly by bribery, found means to set him at liberty. They failed for South
Carolina; but near the lake of Bahama were encountered by a violent tempest,
which continued eight hours. They then hoisted fail, but the winds proving
contrary, and their yard and top mast being broken, they were o^liged to
abandon themselves to chance, and at l^st found themselves near an island,
which the pilot assured them was one of the Lucay or Bahama Isles, which was
probably yet unknown to Europe: for though Christopher Columbus discovered
forty, it is well known that more exist. While the carpenter pursued his work,
Don Lescar, with his friend Blake, and a few others advanced into the isle,
which he found to be fruitful, but entirely unfrequented, and wild; immediately
the singular idea of founding a colony struck him; he communicated it to his
friends and to the whole crew, who having left their country to escape the
punishment of their crimes, or upon different discontents, unanimously approved
it: in short, they took possession of the island, tilled the land, and built
commodious habitations: but they had among them no women, and they wanted
wives. In this dilemma, Don Lescar, ever fruitful in expedients, recollected
the stratagem made use of by the Romans to carry of the Sabine women -- but I
forget, my children, that you are unacquainted with the history of civilized
nations -- "

Eleanor and Ambrose here interrupted him to observe, that though they had been
brought up on a desert island, their kind friend had taught them that they were
not the only beings existing in the world, and had acquainted them with the
history of other countries.

The old man then continued: "Don Lescar proposed to his comrades to make use
of the same stratagem, and they accordingly set ^ail for Cuba, an island
inhabited by the Spaniards. There feigning themselves travelers come to see
the country, they one night gave (...) on board their vessel to the women, who
assembled to the number of sixty, with some gentlemen: I was unfortunately
among the latter, for in the midst of our gaiety, our perfidious hosts weighed
anchor. The wind was favorable, and the vessel departed, while the people on
share gazed on us with the utmost unconcern, thinking Don Lescar's design was
merely to afford us the pleasure of a little excursion on the sea; we too at
first believed his intention to be no other, but fatally were we undeceived?
The vessel, which was a swift sailer, in spite of our prayers and tears,
conveyed us to this island, never to return. The men, myself only and a few
others, from whom they judged they had nothing to fear, excepted, were all
massacred; the women alone, who were the objects of their treachery, were
preserved, and those assembled at the fete, being for the most part dissipated
and abandoned, easily accommodated themselves to the terms offered by Don
Lescar. A few, however, preferred death to becoming the wives of their base
enslavers; and these drag out a miserable existence in the prisons of St.
Verrado.

When the inhabitants were furnished with the necessaries, they began to think
of the luxuries of life, and George Blake, at the head of an hundred men, put
to sea to pillage merchantmen and other vessels* when he meets one superior in
force to his own, he hoists the white flag, salutes it with three fires, and
pusses as a friend; but if it has suffered from the tempest, or is inferior, he
attacks it, throws out his grappling irons, and brings it in triumph into our
port, taking always the cruel precaution to massacre all the men from whose
courage or address ^e thinks he has any thing to fear: he acts the same with
respect to vessels which unfortunately put in here for repairs, or to take in
water: violating every law of justice and hospitality; he murders the men, and
seizes upon the women and cargo. By such means he has collected this little
fleet of twenty sail, which you see in the b^sin, and has procured for the
colony in profusion, all that is necessary to encourage luxury, and secure the
establishment of his colleague. It is seven days since he set out upon one of
these expeditions; he is not yet returned, and his absence so much longer than
usual, begins to alarm the whole colony. It is not improbable but that this
villain may have met the just punishment of all his crimes.

With respect to the Verradians, there is scarcely an excess to when they are
not carried; drunkenness reigns indiscriminately amongst them. As the prizes
made by their vessels are divided in the public square among the inhabitants,
each has a profusion of brandy, and other spirituous liquors, which they employ
to their own destruction: even children are infected with this dreadful vice;
there are already in the island upwards of two hundred, who, corrupted by the
example of their parents, before they have attained the age of reason, lose the
little they possess in draughts of brandy. The inhabitants are in continual
strife, and sometimes kill (...) other, but this crime is punished with death.
They know here no other employment than di^^^pation, no other God than
volu^t^ousness, and no other (...) than liberty. Thus ene^vated by i^leness and
excess, they are not in a state to resist the (...) attack: a hundred men,
could they discover and surprise it, would be sufficient to sub^^e the whole
colony; but Don Lescar has prohibited any one under pain of death, leaving it
without hi^ order or permission. Nor is this (...); the vessels you see here
are with their boats chained in the basin; and he alone has the ^ey of the
chains. These strong (...), those guards (...) to fire upon the first who shall
dare approach, ^ender all access to the port impossible, and when once you set
foot in St. Verrado, it is for life."

Ambrose and Eleanor trembled at these dreadful words, which the stranger
observing, hastened to divert their attention.

"Don Lescar," said he, "notwithstanding these precautions, is sensible that
other chains than those of force are necessary to bind his subjects; he labors
to render their state agreeable, that he may add those of inclination; with
this view he permits an unrestrained license, which he judges alone capable of
attaching them. To consess the truth, all are satisfied with their condition,
and among them there is not a single inhabitant, myself excepted, desirous of
quitting St. Verrado to inhabit another country. Every day there are superb
entertainments at the palace of the Governor, balls, concerts, and assemblies,
they love riot and dissipation; what would they more? they have it to their
wish. Such, my children, are the laws of the Verradians; such their manner of
life; endeavor to bear with, and to accommodate yourselves to it, without
wandering from the principles of virtue: live here, since heaven has sent you,
wise, gentle, modest, temperate, and do not imitate the odious companions with
whom you must associate. I will from time to time see, and advise you:
persuaded that you will be secret, and set some value on my lessons.

Eleanor and Ambrose astonished and shocked at all they heard, thanked the old
man for his information, and expressed their readiness to be guided by his
advice. Then seeing their guide, he bade them farewell, telling them at
parting, that he was called the Count d'Oresty.

Don Lescar upon their return, inquired how they liked his city? But observing
the impression of melancholy, which notwithstanding their efforts to appear
cheerful, the discourse of the Count d'Oresty had left upon their countenances,
he expressed his displeasure. Eleanor and Ambrose excused themselves,
attributing it to the concern they could not help feeling for the loss of their
protector. This was the first time they had ever known dissimulation, or felt
the necessity of it. "And wherefore," said the Governor, "this unavailing
sorrow? This Carlton was your friend and protector: well, I will be so; I will
love and protect you as well as he did; I will do more; I will cause all my
subjects to honor and respect you. Besides, a thought has struck me concerning
your friend; the manner in which he and Peter disappeared, is singular; I have
reflected upon it, and do not think it in the least improbable but that you
may, in a very short time, see him land in this island."

Eleanor and Ambrose exclaimed in an extacy, How? Where? My Lord -- do you
know? -- Is there any hope of --

"Have patience," interrupted Don Lescar, "and be not so elate; what I suggest,
is merely conjecture; I will tell you upon what grounds: My subjects frequently
make short trips upon the seas, for the purpose of taking prizes; it is not
eight days since one of my captains sailed with about a hundred and fifty men:
now as the time agrees with that in which, by your account, your friends
disappeared, it seems very probable that he may have touched at the island, and
borne them away to increase the inhabitants of my colony. Can you describe the
corpse you found lying on the ground?"

"No," replied Ambrose, "it was too much disfigured; but we found about it some
papers and other articles which I will show you. Saying this, ^e searched his
pocket, and produced them; but no sooner had Don Lescar examined the papers,
^^an his countenance changed; "Heavens! exclaimed he, what do I see! it is the
hand writing of my friend! it is he himself; the hand of an assassin has divided
us for ever." With these words he darted a furious glance upon Ambrose, grasped
the papers, and went out of the apartment, without pronouncing a single word.
The children looked at each other amazed: "What have we done?" said Eleanor.

"He thinks," said Ambrose, "that the man who was killed upon our coast is his
friend."

"Let us fly," said Eleanor, alarmed, "perhaps he will revenge his death upon
us."

"And why fly?" said Ambrose, "were that even possible, when we may expect soon
to see our dear father; he will counsel and defend us.

"Ah, no," said Eleanor, "he is without doubt murdered: we can no longer
entertain the hope of seeing him."

A deep silence ensued, and they remained overwhelmed with the bitterest
reflections. Two days elapsed before they saw the Governor; on the third he
sent for them into his apartment; his countenance was gloomy and morose; hut he
received them with his former kindness. "I have suffered much, my young
friends," said he, "since I saw you; I have shed many tears and it is this
Carlton whom you regret so much, who has caused them to flow; banish him,
therefore, from your remembrance, as the enemy of one whom you must henceforth
learn to honor and obey."

"Ah, my Lord," said Eleanor, falling upon her knees, "pardon our dear
protector -- the injury he has done you was involuntary: in his own defense --
Pardon him; Eleanor on her knees entreats it. As a favor -- "

"As a favor, sister," interrupted Ambrose bluntly; "as justice you mean; had
Don Lescar been in the place of our Carlton, would he not have done the same?

"Young man," said Don Lescar, incensed at the oblique reproof that was
conveyed to him in these words, "moderate your impetuosity; remember that you
are in the presence of your King.

"I respect your title," said Ambrose, "though I know not what is due to it;
but I appeal to your heart, to your probity: you believe that our Carlton has
destroyed your friend, admitting it to be so, you know not the provocation: --
WE are assured it was in defense of his life or liberty, and, in this case, is
he not justified? The man of honor should approve the actions that honor
justifies."

"And do you," said Don Lescar, "bred in the depths of forests, pretend to talk
of honor? Do you pretend to know its laws?"

"I know the rights of man toward man," said Ambrose, "they are equal to all
beings, common to all States."

"And so," said Don Lescar, with a sarcastic smile, "knowing natural laws, you
pretend to judge of those prescribed by civil society and religion? Are these
the fine maxims your friend has taught you?"

"He has taught me at least," said Ambrose, "to despise irony, and to brave
pri^^."

Don Lescar was incensed: "Ungrateful wretch," said he, "is this the return for
all my favors? Tremble at the effects of my displeasure."

It must be owned that the sentiments of Ambrose were uttered with an asperity
and confidence that cannot be justified: Don Lescar was his superior in years;
had hospitality entertained him and his (...), and though the Count d'Oresty
had destroyed the confidence they might otherwise have reposed in him, no
personal injury had yet been offered; some respect was, therefore, due to him;
but bred in unfrequented wilds, accustomed to combat the beasts of the forest,
and hardened by labor and fatigue, Ambrose had contracted a certain roughness
of character, which rendered him a little savage: he had never been
contradicted; on this occasion he was; his heart, replete with the noblest
sentiments, could not brook the pride of a man, whom he not only considered as
the enemy of his dearest friend, but degraded by his vices beneath the lowest
of his species. Eleanor possessed equal strength of mind with her brother, but
she was more timid; every thing alarmed her, because she more quickly foresaw
the consequences. Terrified at the scene that was taking place between her
brother and Don Lescar, she endeavored in vain to (...) them: "Be calm, my
Lord," said she: "Brother, do not vex him."

"It is for your sake alone, Eleanor," said Don Lescar, "that I can forget the
insults and arrogance of a youth, who is unworthy a sister so beautiful and
interesting: my heart is already weighed down with care; the hand of an
ass^ssin has bere^t me of a faithful friend and a valuable subject: it is you
only who have power to console me: I love you, Eleanor, you sh^^l one day be
Queen of St. Verrado -- Do you not understand me? You are at present young; I
will be your guardian and protector, but at last you shall be my Queen."

It is impossible to express the astonishment of Eleanor; the idea of ever
becoming the wise of Don Lescar, however distant the period might be, st^^ck
her with a horror which she could not (...): be observed it, but not thinking
it (...) further upon the subject, (...); but with a lo^k which taught his
young guests they had every thing to fear if his will was resisted.

"Oh!" said Eleanor, "what will become of us!"

"Fear nothing, sister," said Ambrose, "God will protect us; I trembled on the
waves, I wept at our separation from our dear father and Peter, but I will
never weep or tremble at the threats of a tyrant: we will endeavor to see our
good old man; he will console and advise us." Saying this, they took their way
toward the port, in the hope of meeting the Count d'Oresty, but they were that
night disappointed: in short, several days elapsed before they saw him, except
in the presence of witnesses, before whom it was impossible to discourse of any
thing interesting. During this time, Ambrose and Eleanor had the mortification
of hearing the most horrid execrations bestowed upon the name of Carlton; he
was now universally believed to be the assassin of the naval Chief, and the
arrival of the Verradian vessel was awaited with impatience, to sacrifice both
him and his accomplice, Peter, to the vengeance of the people. Eleanor and her
brother, therefore, far from looking with joy, as formerly, to the moment of
his arrival, prayed fervently to Heaven that it might be retarded. In the mean
while a delay so unusual began to alarm the inhabitants, from the supposition
of their vessel being captured, and a discovery made of their retreat. The port
was doubly guarded, and the whole colony put into a state of defense; but in a
short time their fears insensibly decreased, and lulled in indolent security,
they returned to their former course of luxury and dissipation.

Eleanor and Ambrose continued to be treated as the distinguished guests of the
Governor; but under this mask of kindness, it was easy to discern that he
concealed an implacable hatred to Ambrose, he could not, without indignation,
behold the pride and firmness of a youth whom he considered as a savage; the
strictness of his principles, and the solidity of his arguments, always on the
side of virtue, incensed him; the unshaken attachment too which he at all times
discovered to his dear friend, and the freedom with which, even at the peril of
his life, he expressed his sentiments on this subject, was another cause of his
disgust; in short, his hatred arose to such a pitch, that had it not been for
Eleanor, it is probable he would have sacrificed him to his resentment. She,
however, more soft and gentle, mediated between her brother and Don Lescar, and
thus warded off the blow that might otherwise have proved fatal. As observed
before, Eleanor was now nearly fifteen; she was tall, and well-made; her
sunburned complexion was fresh as the dew; her teeth were white and regular,
and her large dark eyes sparkled with intelligence and vivacity: her hair
flowed negligently in natural curls upon her shoulders, and there was a
gentleness in her manners, and a grace in her least motion, that rendered her
whole figure inexpressibly interesting. Don Lescar was struck with her
innocence and beauty, and from the first moment of her arrival conceived the
idea of making her one day his wise. From this cause had arisen the favors he
had bestowed on her and Ambrose; favors which they might justly have claimed
from humanity and hospitality; but Don Lescar was a stranger to both, and was
too depraved to bestow upon other ground^ than those of self-convenience or
self-gratification.

Ambrose and Eleanor had now more than once seen and communicated their griefs
to the Count d'Oresly; the good old man sincerely sympathized in their sorrows,
and by his counsels endeavored to confirm them in the principles of virtue; he
often pointed out to them, in the wretched inhabitants of St. Verrado, the
fatal effects of luxury and intemperance; "behold," said he, "their features
distorted, their constitutions undermined, their reason obscured, their
faculties decaying even before they have attained their due maturity, and their
whole frame convulsed with passions which degrade them far beneath the beasts
which they despise; such, my children, is the price of pleasures which cloy in
the possession, and which are pursued more, perhaps from habit than from
inclination. He then set before them the superior advantages of a life of
virtue and moderation, and thus strengthened them against the temptations to
which their innocence was exposed among the dissipated companions with which
they were daily constrained to associate. One day, as they were as usual,
discoursing upon their misfortunes, and lamenting the cruel necessity which
doomed them to live under a tyrant whom they abhorred, having remained a few
minutes silent, the Count addressed them in these words: "When I reflect, my
children, upon the dangers to which your innocence is exposed, and that your
lives are scarcely safe in a place where you are beheld as the friend of one
who is universally believed to be the assassin of a man, who, though stained
with the blackest crimes was nevertheless the idol of his comrades, I feel an
irresistible desire to deliver you from so many perils: my own life is of
little importance; in a few years I shall be removed to a country far beyond
this circumscribed spot of earth. I had resolved to wait for this happy release
in St. Verrado, since a whimsical destiny had made it my abode; but your
misfortunes, my children, the perils to which your innocence is exposed, has
showed me the possibility of an escape, which would otherwise have remained
undiscovered, as unsought."

"But," said Eleanor, "our dear Carlton; we must stay and take him with us."

"Yes," said Ambrose, "we must take him, or stay and die with him: while a hope
remains of our dear father (...) arrival, we cannot leave St. Verrado."

"My dear children," said the Count d'Oresty, "your affection and gratitude
charms, and interests me still more in your behalf; but rest assured, whatever
may be the cause, that the vessel which you have reason to suppose deprived you
of your friends, will never more return to St. Varrado. Don Lescar himself,
nay, every inhabitant of this island, has relinquished all idea of it; who
knows, therefore, Heaven may have preserved your friends; and that misfortune
(if, as is generally believed the vessel has been captured) which may end in
the destruction of the colony, may have brought life and liberty to them: but
however this may be, you are as likely, if God permits, to meet them in other
countries as in this."

Eleanor and Ambrose acknowledged the force of this argument, and were soon
persuaded to enter into a me sure, which the Count assured them afforded a much
greater probability of discovering their friends than remaining at St. Verrado.
They expressed their readiness to be guided by his advice, and enquired how he
proposed to effect their escape?

The Count d'Oresty did not think proper at this time to disclose his plans; he
only counseled Ambrose to moderate his impetuosity, and keep up a friendly
intercourse with Don Lescar; on which he told them the success of their
enterprise would in a great measure depend: he then departed, telling them to
attend every day at the port, and that when he had digested his plan, and
arranged matters for its execution, he would talk more to them upon the subject.

Eleanor and Ambrose exactly followed the instructions of their friend: they
attended regularly, at the port, but a week elapsed before they saw the Count
d'Oresty; at length he accosted them: "Well, my children," said he, "do you
think you shall have courage to trust yourselves once more on the seas in your
little bark?"

"Ah, father," said Ambrose, "we commit ourselves wholly to your guidance; we
have lost our dear Carlton, and think ourselves beyond measure happy in meeting
a friend to supply his place. We are very simple -- we know nothing of the
great world -- It is you who must advise and direct us."

"Well, my children," said the Count d'Oresty, "God, who sees the purity of my
intentions toward you, will, I hope, direct me: we must encounter perils -- "

"Talk not of perils," interrupted Ambrose; "tell us only what we must do --
deliver us from Don Lescar -- from this wicked place, since we must no longer
indulge the hope of seeing our dear father."

"It is in your little bark, my children," said the Count, "that we must
attempt our escape; I have examined it, and find it solid and well built; if we
can once embark, I doubt not but I shall be able to steer so, as to land you on
some shore inhabited by beings less cruel than those among whom you now reside:
from thence, if God spare me so long, I will convey you to England, where you
may, perhaps, hear tidings of your friend; but much before remains to be done;
your little bark, you see, is chained in the basin; the keys of the port must
therefore be obtained or we cannot proceed in the enterprise. Do you think,
Ambrose, that you would have courage to enter the apartment of Don Lescar, and
get possession of them?"

"I could have courage," said Ambrose, "to do any thing rather than live under
a tyrant whom I despise and abhor -- but how -- "

"You must take them," said the Count, "from under the head of Don Lescar while
he sleeps."

"Oh Heaven!" exclaimed Eleanor, "should he awake! my brother's life -- "

"Be not alarmed, Eleanor," said the Count d'Oresty, follow exactly my
directions, and all will be well. If the wind, Ambrose, continue in the same
quarter as at present (for this will be necessary to observe, that it may blow
us swiftly from the coast) toward evening feign an excuse to withdraw, and
steal privately into the chamber of Don Lescar, where you must conceal yourself
till he retires to rest."

"But," said Ambrose -- "

"Hear me to an end," interupted the Count^ "you, Eleanor, take this powder,
and when Don Lescar has drunk a few glasses, watch a favorable opportunity,
and drop a pinch of it into his wine. It will first cause a drowsiness, which
will probably induce him to repair to his chamber, and throw him into a deep
sleep, during which, Ambrose may, without danger of awaking him, take
possession of the keys, which, when he retires to rest, are always placed
beneath his pillow. Now, my children, if you have address and courage to
execute this, you must immediately haste with the keys to this place, where I
shall expect you, and be ready to perform what is farther necessary to the
success of the enterprise."

The attempt was bold and hazardous; the execution of it, if not impossible,
seemed difficult and replete with dangers; but Ambrose, transported with the
hope of escaping from a country which he had in horror, and also with the
thought of visiting England, where a probability remained of one day seeing his
dearest friend, if he was still an inhabitant of the earth, promised every
thing. Eleanor, though alarmed for the safety of her brother, consented to
perform her part, and after some farther arrangements concerning the execution
of the plan, they returned to the palace of the Governor.

Early in the evening, pursuant to the instructions of his friend, Ambrose,
alleging indisposition, withdrew from the presence of Don Lescar, and watching
an opportunity, slipped privately into his chamber, and concealed himself behind
the hangings. He left Don Lescar, as usual, carousing among a number of his
comrades, but as if Heaven favored the enterprise, on account of a slight
indisposition which had afflicted him for some days, he dismissed them at an
early hour. Eleanor watched a favorable opportunity, and, with a beating
heart, dropped the powder given her by the Count d'Oresty into his glass. Don
Lescar soon was sensible of its power, and rising, retired to his chamber. Let
the Reader judge if possible what were the feelings of Eleanor at this moment;
the idea of her brother being concealed in the chamber of Don Lescar, of the
dangers to which he was exposed, of the double part she had been acting, which
obliged her to smile with pretended sincerity on the tyrant she was deceiving,
all rushed forcibly on her mind; she threw herself into a chair, and bursting
into an agony of tears, "Oh!" said she, what is to be compared with sincerity
and truth! What advantages can be equivalent to the loss of it! Better were it
to have borne all the malice Don Lescar could have inflicted, than have entered
into this labyrinth of deception; gracious heaven! should Don Lescar awake --
should my brother be discovered -- what will be the consequence -- I tremble --
merciful God protect him -- save him -- if we have done wrong, forgive us -- Oh
save him, save him, let not Eleanor lament her last, her only friend."

In the mean while Don Lescar entered his chamber, and was scarcely stretched
upon his bed, before, as the Count d'Oresty had foretold, he sunk into a deep
sleep, and gave Ambrose, who boldly advanced to the bed, an opportunity of
seizing the keys, which, at this moment seemed to him a greater treasure than
the wealth of the Indies. He then, as it had been agreed, stole to the
apartment of his sister, who was ready to expire with joy upon seeing him safe
out of the chamber of Don Lescar. Little passed; he took her hand, and they
escaped together by a private door, of which Eleanor had the key: they flew
immediately to the port where the Count d'Oresty anxiously expected the success
of the undertaking. He no sooner behold the keys, than without staying to
accost them or to disclose his intentions, "Run, run, my friends," cried he to
the guards, "the prison is on fire, and all the prisoners will escape." While
he was speaking, a frightful volume of smoke arose to the clouds: he had found
means to set fire to a neighboring arsenal in which the ^pirates kept all
their powder. The guards alarmed, quit their (...), run to the conflagration,
and afford the Count an opportunity of opening the palisades. Accompanied by
his young friends, he precipitately enters the little bark, unchains it, and
rows from land. It was not long before the Verradian arsenal blew up, and made
the Count easy respecting the pursuit, which he was sensible would be made
after them, should his absence or that of his young friends be discovered; but
the universal alarm and confusion occasioned by the unexpected event, precluded
all idea of an immediate pursuit.

A brisk gale blowing from land, our navigators lost no time in spreading the
^ail of their little vessel. Eleanor, her eyes fixed upon the island,
motionless with terror and astonishment, could not utter a single word: the
Count d'Oresty and Ambrose, mute also, bus^ed themselves with flowing some
provisions which the Count, a short time before he set fire to the arsenal, had
found means to conceal in a retired spot at the foot of the pallisades, and
with the assistance of Ambrose, had conveyed, after the retreat of the guards,
into the vessel. Ambrose first broke silence, "Whither are we going, father?"
said he.

"Can I tell, my son?" said the Count, still confused with the events that had
occurred in such quick succession to each other. "Let us get clear of this
hated land, before we talk of our rout."

"Our island," said Eleanor, "cannot be far from hence."

"And what do you infer from that?" said the Count.

"I do not know," replied Eleanor, "but somehow I have an idea that we should
find our ^dea Carlton there."

"Mere chimera, my child," said the Count; "No, we must not quit an inhabited
for a desert land; we will direct our bark toward Cuba."

The bark rapidly out the waves, and in a short time they lost sight of St.
Verrado; the night was dark, and neither moon nor stars was to be seen, but in
a few hours the sun began to enlighten the east, and the Count perceived a
number of small islands, which he had apparently coasted during the night
without knowing it; but the waves seeming to drive the bark with more violence,
he was fearful of being driven into the Canal of Bahama (not doubting but that
he was near it) the rapidity of which is so great, that it threatens instant
destruction. In consequence of this, by dint of oars and sails, they worked the
vessel, and the next morning found themselves near a coast, which, from the
form of the buildings, and the colors of the vessels that were in the port,
the Count judged to belong to the English. How great was the joy of our
voyagers? The vessel made into the port, and they landed amidst a crowd of
inhabitants, who put to them a thousand questions, which the singularity of
their dress, and the peculiar form of their vessel, naturally excited: they
soon, in their turn, learned that they were in the island of Providence, one of
the Lucay Isles, situated upon the Canal of Bahama, that it belonged to the
English, that Sir James Corpley was the Governor, and that they might expect
from his humanity all the succor they could desire. This was joyful
information; the islanders readily conducted them into the presence of the
Governor; but what was the astonishment, the joy of Eleanor and Ambrose, when,
upon entering the apartment, they beheld their lost, their lamented friend,
Colonel Carlton! In an instant they were in his arms. "My children -- my father
-- my protector," was alternately repeated.

At length, becoming more calm, "to what unforeseen event, my children," said
the Colonel, "do we owe this unexpected, this unhoped-for happiness?"

"Oh, my dear father," said Ambrose, "if God had not sent us this good friend
(pointing to Count d'Oresty) who has risked his life for our sakes, we should
never have been blessed with beholding you; he has -- "

At this moment, Peter, informed of what was passing, rushed precipitately into
the apartment, and overcome by the excess of his joy, sunk, half fainting, at
the feet of his young friends. Ambrose and Eleanor were rejoiced at the sight
of the good old man, and were not a little affected at seeing tears (though of
joy) roll down his furrowed cheeks. They supported him in their arms, and
endeavored to calm his agitated spirits by a thousand tender expressions,
which the gratitude and affection of their hearts dictated.

Sir James Corpley, the Governor, seemed sincerely to participate in their
happi^^^^ and invited the Count d'Oresty and his young friends to remain his
guests during their residence in the island. The Colonel expressed his
acknowledgments to the Count d'Oresty (whom he recollected formerly to have
seen in England) for the attention he had shown to his young pupils, and they
all sat down to an elegant repast, during which they had leisure to converse,
and recover from their fatigues. What a happiness to be thus reunited after
the dangers they had encountered! They could not eat, they looked at each
other, questioned, and made such a confusion of their adventures, that the
Governor requested they would recount them in the order they had occurred,
assuring them that he was already much interested in their fate, and wished
only to know in what he could be serviceable to them. The request was no sooner
made than complied with; the Colonel began first, and related the circumstance
of his shipwreck, and all that had happened during his residence in the
uninhabited island; but as the Reader is already acquainted with these
particulars, we will take up his narration only at the moment in which Ambrose
and Eleanor left him to visit, for the last time, the tomb of their friend
Derley. "The children," said the Colonel, "had scarcely left me, when Peter,
who was employed in stowing the provisions in our little bark, suddenly cried
out, a vessel, Sir! a vessel!"

"A vessel, I replied, do you say?"

"Yes, Sir," said he, "it approaches, it makes rapidly for land."

"I immediately turned my eyes toward the sea, and saw a ship making toward us
full sail. I cannot exactly describe my sensations at the sight of an object so
unexpected: my heart seemed to fink at the moment I was transported with joy;
and, as if I foresaw the consequences, this event, so long and ardently wished
for, disquieted, and even alarmed me. Friends o^ enemies, said I to Peter, let
us meet them. Accordingly I walked to that part of the shore to which I saw the
vessel making. In preportion as it approached my fears diminished, and the
Spanish colors which were hoisted, entirely removed them: I thought we might
expect every necessary succor from a civilized nation of Europe; probably, in
alliance with ours. The Spaniards soon came upon deck, and shortly after
descended from the vessel, headed by their captain. "Is this island inhabited,"
said the Chief, in a surly tone of voice?

"No," I replied, "this is the first vessel we have seen touch here."

"And who are you?" said he, "what -- "

"He was continuing, when one of his own people, animated by a motive to which
I was then a stranger, fired a pistol, which grazed his shoulder. "Ah,
traitor," said the Chief, drawing another, "is it thus? -- Die villain!" --
Saying which, he fired upon the assassin, who escaped by turning aside his
head, and was preparing to draw another pistol, (for they had each two at their
girdle) when I, thoughtless of the consequences, imprudently snatched an iron
crow from one of the men, and felled the assassin to the ground; I was
immediately seized, while a ball from another of the conspirators dispatched
the unfortunate Chief."

Here Ambrose interrupted the Colonel, by exclaiming, "I was sure he did not
kill him -- "

"What do you say, my child?" said the Colonel.

"Oh, nothing," said Ambrose: "go on, father, we will explain this afterward."

"The confusion," said the Colonel, resuming his narrative, "immediately became
general; myself and Peter, who had attempted to defend me, were conveyed on
board the vessel: in vain we called on you, my children, and entreated the
pirates at least, to join yours to our unfortunate destiny; solely occupied
with the desperate act they had just committed, they embarked precipitately,
without paying any regard to our prayers, inhumanly put us in irons, and
confined us with a dozen unfortunate women, prisoners like ourselves. I need
not describe the horror of our situation, separated from you, my children, and
slaves without knowing our masters. Toward the middle of the night, some coarse
food was thrown into our dungeon, and in the morning six sailors handcuffed,
were added to our miserable society: from these we learned the motives that had
given rise to the horrid scene transacted on the island, and also the cause of
their own detention. The prisoners confined with us belonged a few days before,
to a French merchantman, which had been attacked and taken by the pirates.
George Blake, the late Commander, being dissatisfied with the little courage
shown by his comrades in the action, reproached them severely, and formally
signified to them that they should not have any share of the booty: this highly
incensed them, and one of the number, named Burney, formed a conspiracy with
the others to assassinate their Chief on the first favorable opportunity that
should offer, to go to St. Domingo or Cuba, sell their booty, and return to
England, there to live quietly on their ill-gotten wealth. The plot was ripe
for execution, when Blake, struck with the unexpected ^ight of our island,
either from curiosity or the hope of booty, descended upon it. The rest
explained itself, the unfortunate Chief was assassinated, and we made
prisoners: But, said I to the sailor who gave us this information, how is it
that you are handcuffed and confined? are you not their friends? No, said the
sailor, we refused to join in the conspiracy against our Chief, who was a
generous, brave man, undeserving the fate he met with: they are afraid lest we,
in our turn, should form a conspiracy against them, and it is on this account
they confine us. And to what port, said I, are we now going? It is of little
importance to us, said the sailor, for a council has this day deen held in
which it was probably agreed to massacre us all. Barbarians! we exclaimed with
one accord. It is their custom, said the sailor, the French merchant ship they
took yesterday was sunk with all the men it contained, after they had pillaged
the cargo, and taken out these unhappy women, whom the will now probably
sacrifice, as they do not return to the colony to which their vessel was bound.

"The women, upon this horrid recital, broke into violent lamentations: as for
me, I patiently waited for death, which no longer appeared un welcome, after I
had lost all that could render life desirable.

"The vessel continued its course till toward the middle of the next day, when
it was on a sudden violently agitated, and we judged from the noise of cannon
which assailed us on every side, that the pirates were engaged with another
vessel, which, by the size of the balls that struck us, some of our companions
judged to be of superior force. I need not describe our anxiety during the
engagement, which lasted about two hours; hope and fear alternately possessed
us; at length our trap opened, and a strange voice exclamed, You are free!
immediately our irons were taken off, and we were put on board another vessel,
which proved to be English. The pirates had attempted to give chase to the
English, but the Captain had made use of his superiority to attack them; they
had fought, it was said, desperately, and did not strike to the English till
the greater part of their men were killed. We learnt farther that the Captain
was charged with dispatches from the English Government to its American
possessions, and that he would first touch at the Isle of Providence, to the
Governor of which he had letters of recall. Thus from slavery and death were we
unexpectedly restored to life and freedom: I made myself known, and
communicated my story to the Captain, who, upon our arrival at the Isle of
Providence, presented me to Sir James Corpley, the Governor, with whom I had
been formerly intimate in England: his reception was such as might have been
expected from the most generous of men; he was interested in my misfortunes,
and since that time has detained me his distinguished guest: but an important
expedition is now in agitation; six of the Verradian prisoners, intimidated by
the threats, and allured by the promises of the Governor, have confessed the
situation of the island they inhabit, and in a few days, four hundred men, of
which Sir James has given me the command, will embark, to extirpate this horde
of robbers, and take possession of the island in the name of the English
Monarch: But do not think, my children, said the Colonel to Ambrose and
Eleanor, that I was unmindful of your situation; I had permission from my
friend to touch at our island, little suspecting that you had ventured to
abandon it."

The Colonel thus terminated his recital, and received the thanks of all
present. Ambrose then recounted all that had happened since his separation from
the Colonel; and his recital was continued by the Count d'Oresty, whose courage
and exertions, in behalf of the amiable orphans were universally applauded. The
Colonel again thanked him in the warmest terms, and a friendship from that
moment took place between them, which continued to the end of their lives. The
generous Governor congratulated his guests in the most polite and friendly
terms upon their reunion, appointed by Providence to take place in his island,
which on this occasion, he observed, justified its name.

The happiness of Eleanor and Ambrose would have been complete, had it not been
embittered by the thought of a second separation form their friend, on account
of the expedion to St. Verrado; Ambrose earnestly entreated to be permitted to
accompany him, but the tears of his sister, and the commands of the Colonel, to
which he had been accustomed implicity to submit, at length prevailed, and he
relinquished his request. The Count d'Oresty, notwithstanding his age, made one
in the expedition, justly considering that his knowledge of the island might
forward the success of the undertaking. Eleanor and Ambrose accompanied their
friends to the port, and with their eyes followed the little fleet, (consisting
of three ships) till they could no longer distinguish it: they then returned
with heavy hearts to the Governor, who used all his arguments to mitigate their
sears for the safety of their friends, and to inspire them with the hope of
their safe and speedy return.

It seemed as if Heaven favored the expedition against St. Verrado; the
weather continued favorable, and at the end of three days, toward midnight,
the little fleet arrived before the island; the whole colony was buried in
sleep, except the gaurds, who watched before the palisades, to prevent any one
mounting the bank, and entering the vessels.

The six Verradians (who, by the promise of liberty and a high reward, had been
prevailed upon to enter into the plot) were dispatched in the long boat, and
having entered the port, made themselves known to the sentinels, whom they
amused with a false recital of their adventures, while the Colonel and his men,
favored by the darkness of the night, scaled the palisades, fell upon, and out
them to pieces before they had time to sound the alarm or to defend themselves.
One of the guards, however, escaping, ran to the city, rang the alarm, and
roused the inhabitants, who scarcely awake, knew not what they meant, nor what
enemies they had to encounter. The English dispersed in the streets, attacked
the Verradians, as they came out of their houses, and lighted brands soon set
fire to the four corners of the city. Don Lescar astonished, thunderstruck at
this sudden attack, at length assembled about two hundred men, and advanced in
order for battle: the slaughter soon became horrible; on one side, the English,
armed with swords and bayonets, on the other, the Verradians vigorously
defending themselves with enormous masses of bamboo The bamboo here spoken of
is not that of the East Indies, which we frequently see converted into walking
canes. This plant is peculiar to the American Isles (though not very common)
and rises to the height of thirty or forty feet, with a size proportionate; its
trunk is furnished, at equal distances, with kno's, containing twelve or
fifteen pints of liquor; its leaf very much resembles the elder.
, presented a scene of the utmost horror and confusion. In the mean time, the
besieged, little formed for combat, enervated by luxury and pleasure, first
gave ground; and to render their defeat complete, a hundred men, which were
left for that purpose in the ships, bombarded the city, and razed the citadel,
the construction of which was not very solid.

In this expedition the English lost twenty men, and the Verradians nearly
three hundred men and women; for the women, laying aside the timidity of their
sex, armed with bamboos and stakes, rushed into the midst of the battle, and
fell fighting beside their husbands. In the midst of the carnage fell the proud
Don Lescar, by the hand of the Count d'Oresty: the rest of the inhabitants
having demanded quarter, the English chiefs caused the slaughter to cease, and
stopped the progress of the fire. Day, at length returned to discover the
disasters of the night, and the Colonel satisfied with his expedition, thought
of re-imbarking with his prisoners: but what was his consternation! not a
single vessel, not a single boat was to be seen in the basin. The men who were
left with the little fleet, had dispersed themselves over the city to assist
their people, and the treacherous Verradians had seized this unguarded moment
to set fire to the ships, as well to their own as to those of the English. Both
Colonel Carlton and the Count d'Oresty had heard the explosion caused by the
blowing up of the magazines of powder; they had distinguished the Heavens red
with the reflection of the flames; but in the heat of combat, in the confusion
that universally reigned, they had attributed all to the conflagration of the
city, which made a rapid progress. An event so unexpected, did not a little
embarrass and mortify the Colonel; he saw himself deprived of means to return
to the Isle of Providence, where he had left his beloved pupils, and from
whence he hoped shortly to embark for England. Besides this, he was wholly
destitute of shelter, or any thing necessary to feed and lodge nearly four
hundred of his own men, and upwards of three hundred prisoners. He was
constrained, however, to accommodate himself to these difficulties, and as the
only part there remained for him to take, ordered the houses that were saved
from the flames to be searched for sail cloth, cables and tools necessary to
construct a vessel. These were happily found, and the carpenters immediately
set to work. They labored without intermission day and night, and at the end
of six weeks launched two little barks, unworthy the name of ships, sufficient
to contain the Colonel and about two hundred of his men, with whom he resolved
to embark, leaving the residue to guard the Verradian prisoners. He took with
him also twenty-five unfortunate women, who had long groaned in the prisons of
St. Verrado. But before we take leave of St. Verrado, we must acquaint the
reader with an interesting event, that occurred during the Colonel's
continuance in the island. One day having visited different parts of the city
that had escaped the ravages of the flames, a Verradian, who was with him,
pointed to the house of their old commander, George Blake, as the largest and
best built in all the colony, excepting the Governor's. Curiosity induced the
Colonel to enter it; he ascended into an upper chamber, and observing a small
cabinet, forced it open to examine the contents. These were a few jewels, and
several parcels of letters and papers, which he perused with little attention,
till the following attracted his notice.

Why, my dear Eleanor, must I deceive the best of fathers! Why is he blinded by
ambition? Are not virtues, titles of nobility, and the qualities of the heart,
inestimable treasures? Oh, my wife, my children, why must I not own you? Why
must you not find shelter in the arms of my venerable, my much respected
father! but it cannot be. Make every thing ready for your departure; I confide
you to safe hands; Derley accompanies you, and my heart is easy; kiss my
Eleanor and Ambrose a thousand times for me: how young they are to encounter
the fatigues of so long a voyage! but Heaven and the tender cares of a mother
will protect them. I shall find you all at Charles Town. Adieu, embark without
uneasiness, assured that nothing but death shall prevent an affectionate
husband from soon joining you.

The Colonel did not, the Reader will conclude, unmoved peruse a letter, which,
upon a comparison, evidently appeared to be written by the same hand as that
found upon Derley; the date was nearly the same, but it had no signature. He
now searched every part of the cabinet with the minutest attention, and at last
drew from a private drawer a picture of the most interesting nature: it
represented a beautiful young woman holding two children; "It is Eleanor! It is
Ambrose!" The Colonel called to mind their features at the time he first
entered the uninhabited island, and traced the resemblance undiminished by the
years that had then elapsed. Eleanor was the exact resemblance of her mother;
Ambrose, more masculine, was building a house of cards, upon which was written,
" tell est la vie." What an interesting discovery! The features of the woman
(though fresh and lively) upon a comparison, evidently resembled those
delineated in the gold box of Derley; but still it threw no light upon the
birth of his pupils. As he viewed the interesting miniture, a thousand
different ideas rushed upon his mind: By what means did these precious deposits
fall into the hands of the pirate? Could it be possible his amiable pupils were
the offspring of a wretch so depraved; or had he plundered and destroyed their
unfortunate parents? His mind floated between these two ideas, when a letter,
written in a woman's hand, presented itself, and threw some light upon the
matter: it was as follows:

At length, barbarian, I break the bonds in which you have for six months held
me, and return to my country; but, alas! I return desolate and wretched,
deprived by thy merciless hand of of all that could render life desirable.
Detested wretch! where are my poor children? my Eleanor, my Ambrose? in what
corner of the earth have thou concealed them? Derley, the friend, the confidant
of my husband, the only support of an unfortunate woman, is no more -- Ah,
without doubt, my children sleep with him in the night of the tomb. Oh,
insupportable, reflection! I can no more; the moment is favorable, and I
depart: but tremble, villain, the venof a just God will pursue thee, and
deliver the earth from a monster who contaminates it.

This letter evidently had a correspondence with the former; the names and date
were the same, and upon a calculation, the Colonel found the time nearly
approached the period in which his pupils were left upon the Island: he no
longer doubted, though ignorant by what means, but their misfortunes originated
from this villain, to whom it appeared, by the superscription, the letter was
addressed. Hoping to make farther discoveries, he enquired very particularly
among the Verradians concerning their naval Chief, hoping from thence to draw
some conclusions, but he was disappointed; all that he could learn was, that
George Blake was the Captain of an English vessel, who upon some misdemeanor
had been outlawed; that having rendered services to Don Lescar, and, at last,
assisted him in making his escape, the closest intimacy had existed between
them, and that he was considered as the most daring and enterprizing of all the
pirates. Not being able to gain any farther information, the Colonel secured
the letters and picture, and embarked for the Isle of Providence. After five
days sail they arrived there, and were received with universal joy by the
Governor and the whole island, but especially by Eleanor and Ambrose, who,
alarmed at an absence so much longer than was expected, began to fear both the
Colonel and the Count d'Oresty had fallen victims to the fury of Don Lescar;
but their friends were returned, and all sorrow was banished.

The arrival of the Colonel with his suite, and the news of the victory, was
celebrated with universal demonstrations of joy; the brave soldiers who fought
under him were generously recompensed, as well as the six Verradians who had
been instrumental to the victory. The three hundred prisoners taken at St.
Verrado were sent to the Governor of the Spanish island of St. Domingo, as also
a particular account of the expedition.

Sir James Corpley, who was fond of splendid entertainments, gave one at which
the soldiers who were sent on the expedition to St. Verrado, and the
unfortunate persons released from its prisons were present; nor could a sight
more interesting be conceived than this social union of the heroes and the
unfortunate persons delivered by their valor.

The reader will recollect that the vessel which delivered Colonel Carlton from
the hands of the pirates bore letters of recall to the Governor of the Isle of
Providence. As soon, therefore, as he had settled the affairs of the island, as
appointed by Government, he embarked for the British Isles, accompanied by
Colonel Carlton, the Count d'Oresty, Eleanor and Ambrose, and the faithful
Peter. With respect to the prisoners released from the dungeons of St. Verrado,
some of them settled in the Island of Providence, and the rest returned to
their different countries.

What now could exceed the happiness of Eleanor and Ambrose! returning to their
country under the conduct of their dear protector and the Count d'Oresty. The
weather was favorable; the vessel arrived happily in port, and our voyagers
being furnished with clothes and every thing necessary to make their appearance
as natives in England, set out post for the metropolis. It is not easy to form
a just idea of the sensations of Colonel Carlton upon his arrival in a country
which he had not seen for more than twelve years, and which contained
treasures, to him, of inestimable value. The different revolutions that might
have occurred in so long a space of time naturally presented themselves to his
mind, and alternately agitated him with hope and fear: he had left a wife and
child whom he tenderly loved -- but death might long since have consigned them
to the grave; or a second marriage, upon the supposition of his death, might
have embittered the remainder of his days. As he drew near London his fears
increased, and while every one was elate with joy and gladness, he was
melancholy and dejected. Upon his arrival, he went immediately to the house of
a relation, where he was informed that since his supposed death, Mrs. Carlton
had retired to a villa a few miles from the metropolis, where, with her son,
she lived wholly secluded from the great world. How grateful was this to the
heart of the Colonel! Accompanied by his two pupils and the Count d'Oresty, he
immediately set out for the village, and toward evening arrived at an inn
about a mile from the house where Mrs. Carlton resided. Here he alighted and
remained with Ambrose and Eleanor while the Count d'Oresty took upon himself
the necessary office of preparing Mrs. Carlton for his reception. He introduced
himself to her as a friend of the Colonel's, and mentioned at a distance a
report of a few having been preserved from the wreck; then having inspired her
with hope, he ventured to tell her that letters had been received from some of
the crew; but when he announced the certainty of her husband's safety, and, at
last, that he was actually in England, notwithstanding the caution with which
it had been revealed, her surprise and joy was so great, that the Count did not
think it prudent to acquaint her he was so near, but contented himself, as the
day was far advanced, with promising her an interview the next morning. The
description he gave the Colonel, on his return to the inn, of his Lady's
emotions on the unexpected news of his arrival, afforded him heartfelt
pleasure.

The next morning early, the whole group was assembled at the mansion of Mrs.
Carlton, who was already up, and, with her son, a promissing youth of sixteen,
impatiently a waiting the arrival of her husband. The meeting was too affecting
to admit of description: the Colonel alternately pressed to his bosom his wife
and son, and in the excess of happiness he enjoyed, forgot the years of anguish
that were passed, or remembered them only to heighten his present joy. The
first transports of meeting being over, the Colonel presented Eleanor and
Ambrose to his lady, telling her with a smile, they were his adopted children,
and that he hoped and trusted she would not find them undeserving her
protection. The esteem of the Colonel was a sufficient recommendation to Mrs.
Carlton; though unacquainted with their story, she cordially embraced, and
presented them to her son Charles, who assured his father he should from that
moment consider them as his brother and sister. In her turn, Mrs. Carlton
introduced to the Colonel, by the name of Millar, a worthy clergyman, who had
undertaken the care of their son's education, as also a gentlewoman, about the
age of thirty five, as the companion of her widowed hours. "Had it not been for
my worthy friend," said she, "I must have sunk under the weight of my
affliction; but her example taught me fortitude and resignation; I looked for
consolation to religion, and to a happy eternity, for the felicity I despaired
of tasting here."

The joy of Eleanor and Ambrose, on seeing their generous protector thus
happily reunited to his family, was such as might be expected from the
susceptibility of their hearts: their eye^s were alternately fixed upon the
Colonel, Mrs. Carlton, and Charles, never wearied with contemplating the
happiness that was expressed in the countenance of each. The Count d'Oresty,
and all present, shared in the general joy; and it was not, perhaps, possible
to find a happier group than that assembled at the breakfasttable of Mrs.
Carlton. The adventures of the Colonel, at length, became the topic of
conversation, and at the request of his Lady and friends, he recounted the
principal events that had occurred since he left England; he mentioned his
shipwreck on the uninhabited island, his discovery of Eleanor and Ambrose, and
did not forget the many little incidents that occurred to illustrate the
goodness and simplicity of their hearts. This part of the narrative seemed to
make a singular impression on the Lady, whom Mrs. Carlton had introduced (...)
her companion and friend during the absence of her husband; she lost not a
word, and more than once her eyes were observed to be dim with tears; but when
the name of Derley was mentioned, her countenance underwent a total alteration;
she grew pale, and casting her eyes round with a wildness that alarmed every
one present, requested to see the letter and box found upon him. The Colonel
produced them; and the stranger immediately exclaimed, "My children!" and fell
back senseless in her chair. All arose in haste to give the necessary
assistance; she revived; and Eleanor and Ambrose, no longer doubting but they
had found their mother, threw themselves on their knees before her: "Yes," said
she, bending on them an eye of tender scrutiny, "it is my Eleanor -- my Ambrose
too! the living image of his lamented father; my heart from the first moment I
beheld him, pointed out the resemblance; but could I think!' -- and here she
stopped, overcome with sensations too great for words to express. Ambrose and
Eleanor, while alternately embraced by their mother, mingled tears of gratitude
and affection with those she shed over them. The striking resemblance (allowing
for the difference of years) between Eleanor and her mother, was now
universally observed, and every one wondered it had not before struck him; yet
an event so far exceeding the bounds of human probability, could scarcely
obtain credit from any, excepting Mrs. Carlton, who, being acquainted with the
story of her friend, entertained no doubt but that Providence had reunited her
to her children. To remove every doubt, the Colonel produced the letters and
picture he had found in the house of George Blake; these were immediately known
by Mrs. Carlton's friend, who being sufficiently recovered, satisfied the
company, by relating the particulars of her history. Her words were as follow:
--

"I am the daughter of an officer; my father was descended from an ancient
family, but inherited only a small patrimony; he had served many campaigus, but
soon after the death of my mother, retired from the army in disgust upon a
small annuity: this, from the embarrassments of the person in whose hands it
was placed, after a few years ceased, and my father, at an advanced age, found
himself reduced to a poverty, his high spirit was ill formed to brook.

"Our support depended chiefly upon a young man, an orphan, whom my father in
happier days had brought up and placed with a jeweller: forgive the tear I shed
to ^his memory; to me his affection was that of the kindest brother; to my
father, of the most duteous and affectionate son. Derley shared with us the
pittance he obtained by industry, which, joined to the little I gained from my
needle, presered us from the extremities of want. But greater distress soon
followed; Derley, from a variety of incidents too tedious to relate, and some
debts he had contracted on our account, was thrown into a prison, and my father
who was reduced by a long illness, grew so bad, that his life was despaired of.
Overwhelmed by this accumulated distress, I was one evening returning with some
work from a shop that employed me, when, in passing through a retired street, I
could not forbear giving vent to my tears, which in the presence of my father I
felt myself obliged to suppress; but I cannot describe to you how much I was
humbled and confused, upon observing that my grief had drawn upon me the notice
of a young man, who, as I afterward found, had for some time followed me. He
addressed me in the most respectful terms, and enquired into the cause of my
grief, adding, "Do not suppose that any other motive than concern for the
unfortunate prompts my curiosity, perhaps I may alleviate your distress. I
replied, that my grief was not of a nature for him to alleviate, and that the
only favor he could do me was to suffer me to pass unnoticed. Saying this, I
quickened my pace; but the stranger still following urged me, though in terms of
great delicacy, to accept his friendship, at the same time offering me his
purse. Great as our distress was, I was not yet sufficiently humbled to accept
of pecuniary relief from a stranger; nor, indeed, would prudence have permitted
it: I returned the thanks due to his generosity, but refused to accept any
thing, and being arrived at our own door, wished him a good night. Upon
entering, I found that an alarming change had taken place in my dear father,
who survived only till the next evening. You who have hearts alive to the
feelings of humanity can better imagine than I can describe my situation:
deprived of a father whom I regretted, not only as the parent who had given me
birth, but as the friend who had guided my youth; Derley, my only remaining
friend, absent, languishing in a prison, unable either to console or advise me!
I was overwhelmed with the weight of these afflictions, when the unexpected
entrance of Derly, for a moment, suspended my grief; my heart gathered strength
from the presence of my best friend, and I arose to communicate, in terms of as
much gentleness as my own grief would permit, the loss we had mutually
sustained. Derley was shocked and affected to tears; for some moments he gave
vent to the emotions of his grateful heart, and then turning to me, endeavored
to give me the consolation he himself wanted: at length we became more calm,
and I enquired by what unexpected means he had obtained his release? He replied
that a generous stranger, of whose name and quality he was ignorant, had by
some means gained intelligence of his misfortunes, paid the debt, and enclosed
for him a banknote of ten pounds. The idea of the stranger who had accosted me
the preceding evening, immediately rushed upon my mind; I communicated to
Derley what had passed between us, and he agreed with me that it might be the
same, though we were at a loss to conceive how he had gained the knowledge of
our situation.

"Having performed the last melancholy duties to my dear father's remains, I
began to think of looking out for a situation in which I might provide for my
own subsistence, sensible that I could not long with propriety remain under the
protection of Derley. About a week after the funeral of my father, the generous
stranger introduced himself to Derley, as a friend willing to render him any
father services his situation might require: I was present, and knowing him to
be the same that had accosted me, could not do less than express myself obliged
by his civilities. Upon enquiring, we learnt that he had obtained a knowledge
of our situation from the woman in whose house we lodged. From this time he
called often, and his visits at last became so frequent, that Derley, the
watchful guardian of my youth, was alarmed, and would absolutely have forbidden
them, had not the stranger, foreseeing his intentions, professed his views to
be honorable. Young and unexperienced, I too readily listened to his
addresses, thoughtless of the obstacles that must attend our union, for we soon
learnt that our benefactor was the only son of the Count d'Oresty, the
Ambassador from France."

The Colonel and his pupils at this moment turned their eyes upon their
venerable friend with surprise and enquiry; nor was the Count himself unmoved.
The mother of Eleanor and Ambrose stopped -- but the Count looking
significantly at the rest, and making a sign that she should go on, she
continued. "Thoughtless of the consequences, instead of restraining my
inclinations, and setting before M. d'Oresty the duties he owed his father, and
the evils that must attend his disobedience, I listened to his addresses, and
consented to a private marriage, foolishly amusing myself with the hope that he
would find means to reconcile his father to the imprudent step he had taken. A
house was hired in a retired part of the town, and we lived together in mutual
harmony; but happiness was far from being our guest; the idea of the troubles
in which I was sensible I must involve my husband, should his father, who I now
understood inherited all the pride of high birth and designed him for another,
prove inflexible, continually alarmed, and made me wretched. These reflections,
which I ought to have made before it had been too late, undermined my peace,
though they did not repair my errors. A few months after our marriage, I
observed a gloom on the countenance of my husband, and enquiring the cause, he
told me that his father, having learnt that a connection existed between us, had
declared that if it tended to marriage, he would certainly disinherit him. This
entirely frustrated his design of disclosing his marriage, which he now thought
it necessary more closely to conceal: our residence was changed, and soon after
I brought into the world twins; my Eleanor and Ambrose were born. More than
three years elapsed, and all suspicion of our union had died away when my
husband one evening returned with the dreadful tidings that his father had
ordered him to embark in a few weeks for France, to forward his nuptials with
the daughter of the French minister, for whom he had from his infancy been
designed. I need not tell you the anguish this communicated to my heart, nor
was my poor d'Oresty less affected: I wept, and my husband, who well knew the
inflexibility of his father, had scarcely a word of consolation to offer me. We
parted that evening without resolving upon any thing, but the next, he met me
with the appearance at least of more serenity; he told me that finding it
impossible without the utter ruin of us all to discover his marriage to his
father, he could think of no way but to embark immediately for South Carolina,
and solicit the interference of an uncle who resided there, and who had great
influence with his father. The tender age of my children made me alive to all
the perils and fatigues they must encounter; I represented these to M.
d'Oresty, and endeavored to dissuade him from the voyage, especially as I
conceived the interference of his uncle might be equally as well obtained by
letter; but poor d'Oresty thought otherwise; he imagined that his uncle, and
every one must see with the eyes he did, and thought the presence of his wife
and children would plead more powerfully than volumes. His first design was to
embark with us, but the difficulty he found in disengaging himself, without
creating suspicions which he wished to avoid, made him relinquish the idea, and
it was determined that I should embark with the children and Derley, and await
his arrival at Charlestown. Finding that his heart was set upon the voyage, I
submitted, and in less than three weeks set out under the conduct of Derley,
with the children and a female servant, for Plymouth, from whence we were to
embark with the first fair wind. The letter you found in the pocket of poor
Derley I received from my husband the day before we left London.

"As the winds were contrary, upon our arrival at Plymouth, we took up our
residence at the inn, where we remained above a week; during this time we had
frequent visits from the Captain of the vessel in which we were to ^ail;
indeed, he intruded oftener than was agreeable to me, but attributing all to
his wish of obliging, and the partiality of a mother being flattered by the
attention he paid the children, I passed it over in silence and embarked
without suspicion of danger. We had not been many days at sea before I observed
a familiarity in his manners that disgusted me; but judge what was my
indignation when he had the presumption to profess a passion for me. I retorted
in the language my wounded pride dictated and the insult deserved; to which he,
with the utmost coolness returned "that the offer of his hand, which he freely
made me could not be construed into an insult, especially as I must consider
that he was sole master in the vessel, and consequently that I was in his
power," I now saw the villain I had to deal with, and profitting by the hint
that I was in his power, I endeavored to remonstrate with less haut^ur,
representing to him, that being already the wife of another, I could not listen
to his proposals, however honorable or advantageous they might be." I had no
sooner said this, than he drew from his pocket a letter, and putting it, with a
sarcastic smile into my hand, told me that I should see he wished to exact
nothing inconsistent with the strict rules of honor. My eye gl^nced upon the
superscription, which I immediately knew to be the handwriting of my husband:
I opened the letter trembling, and read these terrible words.

MY DEAR ELEANOR,
All our plans are frustrated -- I am mortally wounded -- if this meets you,
lose not a moment -- set off instantly for London, (the bearer will conduct
you) that I may have the satisfaction of leaving you under the protection of my
father. -- There is no time to dissemble. God grant you may not arrive too late.

D'ORESTY.


I will not attempt to describe what I felt upon reading this letter; my
anguish arose to a pitch that bordered upon madness. When I cast my eyes round,
and saw myself shut out from the possibility of flying to my husband, and
learnt, that had it not been for the blackest treachery, I might have arrived
time enough to have taken a last farewell of him; for Blake made no scruple of
confessing, that though I was on board when the messenger arrived, we had not
weighed anchor, attributing what he had done to the violence of his passion, as
he understood from the messenger whom he had accosted upon the beech, that it
contained an express for me to return to London. For some hours I actually lost
the use of my reason, which so alarmed the wretch who persecuted me, that he
left me to the care of Derley, who in vain strove to soothe and reconcile me to
my misfortunes. Time, however, and the tender cares of a mother, affected what
argument could not; my reason returned, and the innocent prattle of my children
diverted my thoughts from a calamity, the recollection of which drove me almost
to phrenzy; but I had more yet to endure. I was again persecuted by the odious
addresses of Blake, from which Derley in vain endeavored to defend me. He grew
impatient, and to entreaties added threats of the most horrid nature. Alarmed
at my situation, I endeavored to dissemble, thinking, that when we arrived at
Charlestown, the place to which the vessel was bound, I should easily rid
myself of his importunities. He, however, more skilled in artifice than I was,
saw through my drift, and finding that Derley would ever remain an obstacle to
his views, he resolved to be rid of him at the first opportunity: nor was this
all; my innocent children became the objects of his detestation, from the
supposition, I conclude, that they kept alive in my heart the remembrance of
their father; at least I can assign no other reason for the dreadful scene I am
going to relate. We had been at sea about seven weeks, when one morning as I
was sitting with my children, one on one knee, and the other on the other,
weeping, and talking with Derley on the events that were past, Blake came into
the cabin: he renewed the usual theme, mingling threats with promises, till
finding I paid no attention to his discourse, but still wept on, and embraced
my children, he suddenly started up, and snatching them from my arms, threw
them with violence on the floor. Derley, who was attached to the children,
incensed at this act of brutality, yielding to the impulse of the moment,
seized him by the throat; an affront which Blake revenged by drawing a short
sword, and stabbing him, as I thought, to the heart. At the instant, five or
six men came into the cabin, and at a signal given, seized Derley, while
others, notwithstanding my prayers, tears, and frantic endeavors to prevent
it, bore away the children. What were all my former troubles to the anguish of
this moment! I fancied I heard the cries of my children under the hands of
their murderers, yet was unable to fly to their rescue; I endeavored to force
the door of the cabin, but finding my efforts vain, I sunk down insensible and
remember no more till I found myself on my bed, my servant sitting by me. I
called aloud for my children, my Ambrose -- my Eleanor, and was in vain assured
that they were in safety -- that they were left with Derley on an island we had
coasted; I gave no credit to the tale, believing it fabricated merely to amuse
me, especially as I found my servant was in the interest of Blake. I will not
trouble you with all I suffered during the voyage; suffice it to say, that we
arrived at Charlestown, where I hoped to escape the tyranny of my persecutor,
but I was mistaken; under the pretense that I was his niece, and deranged in my
intellects, he conveyed me to his house, and committed me to the care of my
treacherous servant, whom he had suborned to his interest. Six months I was
closely confined, but at the end of that time, through the assistance of an
honest labourer who worked in grounds adjacent, I effected my escape, and
having fortunately concealed about my person bank notes to the amount of a
hundred and fifty pounds, engaged for my passage in a vessel that was on the
point of ^ailing for England.

"You will, perhaps, think that my first step ought to have been that of
communicating my story to the magistrates of the town, and claiming their
protection; but if you knew what I had suffered, how much my spirits were
depressed, and what reason I had to dread the machinations of the wretch by
whom I was persecuted, you will cease to wonder at my conduct. My sole object
was to return to England, either to meet my husband, (which seemed within the
bounds of possibility) or to die there in obscurity.

With these ideas I embarked; but on my arrival soon learnt, as I had reason to
presage, that my husband was no more. He expired, as far as I could judge from
the vague information I collected, a few hours after the messenger was
dispatched to me; even before the arrival of his father, who set off for Bath
on the morning on which the duel was fought. I learnt also, that the Count
d'Oresty, in consequence of his affliction, had solicited his recall, and had
returned to France a few weeks after the death of his son.

"All my hopes of happiness were now at an end, and I resolved, in some quiet
family, to seek an humble establishment, where I could perform the duties of my
station, and prepare for the quitting of a world which had for me no longer any
charms. The person at whose house I lodged, understanding my intention,
mentioned a lady, who she said was on the point of retiring into the country,
and wanted a person capable of being a companion, and at the same time of
assisting in the management of her family. Need I say that it was my dear Mrs.
Carlton? I was introduced to her and immediately engaged. In due time I related
to her my unhappy story, and experienced her generous sympathy: ^she treated me
with the affection of a sister, and could I have forgotten my children -- my
husband -- my friend -- torn from me by the most perverse and cruel destiny, I
might have been happy. She pressed me to make myself known to the family of my
husband, offered me money for the purpose, nay would have accompanied me to
France; but I declined her generous offers; I knew not whether the father of my
husband was acquainted with his indiscretions, and as I had not children to
prompt my ambition, or to call forth my exertions, I wished not to fully his
memory with the revival of follies which originated only in his too great
partiality for me. Twelve years have passed, not unprofitably away; religion
has taught me to moderate both my griefs and my resentment, and reconciled me
to a life which I once thought insupportable."

Here Madam d'Oresty ceased -- and the Count, rising from his seat, looked with
reverence toward Heaven, and exclaimed, " Wonderful are thy works, Oh God, and
thy ways past finding out." Then taking Madam d'Oresty by the hand, What a
train of interesting events, said he, have you unfolded! In me behold the
father of your husband; in me, my children, turning to Ambrose and Eleanor,
"behold your grandsire,"

The Colonel, his pupils, and indeed the company in general, had been prepared
by the aspect and gestures of the Count; to expect something extraordinary; but
Madam d'Oresty, absorbed in the recital of her calamities, and commanding only
a side view of him from the seat she occupied, heard this declaration with
inexpressible wonder. She viewed the Count a moment in silent astonishment: but
soon recollecting the character in which she stood before him, she covered her
face with her hands, and bending forward, seemed to await the reproaches she
considered due to her from the father of her husband.

The Count was affected by this interesting attitude, too expressive to be
misunderstood, and taking her hand, assured her he should henceforth consider
her not only as the widow of his son, but as the daughter of his affection.
"You appear, said he, "too sensible of your errors to permit me to animadvert
upon them; we have none of us been blameless; myself not the least; the reserve
and severity with which, from his infancy I treated my son, repulsed rather
than invited the confidence of friendship, while the authority I assumed over
his inclinations made him lose the respect due to me as a parent; but his
errors have been signally punished; let the grave cover them, and may they
prove a useful lesson to his children. Early my dear Ambrose, and you, my sweet
Eleanor, learn to restrain your inclinations, and to keep them within the
bounds of moderation; remember, my children, that the gratification of a moment
may be followed by years of anxiety and pain."

The Count then embraced Eleanor and Ambrose, who threw themselves upon their
knees to implore his blessing. The conversation then turning upon past events,
the Count confirmed what Madam d'Oresty had heard concerning the death of her
husband. "I unfortunately," said he, "set out for Bath the morning on which the
fatal duel was fought; an express was dispatched for me, but before I arrived
my son had breathed his last. I will not attempt to describe my grief; he was
my only child, and Heaven is witness how dear! The country became hateful to
me: I solicited my recall, and returned to France. It happened soon after that
I had letters from Cuba, acquainting me with the death of an old friend, who
had left me his possessions there: I prepared for the voyage, thinking an
entire change of objects might dissipate the melancholy which since the death
of my son had taken possession of my soul. I arrived, and remained there some
months, when Blake, as the Colonel has before related, descended upon the
island, and bore me, among the number assembled in his vessel, to St. Verrado."
Here the Count ceased, and joined with every one present in admiring the
wonderful chain of events by which Providence had united them.

The Count had passed about a week at the mansion of his friend, when he began
to think of embarking for France, to see after his estates. The prospect of so
early a separation cast a gloom over the whole party; but when the Colonel
proposed to his Lady a trip to the continent, cheerfulness was universaly
restored. Charles and Ambrose, between whom a friendship founded upon mutual
virtues had already taken place, looked at each other and smiled, while the
eyes of Eleanor met those of her mother and Mrs. Carlton sparkling with
pleasure; in short, the proposal was universally relished, and in less than a
month they all embarked for France. The Count upon arriving found that his
estates still remained in the hands of his agent: for as no certain tidings of
his death had transpired, no claim had been made. The Reader need not be told
that the Colonel and his family were the guests of the Count d'Oresty; during
three months which their visit continued, he spared no polite and friendly
attention to render it agreeable; they made an excursion to Paris, from which
the Count's seat was a few leagues distant, and were gratified with the view of
every thing that celebrated city contained deserving the attention of the
curious. They visited the Louvre, the Thuilleries, the Palace of Orleans,
celebrated for its valuable collection of paintings, and the Gobelines, a
famous manufactory of tapestry, which takes its name from one Goblie, a noted
dyer of Reims, who lived in the reign of Francis the First. Ambrose and Eleanor
were interested in every thing they saw; the perfection to which the arts had
arisen struck them with wonder and delight; for though acquainted with the
principles of each, they had formed no idea of the powerful effects produced by
them when applied by genius and industry: in the mean while, they conciliated
the affection of heir mother and grandfather by a thousand instances of their
docility and the goodness of their hearts; the Count became daily more attached
to them, and they in return omitted nothing that might express their gratitude
and affection. After three months spent in the pleasures of social intercourse,
the Colonel prepared to return with his family to England, when an unexpected
event retarded his departure, and plunged every one in the deepest sorrow. This
was the death of the Count d'Oresty, who was seized with a complaint of which
he died in three days. His loss was sincerely regreted by every one but
especially by Ambrose and Eleanor, who had flattered themselves with long
enjoying his paternal care, and showing by their conduct the grateful sense
they entertained of his kindness. Nor was Madam d'Oresty less affected: she
regreted him with all the warmth of gratitude and friendship his generous
conduct toward her and her children merited; indeed his attachment to them was
manifested to the last act of his life; for being alarmed at the symptoms of
his disorder, he sent for a notary and in the presence of the Colonel and Mrs.
Carlton made his will, in which he nominated Ambrose his* heir, and provided
amply for Eleanor and her mother: but this acquisition of independence, far
from mitigating, increased the grief they felt for the loss of their friend, by
adding another to the proofs they had already received of his friendship and
affection.

As the Colonel was nominated executor to the Count's will, as also guardian to
Eleanor and Ambrose, his presence was necessary to arrange their affairs: he
remained, therefore, some time longer in France, till having settled every
thing to his satisfaction, he embarked for England, accompanied by Madam
d'Oresty and his pupils, who joyfully accepted the invitation he gave of
passing the ensuing Winter in England* after a pleasant voyage they arrived;
and in the society of their friends began to resume their wonted cheerfulness,
when an event the most distressing and unexpected turned all their joy to the
bitterest anguish. The Reader must recollect that Sir* James Corpley had sent
the prisoners taken at St. Verrado to the Governor of the Spanish island St.
Domingo, with an account of the expedition, and his reasons for undertaking it:
these reasons, however, did not satisfy the Court of Spain; the destruction of
the Colony was construed into an infringement upon the rights of the Spanish
Crown, and remonstrances made to the British Cabinet. The inhabitants of St.
Verrado were in vain represented as a banditti, to whose depredations all
Europe was subject; the honor of the Spanish Court was thought to be
concerned, and satisfaction demanded. In short, after various negotiations
between the Courts, it was at last settled to punish the aggressors, viz. Sir
James Corpley and the Colonel, with exile. This was an unexpected stroke: the
joy which had for some months before enlivened the mansion of the Colonel was
no more. Eleanor wept; Ambrose inveighed loudly against the sentence, which,
notwithstanding the representations of the Colonel, he could not help thinking
unjust, and both declared they would follow their protector to the end of the
earth. Madam d'Oresty said the same to her friend Mrs. Carlton, who felt rather
on her husbands, than her own account, observing that it was of little
importance what country she inhabited, if she had the society of her husband,
son, and friend. "Ah," said Eleanor, "would to Heaven we were all together in
our isle!" This exclamation, uttered without design, gave birth to an idea in
the mind of the Colonel, which soon became the favorite topic of conversation:
this was no other than the founding of a coloney in the island which had so
long served him and his pupils as a retreat. He mentioned it to Sir James
Corpley who immediately entered into it, and pointed out the probability of
Government approving and encouraging such a plan; in short, they united their
interests, obtained the permission and encouragement they desired, and began to
arrange every thing for the founding of a new colony. Madam d'Oresty and her
children still expressing their resolution of joining their fate with that of
their friends, the Colonel thought proper to set before them the advantages
they would forego by quitting a civilized country, where every enjoyment
affluence could purchase awaited them, for one unfrequented, in which they must
wait some years, at least, even for the conveniences of life; he said all that
the most generous and disinterested mind could dictate upon the subject, but
Madam d'Oresty, to the inexpressible joy of Ambrose and Eleanor, declared, that
as it coincided with the inclinations of her children, her resolution was
fixed, and that she had no higher ambition than to live and die with her friend.

In about six months all was ready for their departure, and Sir James Corpley,
the Colonel, Mrs. Carlton, Charles, Madam d'Oresty, her children, the worthy
Mr. Millar, and honest Peter, embarked at Portsmouth, with about six hundred
persons, men and women, who willingly followed as settlers in the new
Government. The voyage was favorable; after a few weeks sail they drew near
the Antillis, and Ambrose and Eleanor began to search with wishful eyes for the
island which had been the asylum of their youth: at length, the vessel
directing its course eastward of Jamaica, they discerned from far the point of
a rock which seemed familiar to them: the vessel approches: it is the same; it
is their beloved isle. They behold the melancholy vestiges of the forest
destroyed by the conflagration; the shore where they had fabricated the little
bark in which alone and unprotected they had tempted the dangers of the sea:
they land, and feel a thousand pleasing sensations on finding themselves again
in an island in which, though they had experienced some painful moments, they
had passed years of peace and tranquillity. Every spot is visited; the place
where their cabin stood; the cavern in which Derley expired; the grot where
honest Peter was preserved; nor will it be asked if they visited the little
mount covered with myrrh trees; they are already with their mother at the foot
of the monument erected with their own hands to the memory of Derley, shedding
with her the tear of gratitude and affection.

In a short time the ground is cleared, and broken up; buildings arise;
fortifications, even a port issues from the hands of the new colonists, and in
less than four years they had shelter, cultivated fields, in a word, all the
conveniences of life. Sir James Corpley and the Colonel, who were nominated
joint Governors, in conjunction formed a code of laws, which were tendered to,
and universally approved by the people; they governed the Colony with that
justice and moderation which formed the basis of their character; and the same
of their wisdom, and of the happiness enjoyed under their administration soon
reaching England, they had the pleasure of seeing the new Colony daily
increase, and at length become one of the most flourishing; it was called the
Isle of Twins, in memory of the desertion of the children, and the sign^d
protection afforded them by Heaven. Not long after the arrival of the new
Colonists, some Carribes, according to their usual custom, landed on the
island; at the sight of the Europeans they embarked precipitately in their
canoes, but the Colonel wishing to put some questions to them, ordered several
to be detained: the account they gave of their expedition into the island; once
in three years, was nearly the same as that given by Peter: but they added,
they often stayed several days in the island, during which they planted maize
and other grain, in the hope of finding it multiplied at their next visit. This
singular custom explained to the Colonel what he had till now considered as a
mystery, viz. the finding, on his first arrival in the island, entire plains of
maize and a variety of vegetable productions, which required the pains of
culture, and consequently not to be expected in an uninhabited land: but to
return. A few years after their arrival in the island, the Colonel and Mrs.
Carlton had the satisfaction of seeing their son Charles united to Eleanor; and
soon after Ambrose made choice of a young lady, the niece of Sir James Corpley,
universally esteemed for her amiable disposition and personal accomplishments.
Honest Peter enjoyed the tranquillity his years required and his services
merited; he died at an advanced age, a few years after their arrival in the
island, and was buried at the side of Derley, to whose memory a superb monument
was erected. The worthy Mr. Millar lived universally respected, and by his
virtues did honor to the religion he professed and maintained in the Colony.
Madam d'Oresty and her friend Mrs. Carlton had the pleasure of seeing their
friendship perpetuated in their children, who, by their conduct, d^ily rendered
themselves more worthy their affection. In short, all these worthy characters
in this delightful retreat enjoyed the tranquillity which is the result only of
virtue.

Ambrose and Eleanor through life entertained for their preceptor that tender
respect and gratitude his conduct toward them justly merited, and their hearts
were so well formed to pay: they looked up to him as to the parent who had
fostered and to the friend who had guided their youth, ever bearing in
remembrance, that the happiness they enjoyed in society was the fruit of those
precepts they had imbibed from him in solitude.

THE END.
Auguste and Madelaine. A REAL HISTORY.
By Miss HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.
A FRIEND of mine who is lately gone to Toulouse, has sent me from thence an
account of some circumstances which happened not long ago in that part of
France, and which, she says, are still much the subject of conversation. I
shall transcribe this narrative, which I believe will interest you. Perhaps a
novel-writer, by the aid of a little additional misery, and by giving the
circumstances which actually happened a heightened color -- by taking his
pallet, and dashing with the full glow of red, what nature had only tinged with
pale violet, might almost spin a volume from these materials. Yet, after all,
nothing is so affecting as simplicity, and nothing so forcible as truth. I
shall therefore send you the story exactly as I received it; and in such parts
of it as want interest, I beg you will recollect that you are not reading a
tale of fiction: and that in real life, incidents are not always placed as they
are in novels, so as to produce (...) effect. In some parts of the narrative
you will meet with a little romance; but perhaps you will wonder that you meet
with no more; since the scene is not in the cold philosophic climate of
England, but in the warm regions of the south of France, where the imagination
is elevated, where the passions acquire extraordinary energy, and where the
fire of poetry flashed from the harps of the Troubadours, amid the sullen gloom
of the Gothic ages.

A young Frenchman, whose usual residence was at Paris, having traveled as far
as Toulouse the year before the revolution, was invited by a party of his
friends to accompany them to Bareges, where some of them were going in pursuit
of amusement, and others in search of health from the medical springs which
rise so plentifully, both in hot and cold streams, among the Pyrenean mountains.

This young Parisian, who had some taste for the sublime scenery of nature,
felt that it would be luxury to leave a little longer the regular walks which
art has planted in the Thuilleries, and the trim gardens and jets-^^eau she has
formed at Versailles, to wander among those piles of mountains which overhang
each other, and listen to the torrents which fall down them with loud and
irresistible impetuosity.

" Rich in her weeping country's spoils Versailles
May ^oast a thousand fountains, that can cast
The tortured waters to the distant heavens:
Yet let me choose some pine-topp'd precipice,
Abrupt and ^^aggy, whence a foamy stream,
Like Anio, tumbling roars." --
What powerful sensations does the first view of such a scene produced -- We
seem to begin a new existence; every former impression is for a while ^^ased
from the memory, and the mind feels enwrapped and lost in the strong emotions
of awe astonishment, and admiration.

Bareges was crowded, as it usually is in the season, not only with French
company, but also with strangers, who travel from other countries, in order to
use its celebrated baths. The company amused themselves, as they generally do
at water-drinking places, by sauntering, lounging, cards, lotteries,
jeux-d'esprit, and scandal.

Bareges is a very expensive place. Even moderate accommodations must be
purchased at a high rate; and provisions, as well as lodgings, are sometimes
obtained with difficulty. Bareges is therefore seldom resorted to by any but
people of considerable fortune, who can afford to level the obstacles which
mountains interpose to their conveniences and comforts, by the all subduing
force of gold.

Among a number of persons of rank and fortune, there was however, one family
at Bareges in a different situation. This family consisted of an elderly infirm
French officer, who had long been afflicted with the palsy, and his daughter, a
young woman about nineteen years of age. Their appearance and mode of living
seemed to indicate, that, though in search of relief this old officer had
journed to Bareges, he had in so doing far exceeded the bounds of economy which
his circumstances prescribed, and was forced to deny himself every
accommodation his infirmities could spare. He lived in the most retired manner,
in the worst lodging at Bareges; -- and while the other ladies were dressed in
a style of expensive variety and profusion, his daughter wore only a plain
linen gown, which though always perfectly clean, was coarse; and her dark hair
was left unpowdered, and without any ornament whatever. Fortunately for
Madelaine, however (for that was her name) her person was calculated to make
her coarse gown appear to the best advantage; and though she was not very
beautiful, her countenance had an expression of sweetness which answered the
end of beauty by exciting love and admiration.

The company at Bareges soon became acquainted with each other, and the ladies
always took notice of Madelaine when they met her in their walks, which
however, did not happen very often, for her father was frequently unable to go
out. When he did he was supported on one side by Madelaine, and on the other by
his servant. It was impossible to see with insensibility, the attention which
this interesting young woman paid her father, whom she never quitted one
moment. It was remarked with what careful tenderness she used to lead him along
the streets of Bareges, walking the slowest pace she could, and watching his
steps as he moved feebly on. And when he was not able to venture out, she was
seen at the window of their little parlour reading, in order to entertain him.
-- Her looks and manner announced that her disposition was naturally sprightly,
and that she would have been gay, if her father had not been sick. But all the
cheerfulness she could assume while he suffered, was exerted to amuse him, and
shorten the tedious hours of languor and debility.

Though Madelaine was handsome, the obscurity and seclusion in which she lived
preserved her from the envy of the women. -- They knew well enough, that the
gentlemen at Bareges were, for the most part, men of the world, who though they
may admire beauty, and approve of virtue, are never so far the dupes of any
tender or moral sentiment as to let it interfere either with their vanity,
their ambition, or their interest. Although the French revolution had not yet
happened, these ladies were aware that with respect to marriage, the age of
calculators was already come, and therefore no rival was to be feared in
Madelaine. The ladies joined with the men in admiting the grace of her person,
and amiable qualities which her conduct displayed. Madelaine, in short, became
the object of general esteem.

Auguste, for so I shall call our young Parisian, who has lost his title since
the laws of equality have been established in his country -- Auguste spoke less
of Madelaine than the other gentlemen at Bareges; but it was perhaps because he
thought of her more. Sometimes in his solitary morning rambles he used to make
comparisons between her and the Parisian ladies, among whom he had passed the
winter, and the comparison generally ended with a deep sigh. The scene on these
meditations was certainly much in Madelaine's favor. Perhaps at Paris or
Varsailles, Auguste might have been dazzled by the polished graces of a fine
lady rouged, powdered, perfumed and equipped for conquest. These artificial
attractions might, perhaps, have accorded well enough with clipped trees and
angular walks. But Madelaine's simple manners, Madelaine's natural smiles, and
unstudied blushes, were far more in unison with the Pyrennean mountains.

One evening when Auguste was walking in the town of Bareges with some ladies,
he saw Madelaine at a little distance assisting, with great difficulty, to
support her father, who appeared to be seized with a fit. Auguste darted like
an arrow toward the spot, and held up the officer till he found himself
somewhat recovered; and then Auguste, with a sort of gentle violence, obliged
Madelaine, who was pale and trembling, to let go her father's arm, and suffer
him to assist the servant in leading him home, which was but a few steps
farther. Auguste entered the house, where he remained till the old officer was
a little revived; -- and, after prevailing upon Madelaine to take a few
hartshorn drops, he retired.

The next morning he felt that common civility required he should pay the old
officer a visit and learn how he had passed the night. It happened that
Madelaine had the very same idea. "Surely," thought she, "it will be very
strange if this young man, who was so kind, so careful of my father, and who
made me take some hartshorn drops, should neglect to call and enquire after
us." This idea had come acros^ her mind several times; and she was meditating
upon it at her father's bedside, when Auguste was announced.

The old officer, who had all the finished politeness of his country and his
profession, received him in the most courteous manner; and though he spoke with
some difficulty, yet he was profuse in acknowledgments for the service Auguste
had rendered him. Madelaine's thanks were few, and simply expressed; but the
tone in which they were uttered was such that Auguste felt he could have
sacrificed his life to have deserved them.

The old officer still continued sick, and therefore Auguste still considered
it as an indispensable mark of attention to go every day, and learn the state
of his health. -- He also began to feel that these visits became every day more
necessary to his own happiness. That happiness was indeed embittered by many
painful reflections. He well knew that to obtain his father the count de -- 's
consent to marry Madelaine, was as impossible as it was for himself to conquer
the passion she had inspired. He knew exactly the order in which his father's
enquiries would run on this subject. He was aware that there were two
interrogatories to be answered. The first was -- "How many thousand li^res has
she a year?" And the second -- "Is she noble?" And nothing could be more
embarrassing than that the enquiry concerning fortune, would, he was sure, come
first; since that was the only article which could not be answered in a
satisfactory manner; for to Madelaine's family no objection could have been
made. By the way, though the former nobility of France would not absolutely
contaminate the pure streams of noble blood by an union with the daughter of a
r^turier, they had always sufficient generosity to abate some generations of
nobility in favor of a proper equivalent in wealth.

Auguste, while he was convinced of the impossibility of obtaining his father's
consent to his marriage, did not pay Madelaine one visit the less from that
consideration; and when the usual hour of his visit arrived, he often suddenly
broke a chain of admirable reason on the imprudence of his attachment, in order
to hasten to the dwelling of her he loved. In a short time he ceased all kind
of reasoning on the subject, and abandoned his heart without reserve to the
most violent and unconquerable passion.

Auguste made a declaration to the old officer of the sentiments which his
daughter had inspired. The old gentleman mentioned it to Madelaine, and she
only answered by tears, of which he perfectly understood the meaning. When
Auguste explained his situation with respect to his father, the officer desired
him to think of his daughter no more. Auguste felt that he might as well have
desired him to cease to breathe. He continued his visits, and the officer was
soon reduced to that state of langour and debility which left him neither the
power nor the wish to forbid them. His complaints increased every day, and were
attended with many alarming symptoms. The season for the water of Bareges was
now past, and all the company left the place except the old officer, who was
too weak to be removed, and Auguste, who, while Madelaine remained, had no
power to tear himself from the spot. In a few weeks the old officer felt that
his dying hour was near. Auguste knelt with Madelaine at his bedside -- her
voice was suffocated by tears: and Auguste had scarcely power to articulate in
broken accents that he would devote his life to the happiness of Madelaine. The
old officer fixed his eyes with a look of tender anxiety upon his daughter, and
soon after expired. Madelaine mourned for her father with uncontrouled
affliction, nor could all the attentions of her lover dispel that anguish with
which her affectionate heart lamented the loss of her parent.

The winter being far advanced, she proposed to defer her journey to the
distant province where she and her father had lived, until spring, and to place
herself in the mean time in a convent not far from Bareges. Auguste exerted all
the eloquence of love to induce her to consent immediately to a private
marriage. She hesitated at this proposal; and while they were conversing
together on the subject, the door of the room in which they were sitting was
suddenly thrown open, and Auguste saw his father the count de -- enter. He had
heard of the attachment which detained his son at Bareges, and had hastened to
tear him from the spot before it was too late. He upbraided his son with great
bitterness, and began also to upbraid Madelaine: but there was something in her
looks, her silence, and her tears, which stifled the terms of haughty reproach
in which he was prepared to address her; and ordering his son to leave the
room, he desired to speak to her alone. After explaining to her the absolute
impossibility of her being ever united to his son, and his determination to
disinherit him, and leave his whole fortune to his second son, if Auguste
should persist in his attachment to her -- after endeavoring to awaken her
pride and her generosity, he desired to know where she proposed going. She told
him her intention of placing herself immediately in the convent of --. He
approved of this design, and left her to go to his son. No sooner was the door
of the room shut, than Madelaine gave way to those tears which she had scarcely
been able to refrain while the count was speaking. She had never felt so
sensibly her orphan condition as at this moment; and the dear remembrance of
her fond father was mingled with the agony of disappointed love.

Meantime the count de -- declared to his son, that his only chance of ever
obtaining his mistress, depended on his absolute un-conditional submission to
his commands, and that he must instantly attend him to Paris. Auguste eagerly
enquired what was to become of Madelaine, and his father told him that she had
determined to take refuge in the convent of --. Auguste absolutely refused to
depart till he was allowed an interview with Madelaine. The count was obliged
to consent; but before he suffered them to meet, he obtained a promise from
Madelaine not to mention to her lover any particulars of the conversation which
had passed between her and the count.

Auguste, in this last interview with Madelaine, atoned for the cruel disdain
of his father, by the most solemn and passionate assurances of fidelity, not to
be shaken by time or circumstance; and then, after attempting to leave the room
several times, and returning as often, he at length tore himself away.
Madelaine when she saw him depart, felt that every earthly hope had vanished
with him.

She set out early the next morning for the convent of --; but not till after
she had sat for some time weeping in the chair which Auguste used to occupy.
Madelaine passed the remaining part of the winter in the convent of --, during
which period she received frequent letters from Auguste; and when spring
arrived, he conjured her, instead of removing to her own province, to remain a
little longer in her present situation; and flattered her with hopes of being
able, ere long, to fulfill those engagements upon which all his happiness
depended.

In the summer of this year an event took place which will render that summer
forever memorable. The French nation, too enlightened to bear any longer those
monstrous oppressions which ignorance of its just rights alone had tolerated;
shook off its fetters, and the revolution was accomplished.

Madelaine was a firm friend to the revolution, which she was told had made
every Frenchman free, "And if every Frenchman is free," though it Madelaine, surely
every Frenchman may marry the woman he loves." It appeared to Madelaine, that,
putting all political considerations, points upon which she had not much
meditated, out of the question, obtaining liberty of choice in marriage was
alone well worth the trouble of a revolution; and she was as warm a patriot
from this single idea, as if she had studied the declaration of rights made by
the constituent assembly, in all its extent and consequences.

The count de --, who was informed of the correspondence between the two
lovers, and who saw little hopes of his son's subduing a passion which this
intercourse of letters served to cherish, contrived means to have Auguste's
letters intercepted at the convent. In vain Madelaine enquired with all the
anxiety of tenderness for letters. In vain she counted the hours till the
return of the post days. Post after post arrived, and brought no tidings of
Auguste. Three months passed in the cruel torments of anxiety and suspense, and
were at length succeeded by despair. Madelaine believed she was forgotten --
forgotten by Auguste! She consulted her own heart, and it seemed to her
impossible; yet, after a silence of three months, she could doubt no longer.

Poor Madelaine now recollected with anguish, instead of pleasure, that all
Frenchmen were free. She would have found some sad consolation in believing
that all Frenchmen were slaves. It would have been some alleviation of her
sorrows if Auguste had been forced to abandon her; and she fancied she could
have borne to lose him, if she had been sure that he still loved her -- it was
losing him by his own fault that filled her heart with pangs almost
insupportable.

The little pittance which Madelaine, after paying her father's debts, had left
for her own support, was insufficient to defray her expenses as a boarder in
the convent. She had already by her sweetness and gentleness, gained the
affections of some of the nuns, to whom she was also attached, and who
incessantly conjured her to take the veil. "And why," she sometimes exclaimed,
"why should I hesitate any longer in so doing? Since Auguste is lost, what have
I to regret in renouncing the world? What sacrifice do I make; what happiness
do I resign?

Madelaine had no ties to the world, of which she knew but little: but to
separate herself irrecoverably, and for ever, from him to whom her soul was
devoted -- to see him, to hear his voice no more -- to take vows which would
make it even a crime to think of him -- to banish him even from her thoughts --
alas! Madelaine felt like Eloisa. "All is not heaven's while Abelard has part,
"Still rebel nature holds out half my heart!"
Sometimes too the idea occurred that Auguste might love her still -- "And am I
then," thought Madelaine, "going to reduce myself to a state in which I shall
be forced to wish he was unfaithful, in order to save me from the agonies of
remorse!" -- She put off all thoughts of entering on her novitiate for some
weeks longer -- no letters arrived, and again her resolution to take the veil
returned. "Why," cried she, "why should I still continue to lament that
inconstant lover who thinks of me no more? Alas, did he not see the anguish of
my soul at parting with him? -- Does he not know the deserted situation in
which I am left? -- Oh, yes! he knows I have no other refuge, no other resource
than taking the veil -- no doubt he wishes to hear I have done so -- he will
find in my renunciation of the world some excuse for his infidelity -- Oh,
heavens! will Auguste hear then that I am separated from him for ever without
one sigh? -- Ah, why need I deliberate any longer? -- My trials will soon be
past -- I feel that my heart will break -- yes, death will come to my relief --
and in heaven I shall find my father!"

Madelaine at length determined to join the holy sisterhood of the convent. The
white veil for her novitiate was prepared. The day was fixed, when, prostrate
with her face toward the earth, and with flowers scattered over her, and a part
of her long tresses cut off, she was to enter upon that solemn tribunal
preparatory to her eternal renunciation of the world -- of Auguste!

A few days before that which was appointed for the ceremony, Madelaine was
called to the parlour, where she found her lover, with some of the municipal
officers of the town, wearing their national scar^s.

Madelaine, at the sight of Auguste, with difficulty reached a chair, in which
she sellback senseless; while Auguste could not forbear uttering some
imprecations against the iron grate by which they were separated, and which
prevented him from flying to her assistance. He, however, procured help, and
Madelaine recovered.

One of the municipal officers then informed her, that they had received the
day before a decree of the national assembly, forbidding any nuns to be
professed. He added, that the municipality had already given information of
this new law to the abbess, who had consented to allow Madelaine to leave the
convent immediately. As he pronounced these last words, Madelaine looked at her
lover. -- Auguste hastened to explain to her that his uncle, who loved him, and
pitied his sufferings, had at length, made a will, leaving him his fortune upon
condition that his father consented to his marriage with Madelaine.

When her lover and the municipal officers departed, Madelaine retired to her
apartment, to give way to those delicious tears which were poured from a heart
overflowing with wonder, thankfulness, and joy. When her first emotions had
subsided, she began to pack up her little wardrobe in preparation for leaving
the convent on the following day. "I always loved the revolution," thought
Madelaine, as she laid aside the white gown in which she was to be married the
next morning; "and this last decree is surely of all others the best and wisest
-- but if it had come too late!" -- At this idea Madelaine took up the veil for
her novitiate, which lay upon her table, and bathed it with a flood of tears.

The next morning, Auguste and Madelaine were married in the parish church of
--, and immediately after the ceremony, set out for Paris, where they now live,
and are, I am told two of the happiest people, and the best patriots in France.


