AN APOLOGY FOR THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETY, CALLED FREE QUAKERS, IN THE CITY OF
PHILADELPHIA, SHOWING THAT ALL CHURCHES WHO EXCOMMUNICATE, ACT INCONSISTENTLY
WITH THE GOSPEL OF JESUS.

BY SAMUEL WETHERILL.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY RICHARD FOLWELL, NO. 33, CARTER'S ALLEY.

INTRODUCTION.
IT may not be improper for the Author to apologize for the free manner in
which he has censured the Society of Friends, in the following treatise. The
subject here discussed has long occupied his mind; and being fully persuaded
the system of Church Government among that people is wrong, he could not omit
expressing his sentiments thereon. It seemed more especially necessary, as an
Apology for the society of which he is a member. In order to show why they do
not excommunicate upon any account, it appeared proper to point out the evils
which result from the practice. Although the Author firmly believes, that
friends err in judgment in administering the discipline; yet, as a society, he
acknowledges they are respectable, and that many among them are eminent for
their piety and virtue. And if, in the course of handling this subject, any
thing has dropped from his pen that appears unfriendly, let it be attributed to
a difficulty which he found in expressing his sentiments in milder terms,
against that which is so inconsistent with the Gospel of our Lord and Savior,
and the great end and design of his coming.

AN APOLOGY, etc.
THE Christian religion is a religion of love; love even to enemies; yet the
genuine effect of it has been so little experienced by many of its professors,
that it has often been a pretense for the most severe censures, and cruel
persecutions. In the course of Divine Providence, this asperity is worn off in
some degree; yet that this benign dispensation of heaven is not yet fully
understood, the excommunications still practiced by diverse churches, clearly
demonstrate. The most able and regular treatise upon the subject of church
authority, and excommunication, is a treatise by Robert Barclay, entitled, The
Anarchy of the Ranters and other Libertines; the Hierarchy of the Romanist, and
other pretended Churches, equally refused, and refuted, in a twofold apology
for the Church and People of God, called in derision Quakers, etc.

The publication entitled as above, is ingeniously written, as are all the
works of that pious Author; yet the writer of this, being firmly persuaded that
Barclay has erred, conceives it his business to show wherein.

The principle laid down by him, and upon which his system of church discipline
is founded, is, that the people called Quakers were, in his day, the pure and
only Church of Christ; that there should be order in the church, and that
excommunication is a part of this order, and ordained by Christ. The people
called Quakers, in the present day, hold the same doctrine, and Barclay is
esteemed unanswerable. I shall, in the first place, show what the Church of
Christ is; in doing this, it will appear that the people called Quakers are not
the Church of Christ as described by Barclay; and therefore have not those
powers given by Christ to his Church. And, lastly, that were they the Church of
Christ, they could not excommunicate; because Christ has expressly forbidden
it.

First, the members of Christ's body, are those who are engrafted on him the
vine. "I am the vine," says he, "ye are the branches, he that abides in me,
and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do
nothing." The Church of Christ, therefore, includes all those, whoever they
are, that by love to Christ are so united to him, as branches are united to the
vine; such receive from him that spirit which sanctifies them, and leads
them into all truth. This is agreeable to Barclay, see page 84, London edition.
None truly ought, nor can be accounted the Church of Christ, but such as are in
a measure sanctified, or sanctifying by the grace of God, and led by his
Spirit, nor yet any made officers in the church but by the grace of God, and
inward revelation of his Spirit." And further, page 29. "The church is such as
are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints. Now, as no one is a
member, much less an officer in the Church of Christ, but those who are thus
sanctified, or sanctifying, called to be saints, agreeable to Barclay; and as
all who are under this operation, are members of his church, let them belong to
whatever society they may; so those righteous persons, collectively, constitute
the church over which Christ is head. It will not be controverted, I trust, but
that there are pious persons among all other societies. If there are, to whom
do they belong? Do the people called Quakers constitute the body of Christ
complete in all its parts? and are the pious of other societies merely
superfluous members of his body? or do they not appertain thereto? The pious of
other societies must have the same relationship to Christ, which the pious
among the Quakers have; and therefore the pious among each society constitute
the church of Christ in the same sense as the pious among the Quakers
constitute his church; and as all societies are made up of those who are
virtuous, and those who are not; so neither of them are the church of Christ in
contradistinction to all the rest: Upon the whole, then, this truth follows, a
truth comfortable to every Catholic mind, that the church of Christ is made up
of the righteous of every denomination.

The people called Quakers, are, like other societies, composed of persons who
are religious and irreligious. Now, the irreligious, though not members of
Christ's body, are nevertheless entitled to membership in this church; it
therefore follows, they are not the pure church of Christ.

A man has a right of membership among the people called Quakers, by being born
of believing parents; so that it is rather accidental that many are Quakers:
had their parents been of any other persuasion, they themselves might have been
of another society. Now, membership in the church of Christ cannot be by
accident, nor lineal descent: it were unreasonable to suppose so extraordinary
a privilege depended upon those circumstances; and, therefore, the people
called Quakers cannot be the Church of Christ, in that sense of the word for
which Barclay contends.

Christ cannot have a regard for one part of mankind in preference to the rest
-- he must view them with equal love; it is then far from Catholic in any
society, to suppose they are his church, distinguished from the rest of
Christendom.

The terms of union among the people called Quakers consist very much in things
which may be strictly complied with, by corrupt men, and which may yet be
violated by the virtuous: It is not so in the church of Christ.

Again. Christ gave his life for his church, that he might sanctify it, and
cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word; that he might present it to
himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but
that it should be holy and without blemish. Can this be applicable to the
people called Quakers, or to any distinct society whatever? Did Christ give his
life for them alone? The truth is, that no one church or society can
appropriate this sacred character to themselves: it belongs only to the
righteous of all societies, who jointly constitute the church over which Christ
is head.

What those persons meant, who, as Barclay says, deny any such thing as a
Church of Christ, I cannot tell. Barclay has not quoted their expressions, nor
explained their meaning. If they meant that there was no society of Christians
that could with propriety call themselves the Church of Christ, in
contradistinction to all the rest, they were right. Barclay has asserted, that
all churches are fallen, and only pretended churches, excepting the one of
which he himself was a member. Now, if it can be proved, as I trust it will be
in the sequel, that this Church (supposing the people called Quakers in the
present day to be the same Church) is not the chaste spouse of Christ, but is a
mixed multitude, composed of persons of various descriptions, as other churches
are, -- it will then follows, upon Barclay's own principles, that Christ has
not a distinct and visible church on earth.

Barclay, in explaining what is, or may be properly understood by the church,
says, Some were afraid of the church, the power of the church, the order of the
church, the judgment of the church, and suchlike pretenses; because, says he,
these have been the weapons wherewith Antichrist, and the apostate christians,
have been these many generations persecuting the woman, and warring against the
man-child. And indeed great disputes have been among the Rabbis in the
apostasy concerning this church; what it is, or what may be so accounted, which
I find not my place to dive much into; but shall only give the true sense of
it, according to truth, and the scriptures plain testimony. Barclay here refers
to a church which for many generations had been invisible; to explain which he
found not his place to dive much into; but only to give, he says, the true
sense of it, according to truth, and the scriptures plain testimony. Now, to
give the true sense of this subject, according to truth, and the scriptures
plain testimony, is certainly diving into it; yet he has waved it altogether,
and proceeds to give an explanation of the word church -- That it is a
gathering of certain people together, in the belief of the same principles. He
then goes on to distinguish between that church, gathering, or assembly of
people, whereof Christ truly is the head, from such as pretend falsely thereto.
"Forasmuch," says he, as sanctification and holiness is the great and chief
end among Christians, which moves them to gather together, therefore the
apostle Paul defines the church in his salutation to the Corinthians, 1. Cor.
1.2. Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, them that are sanctified in
Christ Jesus called to be saints. This is a proper explanation of the Church of
Christ, and it is much to be desired that all churches or societies in
Christendom were such; but what pretensions have the people called Quakers,
more than other societies, to this distinguishing character, of saints, and
sanctified? wherein do they demonstrate this? are their affections weaned from
the world, and more placed upon things that are above? have they more divine
benevolence, and philanthropy, and do they follow more perfectly, than others,
the great example of Christ? No doubt but diverse among this people, as well as
Barclay, will answer in the affirmative, and roundly condemn all others; and we
should find some among all societies asserting the same of themselves, and as
confidently condemning their neighbors; but what would an impartial being say?
An impartial being would say, that no one church, or society, is the pure
Church of Christ; that they are all fallen, and therefore none of them have
those powers, and that authority which was vested in the primitive church, and
which we hope the church will again possess, when she shall be brought out of
the wilderness, leaning upon the breast of her beloved: and for any church in
the present day, to pretend to those powers, is presumption. Were an
individual, solely led by the spirit of Christ, and vested with miraculous
powers, he would make no high pretensions to extraordinary endowments; and the
authority that he was clothed with, would make itself manifest, without any
pains of the creature to set it off; and its authority would be, altogether, of
the benevolent, and god-like kind; it would be that of opening the eyes of the
blind, unstopping the ears of the deaf, healing the sick, raising the dead, and
preaching the everlasting gospel to the poor. And wherever there are
extraordinary pretensions to sanctity, not accompanied with extraordinary love,
and benevolence to mankind, we may be assured they are pretensions only. So
great a degree of modesty always accompanies real sanctity, that the possessor
can never sound forth his own fame. The sanctified in Christ Jesus remember the
rock from which they were hewn, and the pit from whence they were dug: They
do not forget when they were upon the brink of the pit of destruction, and that
it was of the Lord's mercy they were rescued, and that it is by the guardian
angel of his presence they are preserved and enabled to sing upon the banks of
deliverance. A remembrance of the Lord's gracious dealings with them, keeps
them in his fear, and from every thing that looks like boasting. This is the
disposition of all who are sanctified; and as Christ's Church is made up of
those individuals, so is she his chaste and humble bride. If any one society in
Christendom was wholly composed of such members, that society would be as a
city set on an hill, which could not be hid: there would be light, and love,
and good works, accompanied with the greatest humiliation and modesty; the
possession of the pearl of mighty price, the real riches of eternity, being a
gift of God, is accompanied with the deepest humiliation.

The writer of this would be sorry to asperse an individual, much less a whole
society: he knows the Friends are respectable; that there are many among them
who are eminently virtuous; yet having shown, he conceives, they are not the
Church of Christ, according to Barclay's definition of the church, it follows
they have not those powers given by our Lord to his Church, which some may
think they possess; that what they bind on Earth is bound in Heaven, and what
they loose on Earth is loosed in Heaven, and to gainsay the whole flock draws
after it a far deeper judgment, than if a millstone was hanged about the
offender's neck, and he was drowned in the depth of the sea. In this respect
the society of Friends are as weak as any other society. God has not through
them restored the golden age," as says Barclay, "and bringing them into the
holy order and government of his own son, who is ruling and to rule in the
midst of them, setting forth counselors as at the beginning and judges as at
first, and establishing truth, mercy, righteousness and judgment again in the
earth:" Neither have they "power in cases of faith and conscience, to give a
positive sentence and decision, which may be obligatory upon believers, or such
as are of their society, under pain of being bound on Earth, and bound in
Heaven, and lying under a far deeper judgment, than if a millstone was hanged
about the offender's neck, and he drowned in the depth of the sea. Anarchy of
the Ranters, page 14, 41, and 47.

As all the arguments of Barclay, on the power and authority of the Church,
apply only to the true Church of Christ, or powers possessed by the primitive
Christians; and as it has been shown, that the people called Quakers are not
the sanctified church or spouse of Christ, it follows they have not those
powers; neither has any other society in Christendom, and it is the height of
presumption in any to assume them in the present day.

When Christ, the head of the Church, shall be pleased to restore the golden
age, bring his Church out of the wilderness; and give her counselors as at the
beginning, and judges as at the first, and establish truth, mercy,
righteousness and judgment again in the earth; then will order be restored; for
God is a God of order; but what will be the rules and regulations, in this
renovated state of things, is not for us to determine: they will be according
to the mind of Christ, altogether benevolent, and worthy of him the great
lawgiver.

It has been generally taken for granted, that excommunication is a prerogative
of the Church of Christ; all churches who exercise it, do it upon this
principle. The design of this essay is to show that Christ has not authorized
it. Barclay, to prove his position, quotes the following expressions of our
Lord: Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go tell him his
fault between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established, and
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it the church; but if he neglect to hear
the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and publican; verily I say
unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. From which
scripture," says he, "it does manifestly, and evidently follow, First, that
Jesus Christ intended there should be a certain method and order in his church,
in the proceeding toward such a transgress. Secondly, that he that refuses to
hear two, is become more guilty than hardened in refusing to hear him that
first reproved alone. Thirdly, that refusing to hear the judgment of the
church, or whole assembly, he does thereby exclude himself, and shut out
himself, from being a member, and is justly judged by his brethren as a heathen
and publican.

That there should be order and method in the church is granted, but what that
order and method should be, is the question. The propriety of excommunicating
is denied; there being no warrant for it from the text, as will appear upon
examination. If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go tell him his fault
between thee and him alone." Here is a personal injury done by a brother. "If
he refuses to hear thee, take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of
two or three witnesses every word may be established. And if he neglect to hear
them, tell it unto the church, but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be
unto thee as an heathen man and publican. The plain sense of the text is, that
although he be thy brother who has done thee this injury, yet refusing to hear
thee, and your friends, and the church, he shows by his injustice, that the
state of his mind is that of an heathen man and publican. -- Here is no
excommunication in the case. Jesus does not say, let him then be cast out of
the church. It will be said, that it is implied, because heathen men and
publicans do not belong to the Church of Christ; but it shall be shown, that
excommunication is contrary to the first great principle of Christianity, and
by Jesus expressly forbidden; and therefore could not have been the meaning of
our Lord. This man, although he may remain within the pale of the church, is
necessarily excluded membership from the mystical body of Christ; he is to be
considered in the state of an heathen man and publican. Now, what is the
business of the church with heathens and publicans? Is it not to inform their
understandings, and to convert them to the Christian faith? So that, instead of
casting the man out, and having nothing further to do with him, the church has
a great and an important work before it; it is to open and manifest the grounds
and reasons of the Christian faith; to show this man, that although he has been
a professor of Christ, he is yet unacquainted with the first rudiments of the
gospel. All this is to be done, and whatever more which in divine wisdom may be
manifested as proper. And for the encouragement of the disciples, Jesus assures
them that this labor of their's in this important work shall be approved in
heaven; whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, is bound in heaven, and whatsoever
ye shall loose on earth is loosed in heaven. This is evidently the doctrine
from the text, and context, as will clearly appear if it be taken together.
That which is recommended by our Lord to his disciples, corresponds with his
own great work and labor of love. He introduced what he said respecting the
brother who trespassed, as follows: The son of man is come to save that which
was lost. How think ye, if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone
astray, does he not leave the ninety and nine, and goes into the mountain and
seeks that which is gone astray, and if so be, that he find it, verily I say
unto you, he rejoiceth more over that sheep than of the ninety and nine which
went not astray. Even so, it is not the will of your father who is in heaven,
that one of these little ones should perish." Jesus then adds to the foregoing,
"moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, tell him his fault
between thee and him alone, and so directs, how this trespassing brother is to
be dealt with, in order to be reclaimed: to restore the lost sheep is the
object in view. And can it be supposed, that he who came to seek and to save
that which is lost, and gave his life for this purpose, would direct, that any
person whatever should be placed in such a situation as to be deprived of the
blessing of the church? But it may be said, the man refuses that help which is
offered by the church, and is as an heathen man and publican. Why not then set
him aside? To which I reply: Because Jesus has expressly forbidden it, as will
be further shown in the sequel. Jesus knows it is impossible for men to make
such a discrimination, as that the righteous shall make up a distinct society
from the rest of mankind. He who knows what lodges in men, has with infinite
wisdom warned his followers against the attempt: he could have expelled Judas
from the company of his followers; but as an example of compassion, and a
lesson to future generations, suffered him to remain with them, until the last
solemn supper. The salvation of men being of infinite importance; what
situation can a man be placed in, so favorable to him in this respect as
within the pale of the church? If he be cast out, whither is he to go? If he
may be reformed as well out of the pale, as within, then indeed his being
within is but of little consequence; but if it operates as an injury, or is
less favorable to him, it is wrong to set him aside. The truth is, it is not
proper for us to say, when men may, or may not be reformed, nor should we do
any thing which might operate to the discouragement of a person, in a matter of
so much importance to him as his reformation. Times and seasons in this
respect, are neither in the power of those who wish the man's good, nor in the
man himself: the Lord's gracious visitation is the time in which alone he can
be reformed. This he will meet with either sooner or later, and if he then be
obedient to the gracious call, he shall be sanctified.

That our Lord has expressly forbidden excommunication, is plain from the
following parable. The kingdom of heaven," says he, "is likened unto a man
which sowed good seed in his field, but while men slept, his enemy came and
sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way; but when the blade was sprung
up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also; so the servants of
the household came and said unto him, sir, did not thou sow good seed in thy
field? from whence then has it tares? he said unto them, an enemy has done
this: the servants said unto him, will thou then that we go and gather them up?
but he said nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat
with them: let both grow together until the harvest, and the time of harvest. I
will say to the reapers gather ye together, first the tares, and bind them in
bundles to burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn. And when his disciples
requested an explanation of the parable, Jesus said unto them, he that sows
the good seed is the son of man, the field is the world, the good seed is the
children of the kingdom, but the tares are the children of the wicked one, the
enemy that sowed them is the devil, the harvest is the end of the world, and
the reapers are the angels; as therefore the tares are gathered and burned in
the fire, so shall it be in the end of the world. The son of man shall send
forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things which
offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire,
there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their father. Jesus concluded this
explanation very remarkably, "who has ears to hear let him hear." Happy had it
been for the professors of Christianity, if their ears had been open to hear
the gracious word of their master. Has not every church in Christendom
disregarded the doctrine contained in the parable? The tares in their opinion
must be separated from the wheat; but in this attempt, have not all churches
uniformly done as Jesus said there would be a danger of doing? The servants
said unto him, will thou then that we go and gather them up:" meaning the
tares? "but he said nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, yet root up also
the wheat with them? What mischief has the Roman church made in this attempt,
much precious grain has been destroyed, under a pretense, or from an
apprehension they were tares. Many virtuous men have been excommunicated by
that church; and most, if not all other churches, have done the same;
excommunications are not confined to immoralities only; but men are disowned
for their sentiments also, and even the people called Quakers have expelled men
from them for that which was highly meritorious. As a proof of this, I may
instance Ralph Sandiford, and Benjamin Lay, who were disowned for their
testimony against keeping Negroes in bondage.

It is impossible, by any literal rule, to separate the tares from the wheat:
this can never be done, until the son of man shall send forth his angels, and
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and those who do iniquity. It
may be queried of me, would thou then suffer immoralities of every kind to
remain in the church, and go unrebuked? No: Rebuke, exhort, testify against all
evil, from time to time, as thou may be enabled. But what if sinners stiffen
their necks, and harden their hearts, are they still to remain in the church?
It is not in the wisdom of man to separate the virtuous from the vicious. But
may not divine wisdom direct us to make such rules as will keep the church
clean? This has never yet been done. Divine wisdom, foreseeing the evils that
would ensue in the attempt, has forbidden it. How is it possible a line can be
drawn, or any rule made, so as that all virtuous characters shall constitute a
distinct society? We will suppose, for example, that a good moral character
shall be the test to entitle to membership in society; but how shall we
establish a criterion to determine this good moral character? A man may not
steal, or be guilty of a manifest act of injustice, yet so close, artful, and
hard in his dealings, as in the sight of heaven shall amount to the same thing:
a man may be covetous, overreach his neighbor, and grind the face of the
poor, and no rule can lay hold on him. Then, covetousness, which is as the sin
of idolatry, remains in the church. Further, we will say a drunkard shall be
disowned; but may there not be so great a degree of sensuality, as to be
equally criminal with drunkenness, and yet no rule which can lay hold on the
man? Again, what is worse than pride? and can a rule be made so as to point it
out? May it not remain in the church in defiance of all rules? May it not be
active in church affairs? May not envying, backbiting, and evil reports
prevail, and yet no rule so to discriminate offenders as they can be excluded
from membership? Again: may there not be a total lifelessness in religion, a
dry and barren state, as far from any thing which is good, and divine, as
immoral conduct; and yet, as we cannot see the hearts of men, no rule would
point out such cases? Those things may and will prevail. Seeing, then, it is
impossible, so to cleanse the church, but that there will be as unworthy
characters within the pale as without; and when no good can be done by
disowning; but, on the contrary, many individuals and families made extremely
unhappy by it, is it not then better to let it alone?

The following query, is often read in the meeting. Is tale-bearing,
backbiting, and evil reports discouraged? And yet, administering the rules of
the society often spread scandal far and wide. The overseers of the church are
spies upon the conduct of the members. (I doubt not they mean well.) Scarce one
can pass unnoticed; and when any thing of an immoral nature is heard of, the
matter is sifted to the bottom; and if a person is found guilty, his case is
taken to the monthly meeting, and laid open before great numbers. Suppose a
young woman, seduced by a man, who had gained her affections: She is exposed
before some hundreds; many of whom are giddy and thoughtless: we see them
smiling perhaps in the meeting at her disaster; and when they mingle among
their acquaintance, are repeating the sorrowful tale. The case of this poor
creature is called over once a month, until she is pronounced either a
penitent, or not so. In either case, she is further exposed: if a penitent, she
condemns her conduct, and it is read at a public meeting for worship before
some thousands: if she is supposed not penitent, she is publicly cast out of
the church. Oh! Jesus, thou compassionate Savior of men, thou friend of
publicans and sinners, is this done in thy name, and by thy authority? Thou,
who rescued the poor woman who was taken in adultery, from the hands of the
Pharisees; thou who cast seven devils out of Mary Magdalen, and who revealed
thyself more clearly and explicitly to the woman at Jacob's well than to many
others; thou who swate drops of blood in the garden of Gethsemane, and who died
upon the cross to save sinners, and whose whole divine process was a mystery of
love, which angels desired to look into! are those things done in thy name?
Have thou authorized sinners thus to deal with sinners? Verily, nay. But as has
been before observed, it is not for things which are sinful only, but for those
which are innocent, that some are disowned. Persons are disowned for marrying
those of another society: men may be disowned for paying a tax, or a fine, or
for defending that government, by which those very persons, who exercise this
authority of excommunication, hold their lives and their property. Persons may
be disowned who are virtuous, and yet the vicious escape These are cases which
not only may happen, but they are facts which do frequently happen. A long list
of the disowned, personally known to the author, might be enumerated, of as
respectable characters as any that are members of the society. The following is
a memorial of Thomas Thomas, drawn up by a few of his acquaintance, to preserve
in their families the memory of that amiable man.

"On the twelfth of the tenth month, 1780, died Thomas Thomas, of Richland,
Bucks County, in the sixty-second year of his age. A man who, through the
course of his life, was eminently distinguished by his integrity and exemplary
piety. In him were eminently joined the principal virtues that adorn the
Christian, -- a true evangelical charity crowning the whole. In him the poor,
the widow, and the fatherless, had ever a sincere sympathising friend and
liberal benefactor. To these his memory will remain peculiarly dear and
venerable. He was many years an honorable elder, and overseer of Richland
monthly meeting, faithfully laboring, and cheerfully spending himself in the
discharge of the duties of those important stations, -- religiously applying
himself with unwearied diligence, to cultivate peace, brotherly love, and
righteousness, through may painful exercises and fatigueing travels, until (Oh,
for a veil if possible broad enough to cover the remainder of the scene) the
same congregation a few months before the close of his pious life, which had
been devoted to their service, rewarded him with a total excommunication;
because he could not in conscience deviate from the great example of our
blessed Savior, and the clear precepts of his apostles, in rendering tribute
to the present government, from which alone he could receive protection;
believing it his duty, to yield a peaceable subjection, to whatever form of
government it pleased divine providence to place over him. This severe measure,
though deeply wounding and afflictive, he sustained with a meek and patient
fortitude, truly becoming his exemplary and unblemished character. This short
memorial we owe to the memory of the upright man, our dear friend, who having
paid the debt of nature, has left his survivors to mourn their loss, and is
gone before, to obey with joy the gracious call, of come ye blessed of my
father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

Here let my reader pause! and if he be one of the people called Quakers, let
me ask him, how many such characters have they remaining in their society? What
proportion in number do they bear to the whole? And is it possible, the society
can suppose they are right, in disowning such men, whilst many thousands among
them escape censure, who have no religion at all? Alas! if this is not
blindness, I know not what can be called so.


. Can those rules be of divine authority, which operate thus? But was the end
attainable, which is aimed at by the discipline, which is that of separating
the vicious from the virtuous, it would even then be improper, as will be
further shown in the sequel.

Christ came into the world to save sinners: he laid down his life for such. Is
it possible, then, to reconcile excommunication with such love? But says
Barclay, were such a principle to be received, or believed, that in the Church
of Christ, no man should be separated from, no man condemned, or excluded from
the fellowship and communion of the body, for his judgment or opinion in
matters of faith, then what blasphemies so horrid, what heresies so damnable,
what doctrine of devils but might harbor itself in the Church of Christ, what
need then of sound doctrine, if no doctrine make unsound. To this I reply: No
man should be so separated from the fellowship and communion of the body, as
implies an inconsistency, with that fundamental of the gospel, viz. Christ
laying down his life for the sins of the world. The virtuous cannot have
fellowship, or be pleased with the conduct of the vicious, or they would cease
to be virtuous; but the virtuous, and the vicious may belong to the same
outward society, and assemble together in a place appointed for divine worship,
and this may well be supposed without countenancing that which is wicked. It is
the case in all societies. And if there should be in the church, even horrid
blasphemies, and damnable doctrines of devils, it does not follow, that unless
the persons who hold them are disowned, that those evils are countenanced; and
therefore, it is not to the purpose to say, as Barclay has said, what need of
sound doctrines, if no doctrine make unsound? what need of convincing, and
exhorting gainsayers, if to gainsay be no crime? Does this follow, as a
necessary consequence, if persons are not excommunicated for evils? Is there no
alternative between excommunicating and countenancing them? May not all who
abhor iniquity bear as strong a testimony against it, if wicked or mistaken men
remain within the pale of the church, as if they were turned out? If we were at
liberty only to reprove wickedness, may we not detest it as much as if we were
obliged to put sinners to death? So that, when I contend against
excommunication, and maintain it inconsistent with the gospel, it is not to
make light of evils of any kind: There is great need of sound doctrine; and
there is none more worthy of attentention than that of love to mankind. Let
those who are influenced by it, endeavor to convince: let them exhort, and
testify with great zeal, against all that is wrong: The virtuous must of
necessity do it; yet there is a wide difference between that detestation and
testimony, which the righteous bear against iniquity, and that testimony
against transgressors, which often operates to their injury. To omit disowning,
therefore, would not be an inlet, as Barclay asserts it would, to all manner of
abominations, and make void the whole tendency of Christ and his apostles'
doctrine, and a bidding farewell to all Christianity, or to the maintaining any
sound doctrine in the Church of Christ: (page 51.) All that can possibly be
done to prevent those evils, may be done more effectually, without
excommunicating the sinner. It is generally the case, after a few months
visiting such who act amiss, if there is no appearance of reformation, they are
disowned, after which they are lightly esteemed, and neglected; and are in
danger of being lost; whereas, were they still members of the society, and
favorable opportunities taken with them in brotherly love, many might be
restored to virtue.

One argument, urged in favor of disowning, is, that it is necessary for the
reputation of the society. To allow wicked persons to remain in the church, it
is said, would be a reproach to it. Were sinners suffered to retain a right of
membership in society, with a view to countenance that which is evil, it would
then be reproachful indeed; but no such thing is contended for. Barclay has
taken for granted, that the people called Quakers were the Church of Christ;
that Christ's Church is pure, having no spot or blemish or any such thing;
therefore, all evil must be condemned, and the sinner, unless he repent,
expelled from the church; but, it has and will be further shown, that until
Christ Jesus shall come again, no such church can exist, and that which is true
of the invisible Church, the bride of Christ only, is assumed by a society of
frail and imperfect men.

All mankind are, or were sinners; and, therefore, while so, are not members of
Christ's mystical body, or of his pure church; but he came to seek and to save
that which is lost, or to initiate them into membership in his church. Now, can
putting away be right, when the sole object of Jesus is to save that which is
lost? If membership in society be an advantage, must not disowning be a
disadvantage? Must it not place a man in an unfavourable situation; and is it
not strange, that sinners who have been reclaimed, or improved in virtue by
means of membership in society, should be zealous for putting others away, and
thereby deprive them of those advantages, which they themselves profess to have
received? It will be said they are not put away, until they are labored with,
and refuse to be reclaimed; but it is not for us to set limits to the love of
Jesus, neither should men set limits to their own labors of love: We ought
never to give over striving: it is imitating the great example of him who
sleeps not by day, nor slumbereth by night; but is always waiting to be
gracious to every son of fallen Adam.

As to the reproach which would fall on the church, from the unrighteous, let
it be remembered that Christ Jesus left that society who possess transcendant
virtue, and came among sinners. He conversed with Mary Magdalen, with the woman
at Jacob's well, with the woman taken in adultery, and was frequently a guest
with sinners. And was it not because all men are sinners that he came into the
world? If, then, it was no reproach to Jesus, that he accompanied with sinners,
it would be no reproach to any society, if bad characters were among them, if
those persons were continued in membership with a view to their reformation.

Suppose there were a society of Christians, every member of which was perfect:
If it be right to disown men because they are imperfect, it could not be right
to admit any into membership unless they were perfect; and if men may attain
perfection independently of such a society, what advantage could they derive
from joining them? as improvement in virtue is that which is proposed by all
religious associations.

Imperfect men will constitute a great part of all societies; and if so, how
shall we ascertain, what characters to admit, and what to reject? Is there a
line so clearly visible, as that we can draw it with safety, and say all on one
side are of right members, and all on the other side are properly excluded?
Attempts have been made by most societies; a line has been drawn; but as
injudiciously, as if an ingenious geographer should attempt to mark out the
boundaries of heaven, and of hell, and the line which separates them. It is
granted, there is a perfect distinction between good and evil, yet good and
evil are often blended together in the same person; and among virtuous men,
some are more eminently so than others; so among bad characters, there are some
more depraved than others, and as there are degrees of virtue and vice, so the
least among the virtuous must approach so near to the least among the vicious,
as that no man can say to which class they belong; and, therefore, Jesus has
forbidden to discriminate by expulsion from his Church, having reserved it to a
future day.

Improvement in piety and virtue, is the object intended by all religious
associations. Is it not then highly improper to expel men from society, merely
because they want that which is aimed at by the association?

A religious society should be a spiritual infirmary, where measures ought to
be taken to heal the diseased. Shall we then, if persons appear dangerously
ill, turn them out of doors?

It will be objected to the foregoing, that the primitive Church was in the
practice of disowning. Barclay has quoted much scripture to prove this, and
that the church he was a member of had the same authority. I trust it will
appear he was mistaken in both cases. He proceeds, (See Anarchy of the Ranters,
page 18, 22, and 49.) 1. Corinthians, 5. Chap. 3 and 4 ver. I, indeed, as
absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were
present, concerning him that has so done this deed. In the name of our Lord
Jesus, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one to satan for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord." And 2d Thessalonians, 3d
Chap. 6th ver. "Now we command you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walks disorderly,
and not after the tradition which he received of us;" Verse 14th, "and if any
man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with
him that he may be ashamed. (Galations 1st Chap. 8 Verse:) But though we or an
angel from Heaven, preach any other gospel unto you, than that we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed: as we said before, so say I now again, if any
man preach any other gospel unto you, than that we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed. Again, (1. Tim. 1st chap. 19th and 20th verses) Holding faith
and a good conscience, which some having put away concerning faith have made
shipwreck, of whom is Hymenias, and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto
Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.

The foregoing is produced, together with various other texts to prove the
propriety of disowning. What the apostle meant by delivering persons over to
satan that they may learn not to blaspheme, or the curse denounced upon such as
preach any other gospel than that he had preached, is not easy to understand.
It is sufficient for us to know what Barclay meant. Now, cursing, or delivering
persons to satan, or assigning them over to future damnation, or disowning, are
all synonimous with him; and it must be so, if his first principles are
admitted; for if the people called Quakers are Christ's Church on earth, all
who are expelled from this church, are absolutely excluded membership from
Christ's Church in Heaven; because, the same power and spirit rules in both.
The people called Quakers profess to be led and guided in their decisions by
the Holy Spirit. Upon this principle they call themselves the Church of Christ.
If, then, they are led by the Holy Spirit to disown, the persons so disowned
are in a most fearful situation. Barclay has taken a great deal of pains to
prove that the people called Quakers were the Church of Christ: that what they
bound on earth, was bound in Heaven, and what they loosed on earth was loosed
in Heaven; and that for a man to offend one of those little ones, it were
better that a millstone hanged about his neck, and he drowned in the depth of
the sea, and to gainsay the whole flock, must be more criminal, and draw after
it a far deeper judgment. Now, what can this deeper judgment mean? Eternal
damnation upon Barclay's principles. Let me ask the Friends of the present day
whether this is what they mean? If they mean this, is it not presumption to
pronounce a sentence in the name of the most high, against a man of sober life,
which implies he is assigned over to damnation? Here some will exclaim, and
say, that no such thing is meant. Those Friends may be told, that
excommunication from the Church of Christ, implies an exclusion from the
kingdom of Heaven, which Barclay well understood, and has strongly expressed in
the treatise now quoted; and if the Friends of the present day do not mean it,
I may ask them whether they have not departed from the principle of their
forefathers? All churches who have excommunicated, have done it upon this
ground, that they were the pure Church of Christ; and excommunication with them
meant damnation. The Roman Catholics speak plain, and curse such whom they
disown, with a most fearful curse.

If friends do not mean by it an exclusion from the kingdom of heaven, it may
be asked what do they mean? It will be replied, we mean to bear our testimony
against certain conduct which we disapprove. And might you not bear your
testimony against those things without disowning for them? There are many
things for which men are disowned, which will not be alleged against them, as
sinful, by the judge of all the earth; and on the other hand, there are many
evils, for which you do not disown which will at the day of judgment, exclude
men from admittance among the blessed.

Having remarked as above, I proceed to take some notice of those anathemas of
the apostle Paul. It is granted, that on some extraordinary occasions, the
apostle pronounced a fearful curse. What was the ceremony, on those occasions,
we are not told in the text, though some ecclesiastical writers have given
their conjectures. It does not appear that those persons were cast out of the
church; the incestuous Corinthian, though he was delivered over to Satan, for
the destruction of the flesh, yet it was, that the spirit might be saved in the
day of the Lord. This censure and process, whatever it might have been, was
intended to be salutary, and so it proved; for the apostle, in his second
epistle to the Corinthians, recommended it to them to forgive and comfort this
man, lest he should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. And the
Thessalonians, although commanded in the name of the Lord Jesus, to withdraw
from every brother that walked disorderly, and to note the man who obeyed not
the word of that epistle, to have no company with him, that he may be ashamed;
yet the apostle adds, count him not an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. So
that, whatever was done to the man, his salvation was kept in view: they were
not to forget he was their brother, and therefore he could not have been
excommunicated.

As to the curse pronounced upon those who preached another gospel than that
which the apostle preached, it is to be presumed, that such did not wish to
associate with the apostles of our Lord, and so going off from them, if they
ever belong to the church, there could not be a necessity for an
excommunication. If the apostle saw such were in a state of damnation, it was
his duty to declare it, as a warning to the believers not to be deceived by
them. This affords no argument for excommunication. With respect to Hymenius,
and Alexander, whom the apostle delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to
blaspheme, we must suppose the same was intended as was in the case of the
incestuous Corinthian: whether the same salutary effects followed, we are not
informed; but that they were not disowned, is evident from the context. This
Hymenius is probably the same person the apostle has spoken of in his second
epistle to Timothy: he has there Philetus for a companion. It appears they were
profane bablers, whose words eat as does a canker, who concerning the truth
had erred, saying the resurrection is past already, and overthrew the faith of
some" Nevertheless," says the apostle, "the foundation of God stands sure,
having this seal, the lord knows them that are his, and let every one that
names the name of Christ depart from iniquity." He then adds, But in a great
house there are not only vessels of gold, and of silver, but also of wood and
of earth, and some to honor, and some to dishonor. It a man therefore purge
himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for
the master's use, and prepared unto every good work. From the foregoing, it is
plain, that Hymenius, Alexander and Philetus were not disowned. The great house
here spoken of, is no doubt the church; in this house, there are not only
vessels of gold, and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some to
honor and some to dishonor. Now although Hymenius, Alexander, and Philetus,
could not be members of Christ's mystical church, they yet might belong to the
visible church, or society; they were vessels of some kind or other in the
great house, and although not vessels of gold, or of silver; not vessels of
honor, not sanctified and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every
good work, they might comparatively be vessels of wood, or of earth, or of
dishonor. The apostle has here given a striking illustration of the outward
church, and such as corresponds exactly with what is contended for in this
essay; but far different from that which was attempted by Barclay, and his
brethren. According to them, none ought to belong to this house, but such as
are sanctified and meet for the matter's use, expressly contrary to the words
of the apostle, who admits that unsanctified vessels may remain in the house.
Yet after all the pains taken by the Friends, thus to purge their society, they
are nevertheless such an house, who have among them vessels of various kinds,
vessels of gold, of silver, of wood, and of earth; some to honor, and some to
dishonor. The apostle, no doubt, made use of the above similitude, to show it
was best to let Hymenius and Philetus, together with other unsanctified
persons, remain in the house. And to excite in them, a virtuous emulation,
says, If a man purge himself from the evils above, he shall be a vessel unto
honor, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every good
work. The apostle holds up the possibility of this, and therefore admits them a
part of the great family. And let me ask the people called Quakers, whether
they have not in their great house, unsanctified vessels, for which
nevertheless they find some use?

Although virtue is very desirable among men, as it adds to their usefulness in
all the various concerns of life, yet we must not put away those persons that
appear not to possess it. All mankind are vessels in the house of the great
master, he has those of gold, of silver, of wood, and of earth; he has his
vessels of honor and of dishonor, and they are all used by him according to
their fitness for his purposes.

At the time John wrote his revelations, the Christians were numerous: there
were seven churches in Asia; and yet only two of them that were not rebuked,
some of them very severely, many great evils had crept in among them. Had the
apostles seen it were possible to prevent those evils, there is no doubt but
they would have used means for the purpose. If they had ever excommunicated,
and it was well adapted for this end, there must have been great remissness in
the churches to have permitted evils to have gotten to such a height; but we
cannot suppose during the life of John the Divine, any measures were omitted
that were proper to preserve the church pure, and therefore the churches could
not have excommunicated. And it deserves especial notice, that this severe
reprehension of our Lord, was the effects of his love, such as I love I rebuke
and chasten, be zealous therefore and repent. We may therefore fairly infer,
that those men though wicked, being the objects of the love of Jesus, were
permitted to remain in that situation, which was the most likely to favor
their reformation: that situation is the outward church of Christ.

I trust it is already proved, that disowning cannot be reconciled with the
great principle upon which Christ came into the world. Had it even appeared,
that in some instances it was practiced in the days of the apostles, that would
not make wrong right. Many of the primitive Christians had belonged to the
church of the Pharisees, and as excommunication was a part of their discipline,
so those converts might have carried with them a prepossession in favor of the
practice. We read that Diotrephes, loving to have the pre-eminence, cast some
out of the church. This is the only plain instance mentioned in scripture of an
excommunication, and which was censured by John; but as is above observed, if
in other instances it had been practiced in the church, and that it was what
ecclesiastical writers suppose it to have been, assigning men over to the
Devil, with all the curses of the Mosaic law denounced against them; what have
we to do with this Judaism? Are we under that dispensation? And is it not
surprising, that Barclay should have produced the curses of the Mosaic law, to
illustrate, or to prove disowning to be agreeable to the nature of the gospel?
If it be justifiable to curse a man for some horrid crime, did Moses, or the
apostle Paul, ever mean, that all the curses of the law should be pronounced
upon every member of the congregation, who should defend his own life, or his
friends, or the government under which he lived, or who married a woman except
of a particular tribe? The gospel is not cursing, but blessing, and doing good
even to enemies.

Disowning even in criminal cases is a remnant of Judaism. The Pharasaical
church disowned for things innocent, and praiseworthy, and it will always
reduce that society who practices it to a resemblance with them. Such will
strain at a gnat and swallow a camel. Innocent persons will be disowned, and
sinners remain in the church: the rules operate thus unavoidably. Many have
been dealt with for that which was not sinful, who yet have been made sinners
before the meeting had done with them. There is scarce a member of the society
who has not heard of the famous, or rather infamous George Keith; yet but few
are acquainted with his case; and it calls for more pity, than has been
generally bestowed upon it. George was a man of great talents, and learning, an
eminent minister among Friends, and high in esteem; but holding an opinion
respecting the future state of the soul, different from what was generally
held, and happening to express this sentiment in his public testimony, he was
called to an account, as one not orthodox; he supported his opinion, as might
be expected, and so a field of controversy was opened. George being a man of
high temper, and those who opposed him, men not thoroughly sanctified, or they
would have been wiser than to have made a man an offender, for an opinion in
metaphysics. The breach, by degrees, grow wider, and wider, until George was at
length disowned. This, to a man who had been so much esteemed, and one perhaps
of an irritable temper, was more than he could bear: It so operated upon his
mind, that at length he cast off the Quaker entirely, and opposed the society
with great acrimony. Many a man since his day has met with a fate somewhat
similar.

Numbers have been dealt with for that which was not sinful, and far the doing
of which they were not sorry; yet have been obliged to condemn it rather than
be disowned, and thereby were made sinners, when they were not so before. In
many instances, persons have deliberately planned a violation of the rules of
the society, and at the same time planned an acknowledgment for the
transgression; which has been received and all seemed well.

Manifold are the evils that attend disowning: it leads to insincerity,
subterfuge, and dissimulation; and not only individual members are embarrassed
in this respect by it, but the society at times are so likewise. A remarkable
instance of this kind happened some years ago.

A number of wicked men, inhabitants of Lancaster county, having an hatred for
the Indians without exception, assembled together, and fell upon a settlement
in said county, and murdered every one who happened to be at home. The rest of
the tribe being dispersed about the country, selling their baskets and brooms;
upon hearing of the sad catastrophe which befell their relations, fled, some of
them to Lancaster, and begged the protection of the inhabitants. The best
protection which could be given these poor creatures, was to lock them up in a
prison; but bolted doors and brick walls, were poor defense. These soon gave
way to those desperate men; and every man, woman, and child, enclosed within
the walls, were murdered. The remainder of this wretched tribe collected
together, and hastened to Philadelphia, and put themselves under the protection
of the inhabitants. They were pursued, and expresses came to this City, giving
an account that those wicked men, not only vowed destruction to the Indians,
but the death of several Friends likewise. At length, an express came in the
morning, before the dawning of the day, with information, that those insurgents
were within a few miles of the city. The inhabitants were called up, and
assembled in the streets in great numbers, and a consultation was held, to know
what measures should be taken at this alarming crisis. What could be done?
There was no doubt of the bloody design of the men: they had given an
unquestionable proof of this. Nothing could be done, but either quietly give up
the Indians, and some Friends as a sacrifice, or gird on the sword, and defend
them. It was determined to defend them: great expedition was used accordingly;
and such of the inhabitants who had some knowledge in military affairs, took
the lead, and prepared for defense. Diverse Friends joined in the military
parade. Not an individual in the society appeared to discountenance the thing.
Why should they? A formidable appearance was soon made, which so intimidated
those assassins, that they halted at some distance from the city, gave over
their design, and returned home. Thus, this black and terrible storm blew over
-- a storm, which in appearance, seemed to portend something more desperate and
bloody, than what had happened before, bad as it was. A calm ensued, and
serious reflection returned to the people called Quakers. They saw their
testimony was violated, and it became a question of importance, to know what
should be done, to wipe away the reproach, as it was termed by some. Strange,
indeed, that it should be thought a reproach, for men who were not in danger
themselves, to step forward, and at the risk of their own lives, defend the
lives of others! every other part of mankind, would term it an high instance of
heroic virtue. There were diverse conferrences held upon this subject, in which
the members of the society were divided in opinion: some thought they should
proceed as the discipline directs; which requires an acknowledgment for such
conduct, or that the society should bear a testimony against the violators of
the rule. But there were other persons, men of virtue, and superior
understanding, who could not proceed to condemn men for doing that, which, at
the time of trial was generally approbated. These Friends prevailed over the
others, and the business ended: had the sentiments of the other Friends
prevailed, the society would have merited the highest reproach.

In many respects men are free agents. Were there several roads all leading to
the same place, a traveller might take his choice. A man intending to visit his
friend may do it to day, or tomorrow, or at another time. If a man should
think the plain language most agreeable, he can use it. If he likes a plain
dress, he can put it on. He may go to any place of worship which suits his
inclination, or accomplish his marriage in a way he likes best. But with
respect to resistance or non-resistance, the case is very different. A man
cannot either resist, or let it alone, as he may please: no man can say, I will
not defend my life, or the life of my wife and children, or the life of my
friend, or my country. And to make a rule, that a man should not do it, is
above all things the most unreasonable and improper; much more so, than it
would be, to make a rule, that a man should neither rejoice nor be sorrowful,
upon any occasion whatever. Men are not machines, or automatons: they cannot
act, in many instances, even according to their own previous determination,
much less according to that of others.

Since the people called Quakers first came forth, the evils occasioned by
their discipline, to many families, and individuals, have been numerous Oh! how
great has been the anguish which some persons have endured on this account. The
author, some years ago, spent about a week with two friends, a man and his
wife, who were excommunicated, the man was disowned for his attachment to his
country during the American revolution, though he had done nothing contrary to
the rules of the society, being an eminent public Friend, and as agreeable a
man as the writer ever knew: his wife was disowned because she loved her
husband, and could not join the meeting in their censure against him: she was
an amiable woman, and an approved minister. This circumstance of
excommunication, was so severe an affliction to her, she being a very tender,
delicate, and weakly woman, as that it increased her complaints; and her
husband told the writer whilst he was in their family that he was assured it
would cost him the loss of his wife. Some time after the author had returned
home, he saw this Friend in this city, and was informed by him, that his wife
was dead, and that her death was occasioned, or hastened by the circumstance
above mentioned.
.

To require one uniform sentiment, and line of conduct, of every individual, is
very injudicious. In this case, men nave not liberty for the free exercise of
that understanding bestowed by the Deity upon them; when at the same time,
there is scarce any subject whatever, upon which men will not differ in
opinion. The occasions for censure, according to the discipline are so
numerous, that it is impossible to expect any other than that great numbers
will get entangled therein. There are the tithe and church rates in England,
marrying persons of another society, or marrying a member of the society not
according to the rules of the society, paying a tax for military purposes, or
paying a fine for noncompliance with the laws, or defending the government
under which a man lives. Many other things are contrary to the discipline; but
for violating the rules of the society in the above cases, many respectable
characters have been disowned.

This essay is to show that disowning is wrong in any case; but to disown a man
for defending his life, or the life of his friend, or the government under
which he lives, are extraordinary cases. The people called Quakers, from the
first, have been advocates for government, they admit that it is a divine
ordinance; have held the highest offices in government; hold large property;
claim of government a protection for their persons and property, and yet if a
member of the society should join with his fellow-citizens in supporting this
government, in the only way in which in extreme cases it can be maintained,
this man is disowned. They bear a testimony against defensive war, and yet
admit the necessity of government. I ask them, if government itself is not a
defensive war? Is it not under an absolute necessity to lay hold on the wicked
disturbers of its peace, and to punish them, some by confinement to hard
labor, and others by putting them to death? I will grant all this may be done
without an apparent warfare: there may be no military parade. But suppose an
armed banditti should assemble, as in the affair of the riot before mentioned,
and should be determined to massacre the citizens; what is to be done in this
case? Supposing all the officers of the government were of the people called
Quakers, what would they do? They would be under an absolute necessity of
violating their testimony. I may be asked how I know that would be the case? --
might not divine providence interpose? Divine providence might interpose: far
be it from me to set limits to his protection But I ask, why is government
instituted? Might not divine providence interpose and prevent those evils which
government is intended to suppress? The forming a government, arises from the
probability of a combination of wicked men to do mischief; and to repel such
attacks it is ordained. It would seem strange, that a person should take on him
an office of a coersive nature, and yet when an occasion offered for exerting
this power, he should decline it, on a presumption that divine providence might
interpose, and render his exertions unnecessary. If those were his sentiments,
why hold the office? If government is a divine ordinance, it cannot be a want
of confidence in divine protection, to use means for its support.

Suppose a man was alarmed at midnight, by a number of villains, who meant to
rob and murder him, his wife and children; the discipline says, in effect, he
must submit to it, rather than prevent it by violence; and if the man could
prevent it no other way than by the death of those men, and should slay them,
he must condemn his conduct, or he is liable to be disowned.

This doctrine of non-resistance does not stand upon the same ground as other
doctrines do. A man may change his opinion from time to time, and as he
changes, may be esteemed a proper member of that society, whose doctrines
correspond with his own; but with respect to non-resistance, the criterion of
fellowship is made to consist, not in sentiment, but in so acting, as not one
man in an hundred thousand could act, were he brought to the test; and those
very men, who excommunicate for self-defence, would do the same thing, were the
trial brought home to themselves. Must not that discipline then be founded in
error, which requires an impossibility?

It is agreed that government is a divine ordinance: the people called Quakers
admit it. I trust it is here shown that government cannot exist without
defense, the sword being its sinews. Government in its essence is a defensive
war; a defensive war therefore of that kind is not sinful.

But though a defense of this nature is not sinful, yet our blessed Lord has
pointed to a state more desirable, even that in which there is no strife -- a
state of absolute christian perfection. And, as he said upon another occasion,
so let it be said upon this occasion, he that is able to receive it, let him
receive it; but few among the professors of christianity, since the coming of
Christ, have been able to receive it. It is a different thing from embracing a
system of religious tenets, which may render a man a member of that society,
which is distinguished for holding them. To be a christian, is to be made a new
creature; it is to experience a thorough sanctification; being inwardly made,
such as Christ was, and thereby manifesting an outward conformity to the great
example set us by him. This state is not to be attained instantly, even by
those who sincerely wish to attain it: It is therefore as unreasonable to
expect that all who profess the christian name, should, in all cases, act the
part of perfect christians, as it would be, to expect that a new born babe,
should possess all the faculties, and bodily strength, of a man in the prime of
life. As it is only the perfect man in Christ who resists no evil, so to
expect this of all, under pain of expulsion, is to expect children to read, who
have never learned their letters, and yet, for their deficiency, to expel them
the college.

The impropriety of disowning, has been discussed, chiefly upon the principle
of its being supposed a prerogative of the Church of Christ. But there are some
that approve it, who found their opinion upon other grounds: they will not
contend, that Friends are the pure Church of Christ; but they say, that all
societies have a right to lay down such rules as they may think proper, for the
well-ordering of the body, and for a test of christian fellowship: that all who
do not comply with those rules, have no reason to complain when they are
disowned, as they should not have violated them. Friends of this description,
do not suppose that a testimony given against such who transgress, implies an
exclusion from heaven, they yet contend, it is expedient to keep up the rules
of the society. Here are two kinds of men, who differ widely in their
principles, yet practically agree. Those who believe the society of Friends are
the Church of Christ, that they have the mind of Christ, and that disowning
necessarily implies an exclusion from heaven, are, according to the ancient
principle laid down by Barclay, the true and orthodox Quakers. The others who
do not suppose the society are the pure Church, who do not pretend to binding,
and loosing in heaven and on earth, are most catholic and modest. But let me
ask those Friends, supposing a number of men were forming themselves into a
religious society, for the purposes of improvement in piety and virtue, would
the present discipline of Friends be the most proper rules to produce this
effect? Would they agree, that no one among them should marry a person of any
other society, though ever so amiable, under pain of being expelled from the
body; nor even a member of their own society, unless they accomplished their
marriage agreeable to one particular form? that no man should defend his own
life, nor the life of his friend, nor the government under which he lived, nor
pay taxes for military purposes, nor a fine for not complying with the laws in
certain cases? that no man should publish a religious, or political treatise,
without consent of the society, under the penalty of being expelled from the
body? Can it be supposed, that any number of men of sound understanding, would,
in the present day, lay down such a plan, and make a compliance with those
rules the test of christian fellowship? If then it is impossible to suppose
such a case, are they wise, who make those rules the test of christian
fellowship, merely because they were made the conditions of fellowship by their
ancestors? How much more reasonable would it be in them to say, the design of
this institution is, that we may be mutually instrumental in promoting the
temporal and eternal felicity one of another. We feel the importance of a
virtuous life, we will therefore use all the means with which divine providence
may favor us solely for this end. If then a brother should be overtaken in a
fault, we will endeavor to restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering ourselves, lest we also be tempted; but in no case whatever, shall
any one be expelled from the society, lest it should prove his ruin. How
greatly preferable would such a system of church government be? How much better
adapted to the purposes of religious association? How perfectly corresponding
with the gospel of our Lord and Savior, and the great end and design of his
coming? Such then is the plan of the religious society of Free-Quakers in the
city of Philadelphia.

It may be objected to the foregoing, that if every man is to enjoy his
opinions without censure, he must be at liberty to publish or to preach them,
and that this would render the society, rather a Babble, than a Christian church.

ANSWER.

The most perfect plan that can be formed for a religious society is liable to
some inconveniences; but those inconveniences are to be submitted to, in order
to avoid greater. The evils of disowning are manifested in the foregoing
treatise. Although the right of individuals are to be maintained, yet the
church has its prerogative also, which is that of determining, whether what is
offered to them is edifying or otherwise: here wisdom is necessary, mutual love
and forbearance ought to be exercised; and although the individuals who compose
a society, may differ in opinion in lesser matters, yet if the love and fear of
the Lord prevail, they will be favored with discernment, so as to encourage
that which is good and edifying; and suppress that which is otherwise. It does
not then follow, that because no one shall be disowned, that therefore that
which is evidently of evil tendency is to be received, or countenanced. A
variety of opinions may prevail, yet perfect order and decency may be
maintained in the church. After all the pains taken by the different societies
in Christendom to preserve what each of them call orthodoxy, yet contradiction
frequently appears. If then, a diversity of sentiment is unavoidable, may it
not as well be admitted, and acquiesced in? Is it not a vain attempt to aim at
that which is impossible? And may not a variety of opinions be made an occasion
of mutual love, forbearance, and charity? and so a means of manifesting more
conspicuously, the graces of the gospel? Religion consists more in love to
the Lord, and to one another, than in sameness of opinion: the latter is
desirable, but not essential: it may happen where there is but little virtue;
and on the other hand, there may be a diversity of sentiments accompanied with
a virtuous life this is preferable. Such then is that which is proposed and
desired by the religious society called Free Quakers.

CONCLUSION.
ON a review of the foregoing, the author expects he shall give offense to
Friends. He has endeavored to lay waste that which by some is held sacred; the
discipline in their opinion, being of divine origin. Numbers, both men and
women, who are virtuous, and sincere, make the maintaining those rules a great
part of their religious concern: for this do they cross sea and land, and
undergo great difficulty, dangers and hardship. What can the writer then
expect, but that he should be esteemed an enemy to truth, and even reviled by
some? But the motive to this publication is known to the searcher of hearts:
the author believes, that all men will be called to account for their deeds,
whether they be good or evil. Under an impression of this solemn truth, and for
the cause and testimony of Jesus, is this publication sent forth. If it is now
rejected, as there is reason to expect it will be, the writer believes, the day
is coming, when the nature of the gospel will be better understood, and when
the ecclesiastical government of the people called Quakers will be reformed,
and grounded upon principles more evangelical than at present it is. May Jesus,
for the consolation of his people, hasten the day. -- Amen.


