A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT NORTH-COVENTRY, JULY 4th, 1799, BEING THE
TWENTY-THIRD ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY ABIEL ABBOT.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.

1799.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
GENESIS xii.2. I will make of thee a great nation.


THIS joyful anniversary and the aspect of this assembly promise me a candid
attention, while I endeavor to show what is necessary to constitute a great
nation, point out some alarming signs of danger to our national greatness and
glory, and call upon you to avert these impending evils.

A country favorably situated and sufficiently extensive is necessary to make a
great nation. An equinoctial and polar situation is nearly equally unfavorable
to vigor of mind and body, and yields its puny inhabitants but a scanty
support. The vertical rays of the sun and an almost entire absence of his
influence have nearly the same effect upon its inhabitants. They turn the one
into a barren heath, and diminish and enfeeble the other. Hence, probably, we
find no nations in such a situation distinguished for numbers, power, wealth,
or civil and moral improvements. If we would find nations respectable for
greatness, refinement and happiness, we must turn our eyes to or near the
temperate zone. Here the mind is vigorous, man feels his strength and dignity,
arts and sciences flourish, and moral obligation is known and revered. Here are
found those nations, which have made the greatest figure and enjoyed the most
happiness. This is the soil most favorable to civil and religious advantages,
and in which the root of despotism cannot long flourish. Wherever it has
pleased God to plant a great, free and happy nation, we shall find universally
temperature of climate and a considerable degree of fruitfulness of soil.

To these advantages must be added a competent extent of territory. A
commonwealth very contracted must be straitened in the number of citizens, and
in the means of defense. Where the people depend chiefly on agriculture, the
most sure and happy means of living and enjoyment, a small tract will not
afford sufficient numbers nor wealth to give them commanding influence in the
scale of nations. The ambitious may make their attacks with success, or the
nation will be dependent on allies and pay tribute. A commercial situation of
less extent may employ and support more people, produce more wealth, and be
more easily defended; but does not commonly nourish those sons of valor who
sicken the countenance of ambition, and palsy the arm of tyranny. A temperate
and fruitful soil has always produced heroes, and where this has been
sufficiently extensive, national greatness and glory.

Our country, my hearers, yields to none in temperature of climate,
fruitfulness of soil, and variety of productions. It is most conveniently
situated for raising and enjoying all the necessaries and comforts of life.
Washed by the Atlantic several hundred miles, an easy exchange of the
superfluous articles of our own country may be effected for the necessaries and
luxuries of foreign growth, and commerce flourish to the profit of our
citizens. Our territory is sufficiently extensive to support numbers, which
will make a great and powerful nation, and furnish sufficient strength for
defense against the most powerful foe, without depending on the brittle reed of
foreign alliances. For temperature of climate, variety and fruitfulness of
soil, and extent of territory, no spot on the globe could be found, for which
we should exchange without loss. The lines are fallen to us in pleasant places,
we have a goodly heritage.

Another important requisite for forming a great, respectable and happy nation
is a good form of government. This will give complexion to national character.
The form of government must establish liberty with order. For what is man
enslaved? A mere machine subservient to the pleasure and use of another. His
mind is stupefied, the noblest energies of his soul are palsied, and he sinks
beneath those designs and actions, which stamp human nature with dignity. The
countenance and deportment of the unhappy African, born in slavery, forcibly
express this melancholy truth. The more enlightened and generous European or
American, chained to the galleys without hopes of redemption, presents the same
horrible picture. Extend the idea to a community; and what is a nation
enslaved? A mere servile herd, void of literary, social and moral improvement,
and more unfeeling than the beasts of the forest. This humiliating truth may be
seen in the degraded character of the present barbarous inhabitants of those
celebrated countries, where Thebes, Corinth, Sparta and Athens once stood;
where learning, liberty and refinement were united; where the free and
confederated states of Greece withstood the arms, and rose superior to the gold
of tyrants; and where was seen the powerful influence of freedom on national
character and happiness. But a free people need not be told the value of
liberty; ye know its worth. It was purchased with millions, and sealed with the
blood of thousands. Nor was it purchased in vain. The acquisition of freedom
has raised us to national independence, greatness and glory, and blessed us
with constitutions of government, which with the blessing of heaven, will
preserve our rights inviolate.

The opportunity, providentially given us, of constituting government on the
most liberal, rational and equal principles, has been wholly unparalleled. "I
confess," observed a patriotic writer in the early stage of our revolution, "I
have always looked upon this with a kind of enthusiastic satisfaction. The case
never happened before since the world began. All governments we have read of in
former ages, were settled by caprice or accident, by the influence of
prevailing parties or particular persons, or prescribed by a conqueror.
Important improvements have indeed been forced upon some constitutions by the
spirit of daring men, supported by successful insurrections. But to see a
government, in large and populous countries, settled from its foundation by
deliberate counsel, and directed immediately to the public good of the present
and future generations, while the people are waiting for the decision, with
full confidence in the wisdom and impartiality of those to whom they have
committed the important trust, is certainly altogether new. We learn indeed
from history that small tribes, and feeble new settlements, did sometimes
employ one man of eminent wisdom to prepare a system of laws for them. Even
this was a wise measure, and attended with happy effects. But how vast the
difference! when we have the experience of all ages, the history of human
societies, and the well known causes of prosperity and misery of other
governments to assist us in the choice." Of this propitious and unprecedented
opportunity the enlightened people of this country appear to have reaped the
highest advantage. The individual states have constitutions on the most liberal
principles, which secure the most precious rights and privileges of every
citizen, without any unreasonable restraint. Elections are frequent, which
gives the people opportunity to displace those who are either unqualified or
unfaithful, and to promote to office the wise and honest. If the people are
faithful to themselves in the exercise of their privileges, their rights and
liberties will remain on an unshaken foundation.

Our rights and liberties derive a greater and higher support and security from
the constitution of the United States. By the union which is formed between the
several states, each state participates the power and privileges of all the
others; and thus an energy is given to the separate parts, as well as to the
combined whole of this great republic. The federal government is as truly the
government of our own formation, as that of this or any other state in the
union. It was framed and adopted by "the people of the United States in order
to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquillity,
provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the
blessings of liberty to themselves and their posterity." These patriotic and
glorious designs have been effected in a degree beyond the calculation of its
most sanguine admirers. This government effectually preserves the rights, while
it secures the order and prosperity of the citizens. Where any right is given
up, the individual receives an hundred fold in the protection of his person,
property, and other privileges.

Nothing then is wanted in the forms of our government to make us a great and
happy nation. "If we," says our worthy President, "compare the constitutions of
other nations with those of the United States of America, we shall have no
reason to blush for our country; on the contrary, we shall feel the strongest
motives to fall upon our knees, in gratitude to heaven, for having been
graciously pleased to give us birth and education in that country, and for
having destined us to live under her laws."

But unavailable will prove a temperate climate, extensive and productive
territory, and good forms of civil government to national greatness and
happiness, unless accompanied with a sense of moral and religious obligation.
By the greatness of a nation we may understand its strength, its order, and the
result of these, its happiness. All this is expressed in one word, religion.
Religion promotes union and confidence, and thus gives strength to a nation. It
attaches the people to the government, and the government to the people. This
union and mutual confidence of public and private characters is the most
formidable position, which a nation can take to face her enemies. A sense of
moral obligation is highly conducive to success in all the operations of a good
government. Men thus influenced will be faithful to their trust and discharge
with punctuality and energy the duties of their office. Religion will make good
rulers and good citizens. Such rulers and such citizens strike terror into
their enemies. There is no access to them, but through the path of honor.
Religion is the strength of a people more sure than this; it secures the
protection of the God of armies. That people is invulnerable, which is so
protected; the fortress is impregnable, which is so defended.

An essential requisite to national greatness and glory is good order. And good
order is but the political name for religion. Wherever religion spreads an
universal influence through society, there is nothing out of place; there is no
crowding for the highest seats. It teaches each one to think others better than
himself, and to wait unambitious, till he is bidden to go up higher. Religion
lays such salutary restraints, as, if respected, there is no encroachment upon
property, nor upon liberty. One neighbor seeks the good of another, and there
is a lively circulation of love and kindness through the community. Religion
must therefore be the happiness of a people; it cannot fail of this
consequence; for when there is security against enemies abroad, and order, love
and harmony at home, crowned with the gracious smile of heaven nothing is
wanted to complete the picture of national felicity. Righteousness exalts a
nation. That religion sacredly regarded is essential to the prosperous
existence of a nation is witnessed from the experience of all ages. The states
of Greece flourished, till a sense of moral obligation was weakened, and the
way opened for the corrupting and successful influence of the gold of Philip.
Rome was powerful and prosperous till the poison of Epicurean sentiments
pervaded the nation; and then she became a nursery of corruption and crimes,
and an easy prey to her enemies. Thus religion will prove the strength, order
and happiness of a people. And no religion has been so favorably calculated for
the rectitude, support and comfort of the individual, or for the order,
improvement and honor of society, as the Christian. This maintained in its
purity will effectually promote the prosperity of a nation.

We, my friends, enjoy the privileges of this religion, and may derive
unspeakable advantages from complying with its duties. The pure streams of
truth may flow to us from this fountain, and purify our hearts and refresh us
in the journey of life. No religious privileges for the promotion of individual
or national rectitude, improvement, glory and happiness, can be found on the
globe superior to what we enjoy.

Thus we are favored by God with a healthful climate, a various and fruitful
soil, and an extensive and well situated territory; the most liberal and best
constitutions of government; and the most valuable means of the best religion;
all which advantages wisely improved will, by the propitious smiles of heaven,
effectually secure and promote our national greatness, glory and happiness.

But all these advantages will prove insufficient to secure our national
greatness and happiness unimproved. The fabric of our glory may be undermined,
and every thing valuable rifled from us. Though this be a gloomy part of our
subject, I cannot but mention some alarming signs of danger to our happy
republic. Do not esteem them words of course; if I mention topics often urged;
I wish there may not be increased necessity of urging them.

Here I may mention growing impiety; I say growing impiety; though it does not
become me to compare the present with former times. It is certain that impiety
has become very bold; it vaunts itself in fashionable oaths and curses, and
sometimes in a profane ridicule of things most sacred. While this is the case,
religion must be at a low ebb. For even granting that comparatively few are
thus openly profane, the rest by their silence seem to lend them their
countenance. But were there a vital spirit of piety prevailing among us, every
species of profaneness would be the reproach of a man.

There is scarcely a stronger proof of impiety, than a profanation of the
sabbath. This is the principal fence about religion. Break down but this, and
the ark will be taken. There is too much reason to apprehend that this species
of impiety is growing upon us. A few years since there were seen few
travelers, except such as were going to the house of God; and little business
but that of necessity and mercy. There is confessedly a great change for the
worse in this respect.

Neglect of the institutions of religion evidently indicates that its
obligations are not duly felt, nor its duties performed. It shows a coldness to
the gospel and its glorious Author, and leads to a general neglect of moral
obligations. It is too manifest that neglect of religious institutions is too
prevalent, and is truly alarming.

Growing laxness of sentiments and morals may be mentioned as a subject of
alarm. Innovation and reform, a prostituted word, are the order of the day; and
people are as desirous of licentiousness in religion, as in government. They
will have a religion all reward and no punishment, as well as a government all
protection, and no energy or expense. Indeed the religion of the present day is
made to appear much like its politics. A party uncandid spirit is mixed with
both of them; and thus is waxen cold brotherly love, that cement which binds in
a sweet and safe union both citizens and Christians. This laxness of
sentiments, this breach of love, and spirit of party and intrigue carry a
threatening aspect to the greatness and glory of our country.

I have mentioned causes enough for the decline and fall of our country, if
they be not checked; but I have yet to mention what fills many thoughtful and
judicious people with the deepest apprehension. These vices of profaneness,
this breach of the sabbath, this neglect of religious institutions, this defect
of love and charity, are apt enough to thrive in any society, and at any time.
But to what height will they grow, when fostered by the hand of revolutionary
and atheistical men? This I firmly believe is the danger, is the fate of our
country at this moment. I would spare party and politics, till I see the ark of
God, and my country in danger; then to be silent would be infidelity to my
trust, especially on this occasion. The moment is come, when in our country,
and in every Christian one, politics and religion are blended. The dagger is
aimed at our government through our religion. I make no apology then, while
with an honest heart I speak my apprehensions, and endeavor to raise yours. It
is as plain as the noonday sun from a thousand proofs, above all from the
corruption and savage sacrifice of the freest and happiest governments of
Europe, that the French Republic, shall I call it! have fixed as their object,
the thraldom of the world, and as their means, universal corruption and force.
The first of these means, corruption, has hitherto been at work amongst us; and
force, unless where it has fallen on our defenseless commerce, has been only
brandishing its sword at a distance. Corruption in her very nature comes
masked; she stalks not in public view; she fishes out in darkness her first
objects and her proper instruments; and you see her publicly only by the
effects she has produced. But that this fiend has been amongst us, we have had
demonstrative proof. One public officer, it was ascertained to public
satisfaction, was corrupted with French livres. And Fauchet, the grand almoner
of the Directory, lamented in his intercepted dispatches the deficiency of
roleaus, which prevented his extending his charity to other hopeful friends of
his government.

But it is not the single virtue of political integrity, which has been
assailed. This were too narrow a field for corruption to traverse, and, with
our present administration, too difficult to effect the design. A bolder and
more fatal blow has been aimed at the religious principles of the nation.
Corrupt the mass of people, and the corruption of the government follows of
course. There is not a surer policy to ruin a nation, than this. The French
have abolished the Bible with every mark of insult that could be invented. But
there are a few choice political examples in it, which they reserve for
imitation. Such are the counsel of Balaam and the policy of Balak. The
unwilling prophet could utter nothing but blessing upon the Israelites before
corruption had spread her poison, and then they became weak and vulnerable like
other nations. This is the counsel and policy of the French. The developement
of Robison and Barruel is book proof of this. They have unfolded a "scheme the
most extensive, flagitious, and diabolical, that human art and malice have ever
invented. Its object is the total destruction of religion and civil order. If
accomplished, the earth can be nothing better than a sink of impurities, a
theater of violence and murder, and a hell of miseries." It was originated by
Voltaire, matured by Weishaupt; its hot bed now is Paris; its nursing fathers
are the French government; its missionaries are their generals and armies. Its
first fruits have been seen in France; Christianity expelled; its priesthood
seized and murdered; its temples plundered; and its government a military
despotism.

"The principles of the French are the pioneers of their arms; wherever those
have corrupted, these have conquered and enslaved. This may be seen in all the
countries they have overrun." But living at a distance have we not escaped the
poison of these teachers of atheism? No; they flock in the streets of principal
towns, and, as they find opportunity, infuse the venom. Every convert becomes a
teacher. From the town the sentiments creep into the country; from being
whispered in a corner, they begin to be proclaimed upon the house top.

The immoralizing plan of the French is as systematic as their politics; it is
a department of their politics. These French atheists in the country are not a
few chance renegadoes, whom adventure or curiosity has brought to our shores.
That many of them are commissioned from the five apostles of atheism at Paris,
who can doubt, if you consider their abilities and indefatigable industry and
zeal? They have not sent men alone, but books to corrupt us. Books insinuate
themselves, where men could find no access. By his book a bad man multiplies
himself into a million of evil counselors; he lights down upon a society like
a swarm of locusts, and neither the market nor the farm, the town nor the
country, can escape him. In this manner has the faith of the United States been
oppugned by that infamous production entitled "the age of reason." From what
country did this issue? From France. Who wrote it? A jacobin American. Under
whose auspices? Those of the Executive Directory. Thousands of copies were
instantly exported to this country, and hawked about from Georgia to Maine at
half the sterling cost of the impression. Was its author an Eastern Nabob* that
he had wealth to defray the expense of this abominable assault upon the
religion of the country which had the misfortune to give him birth? No; he was
a poor retainer to the men in power at Paris. Judge then whence the "roleaus"
came to defray the expense of a publication, which was to "unhinge the faith of
thousands" in England and the United States.

I have mentioned the influence and intrigue of the French as employed chiefly
against our religion; to mention them as employed against our government more
directly, would make a volume. But which way soever employed, if successful,
they are alike fatal to our government and our religion. It is time to tremble
when we hear a word in defense of their principles, or in gratulation of their
success. We once gloried in their prosperity, because we foolishly thought
theirs the cause of liberty; we should now glory in their defeat; for theirs is
now the cause of universal subjugation and ruin. Can such a cause have
advocates among the lovers of our country and religion? I fear it has even
among these. It is not the political demagogue alone, who, in pleading the
cause of France, has his views of interest; there are doubtless some who are
friends to piety and their country, who imagine the cause of France the cause
of humanity. But let them read the history of Holland, Geneva, Venice, and
Switzerland of recent date; it is written in letters of blood; the tears of the
reader fall on every page. Let us all read. And when we come to Switzerland;
when we have followed the historian through the mazes of French influence; when
we have seen those States, once combined like our own in one powerful union;
those states, long esteemed the happiest community in the habitable world;
those states, free, enlightened, contented, loving their government to
enthusiasm, preserved from change for centuries; those states, always
inoffensive to other nations, and therefore seldom at war; when, I say, we have
seen those states, till now firm as the Alps on which they lived, at length
tottering with French influence, and then plunged headlong into remediless ruin
by French perfidy and power; let us pause a moment and listen to the admonition
issuing from the tomb of Swiss liberty and happiness. Do you not hear the
expostulation in language like this; -- "Art thou enlightened, America? So were
these cantons. Are your states united? So were these. Is your government
beloved? So was ours. Have you heroes and statesmen revered through the world?
So had we. Are your altars of religion standing? So were ours. Do you court
peace? So did we with sincerity, with sacrifice. Happy America, learn wisdom
from wretched Switzerland. We trusted France; we listened to her protestations
of friendship; we suffered her influence; we learned to endure her insults
through hope they would not be repeated. Steady to her purpose, she corrupted
our knowledge, dissolved our union, weakened our attachment to our government,
calumniated our heroes and statesmen and destroyed their influence, cast
contempt upon our religion; and when all was ready, in violation of a sacred
treaty, let loose her savage army to finish the work of nine years intrigue."
To this admonition may our country listen in season. The same arts one by one
are practicing upon these too unsuspicious states. The plan progresses.
Virginia and Kentucky have sounded the horn of sedition. And it is
unquestionable that emissaries are with astonishing address spread through the
states. If our principles are corrupted and delusion is effected, some other
nation may listen to the admonition, which shall shortly issue from the tomb of
American ruins. But may Almighty God turn the counsel of Ahithophel into
foolishness.

These are some of the signs of danger to the greatness and glory of our
nation. Then permit me to call upon you to exert yourselves against these
illboding signs of the times. You see the several sources of our danger; guard
against them all. But be most watchful, where danger is most fatal, on the side
of religion. Here we are vital, if the dagger reach us. And let us not think
the ark is safe, because our meeting houses are standing, if they are thinly
resorted to. Let us not think that the sabbath, that sacred fence round our
religion, is reverenced, merely because, unlike the French, we have not yet
displaced it from our calendar. We must in truth reverence it, not doing our
own pleasure on that day; but call it a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honorable. Let us not think that the name of atheism will startle American ears
with horror, while profaneness, that practical atheism prevails among us. Let
us not expect that the spirit of religion will dwell among us, if we cast off
the forms of it; or that we shall long feel the influence of the moral precepts
of the gospel, if we neglect its positive institutions. In short, let us
profess and practice religion from personal, national and evangelical
considerations. It is the happiness of the individual; it is the safeguard and
glory of the community. Nothing but this can save us from the storms of
impending dangers. Religion will shut the door against an evil influence, which
is usurping such power in the country. It will teach us to say -- O my soul,
come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly mine honor be not thou
united.

The President of the United States, whose duty it is to watch for our safety,
has recently told us, "that we are in circumstances of great urgency; -- that
this is a season of imminent danger; -- that the most precious interests of the
people of the United States are still held in jeopardy by the hostile designs
and insidious arts of a foreign nation, as well as by the dissemination among
them of those principles subversive of the foundations of all religious, moral
and social obligations, that have produced incalculable mischief and misery in
other countries." When we thus hear the alarm from authority, it becomes us to
be watchful, and with united zeal endeavor to avert the impending evils. Let us
exert ourselves in season. The foe is more easily prevented, than expelled.
There is still hope for us, if we are faithful to ourselves. Our altars, though
threatened and assaulted, are yet in their place. Our armies are yet vigorous
with youth and numbers; our generals are experienced; our navy, though small,
is increasing, valiant and successful. The pillars of our government, though
assailed with every engine of intrigue and malice, are still firm in their
sockets. For these blessings let us be thankful and praise God; and in
obedience to his laws trust in him that he will still be our shield and
salvation.

Let the celebration of this anniversary remind us of the worth of our
independence and national privileges, and impress our minds with the importance
of using all means and of grudging no expense to preserve them. Though we love
peace, let us be prepared for war, and at the call of our country gird on the
harness, and manfully defend our altars and our government. May God disperse
the clouds, which now obscure our political horizon, and cause our national
greatness, glory and happiness to become as clear and resplendent as the
noonday.


