AN ORATION DELIVERED AT MOUNT-PLEASANT, STATE OF NEW YORK, ON THE Fourth of
July, 1798; BEING THE TWENTY-SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF American Independence.

BY -- THOMAS YARROW, MEMBER OF, AND LATE SECRETARY TO DIVISION TEN OF THE
LONDON CORRESPONDING SOCIETY.

Ye shades of ancient heroes! ye who toiled
Through long successive ages to build up
A laboring plan of state, behold at once
The wonder done!
THOMPSON. MOUNT-PLEASANT: ( County of West-Chester -- State of New York.)
PRINTED BY WILLIAM DURELL -- 1798.

ARGUMENT.
A view of the condition of the human species before the American Revolution,
with animadversions on Civil and Ecclesiastical tyrants.

An account of the principles of the first settlers of north America. Causes
assigned for their migration from Europe.

A sketch of the Revolution. The beneficial consequences arising from it. Its
important effects toward an universal emancipation of mankind.

Observations on Patriotism. Conclusion.

AN ORATION.
CITIZENS --
IN countries debased by slavery, it has been a custom prevalent for many ages,
to celebrate the annual return of the birthday of some mischievous despot,
some sceptered robber, or some cannonized fanatic, who had been distinguished
from the rest of mankind by his unparralled injustice, or cruel superstition.
But happily, CITIZENS, such is not the nature of our meeting: We assemble here
from motives diametrically opposite. -- We come to commemorate the
establishment of that Independence, which has in its magnitude and importance
eclipsed the greatest actions recorded in history, and which had for its object
the most glorious of all pursuits, that of breaking the fetters of lawless
power, and thereby rendering a people free and happy.

Before I proceed to dwell particularly on the transactions which were
immediately connected with this great national event; permit me to animadvert
on the condition of our species a few centuries back, as delineated upon the
historic page.

IN taking a tetrospective view of the condition of Man in past ages; what do
we contemplate but the most frightful tyrannies exercised over the human mind?
What do we behold but the understanding* the genius, the intellect of man
depressed and shackled; every faculty of the soul enchained; her noblest powers
either annihilated or prostituted to the most despicable purposes of rapacity,
power and ambition? A dark shade of ignorance overwhelming the empire of
reason, and chasing away every ray of wisdom, of science, of public and private
worth. When we read of the insults and injuries tyrants have heaped upon man,
because fortune has placed upon their heads baubles named crowns. -- when we
hear how the energies of intellect have been absorbed in the meanest servility
to these execrable monsters; how the astonishing active powers of which the
human mind is possessed have been rendered torpid, and as senseless as an
automaton, or perverted so as to admire, and even penegyrize the nefarious
systems of feudal laws, divine heriditary and indefeasable right -- systems
which have rendered him wretched. When we consider the enormities, the cool and
deliberate enormities committed under these imposing authorities; but, more
painful to mention, when we think how they have whetted the poignards of war,
and taught him the science of human butchery!! What breast but feels oppressed
with woe at the bare recital?

YET in these days of evil import to the happiness of mankind; nations were
then in being, estimabl^ for their virtues, and for their love of liberty. --
The Grecian and Roman republic's existed at a time, when the most insupportable
tyranny was exercised over the inhabitants in the east. England under the
generous code of the glorious Alfred, felt the good effects of freedom, when
all Europe and Asia groaned under the burden of despotism, and the people of
Holland and Switzerland enjoyed the blessings which liberty diffuses, when the
rest of mankind were in the most deplorable state of slavery. The rights of man
thus recognized, and cherished in these countries; they became the favorite
residences of trade, the powerful seats of dominion, or the happy mansions of
public felicity; such is the unalterable connection between the freedom and
well being of states.

ON the other hand, under most of the old Governments of Europe a double
despotism usurped over the people, they were alternately the victim of civil
and religious despots and frequently of both together; sometimes terrified by
the anathemas of a persecuting fanaticism into the most abject submission; at
other times scourged nearly beyond the patience of the most dispirited slavery,
by the scorpion thong of imperious and unrelenting civil oppression; and often
church and state would combine and form villainous leagues to rob man of his
dearest rights. In despite of this combination of moral and political
depravity. Notwithstanding the obsticles to improvement, men then appeared
whose noble minds were above the prejudices which enslaved the world; whose
virtuous souls could never be subjugated, neither the threats of sanguinary
tyrants, nor the terrors of bloody inquisitors, could prevent them from tearing
the veil from before imposture, and advocating the cause of human rights, and
injured humanity!

THE writings of the philanthrophists, patriots, and philosophers, who lived
under the odious Stuarts inspired the most virtuous of their countrymen with
exalted ideas of human rights; although the frantic Laud and his coadjutors made
every effort to impede the progress of intellectual improvements, but all their
exertions had an effect contrary to their expectations, and only added to the
flame which at last consumed them. The commotions in England at that period
made many fly from persecution to this western hemisphere, then a wilderness
inhabited by untutored aborigines and the destructive animals of the forest,
exposed to the greatest hardships and assailed by a multitude of evils and
misfortunes almost too much for mortals to endure: yet to minds so enlightened,
to people whose choice was to exercise the right of thinking for themselves
even in penury, rather than live luxuriously in their native country under a
Government that rendered it a crime of the first magnitude to assert that
right; their calamities they conceived as light and trivial.

SUCH, CITIZENS, were principally the forefathers of Americans; and surely from
such fires, it was natural to expect in the common course of things for a RACE
OF HEROES to proceed, who would illume the earth with the rays of knowledge;
and develope the principles of POLITICAL JUSTICE. The succeeding age proved
these expectations to be wellfounded, and exhibited to the world that their
offspring inherited all the virtues of their progenitors, combined with the
improved state of the human understanding in the Eighteenth Century.

ON the contrary, Britain was visibly degenerating from her original purity,
and the spirit of freedom which once animated that Isle, was then no more!

HER Sovereign, regardless of the interest of his subjects, hearkened with
avidity to the poisonous suggestions of a corrupt and desperate ministry for
enslaving Americans, by introducing among them, as system of taxation without
their consent by representation.

THE PARLIAMENT, chiefly composed of placemen, pensioners and the sycophants of
St. James' meanly acquiesced in the measure, and applauded the utility of the
design, while the PEOPLE vainly immagined, that they would be partly alleviated
from the devouring and vulturous appetite of their rulers, by suffering them to
feed upon the colonies; but the voice of experience might have taught them,
that nothing can satisfy ministerial rapacity, that the greater the extent for
it to ravage, the more its destructive powers will be displayed. The Demon at
length appeared, which the Governors of England had been long conjuring up to
place in the New World, and the reception which it met with, will form a
memorable epoch in the annals of virtuous resistance, as long as patriotism is
beloved, honored and esteemed.

THE votaries of liberty determined not to submit supinely to an invasion on
their rights. The cry of resistance resounded from all parts, and every house,
and even cottage reverberated with the charming accents. Never was the world
presented with a spectacle more truly great, and more worthy of imitation; it
is true, nations have at different periods cut the cords with which they were
previously bound; but we have not a single example in history when a people
opposed the first approach of tyranny, and would not admit of its advances
however specious and deceitful the pretext.

MINISTERS, instead of abandoning their projects, which prudence would have
dictated, pursued their delirium still to a greater height, by conveying a
horde of armed mercinary assassins across the Atlantic to enforce their
arbitrary proceedings, in open violation of every principle of humanity,
justice, and good government. Ignorant of the people whom they wished to
enslave, thinking their opposition only a momentary capriciousness, which would
cease on the first visible appearance of danger: insolently supposing that a
standing army, that pest of human society; that baneful engine made use of by
oppressors to support their unwarrantable designs, would be adequate to
annihilate the spirit of freedom, that imperishable spark, which for a time may
be smothered; but which eternity cannot totally extinguish!

IT was now that military despotism appeared clothed in all the horrors of its
insignia, bathed in the blood issuing from the wounds which its daggers encised
in the bosoms of American freemen; repeated acts of carnage impelled them in
return, to use those destructive weapons which hasten the desolution of life,
or, suffer the miserable object on whom they have been employed to drag out a
pitiful existence.

IT is needless to pursue the detail of cruelty, folly, and wickedness on one
part; of heroism, perseverence and fortitude on the other, until the
REPRESENTATIVES of the Thirteen American Provinces, favoring the wishes of
their constituents, pronounced the decree of eternal separation, and severed
the gordian knot which had connected them with England, by declaring THE UNITED
COLONIES FREE, SOVEREIGN, AND INDEPENDENT STATES!!

LET us pause for a moment, and indulge ourselves in the pleasures of mental
perception. -- Let us imagine that we are now viewing those venerable sages,
those brave asserters of equal rights, announcing the first period of our
national existence; proclaiming the establishment of LIBERTY and EQUALITY to
THREE MILLIONS OF PEOPLE worthy of the beneficient system, and resolved to
support it, or DIE in the attempt!

THE tongue of genuine Republicanism knows not how to utter the language of
adulation; destitute of the corrupt materials, and a stranger to the manner in
which they are employed, it promises as the most acceptable manner of
expressing its gratitude to those ILLUSTRIOUS ARTIFICERS, who raised the sacred
EDIFICE, to preserve IT as an inheritance, invaluable, inestimable,
unalienable. -- And you, ye true heroes, who cemented it with your blood; who
rallied round the ALTAR of FREEDOM, and formed the Patriot Phalanx that
overthrew the armies of tyrants; your generous efforts in our behalf are
engraven on our hearts with the noblest title mortals can attain, that of being
the PATRESPATRIA, the saviors of our country.

BRITAIN, that collossul power whose pride by recent conquests (before her
impolitic attempts on the liberties of America) had been wound up to the
highest pitch of agrandizement, after expending in the course of seven years
hostility near an hundred millions of treasure, and immolating at the shrine of
vengeance above an hundred thousand of human lives, was at last compelled to
abandon her object, and relinquish a claim which she was unable to maintain
either by the voice of reason, or by an appeal to the sword. With sullen
impotence she yielded to the heroism of our republican soldiers, who overthrew
all the machinations of her atrocious policy, and forced her to close a war, in
which, -- "She had often been the object, and rarely the actor of a triumph."
Twenty two times has this spacious orb revolved round the great axle of heaven,
and received the benign effects of its prolific radiance, since the event took
place which we now commemorate; and from that data the abettors of tyranny have
had to sing the funeral dirge over their departed system, while other nations
fired with the same generous enthusiasm: -- filled with the same happy spirit,
have broken the sorcerous talisman, and raised themselves from the degrading
epithets of vassals, and slaves, to the more dignified names of MEN and
CITIZENS. The United States from their birth appear to have been designed the
political redeemers of mankind! as instruments dropped by the hand of Wisdom to
be the safeguard of the whole human race, and destined to defend the temple of
freedom a palladium coeval with time itself; but which the royal plunderers,
and ecclesiastical impostors of the earth, with too much success had concealed,
and forcibly compressed the active elasticity of its disposition.

THE vast accession to moral, scientific as well as political improvements,
resulting from the American Revolution, are in their nature indefinite; among
those that are most beneficial, may be reckoned the negation to that unnatural
system which has prevailed in all countries, and interwoven in all the
constitutions of government* ancient and modern which had ever been formed
prior to the American; of uniting the strongest religious sect with the
political institution, and investing it with exclusive privileges, always
sufficiently formidable to organize tests, and such like restrictive laws; and
sometimes powerful enough to prescribe certain modes of faith, creeds, and
other articles of belief for the rest of their fellow subjects; which on not
being complied with by conscientious men, begat persecutions, and often ended
in slaughters, or general massacres. -- Princes and those who ought to have
been the guardians of the public weal, excited by the sacerdotal order, became
the executioners of part of their subjects, and believed it to be a sacred duty
to tyrannize over the thought, to overwhelm and to crush all those whose
opinions did not harmonize with those of the priests. Immaginary crimes were
more abhorred than those committed by assassins, oppressors, robbers,
corruptors or seducers. The greatest of all wickedness was to despise that
which the established church held to be sacred, or to dispute the infallibility
of its canons. They punished in the most atrocious manner, all men who prefered
following the sober dictates of reason, to the blind delirium of a fanatical
clergy. But decreed nothing against the deceivers of innocence, cheats or
calumniators. If the revolution had been productive of no other good than the
rejection of these precedents so absurd, mischievous, and yet so universal, it
would have still been regarded as an object the most advantageous that ever was
attained for mankind and celebrated with every species of ceremonial, which
could possibly testify a sense of the happiness derived from the transcendent
action.

ADVERTING further to its influence on the renovating state of politics, we are
immediately led to pronounce the momentous affairs which have subsequently
taken place on the eastern continent the production of the American Revolution;
then was rehearsed, the important drama in which all Europe have acted and in
which Galia has appeared as the HERO of the piece. It was by fighting the
battles of liberty, that taught the subjects of an arbitrary monarch those
instructive lessons, that the whole of legitimate authority rests on the
consent of the people, that no power on earth can legally deprive them of their
rights, and that the PUBLIC WILL is alone the LAW; by an application of these
principles to their own case, the spell of perscriptive despotism was
instantaneously dissolved; the gilded trappings, and splendid pageantry of
their monarchy was immediately crushed into atoms.

WHATEVER may be the event of the present commotions in Europe, it is certain
the systems of Gothic Government have received an irrecoverable wound. The
fusty edicts of barbarous ages which have retarded progressive improvements are
rent, and if the present prospects be not delusive, we may anticipate the
period when the lawgiver will never attempt to lead the people but by the
silken thread of reason -- when a beauteous temple of liberty shall be raised,
whose ample base shall lodge, and whose roof shall cover the united family of
mankind! universal peace will then reign -- every part of the globe will echo
back the heavenly proclamation of general happiness; the heart of man will beat
in unison with the divine sound; nations will then live in harmony with each
other, and the organization of equal laws will be powerful incentives to
private virtue. Visions of bliss! may ye be speedily realized.

MAY we soon be enabled to hail that happy era of human felicity, which is the
ardent desire of philanthrophy, and which the enraptured muses have titled the
return of the golden age. If these are no more than the wishes and dreams of
benevolence -- the philosophers stone of humanity; if even it be true that man
can never attain his appointed summit of knowledge and happiness. It is
nevertheless requisite for him to approach as near perfectability as the
constitution of his nature will permit. Let not therefore the gloomy spirit of
misanthrophy; the cold and inanimate doctrine of skepticism chill the bosom of
philanthrophic expectation. Let not those who subsist on the miseries of
mankind; on the corruption and abuses of the governments under which they live,
flatter themselves that what has taken place since the birth day of American
Independence is but the fever of the moment -- No! -- the seeds of freedom are
plentifully sown. The soil however barren; the climate however severe, such is
the natural exuberance of the herb, that it will eventually soar above the
weeds which combine to obstruct its growth. Tyrants may labor, but they will
labor in vain! "as well may they imagine, that by placing their feet upon the
earth, they can stop its diurnal motion, as by efforts the most virulent, or
pertinacious to extinguish the light of reason and philosophy which happily for
mankind is, every where spreading around us Gerald's defense before the high
court of Justicary in Scotland.
" In order for them to effect a counter-revolution in the human mind, they must
prevent all means of social intercourse; they must put an end to all manner of
trade; they must destroy every mark of the mariners compass; every book must be
consigned to the flames: -- The conduit of intelligence and channel of
information, must be entirely closed up, by obliterating every vestige of the
press, in fine, they must drive truth, reason, and science from the residence
of mortals; then, and not before then, can they triumph over us.

AMERICANS! unite in rendering aristocracy odious -- drag from their
entrenchment those disturbers of society who would propagate anarchy amongst
us; to them discussion is dangerous; sage reason furnishes us with arms which
their sophistry would do well to shun. Pity while you attempt to convince those
men whose weakness has made them subject to the snares of faction, that to be
good citizens is to respect the honor and interest of the PUBLIC; prove to them
that policy not founded upon principles of rectitude, can never be truly
beneficial; inspire them with just sentiments, by showing them the reward of
patriotism whose object is the conservation, the peace, and the welfare of the
whole community; its recompenses are affection and glory, or in their failure
contentment of mind and merited self-esteem, of which nothing is able to
deprive virtuous souls. -- Show them on the other hand, how those various state
criminals are tormented who devour the subsistence of the poor; who involve
their countries in distress. Let them descend into the recesses of their hearts
and they will find the tyrant encircled with flatterers, knows not the sweets
of friendship, nor the pleasures of being beloved, he is unconscious of the
hatred which his oppressions excite and of the secret contempt which his
inutility, his vices and his debaucheries create. See! the haughty courtier
blush for the insults he endures, and those meannesses by which he obtains
favor. View! the barbarous conqueror triumph in sorrow over smoking ruins,
over uncultivated solitudes, and over unhappy wretches whose bitter
imprecations stun his ears. -- Behold! the ambitious tortured with an unhappy
ardor which nothing can extinguish, and lastly, observe! the sacreligious
impostor shrink from investigation, and even tremble at the name of formidable
truth. Let it not be said that in thus doing we depart from our necessary
duties; rather acknowledge it to be the prominent characteristic of the good
citizen to employ a portion of his time and talents in enlightening his fellow
men, drawing them from the abyss of prejudice and watching over governmental
affairs. It is the business of monarchies to confine the faculties of the
individual, by laying restrictions on the speech and on the press; and by
granting an order of beings favorable to the views of corruption the sole power
of conducting the understanding and presiding over the public business. In
Republics the obligations of patriotism, are as universal as those of justice,
charity, gratitude, or any other virtuous propensity of the human heart, and
the man who neglects the concerns of his country, is as criminal as the
magistrate who usurps authority not given him by the laws, because the one
sanctions by his silence, the vile conduct of the other. Error has indeed long
labored to prove that the peasant, and artificer has no right to interfere with
civil affairs; but for the honor of human nature toward the close of the
Eighteenth Century, we find this dogma only supported by the contemptable
remains of monarchial folly.

THE progress which man will make in emeliorating his condition, and improving
his intellectual state, will be in exact proportion to the cognizance he takes
of liberal enquiry; this truth was not perceived, till the American Revolution
aroused to action, his dormant faculties, and produced those energetic
exertions which have been made for his emancipation. Had the impulse been
received sooner, it is impossible to say to what degree of perfection he might
not by this time have attained.

AT present he feels the dignity of his nature; he comprehends the order and
intent of his being and the time may arrive as has been already observed, when
he will perfectly understand and practice his obligations, his duties and his
rights. -- O ye adorable Daughters VIRTUE, REASON, and TRUTH, continue to
assist him in his just pursuits. Virtue! inspire him with all that is noble,
generous, and good. Reason! guide his wavering steps through the path of life.
Truth! let him receive the rays of thy enlightening torch, till all the nations
of the earth hail ye Americans as their brothers, and your country as the elder
production of Freedom!

FINIS.

