AN ORATION, DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1798, AT ST. PAUL's CHURCH,
BEFORE THE YOUNG MEN OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK, ASSEMBLED TO COMMEMORATE THEIR
NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE.

By JOHN WELLS, Esquire.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY M'LEAN and LANG.

1798.

AT a meeting of the Committee appointed to act generally for those YOUNG MEN
of the City of New York, who have pledged themselves, and are ready to turn out
at a moment's warning, in support of Government, held at Hunter's Hotel, on
Thursday, July 5, 1798.

ON MOTION,

Resolved Unanimously, That Anthony Bleecker, John M. D. Laurance, and John E.
Seaman, present the Thanks of this Committee to JOHN WELLS, Esquire. for the
seasonable and patriotic Oration delivered by him before the Youth of this City
on the 4th Instant; being the Anniversary of our National Independence, and to
request of him a copy thereof for publication.

By order of the Committee, Signed, WILLIAM H. ROBINSON, Chairman.

AN ORATION, etc.
IN common with the People of America, we are once more met in commemoration of
THAT DAY, the recollection of which must awaken all the feelings of American
pride, and call forth those noble energies of the soul, which governed our
FATHERS in the Declaration of that Independence, which it will be the ambition
and boast of her Sons to maintain.

A people, at stated periods, publicly recognizing the origin of their NATIONAL
EXISTENCE, and the establishment of their SOVEREIGNTY, affords a spectacle no
less interesting than useful. Contemplating the free spirit of our country --
acquainted with her rights -- resisting the first encroachments of unauthorized
power -- struggling against injustice, though, unequal to the combat -- and
determined, at every hazard, to oppose the lawless invasion of her liberties --
the warmest interest is excited in her fate -- the strongest joy in every
success, and the severest sorrow in every defeat.

HAPPILY for us, the firm zeal of our councils, and the undaunted prowess of
our arms, enable us to review the first periods of our national history with
THAT PRIDE, which results from the consciousness of having sprung from
ANCESTORS, who, disdaining the restraints of colonial dependence, NOBLY DARED
BE FREE.

FREQUENT recurrence to first principles, will always be attended with
advantage -- observing them in all their original purity and force, their value
and importance will be impressed on the mind, and we will be better enabled and
disposed to correct their abuse or corruption, to renovate their vigor, and
enforce their observance.

IN this view, the ANNIVERSARY we are NOW CELEBRATING has its peculiar use: it
reminds us of the virtuous enterprise of our ancestors -- their high opinion of
the blessings of CIVIL LIBERTY -- the full enjoyment of their unimpaired rights
-- their solemn determination to perish with their country, sooner than become
the ignoble vassals of domineering power, and teaches us, in the most emphatic
language, the duties which we owe to our country and posterity: and accursed be
that spirit, which is so far sunk in poverty, that does not catch the generous
enthusiasm from their illustrious examples, and SWEAR* that such shall FOR EVER
be THE CHARACTER of AMERICANS!

IN the history of man, so few are the epochs distinguished by their favorable
influence on the liberty and happiness of our race, that they may be considered
rather as extraordinary departures from the established course of things, than
those which placed man in his proper condition in a state of Society.

THE fluctuations and revolutions in Governments, have generally been the
struggles of contending factions for ascendancy, contests for the scepter of
power, in which the PEOPLE have occasionally been used as machines without
sharing in the glory or advantage of success, or meeting with sympathy or
compassion in defeat. The result to them has been a change of Rulers without
any addition to their happiness. Individual ambition, and not public good,
being the purposes to be answered, the flush of victory has rather served to
exasperate resentments, than moderate the passions -- and the PEOPLE, deceived
with the hope of better days, have not unfrequently found their burdens
increased, and their miseries enlarged -- little consolation has it been to
them, that after the tumultuous storms of internal convulsions, the returning
sun of peace and order, has only exhibited a new race succeeding to the throne
of departed masters. Little cause have they had to mark those epochs as the
returning seasons of national festivity. They have not produced to them, in
common with us, those sources of congratulation which enliven recollection --
which shed the cheerful beams of happiness on all around -- which mark the
exultation in the greeting countenance -- and proclaim the FREEDOM OF THE
PEOPLE, the justice of their laws -- the excellence of their government --
their confidence in its administration -- their attachment to their country,
and the orderly submission of all classes to its rightful authorities.

THE few nations in the transatlantic world, who have enjoyed any portion of
civil liberty, have not unfrequently smarted under its loss; and with great
difficulties, regained that of which their indolence or folly had deprived
them. Their charters of re-acquired powers and privileges, have been crimsoned
with the best of blood, and their confirmation obtained by the force of arms.
The national character has been re-established only by a display of valor,
equal to the weakness by which it had been lost; and the turbulent field of
battle, instead of the peaceful council, has been the theater on which the
rights of the people have been traced by the point of the sword, and confirmed
by the armor of war. They have been wrested by violence from the hand of that
usurpation, which they themselves had suffered to be raised over them; and from
the continued exercise of which, naught but the returning spirit of the NATION
could have saved them. Their history, therefore, through its chequered
varieties, constantly presents that picture of instability, which pourtrays the
character of a people not uniformly watchful of their liberties, and regardful
of their rights -- although they may find occasions for the exercise of an
honorable pride in the intrepid conduct of their ancestors; yet, it will not
be unattended with chagrin and mortification, that spirits so capable of
greatness, should at any time, be found to have so far forgotten themselves,
as, slumbering on their posts, to betray the citadel confided to their charge.

HOWEVER great therefore the pleasure may be to them of commemorating THOSE
DAYS which have marked the dignity of national character, yet is the festivity
clouded with the sad remembrance of servile meanness, or the most condemnable
indifference -- if glory dazzles on the one hand, its splendour is diminished on
the other. The occasional establishments of their liberties, are rather to be
considered as the results of favorable accidents, than the fruits of any
uniform system of rights.

BUT, our progenitors who first settled this country, brought with them those
genuine principles of liberty, which have governed it since its first
establishment. They understood thoroughly the rights which belonged to the
PEOPLE, and those which pertained to their Rulers. They had not learned those
deadly doctrines of MODERN LIBERTY and EQUALITY, which by destroying all
distinction, robs the magistrate of his power, and the people of their reason.
Educated in the wholesome school of English jurisprudence, they acquired those
rational maxims of civil liberty, which will forever serve as the PROPS and
ORNAMENTS of the society in which they are cultivated. They prized too highly
the blessings of self-government, to submit to the smallest exercise of
undelegated power. Their proud spirits would not brook the approach of
tyrannical authority, though clothed in the commanding garb of parental right.
They refused to clank their chains to the nod of any master, or bend their
necks to any yoke, however light or easy the burden. Adhering to these
principles, and determined to support them at the hazard of their lives, their
fortunes, and their sacred honor, that revolution, whose commencement we are
now celebrating, was originated and completed.

OUR fathers then presented to the world an example of greatness, wisdom, and
zeal, which are unequalled in the annals of man, and which must do honor to
America, as long as intrepidity and virtue shall have a votary on earth.

HAVING at the close of our revolutionary war, established a character as a
brave, free and independent people, no nation ever rose into notice, under more
auspicious circumstances. And since the establishment of our federal
government, no nation has improved to more favorable advantage; the opinion
which had been formed of us, and more rapidly increased their happiness,
prosperity, and respectability.

THE people of this country, have abundant cause therefore to felicitate each
other on the early and uniform opinion they have displayed of liberty in its
rational sense -- of the industrious care with which our ancestors first
established it -- of the zeal and bravery with which our fathers defended it --
and the pious solicitude with which they have transmitted to our hands a
reputation unstained by dishonor -- unsullied with baseness. -- A crisis has
arrived in our affairs, in which the question is to be solemnly determined,
whether we WILL continue to maintain this honorable, and independent character,
or fix upon it an indelible disgrace, by submitting to become the tributaries
of a foreign power. FRANCE has advanced propositions, and made demands upon
this country, which, if once acceded to, will annihilate the dignity, honor,
and independence of the nation.

THE point now to be decided, involves in it no ^^^s than our NATIONAL
EXISTENCE; -- for its destruction has been threatened, unless we comply with
terms compatible only with the most degraded state of vassalage. There can be
no American, true to the interests and honor of his country, who can, for a
moment, contemplate, with patience, the disgraceful alternative -- who does not
feel every nerve braced for OPPOSITION, and, EVERY DROP OF BLOOD FLOWING WITH
REDOUBLED VIGOR!

IF any wretch can be found so base as to desert his country, in the hour of
danger -- to shrink from the service she may require of him -- or still to be
the advocate or apologist of an implacable and overbearing foe, a mark should
be put upon his forehead to single him out as a fit object for the execrations
of his countrymen, the detestation of mankind, and the everlasting curse of his
God.

BY the conduct which the PEOPLE of this country shall NOW adopt, will be
determined, perhaps, forever, whether a nation can long exist under a form of
government, purely republican: if it should be found that, in the short lapse
of twenty-two years, domestic faction, cooperating with foreign intrigue and
influence, have so far succeeded in the profligacy of their schemes, as to
overawe the councils of our country, to rob them of their energy, and deprive
them of their power, as it would forever disgrace our national character, so it
would have a tendency to cast such an odium on the very system itself, as would
in all probability, forever deter any further experiments on the same plan.

THE honor of our government, therefore, is now at stake; its character about
to receive a stamp that it will forever carry, of firmness and dignity, or
imbecility and meanness; and the country is called upon for its united support
that the independence, which has been achieved, may be preserved, and continue
to prove our strong hold in times of national trouble and difficulty. It will
otherwise serve no other purpose, than to have elevated us to a rank among the
nations of the earth, to become more conspicuously the object of public
contempt -- to be pointed at with the finger of scorn, as a people boasting of
their superior virtue, and enlightened freedom, without the courage and
resolution to defend them against the attacks of the most awful tyranny which
has ever threatened the earth.

BUT I cannot indulge the ungenerous suspicion, that such will be the fate of
my country. I will rather cherish the nobler belief, that my countrymen,
animated with one common spirit, will produce to the world A SECOND and MORE
GLORIOUS instance of their unshaken determination to LIVE a free and
independent people.

THOSE who still survive our revolutionary war, who took a part in its
interests -- who shared in its glorious and honorable fatigues, know too well
the value of their hard-earned labors, to suffer them to be snatched from them
without an effort for their preservation -- And the YOUTH of AMERICA, roused by
the resentments, and animated by the example of their FATHERS, will present a
bulwark to their country against foreign invasion and domestic faction.

THE independent spirit of America will thus maintain our national character
free from blemish, and perform one of the first and most sacred duties a
country owes to itself, and which no reasons of policy or convenience should
ever prevent it from exercising -- Without self-respect, how are we to obtain
it from others -- without an erect and dignified conduct at home, how are we to
command it abroad? The importance to the community, of national pride and
honor, cannot be too deeply impressed -- they are the best guarantee of our
independence -- and the safest security against aggressions.

THAT people, who, on all proper occasions, give unequivocal proofs of their
fixed determination never passively to submit to injustice and insult, and who
possess the power and determination, at all times, to repel their approach,
will be much less subject to provocation, than such as by the pusilanimity of
their councils -- the cowardice or weakness of their citizens -- are known to
possess dispositions that will temporize with disgrace, and compromise with
dishonor. A nation which will once stoop to such meanness, will find that her
pacific dispositions will be attended but with little advantage: if she should
fatten upon her disgrace, she only makes herself the surer spoil of some more
daring foe.

THESE remarks are drawn from the present situation of our country, which
loudly calls for the exercise of VIGOR and FORTITUDE in every description of
people, to maintain and support the constituted authorities, our sovereignty
and independence.

THE republic of FRANCE, toward whom we once felt the liveliest regard -- in
whose fortunes we took the warmest interest -- and in whose prosperity we gave
the most unequivocal proofs of joy, has repaid those flattering tokens of
respect and esteem by a series of injuries, insults and contumelies, the
recollection of which, must excite, in every American bosom, the warmest
indignation, and the keenest resentment.

OUR nation, yet in infancy -- our government, not yet matured by experience --
nor strengthened by practice -- our commerce, extensive and unprotected -- our
country, recovering from the struggles of our revolutionary war, our population
rapidly increasing -- our property, rising in value -- the industry and
ENTERPRISE of our citizens, amply rewarded, ALL combined to render PEACE too
desirable a condition to be lightly departed from. -- The councils of our
country have accordingly, with unremitting assiduity, sought to heal the
differences which have existed between the two republics by reiterated attempts
at honorable and amicable negotiation -- by a fair and candid discussion of
facts, to place the conduct of our government in that upright and independent
view, which comported with national faith, and national interests. But, our
ministers of peace have been rejected with scorn, and their offers of
conciliation with contempt. An appeal to the justice of our claims has been
treated with ridicule -- our ambassadors have been denied their diplomatic
character, and even a permission to discuss our complaints, except upon terms
which suppose in the character of the American people, a degree of abject
meaness, no less wounding to our pride, than insulting to our understandings.

WHAT! The freeborn sons of AMERICA become the vassals of France! -- surrender
their sovereignty at the first summons of an insolent foe! -- tarnish their
dignity, and forever disgrace the character so bravely won!

TO what purpose have so many rivulets of blood flown -- so many valuable lives
been lost, to establish our Independence, if it is now to be sacrificed at the
polluted shrine of French rapacity and dominion. The wounds are scarcely healed
which were acquired in the establishment of our liberties -- the ground is
scarcely cold, which was enriched with the blood of departed patriots -- the
groans of the dying soldier, who nobly fell in the defense of his country, are
still tinkling upon the ear, when we are called upon to abandon our
Independence and sovereignty, gained by the calamities of a seven-years war --
And this, not as a compensation for injuries done -- not as an atonement for
offenses committed -- not for the improper or profligate use of our national
powers; but, for the high crimes of asserting and maintaining our right to
self-government -- of choosing for ourselves the position most profitable and
advantageous during the European conflict, and preserving it with honor and
good faith -- of forming such compacts as we thought best calculated to settle
past differences, and secure the observance of justice in future -- of taking
such measures as would enable us to steer a course clear of the tempestuous
sea, by which Europe has so long been agitated!

CAN any American be found who can patiently contemplate this dictatorial and
insulting conduct on the part of FRANCE? if there be, let him be told, in
addition thereto, that if their demands are not implicitly complied with, they
have threatened to overwhelm us with fire, with sword, and with all the horrors
of Domestic Faction -- to divide our Union, to crush our Government -- and
parcel us out among the powers of Europe, as their pleasure or convenience may
dictate! -- If the passiveness of his temper is proof against this, he is a
disgrace to the land which gave him birth -- Nay, to any land but that which is
ruled by a French Directory.

WITH views thus hostile, which have been unequivocally declared to you, and
which are now known to the world, can any man hesitate between a peace, which
at one blow annihilates every thing sacred to us as a nation, or war,
accompanied with every difficulty which imagination can trace, in defense of
our liberties -- our constitution -- religion and laws.

RECOLLECTING the occasion on which we are met -- the high example set us by
our FATHERS -- it shall never be said that the YOUTH of AMERICA are so far sunk
in slothful degeneracy, as to be indifferent to the fate of their country -- to
be idle and unconcerned spectators of the gathering cloud, whose aspect speaks
destruction -- and whose burst upon our unprepared heads, will leave us in ruin.

MANY of us, my young friends, during that war, which established our
Independence, were yet in the cradle of infancy -- our youthful arms were not
yet strung for war -- our nerves not yet braced for hardy action; but the first
sentiments with which our infant bosoms glowed, were the love and honor of our
country, and the first wish we were taught was, that we had been able to fight
by the side of our fathers. They have now grown old, and to us devolves the
sacred trust of maintaining that Independence, which they with so many glorious
toils acquired.

LET us fully display the true American Character -- mild and forbearing in
peace, proud and powerful in war; for it is not now to be concealed that our
only safety is in the UNION and VIGOR of our councils, and in the strength of
our ARMS. It is by the weapons of war, that we are now to enforce that justice,
which we have sought for with the most unfeigned sincerity, or that we can even
maintain our internal governnment and sovereignty.

THE rapacious monsters of France have breathed their pestilence over Europe --
marked their footsteps with desolation and destruction, and covered the land on
which they have trod, with the blood of the just and the tears of the innocent
-- with the Siren song of pretended liberty, they have enchanted the ear, and
intoxicated the brain of their deluded votaries, until they have made them the
fit instruments of every species of sacrilege, murder, rapine and violence,
which can heap disgrace on the name of man.

NOT satisfied with the progress they have made in Europe, they are about to
traverse the Atlantic; and our country is doomed next to grace the triumphs of
their arms. -- Already have they boasted of their means of sedition -- the
divisions of the people -- and the strength of their party. -- Already have
they disclosed to us our fate, by reminding us of that of Venice, to which we
ourselves may add the afflicting examples of Genoa, Holland, and Switzerland.

NAUGHT, therefore, is left for us, but by a vigorous preparation for war,
either to avert its evils, or be enabled to meet them with proper resolution
and advantage -- a war which will involve in its issue every thing which can be
sacred to us as men, and valuable to us as citizens. -- Let us, therefore, no
longer indulge in the idle dreams of conciliation -- in the deceitful hopes of
negotiation -- but rely on our own strength for the maintenance of our rights,
and the redress of our wrongs.

UNDER the administration of an executive, who has nobly declared that his hand
shall never sign the ingnominious deed, which shall surrender the sovereignty
of his country, we may trust our most unreserved confidence.

THIS is the temper which should animate every AMERICAN, and which would
establish our INDEPENDENCE beyond the power of the universe. In competition
with that, wealth, ease, and private convenience, should be held as naught.
Determined to live a free and sovereign people, let every exertion be made,
every arm be raised in defense of the country -- and, if it must fall, let us
perish with it -- let no one survive the disgrace -- let no one live to be told
that the spirit of America was subdued.

IF this solemn determination be THIS DAY taken, relying on the just providence
of our God, our Independence will still be saved -- its value will be enhanced
-- and our posterity will feel the increased duty of preserving an inheritance
gained and transmitted to them with so much blood, toil, and difficulty; and
we, ourselves, may live to see our country Triumphant, Honored and Respected.

FINIS.

