AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT SALISBURY.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT SALISBURY, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE, JULY 4th, 1798.

BY THOMAS WORCESTER, Minister of the Gospel in SALISBURY.

CONCORD, NEWHAMPSHIRE, PRINTED BY MOSES DAVIS.

MDCCXCVIII.

AN ORATION.
RESPECTED FELLOW CITIZENS,
IT is but a short time since the respectful invitation was given me to address
you on this Anniversary of our Independence; and no request could have been
more unexpected. Several other circumstances might be mentioned to urge you to
be moderate in your expectations; but I confide in your candor.

Days of Commemoration have been observed from ancient times; and this practice
is not without propriety and use. -- Every nation has its important events,
affecting to the public mind, and productive of emotions not to be concealed.
These, in measure, naturally return from year to year, with the day which first
gave them birth. This is the origin of celebrating certain days with social
entertainments: and such celebration, under regular and virtuous management,
serves to awaken grateful remembrance, and to stir up landable ambition to
perform worthy deeds.

The History of our Nation renders no day more signal, and worthy of festival
celebration, than the fourth of July; for this is the birth day of our
independent national existence. On this day, of the year 1776, was a nation
born; or then the manly declaration of our Independence was made. Not because
mere dependence on our mother country was a burden; not from any aversion to
firm, energetic, equally subordinating government; not from any wish to be
without "form, and void" of social subjecting ties; but from opposition to
abuse of power, the COLONIAL CONGRESS DECLARED THESE INDEPENDENT STATES. Not
subject to the Crown of England, nor to be under the protection or direction of
any foreign power.

Redress of grievances had been sought, by respectful remonstrances and earnest
petitions. These however availed nothing, unless it were to make the yoke more
grievous. Under a dread of the growing wealth and strength of her American
colonies, the British government were determined to persevere in oppressive,
weakening measures, to prevent a successful revolt. But their own cruel
measures soon brought upon them what they feared at a distance, viz. the revolt
of the American Colonies. These roused by oppression, resolved to try their
strength to break those galling chains imposed upon them.

Independence was declared with confidence, under GOD, in the military genius
and spirit of the people. Encouraged by some experiments, it was believed the
sons of Columbia could do exploits in opposition to the overgrown power of
England. With increased spirit, TO ARMS! TO ARMS! was sounded through the
Union. To arms against Oppression. To arms for established Independence, for
the rights of man, and national dignity. Like electric fire, a martial spirit
diffused from soul to soul, through the several ranks of citizens, from hoary
heads to beardless boys. Heaven had prepared the man. Heaven had directed the
choice. WASHINGTON was already in the field at the head of our armies. The
unnatural mother country poured forth by thousands, her legitimate sons.
Hastening across the Atlantic, they threatened destruction against our loyal
subjects -- driven to revolt by injustice and cruelty. On our part, the bloody
contest was attended with almost every possible embarrassment. -- Except in
sentiment and spirit, the union of the States was then merely nominal. A
Continental Congress there was; but there was no regular energetic system of
confederacy and subordination, and no chosen head of executive administration
over the whole body. There was no national revenue to defray the expenses of
war. -- Military acquirements, and regular subordination, were much wanting
among those who were called into active service. Many of the officers wanted
experience; the soldiers were not trained to the exercises, movements and
hardships of war; and distressingly far were they from being well supplied with
arms and ammunition. -- Under these, and such like embarrassments, without any
alliance with foreign power, without having our Independence acknowledged by a
single nation, our forces ventured to combat with the numerous, well
disciplined, and well supplied armies of Greatbritain. With now and then a
check, to remind us of our dependence upon the God of Battles; under his
guardian smiles, we gained ground by degrees, until the spared of our enemies,
with a hook in their nose, returned home.

Thus was our Independence established. Thus rose the United States of America
to a distinguished rank, among the nations of the world. Hence the fame of
WASHINGTON, and the fame of that spirit and enterprise of Columbia's sons,
which carried his generalship into effect, have gone forth into all lands.

Now where is the mean soul! where is the unworthy American, who can bear
foreign insults without a glow of military ardour? Are we to be dictated by
foreign policy? Are we to be divided by foreign influence? Are our necks to be
brought under any foreign yoke? Shall any nation under heaven lord over us,
before we have tried our increased strength?

We have now a CONSTITUTION, the result of combined wisdom, accepted by the
several States, uniting them all in one body, under one chosen legislation, and
executive administration. The experience of more than nine years, has
demonstrated the excellency of our System of Federal Government. By the
constituted authorities, many judicious well-timed acts have been passed, which
are yet in force, for the regulation of our national concerns. -- Eight years
successively, the executive power, by the free suffrages of the people, was
committed to the Illustrious WASHINGTON, under whose administration, in our
Judah, things went well. And happy for us, our country has produced more than
one great man, more than one endowed with qualifications to preside over us.

WASHINGTON is succeeded by ADAMS, the long tried friend, and able politician
of his country. In firm and patriotic measures, he happily coincides with his
predecessor: and perseverance will secure to him a blessed memory, while the
names of his calumniators shall rot. Thus blessed in the managers of our
National Affairs, European efforts to involve us in their bloody quarrel, have
been warded off, from time to time; giving us, in our neutral situation,
opportunity to increase in numbers and in wealth, with unexampled rapidity,
under the propitious smiles of Jehovah.

Now we are numerous and wealthy, comparing this with the day when our
Independence was declared. Now we have regular establishments, civil and
military. Now we have not a few whose hands have been taught to war and their
fingers to fight Now we have a national revenue. Now we have existing Treaties,
which have opened free commerce with the most respectable nations. Now we have
the mean Is all this, that we may appear the more contemptible in yielding to
foreign impositions? Or shall the spirit of '75 rouse to vigorous exertions,
corresponding with our greater advantages, against every outrageous indignity?

Must we stupidly endure the most daring insults from a foreign nation, because
she was once esteemed our friend and ally? Shall that nation without
resistance, dictate our government, seize, and confiscate our property, treat
our Envoys with sovereign contempt, and seek to exhaust all our treasures,
because she once assisted us in time of need? Was this the meaning of declared
and acknowledged Independence? -- Truly the French did assist us in our
struggle against Greatbritain: We owed them for their services, and have paid
every farthing. They now owe us as much gratitude for employing them, as we owe
them for their help -- yea more; for we have paid much gratitude besides all
their due, in other things; and in return we have received nothing but insults.

With grateful hearts, our nation held out the fraternal hand, and owned the
Republic of France, in generous and bold distinction from every nation on
earth. -- For a considerable time Americans in general, "from Georgia's banks
to Hampshire's bounds," felt deeply interested in the French revolution. Like
grateful souls we rejoiced in hopes of their obtaining like liberties and
privileges with ourselves. More than was strictly consistent with our
neutrality, we rejoicingly celebrated their successes. -- We wished they might
go on and prosper. We excused their follies. We palliated their frenziful
barbarities. Conscious of friendship to them, we would not believe they were
seriously aiming any thing against our interests, 'till such appearances were
glaringly multiplied. Thus have we paid the sum total of gratitude, if any was
their due. Gratitude did not require us to engage with them in their war. They
had their own policy in assisting us in our's. -- They wished to maim the power
of their rival. Their own interest required that the United States should be
forever severed from the British Crown. This they well knew; and this was the
main spring of all their boasted generosity.

After we had struggled into a prospect of victory, then for their own interest
they lent us a helping hand. There was nothing like what induced them, to
induce us to engage in their war. In every view it was inconsistent with our
interest. We had a right, as an independent people to take that neutral
situation which our interest required. This was done without violating any
Treaty, or any obligation whatever. But after the proclamation of neutrality
was made, they underhandedly exerted themselves in direct opposition to the
authority of our government. They have been assiduously, and insidiously trying
to bring us into the war. They have done all in their power to sow discord
among us, and lessen the confidence of the people in our government, because
they know they cannot conquer without dividing us.

As an independent nation, we have a right to make Treaties, when, and with
whom we please, without asking French leave. Yet their tone has been
insultingly dictatorial respecting our Treaty with England. They have violated
their treaty with us under the mean pretext of treating us as we suffer
ourselves to be treated by others. On this, and no better ground, they have
robbed our commercial fellow citizens of many millions.

Such injuries were borne till they could be borne no longer without seeking
redress. This however was not sought in retaliation. MONROE (of whom I have
nothing more honorable to say) was called home, and General PINCKNEY was sent
to Paris; but as it were with the olive branch in his hand -- with full powers
to negotiate to remove every existing cause of uneasiness. But with unheard of
indignity, he was refused. Still disposed for peace, our Government sent two
more, each with ample powers, hoping that all, or at least some one of the
three would be received. -- But to the astonishment of the world, they all
remained a number of months at Paris, doing well, doing every thing in their
power, and yet doing nothing directly with the French government, because
nothing but money, nothing but "a great deal of money," will open a reception
for them. After all we have suffered, we must pave the way with "a great deal
of money," before they will officially so much as speak with our Envoys.

It is openly avowed among the French, that they regard not the justice of our
claims, but we "must pay money," we must "pay about as much money as we can, or
the fate of Venice may be ours ere long. That is, like Venice, we may have our
government new modelled, according to French policy -- have our wealth drained,
by the point of the sword, into their coffers, and then be bartered away in
compact with some despot, to be subject to his control.

This, fellow-citizens, is the fate our "generous allies" would have us expect
from them, if we will not comply with their money demands.

Every citizen of these States, ought to join in sentiment and spirit with our
Envoys, and say, "we will make at least one manly struggle," before we submit
to all this. -- Torn from the history of the world, be the pages where past
American valor is recorded, if we do not unite in vigorous efforts against that
baneful policy which now threatens our ruin. -- Never more let the fourth of
July be celebrated; never more let the Independence of the United States be
named, if under all our present advantages, we resist not unto blood, rather
than pay one Cent to buy a peace of the plundering scourge of the times. Yes,
never more let these States be called UNITED, if we unite not against such
degrading insults as the French have offered. -- Let the man who can excuse all
these, claim in vain, if he claims the character of an honest friend to his
country.

Loud are the calls to spirited exertions for our defense. Without going into
"Egypt for help," without trusting in any arm of flesh, may we trust in that
power which is above, which has wrought such wonders in our behalf; and may the
same spirit which burst forth in a declaration of Independence, reanimate every
class of our citizens, till again every outrage shall disappear.

Gentlemen, Military Officers,

ALWAYS, but more especially in times like the present, your offices, well
filled, are honorable. The public welfare of every community, requires men in
your stations. -- In these you may do eminent service for your country. Your
time and expense, which are appropriated to military improvements, are not
lost. You have done well in coming together under respectable appearances to
celebrate the day from which our Independence is dated. By this, Gentlemen, you
mean it shall be understood that you are firmly attached to our National
Independence, Government, and honor; that you hold yourselves in readiness to
comply with every constitutional requisition for their support -- Yea, that you
hold yourselves in readiness to go forward, facing the dangers of war, whenever
this shall be required by our constituted authorities. Such valor is laudable
-- and here is room for virtuous ambition to excel.

You, Gentlemen, are entrusted with the military education of youth. And in
doing every thing in your power to make them active in the arts and movements
of war, and to inspire them with manly resolution and public spirit -- In doing
this, you will do important service to your country, and lasting honor to
yourselves.

Fellow Citizens, Soldiers,

YOUR station is respectable. You are among those, who under GOD, are the
strength and defense of the community, against invasions of our rights. On your
class the eyes of our Fathers were fixed when they declared these INDEPENDENT
STATES. Confiding under GOD, in you and your fellows, the civil departments
this day hold up their (...) would stop, and our Independence would be given
up. Count it then an honor to be valiant soldiers. Be teachable in military
operations. Begrudge not your time for this purpose. Be ambitious to know and
perform your duty, and to be well equipt for valiant service. Remember the
great deeds of your Fathers. Show yourselves worthy of that country which gave
birth to WASHINGTON, and to those armies under him who acquired such laurels,
and are famed throughout the world. -- Be ready if called for, to go bravely
into the field of battle, committing your fate to GOD. It is better to die
gloriously, than to live meanly.

"Life for my country, and the cause of freedom,
Is but a trifle for a worm to part with.
And if preserved in so great a contest --
Life is redoubled."
With such motto as this, let all your actions correspond.

Ye Sons of Freedom, who have shared largely in the blessings of liberty and
good government. You who have been growing rich under the privileges of this
land, count not your hard earned property too dear to be sacrificed in defense
of your rights. Hold yourselves in readiness to pay, as for value received,
every sum required by the government of your choice, for national purposes. Our
harbors cannot be fortified -- Frigates cannot be built and furnished to
protect our commerce; and our troops cannot be equipt as the times now require,
without cost. For such purposes, fellow-citizens, count it your indispensable
duty to expend freely. Let fortifications be made. Let the implements of war be
prepared. Let the instruments of death be made plenty and glittering, whatever
may be the cost. -- The better our preparations, with humble confidence in GOD,
the less have we to fear. Away with every feminine sensation. Away with every
fanatic scruple about the lawfulness of using the defensive sword. The Prince
of Peace has said, "he that takes the sword shall perish by the sword." --
This fully implies that against violent offenders the sword may, and must be
drawn. -- Gratitude to the author of our privileges, requires our best
exertions to defend them. -- This should be a main-spring in every defensive
movement. -- Actuated by this, and the like noble principles, in our several
stations, let us act well our parts, without malice or envy. Then shall we
share in the tranquillity and glory of THAT DAY, when those lusts of men, from
whence come wars and fightings, shall be subdued; -- AND THE SUN OF
RIGHTEOUSNESS SHALL EXTEND HIS HEALING WINGS OVER THIS NOW BLEEDING WORLD.


