THE ADVERTISEMENT FOR A HUSBAND. A NOVEL: IN A SERIES OF LETTERS BETWEEN
BELINDA BLACKET, LOUISA LENOX, AND OTHERS.

TWO VOLUMES IN ONE.

WORCESTER: PRINTED BY ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN. AND SOLD BY HIM AT HIS PRINTING
OFFICE.

September -- 1799.

BELINDA; OR, THE ENTERPRIZING LOVER.
LETTER I. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
WHEN you quitted the smoaky capital, to retire to your delicious residence in
Northumberland, you enjoined me, my dear Louisa* to become a constant
correspondent. The request was so consonant to my inclinations, that I yielded
to it with alacrity; but I am not without my apprehensions that you will be
wearied with the length and number of my epistles. I slatter myself, however,
that our friendship is established on so firm a basis, that you will forgive
what you cannot approve, and give me credit for my good intentions, should I
trespass with prolixity or impertinence.

You know, my Louisa, all the secrets of my heart. Considering you as my sceond
self, I have ever communicated to you the particulars of my thoughts, words,
and actions; hitherto, indeed, my life has been unchequered with the
vicissitudes of fortune, and hardly furnishes an interesting scene; but I am
resolved to be no longer unnoticed in the world -- no longer considered as a
mere blank in the (...)!

I need not inform you, that I am this day entering into my eighteenth year;
and you will, without accusing me of vanity, admit that I am not very defective
in person or accomplishments. Do not consider this, my Louisa, as an eulogiu^
on myself* but rather as a reflection on the insensibility of the men; for I
have never received a ^^ngle overture from any of the sex: I therefore, am
determined, in justice to myself to compel them to pay attention to me: and I
dare venture to flatter myself that before many days are expired. I shall
behold half a dozen of these lords of the creation, sighing at my feet.

This may appear romantic to you, without further explanation; but my scheme is
very practicable, though it may be thought to deviate, in some degree, from the
delicacy of my sex. Be that as it may, hazard it I will, regardless of the
censures of the world, if my Louisa should but approve the step.

Beauty, like any other mercantile commodity, is become an article of traffic
in our daily prints; advertisements indiscriminately announce the bargain and
sale of a lady's person, or a bale of silk; and direct the readers whither they
are to repair to treat for the affections of a lady, with as little reserve as
if she had been a hogshead of sugar, or any other common article of commerce.

Taught, therefore, by example, I intend, to pursue the same mode. The WORLD
shall be the vehicle for my advertisement; it is read by all the world, and
will probably produce me many suitors. The address I propose, shall be nearly
in the following words.

A young lady, pretty far advanced in her teens, thus publicly appeals to the
young gentlemen of this kingdom. She has not the smallest reason to accuse
Nature for not embellishing her person; and Fortune, she admits, has been
equally liberal to her. Acquired accomplishments, she also flatters herself,
she has a competent share of; and her disposition has generally been thought
amiable. Notwithstanding these perfections, which are far from being
exaggerated, she has not been asked the material question by any man living.
Thus circumstanced, she heartily acknowledges that a state of virginity is so
irksome to her, that she would willingly exchange it for a better. Proposals,
addressed to Belinda, sealed up, and left at the Bar of the London Coffeehouse,
shall be duly attended to, and an interview appointed, if the proposals appear
adequate to the lady's expectations.

Blame me not Louisa, for forming a resolution of this kind; for be assured I
shall act with the utmost prudence and decorum in the whole of the business.
Never shall Louisa have the least occasion to blush for her affectionate friend,

BELINDA.
Pall Mall.
LETTER II. LOUISA LENOX, to BELINDA BLACKET.
YOU astonish me, my dear Belinda, by the resolution which you have formed. Be
not too precipitate in the execution of such a romantic plan! Excuse me,
dearest girl, for taking the freedom of a friend. -- Suffer me to expostulate a
little with you, on the impropriety of exposing your person, to the wanton
sneers of a rude rabble; for such will assuredly be the fellows who make
application for your fair hand, in consequence of the advertisement. I tremble
for the consequences of such a procedure, and conjure you, if you value my
friendship, to let the idea perish whilst it is in embryo.

Consider, my Belinda, very few serious applications are made to ladies of your
age. I am indeed half a year older than you are, and I should look upon any
matrimonial overtures as an insult to my understanding; and rather an attack
upon my inexperience, than a justifiable claim to my affections. Your person
and talents are sufficient to captivate the richest and most accomplished of
the sex; and, in due time, will certainly be attended to. The men are not those
indifferent beings you would represent them; but hitherto you have mixed but
little with the world; like a recluse, you have passed a few successive years,
in pious attendance on an infirm and ancient parent, who is now no more. The
finest pictures, when not exhibited, are unknown to the connoisseurs; but where
your semblance appears, every man must be an amateur.

You are now emerging from the chamber of sickness and desolation, and will
naturally receive and pay visits among the circle of your friends. Chance, my
dear, will soon introduce objects worthy of your esteem, who will, doubtless
pay their court to such beauty and excellence as belong to my Belinda. Why,
therefore, should you have recourse to such expedients as even the deserted and
abandoned almost despise?

Consider, my Belinda, how soon a female reputation receives a blemish; and,
when once sullied, how difficult, nay how impossible, it is to remove that
blemish. A single erroneous step, or a step, even bordering upon error, will,
by the censorious public, be magnified into a crime; and my poor, innocent
Belinda, by disregarding appearances, being conscious of her own purity and
integrity, may incur the calumny of malignant tongues, and lose the most
valuable jewel upon earth, a " good name."

I am too young to assume the character of a grave adviser, and you may
probably be surprised at so serious a lecture from one who is destitute of gray
hairs. Had you requested my opinion respecting the fashion of a ribband, or any
other article of dress and the ton, I would have answered you with my usual
pleasantry, and you should have found your Louisa as sprightly and frolicksome
as ever. Vive la Bagatelle! -- But, where your reputation and future happiness
in life, are the objects of consideration, my years appear to double upon me,
and I think myself as well qualified for a preceptor, as a Seneca, or a Solon.

You have not been accastomed, my dear Belinda, to such epistles as these from
your Louisa. Often have you termed me, in the pursuit of our innocent
extravagances, your little madcap. Hereafter I suppose you will think me
entitled to the appellation of your philosopher. At all times, however, you may
rely upon me as your friend.

Lay aside your ridiculous plan, my Belinda, or you will make me miserable.
Were I possessed of half your fortune, and a tithe of your perfections, I
should think myself entitled to the attentions of the first nobility. Apropos,
have you any of the beau monde in your quarter, or do you abound in fox hunters?

Adieu, LOUISA.

LETTER III. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
PARDON me, Louisa, if I condemn you for the severity of your epistle. I have
unbosomed my whole soul to you; which I never should have done, had I not been
convinced that you entertained the highest opinion of my integrity and honor.
Do you suppose, my Louisa, educated as I have been in the school of adversity,
(though afterward, liberally treated by the sickle Goddess) that I should so
far forget myself as to hazard my reputation or my honor? No, my dear friend, I
wish only to see the world; to trace out the snares which are so industriously
laid to entrap the unweary sex* and to learn to be upon my guard against the
stratagems of seducers.

Either you have flattered me, or you have always entertained a good opinion of
my discernment and integrity. You cannot therefore suppose that I should
instantly bid adieu to such attendants, without giving them a proper warning,
and engage indiscretion and irregularity in my suite. Indeed, Louisa, I am as
immaculate as you left me, and am determined to continue unpolluted in thought,
word and deed; still, however, I am resolved to have my humor, and to carry my
projected plan into immediate execution. I can, without deviating from the
rules of decency, receive the letters of those who are candidates for my
person, peruse them, and answer them as they deserve; should any of them
display evident marks of being the production of gentlemen, I may probably
condescend to notice them; but if ignorance or vulgarity are the most prominent
features in their epistles, I shall, with contempt, commit them to the flames.

Should I even deign to permit an interview with any of my unknown
correspondents, it should be with such as displayed evident traits of honor,
and a liberal education. A gentleman is as well known by his style, as by his
deportment; and no impostor can impose himself, in that character, on a woman
of the least discernment. With a gentleman, therefore, I have nothing to
risque; with such a man, preliminaries my be talked of; and, if the treaty
should not happen to be definitive, the negotiation is at an end, and no
disagreeable consequences can ensue.

Many vulgar epistles I shall most probably receive, deficient even in
orthography and common sense; but, you know, my Louisa, I detest pretenders of
all kinds. I address my advertisement to gentlemen, and a person who assumes
that character, especially in his writings, is sure of being detected.

To be brief, this advertising scheme is a hobbyhorse of mine; and I am sure to
gather amusement from it, whatever may be the other consequences. I expect to
receive letters from the canaille, as void of decency as of sense, which may
afford you and I some little amusement, when there is a dearth of more
essential matters. Such epistles, however, shall not survive the observation of
the day, but be decently interred, and consigned to perpetual oblivion.

I expect, in a short time, to possess as many letters as a robber of the mail;
but I should be much surprised at finding any bank notes enclosed in any of
them.

Does the WORLD circulate in Northumberland? If so, you will therein read my
address, or, if you please, my ADVERTISEMENT FOR AN HUSBAND.

I hope my extraordinary resolution has not so far lessened me in your esteem,
as to deprive me of your correspondence. If my adventure should not procure me
an husband, suitable to my wishes and deserts, it will at least furnish
entertainment for me and my Louisa. You must not, therefore, throw out any
sarcasms upon my conduct; but believe me to be, as you have ever found me, your
truly affectionate friend,

BELINDA BLACKET.

LETTER IV. PEREGRINE PESTLE, to BELINDA BLACKET.
MADAM,
YOUR advertisement in the WORLD, has struck me like electricity; but, perhaps,
as I am an apothecary, you may consider me as a mere drug, and fit only for an
opiate to a lady of your consequence. But, spite of all the poppies in the
world, I am awakened by your elegant address. Though I have not seen you, I
anticipate the happiness your company will afford. I have not the least scruple
but you will make me every grain of allowance upon an occasion of this
magnitude. Matrimony, indeed, has been said to be a bitter pill to swallow; but
this must have been the assertion of the ignorant, who knew not the ingredients
of which that pill was composed. Every man of experience must readily admit
that he who exclaims against the honorable state of matrimony, ought to be
pulverised. There is not a more excellent electuary, in the whole Materia
Medica, than a sufficient quantity of bank stock beat up in a mortar, with a
due portion of prudence and good nature to form it into a proper consistence.

You may imagine, Madam, from my language, that I have acted as a surgeon in
the navy; in that situation I was employed the whole of the last war; and, I
hope, with honor to myself and advantage to the wounded. But* by you I am
imperceptibly wounded; I feel the stab, though unacquainted with the arm that
directed it.

Have pity, therefore, on your humble servant,

PEREGRINE PESTLE.
Magnesia Row.
LETTER V. MR. HEATHCOTE, to BELINDA BLACKET.
MADAM,
IT is my usual custom to lounge away an hour at a coffeehouse almost every
morning; during which time I meet with a variety of amusements in the diurnal
prints; but nothing has so far excited my attention as your advertisement,
which appeared yesterday in the WORLD. There is such an air of ingenuous can
dor in that little composition, that I am induced to think the writer of it is
in earnest.

Your address being general, no apology is necessary for troubling you with a
few lines. As I purpose to be a candidate for your hand, you will naturally
expect that I should give some account of myself, before I can ever hope to be
favored with an interview. I shall begin therefore, by giving you a faithful
portrait of my person, without exaggeration, either on the side of flattery or
caricature. In point of height, I rather exceed the middle size. I am neither
lean nor corpulent; and my figure is erect and strait. The whole symmetry of my
body will bear investigation, except my legs; they are thought to be somewhat
out of proportion, nature having been too profuse in furnishing those regions.
My face is of the oval kind, and my nose aquiline; my eyes and eyebrows are
truly ebon. It would savor too much of vanity were I to mention the encomiums
which have been lavished on them. The small pox has made some ravages upon my
countenance, but has not injured it; on the contrary, it has stamped a degree
of manliness upon it, which it might otherwise have wanted.

So much for my person! With respect to fortune, I have not much to say; I have
a small unincumbered estate, which I let for three hundred pounds per annum,
and that is all I am possessed of. I might, indeed, by following the example of
my neighbors, almost double that income, by raising my rents among the tenants;
but I am happier at seeing them thrive and flourish upon my farms, than any
augmentation of my rents can possibly make me.

My father, knowing I had but a scanty fortune to succeed to, bred me to the
Bar, to enable me the better to support the character and appearance of a
gentleman. But there were unsurmountable obstacles to my distinguishing myself
in Westminster Hall; I had too much diffidence, and too much honor in my
nature, to make any progress in the courts of law.

Were I possessed of the most shining talents, I never could condescend to
prostitute those talents, and plead against my conscience for a fee. If I
unjustly detain the property of the fatherless or the widow, and give a lawyer
a large fee, his mercenary tongue will move for hours, to varnish my sullied
character, or to conceal my villainy; without regarding the distresses of those
whom his abilities have robbed of bread.

Not being able therefore to add to my fortune, by exercising my profession; my
income would be inadequate to my expenses, were I not to observe the strictest
frugality upon all occasions.

Permit me then, Madam, to approach you, and solicit your fair hand; I feel a
kind of presentiment that nature has formed us for each other. My little
fortune, added to what you possess, will afford independency to both. If you
will deign to honor me with an audience, I flatter myself that I shall be able
to plead my own cause entirely to your satisfaction.

Should I be so unfortunate as to be thought unworthy of an answer to this
epistle, I know not what might be the consequence. Pistols and daggers are
alarming things! -- I will not tell you, however, that I shall have recourse to
either of them; but I should positively be much chagrined to be treated with so
much indifference. This is the first love epistle (if it may be so called) that
I have ever written; and, should it not be honored with your notice, believe
me, Madam, I shall never write another.

I am, Madam, with impatient respect, your most obedient Servant, CHARLES
HEATHCOTE.
P. S. I forgot to mention my age, I am on the verge of my twenty second year.



LETTER VI. PATRICK MAC GREGOR, to BELINDA BLACKET.
DEAR MADAM,
IN passing through the WORLD, according to my usual practice every morning
before breakfast, I ran my head against your advertisement. Indeed, Madam, you
talk like a woman of sense and parts, when you say you are willing to change
your state for a better. A man need not be a conjuror to know what you main by
a better, for sartainly it is better to be married than not to have a husband.

By the holy Shannon, Madam, I am violently in love with you! for though I have
not seen you at all at all, my mind's eye has been looking at every failure
belonging to you, and running over all your charms, from the sole of your
stocking, to the steeple of your bonnet.

I have no fortune, at present; to spaik of, but I shall have when I come to
it; for my father (Heaven rest his soul!) has made a will, and appointed me his
sole predecessor when he dies, which I hope will be spaidily, for he is as
worthy a craiture as ever stepped upon shoe leather. I think, Madam, I have a
right to survive my father, becaise I am told he was born before me. He has got
a large sum of money in the Bank and South Sea, and several other freehold
estates, which must all come to me; for it is not in his power to laive it to
any body else, without altering his will, and that he cannot do, my jewel,
becaise I have got a copy of it in my own possession.

He has a grait deal of other terra firma, which must all be mine; particularly
a large share in the New River Water Works, and the navigation of the Liffy;
besides, he has an annuity of five hundred pounds a year upon his own life, so
long as he lives, which you know he cannot keep any longer than he can keep his
breath.

You see, Madam, I am not a mere fortune hunter, like some of my countrymen;
for my own fortune will be immense, when my father will be so complaisant as to
take himself out of this wicked world.

By way of amusing myself till I come to my estate, I play in Covent Garden
with a sedan chair, in partnership with another jontleman, who was educated at
Dublin College; but, devil burn the new pavement! it is made so aisy and
convainient, that people ride upon a hackneycoach, or upon their ten toes,
whilst a poor chairman stands like a mere cipher, and is no more regarded than
a chairman of a porter club, or of the Eastindia Company.

I hope, Madam, you will not consider my employment as disgraceful, becaise,
you know, every one is a gentleman who can keep his carriage as I do.

Pray let me have an express from you, by the penny post, to let me know if you
have any regard for me. I think I have said enough to win the affections of any
raisonable woman; but if you are unraisonable, the devil go along with you! You
say your "virginity is irksome to you;" then who is to be blamed but yourself
for keeping it any longer; when a jontleman, like me, is willing to take you
for better or for worse?

There is some little disperity in our ages, I must acknowledge; for you are
but eighteen, and I am thirty six; but that is a matter not worth making a
botheration about, for after we have been married eighteen years, we shall be
both of an age.

It is not my intention to desaive any woman, especially one so amiable as
yourself; my honor therefore compels me to acknowledge that I am already
married to a couple of wives; one of which I left in Crow Street, Dublin, and
the other at the Ring's End; but, we were married without ceremony, I left them
without ceremony, and am now at liberty to bestow my hand according to my own
will and pleasure.

It is very disagreeable for a man to be alone, except he has got company with
him; and I am sartain you would find my company more agreeable than to be alone
with any body else.

Direct for Patrick MacGregor at the sign of Beelzebub the Angel, Octagon
Square, St. Giles's.

I am, Madam, with the most exalted humility, your obedient slave and servant,
PATRICK MACGREGOR.

LETTER VII. THE REVEREND MR. PROBY, to BELINDA.
ACCUSE me not of presumption, Madam, for venturing to trouble you with a few
observations on your conduct, respecting your address to the Public, on so
interesting and important a subject as matrimony. I cannot think you are in
earnest; for a young lady with your figure, fortune, and accomplishments, must
demand the admiration and reverence of mankind.

But, whether you are in jest or earnest, let me entreat you, my dear girl, to
be strictly upon your guard. Be not entrapped by the seducive wiles of the
abandoned libertine, who flatters that he may destroy, and who prides himself
upon the victims he has made.

Struck by the consideration of your age and inexperience, I considered it as
my duty to remonstrate with you on so alarming a procedure. You will the more
readily excuse me, my dear Madam, when I inform you that I am a clergyman; and
in that character, conscienciously performing what I could not dispense with,
without committing a violence on my feelings. If in this particular, you think
I am overacting my part, I kiss the rod of correction, and request your pardon;
if, on the contrary, you should commend my vigilance for your safety, I should
esteem myself happy.

My humble situation in life precludes me from making you a tender of my hand,
or I would immediately have addressed you as a lover; in order to snatch you
from the danger which apparently awaits you. I am but a poor curate, and may
probably long continue so, having but little interest with those in power; and
exaltation in the Church depends wholly upon a man's connexions.

I pretend not to superior talents, or to a more exemplary life, than many of
my cloth; but, admitting that my abilities and conduct were in the highest
degree meritorious, how little would they avail against the influence of
connexions! Obliged to support the character of a gentleman, I am starving upon
the paltry pittance of fifty pounds a year; whilst some of the meanest
mechanics in this metropolis, acquire double that sum annually; and, with a
mixture of pity and contempt, express their sorrow for a poor miserable
journeyman parson.

Should you, however, condescend to take compassion on me, and, by honoring me
with your hand, lift me from poverty to happiness and independence, how much
would you be entitled to my gratitude; and how zealously should I endeavor to
deserve a favor so distinguished and so unexpected! But I condemn my arrogance
and self delusion, having as great pretensions to a mitre, as to such
unparalleled generosity from Belinda.

Pardon me, Madam, even for suggesting so extravagant an idea. Let me observe,
however, in mitigation of my presumption, that, though I am indigent, I am
unincumbered with debt; no man having a claim upon me for a single shilling, It
is possible, Madam, that you may receive applications from men, who, with the
appearance of affluence, may be infinitely worse than nothing, and your fortune
may be in some degree exhausted to satisfy the demands of his clamorous
creditors.

Though these observations, so far as they respect myself, may be ineffectual;
yet I hope they will admonish you to be extremely wary and circumspect. Your
unsuspecting years may be amused by misrepresentations and specious promises;
and you may find, at length, that you have listened, with too credulous an ear,
to the protestations of the mercenary or the abandoned.

But how am I deviating from the path I entered upon! When I sat down to write
to you, I was actuated by the purest principles, to dissuade you from attending
to the proposals of others, and I am imperceptibly drawn in to tender proposals
of my own. But should they be honored with your attention, or even excite your
curiosity to be further acquainted with them, still I entreat you to examine
them with the nicest penetration.

But, lest I should swell my letter to the bulk of a moderate sermon, and deter
Belinda from passing through it, I must hasten to a conclusion; but I cannot
take my leave of you, Madam, without submissively beseeching you to listen to
my own overtures; or, if they should be deemed unworthy of your serious
consideration, to be attentive to the cautions suggested by

Your most humble Servant, PHILIP PROBY.

LETTER VIII. MR. RATTLE, to BELINDA.
'PON honor, Madam, you are a very pretty, delicate, modest lady, to advertise
for a bedfellow in such positive and feeling terms! What, because you are
turned of seventeen, and suppose yourself capable of being made a mother, you
think a moment's time ought not to be lost! Oh, what a forward minx! A little
proper correction would be more serviceable to you than a husband.

Have you no affectionate friend, who would undertake to administer such a
remedy to a giddy girl! If not I am at your service, and you may command me at
any time.

Alas, poor lady! She is afraid of leading (...) in another country; because,
forsooth, she thinks herself neglected and forsaken, in not having a man to
play with, almost before she has thrown aside her Doll! Mercy on us! That such
an infant should think of leaping from her leading strings into the arms of a
lover!

The manners of the sexes appear to be inverted; t^^ ^^^es are become feminine,
and the fema^^^ all masculine; the former assume an effeminate delicacy and
timidity, and the latter an air of roughness bordering upon heroism. I have
seen a blowsy female in a phaeton, whipping, cutting and managing the reins of
two pair of horses; and I have seen a male milliner simpering behind the
counter, dealing out ribbands, thread, and catgut.

Let me advise you, my dear little Miss in her teens, to return to boarding
school, and desire your governess to feed you upon watergruel and lemonade; all
animal food you ought carefully to avoid; and a little of the discipline,
recommended in the former part of my letter, will be found very salutary.

When you arrive at years of discretion, (which I am afraid will be at a very
distant period) you will be convinced that I have acted as your real friend. I
have taken the liberty of treating you with that freedom which every child
would be entitled (...) from one who is acquainted wiih the world. No man is a
greater admirer of the fair sex than I am; and, whilst I exist, I will ever
endeavor to be their friend,

ROBERT RATTLE.

LETTER IX. MR. BRISKET, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
IF so be that you will permit me to bid for you, I shall sartainly be very
much obliged to you. You must know as how I am a butcher, but I am wholesale,
and only deal in carcusses. I am as well known about Leaden all as any man that
ever stuck a knife in a bullock, and am as well to do, thouf I say it; but I
have my enemies, who throw out a great deal of callummy and slander against me,
only because I get up in the world; and when some people sees a man prosper,
they grows envious, and all that.

But I does not mind the whole kit of them; not I, believe me. I have got that
in my pocket which will stand my friend, when all other friends dezart me.

I once put up to be a common council man of Cheap ward, but it turned out to
be a very dear piece of business; and, what was worst of all, I came off second
best. I treated the whole ward with buggamy, and claret, and sham pain, to the
tune of twenty guineas, besides the calves heads that I sent in to make turtle
of; but all this would not do; Mr. Blackgrain, the shoemaker, had got the
length of the Alderman's foot, and prevailed on him to make a false return,
thouf I had as many hands for me as there was singers for my antigonist.

I thinks, however, I shall come in next St. Thomas's Day; but you know, Madam,
that is a long ways off, and who can tell what may happen between this and
then! I confess I longs to be a member of the corporation, because as how it
make a man spicuous in the world.

I have sarved all parish offices, and am one of the select westry. I don't say
all this from wanity, Madam, but only signify as how I am a man of some a
count, and not a mere venturer and beggar. Besides, Madam, I am comed of a very
good family; for my great grandfather of my mother's side was a large biscuit
baker in Horseliedown; and great grandmother of my father's side married the
first cousin of a capital soapboiler, in Swine Alley, Barnaby Street.

Yes, Madam, I often boastes of my four fathers and four mothers, and all the
rest of my ancesturs and predy cessurs. I knows what Mr. Alexander Pope, the
great poet, says, upon these occasions.

" But by your father's worth, if yours you rate,
" Count me those only that are good and grait.
" Go, if your anshent, but ignoble blood,
" Has crept through scoundrels, wallowing in mud!
" What can ennoble any sot or coward?
" Not all the blood of Skegs or Harry Howard!"
You perceive, Madam, that I am a man of rudition and reading, and I have a
most purdidgeous memory. I ave got all Pope's essay on man by art, and I once
repeated the 119th salm for a wager of a lamb's fry, and won it hollow.

I do assure you, Madam, I am a man that knows things, and am up to all the rig
of the best of them. It would do your art good, my dear Madam, to hear me, when
I talks about history. I knows the crissen name of all the kings and
pottintates from William the Concurrer, to George the Third of Greatbritain,
France and Ireland, king, defender of the Faith. I have got the hole story of
Nanny Bullen at my finger's ends. I can tell you all about Jane Shore and Lord
Hasting, and all that; and as how Jane shore was starved to death for want of
eating. I can tell you what made the two houses of York and Lancaster so angry
with one another, and how they happened to fall together by the ears.

I knows all the purticulars of Betty Canning, Mother Squires, and the Rabit
woman; and can entertain you, for an hour together, with the martyrdoms of
Smithfield, where I goes every Monday and Friday to buy beasts, and cattle, and
sheep. How many good men have been butchered there, by bloody Queen Mary,
because they would not be papishes.

In short, Madam. I have a fun of entertainment within myself, and shall never
be at a loss for a subject to be guile the tedious hours of a long winter
evening. I subscribes to Mr. Lane's circulating library, and studies politics,
mathematics, and all other ticks, and I can speak French as thouf I had been a
natif of France, and born there. Take this as a sample commong vou po^^y vou?
How do you do! Four be-eng, Je vou remersee. Very well I thank you. You will
not find many butchers that have got so much larning as I have; I can ax in
French for bread, and beef, and a fine lady, and many other necessaries of life.

Now, Madam, I think I have said enuff of myself to convince you that I am
somebody; and that if you reject my purposal, you may meet with a more worser
offer before you die.

If so be that I was twenty years youngerer, I should not doubt of capty vating
you; but as I am on the rong side of forty, I am not without apprehenshons that
you may think me rather too old to be you consart; thouf I can assure you that
I am as young as ever I was in my life, in one sense, and have not got a single
gray hair about me.

But if I be too old for you, mayhap my son may do; for the boy is a chip of
the old block, a chop of the old joint, and as frisky and frolicsome as any
young fellow in the precinct. I should be main glad to have you in our family,
by hook or by crook; for I am sartain that you are vise and vartuous by your
manner of riting.

I never rote so long a letter in my life before, except when I gave an a count
of my travels, from Dover to the continent of Calais.

Some evil minded persons, being instigated by the devil, have said as how my
trade is savige and unsentimental; but your sue purlative good sense will not
be by assed by such narrow prejudices. I never lays wiolent hands on any of my
bullocks, sheep, or lambs, having proper executioners to perform that bisness.
Like Majesty, I only sign the death warrant. Let me suppli Kate you, Madam, to
pay all dew attention to my letter, and to grant me one of the favors I have
axed. Let me either claps you in my own arms, or con sign you over to my son.
In either case, I shall consider myself,

Your weary much obliged humble Servant, BARTHOLOMEW BRISKET.

LETTER X. MR. SALMON, to BELINDA.
YOU would think me an odd fish, Madam, if, after I had perused your
sentimental advertisement in the WORLD, I had not thrown in a bait to angle for
your affections.

Some crabbed old fellows may perhaps condemn you for casting such a net to
catch lovers, and carp at the impropriety of it; and some antiquated dames will
perch themselves at the tea table, or any other gossiping place, and flounder
on at a violent rate against such a step, as deviating from the line of
delicacy, especially when a maid is the object.

Though, Madam, you are but seventeen years of age, it does not necessarily
follow that you are but a shrimp. Ladies of your time of life are sometimes as
fat as porposes, and sound as roaches. I mean not to convey any indelicate idea
respecting your person, but only that I suppose you to be embonpoint. I am not
a dab at making love, or I should turn the scales upon the antiquated
thornbacks who swim in the strong current of slander, and, when detected, twist
about like an eel, to exculpate themselves.

I have only to add, that my natural element is fresh water, that I have never
yet been pickled; that I am at all times ready to be served up to you, that I
shall be like a fish out of water if you treat me with indifference; and that I
am, Madam,

Your most obedient Servant, SYLVENUS SALMON.

LETTER XI. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
BELIEVE me, my Louisa, I receive as many letters as if I had been in a
principal department in the state; and more are incessantly arriving. Lawyers,
clergymen, apothecaries, fishmongers and newsmongers, compose a part of my
correspondents.

Hitherto I have not any reason to regret the adoption of my scheme. It affords
me amusement, keeps me from ennui, and instructs me, in some measure, in the
knowledge of the world.

As I expected, I received epistles of various kinds; serious and humorous;
whimsical and solemn; sarcastical and ludicrous. An apothecary recommends
himself to me as a drug; a lawyer very obligingly offers to partake of my
fortune, because he he has too much honesty and honor to support or defend an
act of villainy; and a very sententious clergyman advises me to be extremely
cautious and circumspect, in a matter of such great importance.

Among the ludicrous letters that have yet come to hand, may be reckoned that
of a blundering Hibernian, who declares himself to be a gentleman of large
expectations, but chooses to amuse himself with carrying a sedan chair!

Another is from an impertinent puppy, who desires me to return to boarding
school. This is the most insolent epistle that I have received. It is evidently
the production of some empty coxcomb.

A wealthy butcher, in the true Smithfield style, solicits my hand, either for
himself or son, and gives a very curious and entertaining account of himself;
and a Mr. Salmon desires to be served up to me, not considering that Lent is
just expired.

A fresh packet of letters has this moment arrived, which would take some hours
in the perusal; but they shall remain unnoticed by me, till I have discharged
my duty to my Louisa.

Had I sufficient leisure, I would copy the letters as I receive them, and
transmit those copies to you; but I am sufficiently employed in reading them
only. You must therefore wait with patience till you return to London, when you
will certainly have a delecious treat in looking over those which I shall
recommend to your perusal.

I am really of opinion, my Louisa, that, among my epistolary wooers, I shall
be able to make a prudent and judicious choice. One or two, who have already
favored me with addresses, seem perfectly qualified to render any reasonable
woman happy, if mental qualifications are essential to that end. My fortune is
more than sufficient for the sphere of life in which I intend to move; then why
should I require an addition to that fortune, or seek for an equivalent in an
husband?

A match, upon such a construction, could be but barter for barter; where, like
two plodding partners, each may be considered as having brought in his full
proportion of the articles in trade, and that neither of them are indebted to
each other.

My disposition is of a different, and I flatter myself of a nobler turn. It is
a glorious satisfaction to me, to confer favors, without even the desire or
expectation of a return! I should be happy in bestowing the means of happiness
on a man whom I esteemed, and in receiving those returns of affection which the
grateful are ever ready to pay. But, where mercenary marriages are negociated,
and shilling for shilling is the stipulation on both sides, the equality of the
parties is principally contended for, and a man treats his wife with common
decency and respect, from no other motive than because she advanced her share
of the capital stock.

Such people, my Louisa, are destitute of sentiment and feeling. There is a
pleasure in conferring and receiving favors; but where there are cautious
stipulations and every act is performed for a valuable consideration, a
generous heart shudders at the idea.

I hope you are, by this time a little better reconciled to my project. As I
have found time, notwithstanding I am so much engaged in business, to write you
this long epistle, I expect one of the first magnitude from you. Favor me with
a description of the country round you, and with some account of your
neighbors. Tell me if there are any pretty fellows within a reasonable distance
of your mansion; but, above all, be particular in informing me when I may
expect the pleasure of seeing you in the metropolis.

Yours, with the utmost confidence, BELINDA.

LETTER XII. MR. LUCKLESS, to BELINLA.
MADAM,
IF your heart is capable of feeling for the unfortunate, I may flatter myself
that you will take compassion on me; or at least, that you will condescend to
pay some attention to my disastrous tale.

In my early youth, indeed, nothing material happened to me of a calamitous
nature, except the loss of an indulgent father and mother; but ever since I
approached manhood, a series of misfortunes have attended me.

At the age of twenty, I succeeded to an estate of fifteen hundred pounds per
annum, and upwards of thirty thousand pounds in cash; so affluent a fortune I
thought would enable me to adopt a genteel mode of living, without injuring my
circumstances.

Having only an antiquated mansion house upon my premises, I ordered a new one
to be erected in the modern style, on which I expended seven thousand pounds,
and about a fourth part of that sum in the most elegant furniture I could
procure; but, before I was in the actual occupation of it, the whole building
took fire, and that and the furniture were all consumed to ashes.

Prior to this accident, I had deposited upwards of ten thousand pounds in the
hands of a merchant, whom I considered as my banker, and meant to draw on him
for cash as I might occasionally want it. He was a director of the Bank, a
member of parliament, and a governor of many of the city hospitals. He was said
to be immensely rich by all who knew him, and I thought my property as secure
as if it had been in the funds; when, guess at my surprise, Madam, the very
next day after the flames had levelled my new mansion with the ground, I read
my merchant's name in the Gazette, introduced with a whereas; and I have since
received a dividend of only two shillings in the pound.

I should have had an equivalent for all these losses, by a twenty thousand
pound prize, had I not foolishly parted with my ticket to a neighbor. I had
purchased it for myself with a determination to stand the chance of it; but,
being then in London, I received a letter from a gentleman in the country,
requesting me to purchase him a lottery ticket. Unwilling to quit the company I
was then engaged in, to repair to a lottery office, I sent my own ticket to my
friend, thinking I could buy another at my convenience; and that ticket was
afterward drawn a prize of twenty thousand pounds.

Certainly I was born under the influence of some unlucky planet; for, not long
after this very provoking accident, fortune, in one of her freaks, deprived me
of a considerable legacy. A distant relation of mine, thinking his death
approaching, gave instructions to an attorney to prepare a will, wherein he had
bequeathed me five thousand guineas; the will was engrossed, read and approved;
but, just as he was about to sign and execute it, he called for a glass of cold
water, and drank it; which immediately threw him into convulsions, and he
dropped down dead. By his thus dying intestate, I lost the five thousand
guineas, that were intended for me, and the heir at law (who would have been
cut off with a shilling, had the will been executed) succeeded to a very large
real estate.

Chagrined at such a succession of disappointments, and my ready cash being all
exhausted, I applied to an advertising money lender for a present supply; who
readily undertook to discount my own notes for any sum I might require, at the
moderate and legal interest of five per cent. He observed, however, that it was
usual, on such occasions, for the borrower to allow a small premium to him, as
agent between the borrower and the lender. To enforce the propriety of his
receiving some little reward, he added, that he must guarantee such notes, by
endorsing them himself, which rendered him liable to pay the whole sums,
provided I did not honor them regularly as they became due; politely observing,
at the same time, that he did not imagine he ran the least risque with a
gentleman of my seeming probity.

There appeared to be something so plausible and proper in the man's conduct,
in this business, that I submitted to his terms, and drew three promissory
notes for five hundred pounds each, at two, four, and six months after date,
and presented them to him, relying upon his protestations that he would furnish
me with cash for them at the hour of two the next day. I waited impatiently for
the arrival of that hour; but my plausible Jew never made his appearance; and I
never heard of the securities I had given him to negociate, till after the
expiration of two months, when I was arrested for five hundred pounds, the
amount of the first note that became due.

I remonstrated with the sheriff's officer on the cruelty and injustice of the
transaction; who unfeelingly replied, that it was of no consequence to him, nor
did he wish to be informed of any of the particulars; he had got a warrant to
arrest me, and that was sufficient for him. Without further ceremony, he
conducted me to a spunging house, where I was confined till I found means to
procure the money to pay the note, and costs of suit.

As the two other notes successively became due, I was treated in the same
inhuman manner, and actually paid the whole fifteen hundred pounds, though I
had not received a single shilling upon any of the securities.

I consulted lawyers, whether it was possible by any means to evade the payment
of them, as it was evident they had been swindled from me; but, as they had
passed through several hands, and had been endorsed from one to another for a
pretended valuable consideration, they advised me to submit to my present loss,
rather than engage in expensive suits, which would probably terminate against
me.

In order to raise money to get rid of this infamous business, I was compelled
to mortgage my estate, upon which I borrowed ten thousand pounds. The remainder
of that sum is now almost consumed.

These, Madam, are a few of the misfortunes which I have experienced; but you
may be assured I shall be extremely wary for the future.

If you, Madam, will condescend to notice me, I think I should receive an ample
recompense for all the untoward events that have befallen me. My fortune is
still considerable, and probably yours may be sufficient to discharge the
encumbrance on my estate. That your disposition is amiable, appears evidently
in your address, and your person, from your own modest representation of it, is
fashioned by the Graces.

Let me entreat you, my dear Madam, to favor me with a line. It will afford
infinite satisfaction to

Your most obedient Servant, LORENZO LUCKLESS.
P.S. Having hitherto been so remarkably unfortunate in all my undertakings, I
expect a series of successes to balance the account between the blinded Goddess
and myself.



LETTER XIII. MR. STANZA, to BELINDA.
YOUR advertisement, Madam, excited my curiosity, and I have presumed to become
your correspondent. I cannot, however, boast of any large possessions or
expectancies, my estate being all personal, in the strictest sense of the word;
for I have only my person that I can call my own. I am ready to settle that on
you, Madam, at any time; but, as I cannot say much in commendation of it, I am
almost afraid to recommend it to you.

Having no income but the produce of my brain, I may literally be said to live
upon my wit. Consequently my table is but indifferently spread. Turtle and
capon I know not even the taste of; and instead of a sirloin smoking on my
board, a mutton chop, unaccompanied with pickles or other provocatives,
frequently constitutes my whole bill of fare.

When I attend my duty in the house of commons -- mistake me not, Madam, for I
am not a member of that august assembly, but only act in the character of a
reporter -- every speech delivered by any of the senators of that house, I
commit to memory, and serve it up to the public the next morning. Probably,
Madam, you may take in the World -- That paper is devoted to my productions --
The Speeches in Parliament, Memoirs of school boys, the fabrication alluding to
crim. con. and all the casualties in that performance, are entirely my own
compositions.

Indeed I am thought capital at a casualty, few of my profession presuming to
attempt to vie with me in that department. No longer ago than yesterday, I
overset a boat under London bridge, by which accident two gentlemen and three
ladies were drowned; and to render the shock as great as possible to the
reader, I made one of the ladies in the last month of her pregnancy.

On the same day I stole an infant, the only issue of a rich and reputable
family, from the arms of the nursery maid, put out its eyes, and sold it to a
beggar woman in Whitechapel.

During the drawing of the last lottery, I killed as many pigeons, by throwing
them from their horses, as would furnish half a dozen dove houses.

I am thought to be particularly excellent in a murder. A murder of my
committing is immediately known by an intelligent reader, because it is always
attended with such peculiar circumstances of horror. I am allowed a shilling
each for all my murders, whilst others are glad to furnish those articles at
only half the price.

Sometimes, when advertisements run short in our paper, I am ordered by the
conductor, to make about half a column of scandal, which is one of the easiest
tasks in the whole province of literature. I acknowledge, indeed, that I feel
some little remorse in fabricating articles of that nature. Were it not in the
way of business, it would be a species of cruelty to rob a lady of her
reputation, and load the husband's forehead with a pair of imaginary horns, for
so trifling a consideration as I usually receive. I have occasioned at least
half a dozen separations between husband and wife, by insinuations and oblique
charges, when the lady has been as chaste and innocent as Diana.

Do not imagine, Madam, that my abilities are limited to the productions of a
diurnal paper. I sometimes associate with the Muses, and pick up a penny in the
poetic line. When I have got a few shiners in my pocket, I attempt heroics, and
often with success. As my cash diminishes, my genius diminishes of course, and
then I can only produce sonnets and other inferior lyric compositions. If my
last guinea suffers transmutation, the wings of my imagination are so closely
clipped, that I am then fit only for elegy.

Once in my life time, I attempted to write a tragedy, but the managers of the
royal theaters thought proper to reject it; sagaciously observing, that it was
too deep and affecting. Was there ever so ridiculous a reason assigned for not
performing a dramatic piece, of singular excellence? Can any thing be more
absurd than to condemn a tragedy for being tragic?

My tragedy was called, " The Incendiary; or, 1780." The plot had some
gunpowder in it and a large quantity of hemp. When I came to the denouement in
the last act, one of the most awful scenes are represented, that I believe has
ever appeared on any stage. No less than three gallowses are exhibited at one
view, and sixteen malefactors! pendant from each gallows. Was there ever a more
noble spectacle! and how consistent with the solemnity, sublimity and dignity
of the tragic Muse?

I fear, Madam, you will think me too prolix; but, when I profess myself a
suitor to a lady, it is necessary that I should acquaint her with the reasons
on which I build my pretensions to her hand. I wish, Madam, to become your
husband; but I should not expect that you would honor me with an answer to this
epistle, had I not pointed out a visible method of getting bread for myself and
partner.

With your pecuniary aid, I would engage to establish a new morning print upon
the most permanent footing. Should such a journal appear, as I am capable of
producing, the publications of the day must hide their diminished heads. The
World would then be at an end; the Post would be deserted; the Public
Advertiser confined to a few private hands; and the Herald become a Pursuivant.

I have some thoughts of taking away one of the gallowses from the catastrophe
of my tragedy, and present it a second time to the managers, but I will not
give up the other two, to please all the critics in the universe.

Before I conclude, I must beg you to give me an audience; when I will produce
such credentials as, I flatter myself, will convince you that I am not wholly
unworthy of your attention.

I am, Madam, with the utmost deference and respect, your most obedient
Servant, AUGUSTUS STANZA.

LETTER XIV. EBENEZER PRIMITIVE, to BELINDA.
FRIEND BELINDA,
I BLAME thee much for the step which thou have taken, and am determined to
reprove thee. Thou have vaunted of thy frail person in terms that do not become
thee, and thrown out a bait for carnality to nibble at; but the upright will
depise thy blandishments, and consider thee as a lost sheep.

Thou may accuse me of impertinence for dictating unto thee, but verily,
friend Belinda, thou art sailing in a rough sea, without rudder or compass.
Recall thy advertisement, reject the importunities of seducers, and confine
thyself to the channel of thy acquaintance. If thou have merit and money, thou
have nothing to fear. The men naturally cleave unto thy sex, as the point
veereth to the north; but thy proceedings savoreth of levity, and thou will
expose thyself to calumny and insult.

Thy plan of public wooing is reprehensible; but if thou will abandon it, and
suffer me to treat with thee on principles of regularity and decorum, I will
meet thee when and where thou please.

Thou may perhaps object to the starchness and singularity of my professed
principles but I am not so violently attached to opinion, as to be deaf to thy
reasonable objections. If, upon an interview, thou should find me agreeable
to thee, and I should also think thee agreeable, my hat should no longer go
unbuttoned, but be molded into any form thou please.

I am thy real Friend, EBENEZER PRIMITIVE.

LETTER XV. LOUISA LENOX, to BELINDA BLACKET.
I CONGRATULATE you, my Belinda, on the number and respectability of your
suitors, and doubt not but you will manage them with propriety. I crave your
pardon for assuming the austere synic in a former letter, and perfectly approve
of your whole plan of operations.

Be it known, too, that I have made a conquest since my arrival in this part of
the world. The son of an affluent grazier has paid his addresses to me in form,
and made me a tender of his heart and hand. He is a good figure, but rustic,
rough and unpolished. He is also good natured in the extreme; and, upon the
whole, with a little cultivation, would be a valuable acquisition.

He has indeed rather too much of the mauvaise honte, but that sheepishness and
timidity will vanish when he mixes a little with the beau monde. His name is
Graham. He was solemnly introduced to me as a lover, by a very respectable old
gentleman, his father, I received him with respect, but without familiarity,
and the conversation, as nearly as I can recollect, was as follows.

MR. GRAHAM. It Is a remarkable fine day, Madam.


LOUISA. Yes, Sir.


MR. GRAHAM. We had a fine refreshing shower yesterday, and yet the roads are
now incommoded with the dust.


LOUISA. The wind is pretty high, Sir, I think.


MR. GRAHAM. Remarkably so, Madam; and yet it would be termed a gentle breeze,
by mariners.


LOUISA. They would call it a gale, Sir, I believe.


MR. GRAHAM. Probably they might. Pray, Madam, what is it o'clock?


LOUISA. It is time for you to be going, Sir, if you are far from home.


MR. GRAHAM. I fear, Madam, my company is troublesome to you.


LOUISA. No, Sir, not in the least.


MR. GRAHAM. If I could flatter myself that my presence was not disagreeable to
you, the danger of being benighted would not give me the least concern.


LOUISA. You much over rate me, Sir, if you think my company equivalent to such
a sacrifice.


MR. GRAHAM. Pardon me, Madam; I make a just estimate of the value of my time,
when I prefer the moments passed with so amiable a young lady, to all that may
be lost or wasted in insignificant pursuits. An hour of your company, though
obtained by the sufferings and solicitudes of many months, would be purchased
at too cheap a rate.


LOUISA. So courtly a compliment I did not expect at such a distance from the
capital. Permit me, however, Sir, to consider it as a compliment; and, even in
that light, I think myself obliged to you for your civility.


MR. GRAHAM. I am too much of the rustic, Madam, to be guilty of a compliment.
Men of polished manners only can manage those weapons with dexterity. Such
unfashionable characters as myself, permit the tongue to act in unison with the
heart, and are generally so vulgar and ill bred as to speak their real
sentiments.


LOUISA. Believe me, Sir, you have seen exhibited an unfavorable picture of
polite life; one that has been heightened with caricature. I cannot see any
reason why politeness and sincerity may not accompany each other; or that a man
cannot have integrity without being a savage.


MR. GRAHAM. My rusticity, Madam, I am afraid, has given you the idea of a
savage. I would cheerfully submit to that, or any other appellation, to obtain
a single look of approbation from Louisa. Permit me, Madam, to salute your hand.


LOUISA. Your advances are somewhat too rapid, Sir. What encouragement have I
ever given you, to induce you to suppose that I would admit of such liberties?


MR. GRAHAM. I approach you, Madam, with that respectful awe, which is due to a
divinity from a mere mortal.


LOUISA. You may remember, Sir, that you enquired about the hour, soon after
your arrival. I take the liberty of informing you that it is now somewhat
later, than when that question was proposed.


MR. GRAHAM. Too well I understand your meaning, Madam: It is but too apparent
that my absence would afford you pleasure. My towering hopes are withered in
the bud, and distress and misery await me! -- Banished from thee, the world
will become tasteless, and life a burden! Happy should I have continued, had
you not visited these regions; had I not seen that angelic face, that
captivating air, that sweetly engaging countenance and deportment!


LOUISA. Consider the hour, Sir!


MR. GRAHAM. You rally me, and indeed too justly, for such an impertinent
interrogatory; but your good sense and generosity will pardon the effects of my
simplicity. Awed by the presence of so much beauty and perfection, words
inadvertently escaped my lips* and I am a sincere penitent.


LOUISA. And will sin no more?


MR. GHARAM. Yes, if talking with Louisa be a sin, let me sin on, so I may be
forgiven.


LOUISA. I forgive you what is past, but be cautious how you offend in future.
-- I wish you a good evening, Sir.


MR. GRAHAM. Permit me to retort a little, Madam; it is now my turn to echo
your own words -- "Consider the hour, Madam!" -- It certainly is but an early
hour. Your wishing me a good evening might be construed a summons for me to
depart, by those who were indifferent; but, delighting in your company, I
consider it as a French salutation; it is customary in France to salute with
those words when company meet to pass the evening together, and not when they
separate, in order to retire to rest.


LOUISA. You have traveled, I suppose, Sir.


MR. GRAHAM. Not out of my native island, Madam; but I have read the
productions of some travelers of veracity, who have visited the continent, and
from some of them I have picked up this piece of information; the truth of
which is hardly to be doubted.


LOUISA. You seem determined, I perceive, Sir, not to understand the broadest
hints I am capable of suggesting.


MR. GRAHAM. Nothing but direct, positive, and peremptory terms, respecting my
departure, will I presume to understand; and Louisa, I am well convinced, has
too much politeness, to adopt such language.


LOUISA. You will, however, permit me to request that you will take your leave.


MR. GRAHAM. Yes, Madam, upon certain conditions.


LOUISA. What are those, Sir?


MR. GRAHAM. That I may be permitted to visit you again.


LOUISA. On no other terms, will you depart?


MR. GRAHAM. On no other terms, Madam.


LOUISA. Agreed!


MR. GRAHAM. Let me thank you on my knees -- Let me --


LOUISA. Keep your raptures for another opportunity! -- Be thankful that your
petition has been granted, and begone.


At this moment my enamored swain took a most respectful leave of me, and I
retired to my dressing room.

Thus have I given you, as faithfully as my memory will permit, the first
dialogue between me and my northern lover. He began his suit with great naivete
and simplicity, but gradually improved as he acquired more confidence, and at
last acquitted himself very handsomely.

I freely acknowledge to you, Belinda, that he is far from being indifferent to
me; and though I affected to wish him gone, by talking of the lateness of the
hour, and bidding him good night, I was as desirous of his staying as he could
possibly be.

I expect -- I am not ashamed to say that I even hope -- his second visit will
not be long delayed. I feel a partiality in his favor, and apprehend he will
find no great difficulty in subduing me.

Appearances, however, must be preserved for a time, and I must affect reserve
and indifference to avoid the imputation of forwardness. You are a happy girl,
Belinda, in having so many strings to your bow; whilst I, like the almost
deserted hen, must lavish all my affection upon a single chicken.

You shall be regularly informed, post after post, of my lover's progress. As
his fortune is reported to be immense, my fears are alarmed that my little
portion may be thought too inadequate, and, from the remonstrances of mercenary
relations, the youth may slip through my fingers. But, if I can read
countenances, on his it appears in legible characters, that he is completely
done for -- nailed! rivetted!

My thoughts are so thoroughly engaged on my new victory, that you must suffer
me to postpone the description of the adjacent country, which you so strongly
solicited in your last. My swain will probably expect me to accompany him in a
few jaunts, which will enable me the better to perform the task you have
imposed on me; but our's will be a romantic peregrination, and instead of
hunting fossils, antiquities and ores, we shall search after enamelled meadows,
laved by the purling stream, and retreat to amaranthine bowers, formed for
enraptured lovers.

Adieu, my Belinda, and believe me ever your most affectionate, LOUISA.
P. S. The length of this epistle, may justly claim a long one in return.



LETTER XVI. SIR HARRY HATTON, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
BEING a gentleman and a baronet, I take the liberty to become your
correspondent. I once had a tolerable good estate, but now have only a scanty
annuity, barely sufficient to keep myself above want, and my apparel from being
ragged.

But my distresses, thank heaven, shall never attempt me to act dishonorably by
false representations. I have a title to bestow, Madam, and a title only. If
that should merit your attention, you may command my attendance at a moment's
warning; but, if you should not deem that title equivalent to your fortune, our
treaty is at an end.

Permit me, however, to observe, that I am not deficient in personal or mental
qualifications, and my age does not exceed twenty six. You need not be
precipitate in giving me an answer. Take time to deliberate, before you come to
a determination. You know, Madam, the respect due, and generalty paid to a
title, by the universal consent of mankind, and how respectable the title of my
Lady is considered in all companies, and upon all occasions.

You have a fortune without a title, and I am in the actual possession of a
title without a fortune. By a union we should both have titles, and an ample
independence; both of us would be gifted with preeminence and fortune.

Nor do I consider it as descending from my rank, when I deign to make
proposals to a lady of your seeming abilities and penetration.

I have further to observe, for your serious consideration, the probability of
the advantage which your posterity may hereafter enjoy, especially the male
heirs, lineally descended, as the title of Baronet will belong in hereditary
course, to the most distant progeny of the house of Hatton.

It is in your power, Madam, to be Lady Hatton, and your real friends will
advise you to embrace so fair an opportunity. But, if you are determined to
shut your ears, when honors court you to receive them, I shall expect and
request that this epistle may remain unanswered, and that this negotiation may
continue a profound secret.

I am, Madam, your most humble Servant, HARRY HATTON.
My address is "Sir Harry Hatton, Lambeth."



LETTER XVII. MR. ELMAR, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
EXCUSE an undertaker, who, for a moment neglects his deceased friends, to lay
himself at the feet of a most amiable young lady. I have a flourishing run of
business, which will fully enable me to support a lady in an elegant style. On
the very day that you advertisement caught my eye, my wife took a final leave
of this sublunary world, and has left me a widower. She was a good wife and
merits decent interment. A hearse and six, decorated with plumes* and attended
by three mourning coaches, shall conduct her to her last home.

How opportunely has she quitted the theater of life, when so fine an opening
presents itself to furnish me with another!

Luckily for me, Madam, we have had a very unhealthy season, and I have driven
a roaring trade for these several months past. I have buried many of my best
friends, and, if the reigning fever should continue its ravages, I am not
without hopes of attending the obsequies of as many more. A young physician in
my neighborhood has contributed not a little, to accelerate their departure.
That he may live long and prosper is the foremost of my wishes!

There are many advantages, Madam, peculiar to my profession. Elm of an
inferior price, as effectually serves for a wooden mansion, as that of the
first quality, and the inhabitant never can complain of the architecture. Heirs
at law, executors, and legatees, always pay the undertaker's bill, without
taxation or grumbling, especially if the deceased cuts up pretty handsomely;
and, if he leaves the world as he found it, some pious relative generally
undertakes to perform the last service liberally.

Really, Madam, I am in a most excellent line of business, and have had the
pleasure and happiness of burying some of the first nobility. I lately was
employed to conduct the funeral of one of the most benevolent gentlemen that
ever existed; his loss was universally lamented, except by me and his legatees.
Had I not been his undertaker, I would have sincerely wished him a longer life!

Probably you may have a friend at Court, who may have interest to procure me
the management of a royal funeral. What a flattering prospect for a man in my
line of business! for, as the family are numerous, the common course of
mortality will frequently create a job for me. Far be it from my thoughts that
such melancholy events will give me pleasure, but when a person's time is come*
Madam, I may as well bury him as any other undertaker.

Should I be so unfortunate as to survive you, Madam, you shall be interred
with all the pomp and trappings of my profession. Mutes shall be posted at my
door, escutcheones and plumes shall decorate your hearse; and your funeral
sermon shall be preached by a doctor in divinity.

As a very tender connection may possibly take place between us, you may command
my services, upon the most moderate terms, if any of your relations should
happen to take a trip into the other world. You perceive, Madam, that I have an
eye to business upon all occasions; and, though I may not be so happy as to be
the object of your choice, I should be proud to be your undertaker.

I dabble a little in the business of an upholsterer, and should you fix on any
other person than myself, to be your happy husband, suffer me to furnish the
bridal bed, that you may consummate in clover. It shall be embellished with all
the art of the profession, and the down, of which it is composed, shall yield
to the lightest pressure. On such a bed you may extend yourself, and repose
with the highest satisfaction, and you and your consort will think yourselves
in elysium.

A sopha, too, will probably be wanted; it being a very necessary and
convenient piece of furniture, I have a patent for making them with elastic
spings, on the most approved principle. Any commands of yours shall be executed
with punctuality and dispatch.

Permit me, Madam, to request an interview. When you see me, you will pronounce
me a man of address and parts, or I am miserably mistaken. I have not been
accustomed to write long epistles, and must consequently appear to a
disadvantage as a correspondent, but you would be convinced should I be honored
with a tete a tete, that I am something more than a pretentender to excellence
in my several departments. You will also find me a man of the world, and not a
stranger to the ton.

All who know me, consider themselves honored with my company; and the heads of
the parish invite me to all their convivial meetings; but nothing can so much
gratify my ambition as to receive a summons from your fair hand, to attend you,
and personally answer for myself.

I am, Madam, with profound respect, your most obedient servant, PHILIP ELM.

LETTER XVIII. DR. POTION, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
HITHERTO I have considered a wife as an emetic, and have had a violent
aversion even to the name of one; but, with our years, our appetites and
dispositions vary, and what is a salutary regimen at one time, opperates like
poison at a future period.

Matrimony has been considered, by some practitioners, to be worse than an
epilepsy or a catalapsy, as only death can effect a cure; but still there are
periodical maniacs who venture upon that state.

Charmed by the style and matter of your advertisement, I thus presume to
examine your fair pulse. In your situation, as the symptoms appear to me, a
husband is the remedy I would prescribe to you, but the dose must not be too
often repeated -- A plurality of husbands, according to the Aphorisms of Dr.
Thelypthoras, may bring on a cardialgia.

The husband I would advise to be taken, should be composed of the following
ingredients. A manly figure, mixed with the essence of good nature, and a
quantum sufficit of understanding. A few grains of volatile tincture of youth,
would be an essential improvement.

I am that composition, Madam, and perfectly adapted to the nature of your
complaint. If a medicine of this kind should not be speedily administered, the
disorder may become violent, and recourse must be had to refrigerents,
evacuants, and annodynes. The diet too should be cooling and light; such as
whey and vegetables. Bleeding is proper, and should be often repeated,
especially if the pulse be strong and quick. Cathartics, such as cremor. tart.
with rad. jalap. sal. cathart. amar. tamarind. mann. elect. lenit. with nitre
dissolved in whey, etc.

You see, Madam, that I am as well acquainted with the treatment proper for the
amorous, as the iliac passion. I ought indeed to understand the science of
medicine, having been regular trained to it in all its stages. I served seven
years to a farrier, during which time I acquired a perfect knowledge of the
structure of a horse, and the most effectual methods of combating the diseases
incident to that noble animal.

At the expiration of my apprenticeship, I walked the Hospitals, as it is
generally termed, but not as a regular pupil, who pays a valuable consideration
for being permitted to attend medical and chirurgical operations. When an
opportunity presented itself, I mixed with others, and stole as much knowledge
and experience, as would have cost a considerable sum, had I proceeded in the
regular mode. -- At length, thinking myself fully qualified as a physician,
both for man and horse, I deserted the hospitals, and without further ceremony,
took a shop in a very respectable neighborhood; put up, in gold letters over
the door, Peter Potion, Surgeon and Apothecary; and for some hours in the day,
amused myself with thumping the pestle in the mortar. This continual sound of
business, together with a fine chemical and galenical exhibition at the window,
soon produced some real patients.

Having picked up a few old volumes on medicine and surgery; such as Heister,
Astrue, Sharp, Hunter, and Le Dran; I ventured to undertake any case however
difficult, and generally by the assistance of those authors, performed a cure
or at least gave such medicines as afforded a palliation. To some, however, I
fear I gave a passport to the other world; but I have the consolation to think
that I exerted my best endeavors, and the best physician could have done no
more. The most eminent of the faculty are often obliged to work in the dark,
and consequently whether they kill or cure, must depend merely upon accident.

Becoming a little established in business, I conceived an idea of inventing a
few nostrums. Being, as I before observed, a regular practitioner, I could not
bear to behold a parcel of empiries lolling in their coaches; many of whom had
been shoemakers, blacksmiths, or the most menial mechanics; I therefore ushered
into the world, with the greatest dispatch imaginable, a Cephalalgi^, or powder
for the headache* and a plaster for the destruction of corns. Thus, by laying a
tax upon the two extremes of mankind, the head and the feet, I presently found
myself in a situation to enable me to imitate the other nostrum mongers, and
set up a mo^^ elegant carriage.

Encouraged by a series of successful events, I came to the resolution of
purchasing a diploma, and be constituted in reality a doctor in medicine. I
applied to the university of A --, and for the moderate sum of fourteen
guineas, purchased as complete a diploma for that purpose, as could be obtained
at Oxford or Cambridge, by eleven years academical residence.

Possessed of such excellent materials for puffing, I got my diploma translated
into English, printed the substance of it on the papers which enclosed my
nostrums, and took such other steps to acquaint the world with my real dignity,
that I am now considered as one of the first physicians in the metropolis.

I have projected some other general medicines, which will, in a short time, be
respectfully presented to the public. Particularly, a lotion to promote
dentition; an otalgiac powder for the cure of the earach; and a balsamic
tincture for the heartach; the last of which I fear I must have recourse to
myself, unless you condescend to notice this epistle, and express a willingness
to partake of my good fortune.

I have forgot to observe to you, Madam, that I once had a specific for the
gout, which is the only article of mine that has not been attended with
success. It happened unluckily that, during the time of my advertising that
medicine, I was laid up with a severe arthritic fit. This got wind, and my
specific became a mere drug; the public very judiciously observing, that, had I
actually possessed an infallible remedy for such an excruciating disorder, I
certainly should have found leisure to administer it to myself.

The wisest of us, Madam, are sometimes off their guard; and, in that single
instance, I admit that my prudence was not properly displayed.

My chariot waits for me, Madam, or you would have found a tedious
correspondent, in

Your most humble Servant, PEREGRINE POTION.

LETTER XIX. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
I CONGRATULATE you, my Louisa, on your new acquisition; and I congratulate the
inhabitants in your vicinity* on their having a man among them so capable of
discerning merit, and so susceptible of the tender passion under its proper
influence.

I am pleased at the encomiums you have bestowed on your ingenuous swain; but
the choice he has made is a sufficient eulogium on him; a volume of panegyric
cannot so effectually display his taste, his understanding, and his
discernment, as his taking the earliest opportunity of tendering his hand and
heart to my Louisa.

The naivete and simplicity of his manner, on a first interview, are highly
characteristic of his sensibility. Who could approach so much excellence, for
the first time, without the greatest agitation and perturbation of mind? --
None but the ignorant and the indifferent. But, according to your own relation,
how rapid were his advances from timidity to a proper degree of confidence, and
from confidence to courage. He is indeed a jewel, and requires but little
polishing.

I am not displeased, Louisa, that you acknowledge Mr. Graham possesses a
little corner of your heart. You admit that he is not indifferent to you; and
that you "expect," and even " hope," that his second visit will not be long
delayed.

Ah! my dearest girl, you must now be numbered among the wounded. -- You must
no longer declare yourself impregnable. Happy am I to find, however, that he
who inflicted the wound, can administer a cure; from him proceed the poison and
the antidote.

I am entirely of your opinion, Louisa, that appearances are to be preserved;
for the malignant tongue of slander is ever voluble, and where any action will
admit of two constructions, the worst is sure to be adopted.

You doubtless expect a catalogue of those lovers, who have made me a tender of
their services since my last. They would make collectively, a most excellent
groupe, and furnish great scope for the genius of a Bunbury. The first upon the
list is the most ill fated mortal that ever has existed since the days of Adam,
and pleads his misfortunes as a kind of claim to my compassion; not considering
what the poet has advanced --

" Look into those they call unfortunate,
" And closer viewed you will find they are unwise,
" Some flaw in their own conduct lies beneath."
But, with all becoming deference to Dr. Young, this observation is more
poetical than just. It comes, however, with propriety from the lips of an
avaricious father, who recommends a fortunate lover to his daughter, and
pointedly exclaims against a suitor whom she approves, merely on account of his
misfortunes; though, in other respects, the former is much inferior to the
latter.

My next correspondent is really a pleasant fellow. His letter extorted several
hearty laughs from me in the perusal of it. He assumes the name of Stanza and
mentions several literary productions in which he is an assistant. He
ridicules, in a fine vein of humor, the contrivances of the editors of
newspapers, to amuse and entertain their readers. His satire on particular
maneuvers is equally just and entertaining, and his projected plan of a new
paper, is mentioned with great pleasantry.

A Quaker is the next upon the list, who, after abusing me in the affected
style of that ridiculous tribe, clumsily offers to embellish his beaver with a
button, rather than not be admitted one of the candidates for my person.

A Baronet, presuming on his title, attacks me with some effrontery; but I
shall treat him with the negligence he merits.

An Undertaker next addresses me, who, from his own description of himself, is
certainly an original character. I may, perhaps, condescend to answer his
letter, and appoint an interview; but it will be only to afford amusement for
the hour.

A Quack Doctor is, to me, a most detestable character; and the epistle which I
have received from one of that description, confirms me in the opinion I have
always entertained of that baneful fraternity. He has meanly purchased of the
mercenary college of A --, a doctor's diploma, the better to enable him to
proceed upon his medical farce, and impose upon mankind. It was well said by a
certain wag, speaking of that university, that though it was poor now, it would
get rich by degrees.

I have this day received a visit from one of my epistolary candidates, in
consequence of a permission under my sign manual. It was my clerical suitor,
Mr. Proby; and really he appears to be in all respects, a gentleman. Taking
example by you my Louisa, I shall relate the conversation that past between us,
according to the best of my recollection, by way of dialogue.

MR. PROBY. I think myself particularly honored, Madam, by the partial
selection you have made in my favor, among a multiplicity of suitors who have
doubtless troubled you with their addresses. I have to entreat your pardon,
Madam, in the first place, for having presumed to arraign your conduct
respecting the advertisement.


BELINDA. That your remonstrances proceeded from the best of motives, is not to
be doubted; and they came with singular propriety from a gentleman of your
cloth. The step I have taken, will be supposed, by many, to be the effect of
levity, and deserving of the severest reprehension; but, be assured, Sir, my
intention was perfectly inoffensive; and whatever aspersions this conduct of
mine may have drawn upon me, I prefer my honor to my life, and would sooner
resign the latter, than suffer the former to receive the slightest blemish.


MR. PROBY. Madam, I believe you. So amiable a countenance proclaims a purity
of heart.


BELINDA. You are pleased to compliment me, Sir.


MR. PROBY. Not in the least, Madam. You have too recently had a sample of my
plain dealing, to suppose me an adept in the school of flattery. I speak,
Madam, the sentiments of my soul, when I declare to you that I think you one of
the loveliest of your sex.


BELINDA. Your are too lavish, Sir, in your encomiums.


MR. PROBY. It is not in my power, Madam, to express half what I conceive of
your person and perfections. Sorry am I to reflect that I have treated so much
excellence with opprobrious censures.


BELINDA. You have my free pardon, Sir.


MR. PROBY. Such generosity, whilst it reflects additional luster on your
conduct, gives me the keener anguish for my offense. Gladly would I wish to
expiate, by the attentions and assiduities of a whole life, a crime so wanton
and unprovoked.


BELINDA. If I understand you right, Sir, you have not any preferment in the
church.


MR. PROBY. None, Madam.


BELINDA. You are neither a rector, nor a vicar?


MR. PROBY. An humble curate, Madam, at your service.


BELINDA. I sincerely wish you had a good living.


MR. PROBY. For your sake, Madam, I wish I had a mitre. I might then venture,
with some degree of confidence, to express my affection for you, and solicit a
return; but my poverty teaches me humility, and I dare not presume to ask what
would infalliably be refused.


BELINDA. Perhaps, Sir, you may be mistaken.


MR. PROBY. When I consider my situation, I am amazed at my own effrontery, in
daring to hint at terms of matrimony with a lady of your fortune and
endowments; but as I have proceeded thus far, I will still go farther. Suffer
me, therefore, Madam, with the greatest deference and respect, to ask you, if
you will permit my future visits? If you refuse to grant my request, which I
acknowledge to be an unreasonable one, I must submit to the sentence with
resignation -- If you hesitate, I will not despair -- but, if you comply, I
shall deem myself the happiest of mankind.


BELINDA. If chance, at any time, should bring you to this quarter of the town,
you are welcome to call at my house, and rest yourself after walking.


MR. PROBY. My best thanks are due to you, Madam, for such unparalleled
generosity.


Such, my Louisa, was the conversation between me and my young sprig of
divinity; when, after a few compliments of course, he bowed and took his leave.

He is really a very handsome fellow; and, had he not quite so much gravity and
formality, would stand very forward in my esteem. But, like your timid lover, I
expect him to improve, and should not wonder at finding him a perfect rattle
after he has received two or three audiences.

Should he happen to be the man of my choice, promotion in the church may be
obtained for him upon very moderate terms. Other genteel and lucrative
employments, are purchased at a more extravagant rate, because they are
suitable to every man; but ecclesiastical preferments can be enjoyed only by
ecclesiastics.

His having no fortune is not displeasing to me, as I have sufficient of my
own. Besides, my uncle is the patron of a living of five hundred a year, and
the present incumbent is upwards of eighty. This is no very distant prospect;
and I know I can procure it for him without any difficulty.

You requested a long epistle from me, and so far you certainly are gratified;
but whether it will contribute to your amusement or information, is a matter
which exercises my hopes and fears.

A new comedy has just appeared at Covent Garden theater. A Baronet's lady
confesses herself the author of it; but she has not acquired that reputation
from it which she expected. It abounds with indelicate allusions, and double
entendres bordering on obscenity. It is to be lamented that the ladies have
taken greater latitudes than the men in these particulars; especially those who
have figured in the dramatic walk; as Mrs. Behn, Mrs. Centlivre, Mrs. Cowley,
etc.

This observation will almost justify the assertion of the poet, that,

" Every woman is at heart a rake."
I long to be made acquainted with the second conference between you and your
northern swain. Suppress not a single syllable, for I feel myself much
interested in the success of that negotiation.

As the abilities of some senators are rated according to the length of their
speeches, why should not epistolary productions be decided on in the same
manner? On that principle, I have wrote you a very excellent letter, because it
is a very long one.

Believe me, Louisa, Your affectionate Friend, BELINDA.

LETTER XX. LOUISA LENOX, TO BELINDA BLACKET.
YOU encourage me, Belinda, by your encomiums on my lover, to cherish a
partiality in his favor. He is indeed a valuable youth, and daily advances in
my esteem. Permit me, however, to thank you, in the strongest terms, for your
extraordinary compliment, in estimating Mr. Graham's abilities by the judicious
choice he had made.

I thank you for the supplemental catalogue of your suitors -- What a curious
groupe! May you select, from such a medley of characters, a person worthy of
you! May your young sprig of divinity, bloom forth, and become a respectable
branch! -- You certainly have a penchant for him; and, if you can overlook his
deficiency of fortune, in other respects he appears to deserve a preference in
your esteem.

After entreaties many times repeated, I consented to accompany my swain to his
father's house, where elegance and hospitality appeared conspicuous. I was
received and entertained like a divinity, and introduced to Mr. Graham's
sister, a young lady of most amiable manners, but had been severely treated by
that merciless destroyer of fine faces, the small pox. She was perfectly
accomplished, sang well, played delicately on the harpsichord, and was
inimitably excellent in various kinds of needle work.

After passing a most agreeable day, I was conducted home by my swain, in his
phaeton. On my return, we had a tete a tete; when I received further proofs of
the sincerity of his professions, and the amiableness of his disposition in the
following conversation.

MR. GRAHAM. To convince you, my dear Madam, that I am not a mercenary lover, I
will not even ask you the amount of your fortune, or whether you have any at
all; and to prove the extent of my passion beyond the power of words, I freely
and voluntarily offer to make such a settlement on you as you shall desire,
consistent with my present possessions, which are indeed very considerable.


LOUISA. But tell me, Sir, what you expect in return for so liberal and
generous an offer?


MR. GRAHAM. Yourself, Madam.


LOUISA. But should you hereafter alter your opinion, and think you have
purchased me at too dear a rate, you will then repent of having taken so
inconsiderate a step, and wonder at your folly.


MR GRAHAM. Never, Madam, never. Louisa is too cheaply purchased with all that
I am possessed of; which, thank heaven! is a clear two thousand pounds a year.
I must ever remain your debtor; for your person and affections overbalance my
fortune, to an extent almost infinite.


LOUISA. Would I could entertain so good an opinion of myself.


MR. GRAHAM. Your humble opinion of yourself my dear Madam, enhances your
perfections. -- With a modest diffidence, you seem insensible of your own
attractions* though they are acknowledged and approved by an admiring world.


LOUISA. Little did I expect, in this remote corner of the world, to have met
with so much honor, generosity, and politeness. But virtue is the growth of
every clime. Even the sterile regions of the north, have produced a man the
most amiable that I have ever seen.


MR. GRAHAM. Your approbation of my conduct, Madam, raises me in my own
estimation; for, what you approve, cannot be destitute of merit.


LOUISA. But can it be supposed that your venerable father would consent to
your bestowing your hand on so improper an object? Can it be possible that he
should not object to your union with a woman without a fortune, when there are
many in affluence who would think themselves happy to receive your overtures?


MR. GRAHAM. My father is no stranger to your person and deserts. The old
gentleman is almost as anxious as myself for the alliance. There can be no
impediment but of your own creating. Suffer me, therefore, to hope that you
will not long delay my happiness. -- Your fiat makes me miserable or happy for
ever.


LOUISA. I cannot be insensible to so much goodness; but suffer me to
deliberate on a matter of such importance.


MR. GRAHAM. Deliberation, Madam, appears unnecessary; but your will shall ever
be a law to me, as sacred as the statutes of the Medes and Persians,
irrevocable! -- But, afford me some consolation. -- Permit me to hope that you
will not abandon me.


LOUISA. You are entitled, Sir, to my best wishes; but be not too precipitate
-- you have a claim upon my gratitude, I had almost said an interest in my
heart -- But I cannot prevail upon myself to give you a definitive answer.


MR. GRAHAM. May I then hope that you will think favorably of me?


LOUISA. You may do more, Sir -- you may expect it.


MR. GRAHAM. For the present then, I will be satisfied. But when shall I know
farther? Believe me, Madam, I am on the rack. My impatience is not to be
expressed.


LOUISA. In a few months you shall know my determination.


MR. GRAHAM. Months! Talk not of months, or weeks, my dear Louisa! Tell me how
many days I am to continue in suspense.


LOUISA. You shall soon be satisfied.


MR. GRAHAM. How soon?


LOUISA. As soon as possible.


MR. GRAHAM. Shall it be tomorrow?


LOUISA. That cannot be. Excuse me, Sir, but, were I ever so much inclined to
listen to your proposals, delicacy, and even decency, requires a reserved
conduct on a treaty of this nature, from a woman who wishes to escape the
censures of the world. It is not enough that I am sensible of the rectitude of
my own conduct; but even appearances are to be preserved, or it is impossible
to avoid calumny.


MR. GRAHAM. Your prudence is commendable, my Louisa; but it is rather cruel
that I should be so great a sufferer merely for the sake of etiquette.


LOUISA. Let me entreat you to have a little patience -- Give me but a month.


MR. GRAHAM. Agreed, though it exceeds a year in my calendar.


LOUISA. Now, Sir, let me hope you are satisfied.


MR. GRAHAM. I must submit, my Louisa, as it is your pleasure; but I will visit
you, as the divine Shakespeare says, "Every day in the hour."


LOUISA. I never shall complain of the length or frequency of your visits.


MR. GRAHAM. I thank you for such gracious condescension, and shall exercise
the privilege you have honored me with, in its utmost latitude.


Am not I, Belinda, a fortunate girl, to be so eminently distinguished by so
valuable a youth! He took his leave of me with as much reluctance, as if a soul
was separating from the body; and bade me, adieu with such a grace, that I was
^^^mored with him.

You see how impatient and how importunate he is to have the connubial rites
performed, which are indissolubly to unite our fates: You see with what
difficulty I have obtained a respite of only a single month. I almost wish it
had been but for a fortnight; and unfortunately it happens to be one of the
longest months in the year, consisting of thirtyone tedious days* I wish the
alteration of the Calendar had not taken place till now, for I would thankfully
have parted with eleven days, and should have thought myself much obliged to
the legislature for restoring the Julian method of regulating time.

You may imagine, my dear Belinda, by my raving, that the little winged deity
has pointed his arrow at my breast, and has penetrated it at least skin deep.
Indeed I feel myself vulnerable, and can no longer boast of my insensibility;
which you know, Louisa, I have often done in your presence; but I had not then
seen Mr. Graham.

Positively, Belinda, I think I shall be married before you. My spark has no
competitor. I have not, like you, a multitude to select from; nor do I wish to
procaastinate, for the earth cannot produce a man more worthy of my affections
than Mr. Graham.

I must again postpone my description of this country and its inhabitants;
which I am sure, your goodnature will readily excuse, when you consider how
deeply I have been engaged on my own private concerns. My mind has been so much
agitated, as to disqualify me for a mere narrator of common circumstances and
events.

But -- Mr. Graham is arrived! -- I see the dear youth entering at the gate! --
Excuse me then, Belinda, for abruptly concluding my epistle -- Next to Mr.
Graham I prefer my dear Belinda to all the world; and she must pardon me for
the exception. I expect the young clergyman to supplant me in the same manner
in the affections of Belinda. I wish, however, always to preserve the second
place in her esteem; being well convinced that she will, at all times, possess
that preference in mine.

Adieu, my dear Belinda -- write me long epistles, and write often --
communicate to me every particle of intelligence, respecting yourself, and the
amiable young man whom you so deservedly esteem. Every thing that concerns
Belinda, cannot but (...) ^^^esting to her

Affectionate friend, LOUISA.

LETTER XXI. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
YOUR letter, my Louisa, delighted me exceedingly. Happy am I to be informed of
your certain prospect of an union with a man, who has every thing to bestow
that can constitute real bliss. Youth, an agreeable person, brilliant parts,
unaffected case, good nature, and a large estate.

Happy am I also to find that you acknowledge yourself wounded by the shaft of
the amorous deity. Your expressing sorrow for the length of the month, clearly
points out your situation, and that the arrow has dealt a deadly stroke.
Apropos, Louisa -- I have contrived a method of lopping off three days, which
to a lover as far gone as you are, is a little age. -- Suppose you make it a
Lunar instead of a Calendar month? Drop a hint of that kind to your much loved
swain, and be assured he will take the benefit of it.

Pray, my Louisa, how much do you think you are indebted to me for annihilating
three whole days? -- But, whenever I can serve or oblige you, the satisfaction
it affords me is a sufficient recompense.

But, now to my own affairs -- I was in high spirits yesterday, and much
disposed to mirth, and therefore, merely pour passar les temps, and enjoy a
little diversion, I summoned another of my suitors to appear before me; and
when I inform you that it was Mr. Patrick MacGregor, you will probably be
surprised; but there was so much laughable absurdity in the letter he was
pleased to honor me with, that I expected to have been greatly entertained with
his conversation.

His enter was rather more familiar than respectful, and the following dialogue
ensued.

MR. MACGREGOR. Your humble sarvant, Madam: I have not had a wink of sleep all
night till ten o'clock this morning, for thinking of the honor you have done me
by fixing your mind upon me. I was graitly plaised to find that you was over
head and ears in love with me, before you had sat eyes upon my parson?


BELINDA. You are much mistaken, Mr. MacGregor, if you suppose me to be in love
with you at present.


MR. MACGREGOR. Then when will you be in love with me.


BELINDA. I am incapable of answering that question.


MR. MACGREGOR. Well, only set your time, Madam, and be punctual; and you shall
find that I will be in love with you at the same time.


BELINDA. That would be very obliging indeed, Sir.


MR. MACGREGOR. Fix upon the day, Madam, if you plaise, and you shall find me
as punctual and sartain as the weather. I never forgets an appointment, unless
it happens to slip my memory. Fix upon the day, Madam, if you plaise.


BELINDA. What think you of the thirty first of February?


MR. MACGREGOR. That day is a long way off, Madam.


BELINDA, Aside. Your observation is extremely just.


MR. MACGREGOR. When I took the trouble of writing to you, Madam, you must
remember if you don't forget, that I told you my father would be very rich when
he died, and that all his fortune was to succeed to me, besides several grait
estates. Now, as the Undertaker has given him over, and he will not live any
longer (like a good craiture as he is) long life to the son of his mother!


BELINDA. I really am shocked at your behavior, Mr. MacGregor. How can you
mention the loss of a parent with such seeming unconcern?


MR. MACGREGOR. If I was dead, like my father, I should be sorry for it, and cry
and weep, and all that -- but, by the holy Shannon, a man must be a fool to
grieve for being alive, and having the possession of a large estate left him in
reversion.


BELINDA. Well, Mr. MacGregor, I would not wish to detain you. You Will remember
the thirty first of February?


MR. MACGREGOR. That I will, Madam, for sartain.


BELINDA. Give me leave to wish you a good day, Mr. MacGregor.


MR. MACGREGOR. Excuse me, fair lady, for I never take laive till I am gone. I
don't like to be turned away, do you see, except I go voluntarily. I wish you a
good day, too, Madam; but that is no raison why I should not stay to enjoy the
pleasure of your company, if it is only out of spite for your wanting me to be
gone.


BELINDA. You seem angry, Sir.


MR. MACGREGOR. I generally am, Madam, when I am displaised. You sent a letter
to me to ax me to come and see you, and now you wish me a good day; which is as
much to say, in plain English, that my absence is more agreeable to you than
the pleasure of my company.


BELINDA. I beg your pardon, Sir if I have inadvertently offended you, and hope
you will continue with me as long as you choose.


MR. MACGREGOR. I Will continue with you longer than I choose, if I like it. By
St. Patrick, I think myself very ill used with your botheration!


BELINDA. Be pacified, Mr. MacGregor. On my honor, I had not the least
intention to offend you. -- Will you be pleased to draw nearer the fire?


MR. MACGREGOR. Now, Madam, since you are so poltie and all that, every thing
past and to come shall be buried in oblivion, and you shall find me a devilish
good fellow for the future. Give me laive, Madam, to examine your face and
eyes, becaise, you know, I am a candidate for your hand.


BELINDA. You really stare me out of countenance, Mr. MacGregor.


MR. MACGREGOR. How can I discover your charms without seeing them? By the
baird of my mother, you have got the sweetest wrinkle in the upper part of the
middle of your forehead, that I ever saw with all my eyes.


BELINDA. You are not very gallant. Mr. MacGregor, to point out a lady's
blemishes.


MR. MACGREGOR. A blemish, do you call it! -- a blemish, indeed! No, Madam;
belaive me, there are ten hundred or a thousand Cupids, lurking in that
charming wrinkle, armed with cutlashes and bludgeons to knock down unwary
passengers, open their chests, and steal away their hearts.


BELINDA. A very pretty allegory, Mr. MacGregor! -- A very poetical conceit!


MR. MACGREGOR. You have as good eyes, Madam as ever appeared in a pair of
sockets. I like them becaise they do not blaze and sparkle like one of the new
patent lamps. Some eyes look at you as if they would ait you up at a mouthful;
but give me an eye like yours, that has not so much fire and brimstone in it.


BELINDA. If you are so lavish of your compliments, Mr. MacGregor, I shall
entertain too high an opinion of myself. Now you have done with my eyes, what
think you of my eyebrows?


MR. MACGREGOR. They are two very fine eliptical semicircular arches, and the
color of them suits me to a hair. They are as regular and as smooth as the down
upon the skin of a badger.


BELINDA. How much am am I indebted to you, Mr. MacGregor, for so flattering a
description of me!


MR. MACGREGOR. Excuse me, Madam, for not being able to spaik in commendation
of your nose. I like a wide nose that is almost as broad as the face, and as
flat as a flounder, such as they wear on the other side of the water in Africa
and Guinea. Yours is a little thin narrow bit of a thing, and sticks out like
a what-d'ye-call 'em of a sun dial.


BELINDA. Now, Sir, I begin to suppose that you are in earnest; you dealt so
much in panegyric before, that I began to doubt of your sincerity: But I am now
perfectly satisfied.


MR. MACGREGOR. Your lips, Madam, have a fine blush upon their cheeks, like
vermillion and red ochre. I wish, Madam, you would let me have a taiste of
them, by way of sample and speciment.


BELINDA. Not till the day appointed.


MR. MACGREGOR. Well then, my dair Madam, as I am now resolved to go and laive
you immaidiately, I have a grait mind not to stay any longer. So I must put off
your teeth and chin till our next merry meeting; when I main to have a touch
upon your neck and breast.


Just as he had finished these words, he rose from his seat, bowed, and
departed.

Oh! my Louisa, what have I endured in the presence of that Hibernian monster!
When I permitted, or rather invited, him to come, I thought he would entertain
me a little with his absurdity, and that I could get rid of him at pleasure;
but I soon perceived my error, and was so alarmed and shocked at his behavior,
that I knew not how to act. At length, by soothing him, and complying, in some
respects, with his humor* the brute thought proper to depart; and I shall take
special care* by changing my place of residence, that he never shall be able to
pay me a second visit, except on the thirtyfirst day of February, according to
my jocular appointment.

This adventure, Louisa, will almost deter me from permitting any of my other
candidates to approach me, except the clerical stripling which I have already
seen. He is, indeed, a youth of amiable manners and disposition, and one for
whom I have conceived a great esteem; as I have already informed you.

But, notwithstanding the insults I received from MacGregor, and the terror I
endured lest he should proceed to disagreeable extremities. I am half inclined
to give an audience to Mr. Stanza; a character which I mentioned to you in one
of my epistles. If I can form any judgment from his letter, he is perfectly
inoffensive; and as he appears to know the world, I doubt not but he will be
entertaining.

Whether I see Mr. Stanza, or Mr. Proby, or whether I am a party in any other
appointment or engagement, every particular worthy of relating, shall be
transmitted to you; in return for which I expect to be informed of every thing
that concerns you.

I am, my dear Louisa, Your affectionate Friend, BELINDA.

LETTER XXII. LOUISA LENOX, to BELINDA BLACKET.
I THANK you, my Belinda, for the three days which you have cut off between me
and happiness. As you predicted I gave the hint, and the worthy youth improved
it.

I trembled for you, when I perused the dialogue between you and MacGregor, and
could perceive, from your cautious and guarded answers to his insolence and
absurdity, that you were much terrified. From your description of the fellow in
a former letter, I thought him absurd and inoffensive; but it appears, upon
trial, that he is a strange mixture of malignity and whim. His sarcasms terrify
me, but his absurd oddities divert me. Never suffer him to approach you more.

You must be expeditious, or I shall set you an example, instead of waiting to
be a follower. My aunt with whom I have now taken up my residence, and who is
my nearest relation now living, highly approves and encourages the proposed
match, well knowing that such an alliance would be, in all respects, honorable
and advantageous to our family.

Mr. Graham has no idea of my having any fortune; but I mean to surprise him,
by presenting it to him on the day that our nuptials are celebrated. I think I
need not now inform you how much it is, having, I well remember, already
mentioned the sum to you. Instead of three thousand pounds, would it were fifty.

I flatter myself that Mr. Graham will not have made an improper or
disadvantageous match, when all expectancies are taken into consideration. My
aunt's fortune is very considerable, and I am her next heir; but, what is still
of greater consequence, I am her only favorite.

How solid, serious and thoughtful am I grown, since I have formed a resolution
of altering my condition. Upon all manner of subjects. I debate with as much
formality and seeming sagacity as my aunt, and deliberate on the consequences
that may probably ensue in certain situations.

In short, I am ceasing to be girlish, and am willing to put on the woman, in
every acceptance of the word. Be not surprised, therefore my Belinda, at the
gravity of my future epistles.

I had a most delightful tete a tete, yesterday evening, with my amiable
suitor. If possible, he every successive day appears more worthy of my esteem,
I had almost said of my warmest affections. The following dialogue, taken
verbatim, will fully convince you that my prospect of happiness is beyond my
most sanguine expectations. -- Heaven grant that it may be realized!

MR. GRAHAM. Well, my Louisa, though time moves heavily, it will at length
arrive at the happy period! But why so mechanically punctual to the day
proposed? Why not appoint an earlier day for removing my anxiety.


LOUISA. You must have been convinced, Mr. Graham, that our affections are
reciprocal; you must have discovered, in a thousand instances, that you are not
an object of my indifference: Nor would I wish any longer to conceal from you*
that your unbounded generosity first demanded my gratitude, and gratitude is
ripening into a sublimer passion. An affected reserve and coyness, would be
difficult for me to assume; nor can I think it departing from decorum to be
ingenuous. I acknowledge your triumph over me, and glory in your victory.
Vanquished by virtue, I yield without repining.


MR. GRAHAM. Amiable girl! On how firm a basis have you established my hopes! I
flattered myself* even before this kind, this candid declaration, that I was
not wholly indifferent to you; but I can now look forward, with a degree of
certainty, to the moment which will cement our hearts and fortunes. Suffer me,
my dear Louisa, to propose an alteration respecting our lunar agreement.
Instead of giving me a definitive answer on that day, as therein covenanted,
give me the definitive answer now, and let that day (alas! too distant for my
impatience) be fixed on for the solemnization of our nuptials.


LOUISA. How pressing, and how impatient!


MR. GRAHAM. Say rather, my Louisa, how deliberate, and how ceremonious!


LOUISA. Permit me to consult my aunt, Sir, before you have my final answer.


MR. GRAHAM. To that, my dear, I have not the least objection.


LOUISA. In her you have a strong advocate Mr. Graham. Her advice and
solicitations have much accelerated the conclusion of this treaty. It is
therefore probable that she would recommend a compliance with your terms,
provided I did not throw in a caveat against them.


MR. GRAHAM. Which I entreat you not to do.


LOUISA. I will not, on my honor.


MR. GRAHAM. Now, my Louisa, I rank myself among the happiest of mankind. From
this moment I shall consider our faith as plighted to each other, and that we
actually are (ceremony excepted) cemented by the most exalted tie, the union of
hearts. I shall make immediate application to some gentlemen of the bar, to
prepare a proper settlement for my Louisa, in which blanks shall be left open
to be filled up at her discretion; for I detest the idea of stipulating with a
woman I adore. She knows the extent of my fortune, and she shall have
uncontroled liberty to make such a provision for herself as she shall approve.
I have only to add, that nothing will give me more displeasure than to show an
illtimed delicacy upon this occasion. It will imply a doubt that I am not
actuated by the most generous principles, and that my liberality is not as
unbounded as my love.


LOUISA. But, Sir, it you suppose me actuated by the same principles, and such
a supposition would be but doing me justice, I must decline every act that
would pronounce a mercenary disposition. If you, to convince me of your
affection and generosity, are liberal to excess; my acceptance of such
liberality, would betray a want of affection in me, and a sordid ungenerous
mind. Besides I have too high an idea of your probity and virtue, to suppose
that you can ever submit to act dishonorably, merely because there are not
skins of parchment to oblige you to a contrary conduct. In short, Mr. Graham, I
cannot prevail upon myself to agree to the humiliating terms which you have
offered. I have a spirit as liberal as your own, and, if I have not affluence
to enable me to confer favors, I have the generosity to refuse them, when they
are presented to me unmerited.


MR. GRAHAM. Your arguments, my dearest girl, are too refined. I admire the
nobleness of your disposition, and the delicacy of your feelings. But consider
how infinitely I am your debtor, and how inadequate my whole fortune is, to
make any thing like a compensation for so much beauty and perfection.


LOUISA. I must persist in my resolution to decline your generous offer;
therefore let us change the conversation. Have you heard of an anecdote
respecting a clergyman of our parish?


MR. GRAHAM. Nothing to his disadvantage, I hope!


LOUISA. No, it certainly was to his advantage; for he was a gainer by the
transaction. But I shall hereafter pay little attention to his doctrine:
Precept, when not supported by example, is a kind of mockery of religion and
morality.


MR. GRAHAM. But, to the point, my dear Louisa, if you please.


LOUISA. The inhumanity of the tale will shock you.


MR. GRAHAM. Should it be a tale of woe, I fear it will produce a sigh from thy
sympathetic heart.


LOUISA. This parish, you know, is pretty extensive* and as Mr. Norton, our
rector, was taking a ride near a remote corner of it, a sudden shower of rain
obliged him to seek for shelter; a poor female cottager, seeing his distress,
invited him into her humble mansion. He accepted her invitation, seated himself
by the fire, and after many earnest entreaties from the poor but hospitable
dame partook of a rasher of her bacon. Mr. Norton's horse was, at the same
time, conducted to a hovel, rubbed down, and plentifully refreshed with hay and
corn. Whilst this reverend clergyman was so cheerfully and generously
entertained by the good hostess, he observed, through a window which opened
into a little orchard at the back part of the house, a sow attended by several
pigs; and the pigs were just of a proper age for the spit: Struck by so
tempting an appearance, his reverence asked the honest cottager if the sow and
pigs belonged to her? She answered in the affirmative, when he humanely told
her he was entitled to one of those pigs and should send his servant for it in
the afternoon. The dame pleaded a large family, and the extreme difficulty of
providing for it; and concluded with entreating him to forego his claim. The
doctor was not to be dissuaded from his purpose, he was peremptory in his
demand, and actually sent for the pig as he had threatened.


MR. GRAHAM. Inhuman miscreant!


LOUISA. The woman shall not be a lose, she shall be satisfied for her pig, and
the story shall be circulated over the adjacent country. To execute such
severity, after having received the most generous treatment, is degrading to
humanity; and con^urable, in a much greater degree, in a man of his sacred
function.


MR. GRAHAM. I am every day receiving fresh proofs of the purity of your heart,
and the amiableness of your disposition. Every occurrence, of whatever nature
it may be, draws forth some latent virtue, some hidden excellence.


No sooner had this compliment escaped the lips of my dearest youth, than he
affectionately took his leave. Immediately after which, I had recourse to my
pen, that I might not delay to communicate to my Belinda, what I knew would
afford her satisfaction.

Is not Mr. Graham one of the worthiest of his sex? Can I be blamed for
acceding so expeditiously to his terms? -- To the former question, I know, you
will answer in the affirmative, and to the latter in the negative. It would
have been unreasonable to have held out longer.

I think you may, without apprehension of danger, venture to admit Stanza --
His pleasantry will divert you, and chase the ennui which your late visitor may
have occasioned. Mr. Elmar, the undertaker, would I think, afford you a
pleasant hour -- he is indeed an original character.

Of Mr. Proby, I expect to hear much, in your next epistle. I wish he had more
vivacity than he appears to possess -- But it is difficult to determine upon a
single interview. Adieu, my Belinda, and believe me ever

Your sincerest friend, LOUISA.

LETTER XXIII. MR. VARNISH, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
I WOULD advise you to advertise yourself for sale to the best bidder; you
would find it a much better method of disposing of yourself than that which you
have adopted. I am a sworn broker and auctioneer, and should be glad to be
employed for that purpose. You may be sold by hand, by candle, or by auction,
according to your own election. I should be happy to put you up, as I doubt not
that you are a good commodity, and will fetch a handsome price. But, to prevent
your being knocked down for a mere trifle, we must engage a few puffers.

It will be necessary, however, that, for three or four days previous to the
sale, notice should be given in the public prints, that you are to be seen and
examined; for it cannot be supposed that any man will bid for a Let, before he
has seen and handled it.

It will be equally necessary that a striking description of your person should
be printed, and circulated in all the Coffeehouses. I am particularly
celebrated for displaying articles to advantage, and for exciting the attention
and curiosity of the public. An address, something like the following, would
probably have a proper effect --

"To be sold, by inch of candle, at Lloyd's Coffeehouse, a young Lady of
character and distinction, free from blemish; and in perfect condition. She
moves gracefully, and is fine in figure. Her dam was the lady of a baronet, her
grandam a baroness, and her great grandam a countess -- Her pedigree in the
male line, is equally respectable. She is as beautiful as the Venus de Medicis,
as chaste as Lucretia, and as accomplished as Minerva. She is to be taken with
all her faults, and five per cent is to be paid down by the purchaser. The
remainder on the execution of the conveyance, which will be prepared with all
convenient dispatch. She is to be seen and examined three days previous to the
sale, which will be particularly announced in all the public prints.

"N. B. The buyer must covenant to support her like a gentlewoman; and make a
settlement on her proportioned to her fortune, which is considerable. None but
gentlemen of fortune will be deemed competent to become bidders for this
valuable lot."

Something similar to the above, with proper variations according to the
circumstances, cannot fail of calling forth the attention of the curious, who
will probably be anxious to become purchasers.

I shall charge only five per cent commission, including the advertisements and
other incidental expenses. Terms so very moderate cannot surely be objected to,
especially as the estate is only personal.

Being a bachelor, I shall have no objection to treat with you privately for
the lot; but if you are determined to have it decided by the candle or the
hammer, I trust you will give me the preference. No man shall serve you with
greater punctuality, dispatch and integrity.

Should you condescend to honor me with your commands, Madam, you may rely on
my obedience. I have a prodigious flow of words, which is essentially
serviceable to me in a line of business where so much oratory is required. I
can talk for half an hour together, upon nothing; and dwell as long upon the
perfections of a pipkin, as on the finest productions of a Raphael or a Titian.
A me^^y mouthed fellow can never make a good auctioneer. Name me any man in the
city (no matter for his riches or consequence in life) who can dwell upon a
subject like myself, or embellish it with half those flowers of rhetoric which
I am master of. But, I hate to be my own panegyrist. It is not vanity, Madam,
that induces me to make this flight mention of my superior abilities; but a
desire of employing them in the service of so amiable a lady.

When you are exhibited, Madam, at the Coffeehouse, you will be astonished at
the fine flourishes which I shall display upon the business. In short, Madam, I
shall cram you down the throats of the audience: Pardon the vulgarity of the
metaphor, Madam; and suffer the strength of the observation to apologize for
its indelicacy.

By this time, Madam, I flatter myself that you will be convinced of my ability
to render you essential service; and, believe me, Madam, my inclination shall
accompany my ability: But, Madam, as I am just going to mount my pulpit, to
dispose of an elegant mansion, with suitable attached and detached offices,
situated in a brilliant park, which is delightfully decorated with prolific
fishponds, permit me to take my leave of you for the present.

I am, Madam, with respect, esteem and veneration, Your most obedient Servant,
VALENTINE VARNISH.

LETTER XXIV. LOUISA LENOX, to BELINDA BLACKET.
PREPARE yourself, Belinda, for a most alarming tale! How uncertain and
insecure are the pleasures and blessings of this life! -- I, who but a few days
ago thought myself the happiest of mortals, and that joy and bliss would
constantly await me, have been plunged into the most agonizing and unutterable
distress.

On Monday last, Mr. Graham passed the evening with me, and did not depart till
it was unusually late. Finding the night advanced beyond his expectation, and
unwilling to keep his servants from their rest, instead of walking, he ran
home, This exercise being more violent than what he had been accustomed to, a
violent perspiration ensued, and after that a swimming in the head. The best
medical advice that could be procured in that country, was obtained the next
morning. The doctor pronounced the malady a malignant fever, and of that
dangerous kind, that he could not flatter the sorrowful attendants; with any
hopes of his recovery.

Think, my Belinda, of the shock I must have sustained, on receiving such
direful intelligence. I hastened to his assistance, and administered to him all
the comfort and consolation in my poor power. Growing worse every succeeding
day, he expected a speedy dissolution, which, with tears in his eyes, he
lamented, because it would sever him, he said, from his dear Louisa.

My concern for his situation, which was too poignant to be concealed, affected
him much. The tenderness of his expressions but added to my affliction. He
appeared, if possible, more amiable to me now than ever! But the thought of
losing him planted daggers in my breast.

The physician, thinking his recovery not only doubtful, but almost impossible,
requested he would settle his affairs. The dear youth, with apparent
resignation, gave instructions for his will, which was accordingly prepared and
executed.

Permit me to add, my Belinda, that I was the first legatee named in this last
testament. He bequeathed me a thousand pounds a year, and a sum of two thousand
pounds to be paid me immediately after his decease.

This additional proof of the strength of his attachment to me, quite overcame
me; I swooned, and fell senseless on the floor. The alarm occasioned by this
accident, struck Mr. Graham like electricity. In spite of the violence of his
disease, he rose in his bed, and wanted to come to my assistance, but the
attendants prudently withheld him. The exertion both of mind and body on this
occasion, produced a crisis to his disease; from that moment, he gradually
recovered, and is, now thank heaven! perfectly restored to health.

It may be necessary to observe, that, after my swoon, I was taken from the
floor and conveyed to a bed in an adjacent room; nor was it till the afternoon
of the next day, that my senses were returned.

But, as soon as reason reassumed her throne, I enquired, with fear and terror,
after my dear youth, and had the exalted happiness to be informed, that his
recovery had been so rapid, that he was pronounced out of danger. The most
enchanting music could not have so delighted my ears, as the heavenly accents
which conveyed to me the blessed intelligence!

I ran to the dear idol of my soul to have this vision realized, for I still
dreaded that it was all delusion! But, (blessed be the Gods) the joyful news
was true. As soon as he beheld me, he greeted me with a benign smile,
expressive of the sweetness and complacency of his nature, and of the pleasure
he enjoyed in seeing me. I fell on my knees and thanked Heaven for his recovery!

It was a delightful embarrassment that I experienced! Gratitude, affection,
joy, alternately were my ruling passions. It almost astonishes me that my poor
weak frame could support me under such a variety of transports!

In a few days Mr. Graham's health was perfectly reinstated, and, with it, the
rosy hue which embellishes his manly cheek. -- Pardon me, my Belinda, if I
express myself too warmly upon this interesting business -- To be cool and
tranquil upon such occasions, would certainly be criminal! I feel myself too
much elevated to be a mere narrator. My transition from wretchedness to
happiness, was as sudden, as it was unexpected!

But, let me suffer my raptures, for the present, to subside. Remember, my dear
Belinda, you are now two epistles in my debt. It is a debt of honor, and I
expect to have it immediately discharged; but let it be at two separate
payments, by two successive mails.

During my tortures and distress, I hope you, and your man of the gown, have
had a second interview. Nothing tragic, I hope, has befallen you, in your
extensive line, as a lover -- nothing that has given you uneasiness or alarm --
for really, my Belinda, your mode of courtship is not without its dangers and
inconveniences.

I am this moment going to take and airing with my dear man: The phaeton is
waiting for us, therefore, for the present excuse,

The most affectionate of Your friends, LOUISA.

LETTER XXV. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
YOU expect from me Louisa, a letter of condolence and congratulation. I am
extremely sorry for the sufferings you have endured, and I felicitate you on
your relief from those sufferings. Your tender bosom must have been greatly
agitated by the various conflicts it has experienced; but I hope the severest
trials are past, and that perfect tranquillity may be speedily restored; for
even the most pleasing passions of the soul, whilst they delight, do injury.

But, my Louisa, your delicate feelings are too susceptible -- You have too
much sympathising goodness, to taste tranquillity when you behold others racked
with torture or disappointment.

Notwithstanding the severity of your late sufferings, you rally me, with your
usual pleasantry, on my young divine. Rally on, my Louisa! should you mention
him in every line, you will not displease me.

-- "Take him for all in all
I never shall look upon his like again."
More than once or twice since I last wrote to you, have I seen Mr. Proby; and
I find him the most agreeable, the most deserving man I ever knew. He has*
indeed, so firmly rooted himself in my affections, that I fear (or rather hope)
he is not to be eradicated.

I abandon the thoughts of all my other correspondents. The grave ones cannot
amuse me, nor the ridiculous ones divert me. Indeed, as I hinted to you, I
summoned my undertaker to appear before me, but he disappointed my
expectations. Instead of finding him a man of wit and whim, as I expected from
his epistle, he was a pert, solemn coxcomb, as dull as he was pedantic. Stanzy
was humorous and agreeable, and really entertained me much.

At present, however, Mr. Proby wholly occupies my thoughts. His person is
elegant, his address pleasing, his character irreproachable; and though he
modestly suppressed that circumstance, in the letter he honored me with, he is
allied to a family of rank and great respectability.

I flatter myself that he entertains a penchant for me; nay, I am convinced of
it. He has even made proposals to me in form, and I listened to them with
respect. In short, we seem to be in a regular train, and advancing, step by
step, to the hymeneal altar. I wish our proceedings were less gradual, and like
yours, hastening to a happy conclusion.

Luckily, the rectory is now vacant of which my uncle has the advowsen; and
consequently the right of presentation. I have acquainted that worthy relation
of mine, with the overtures I have received from Mr. Proby, but without
mentioning the original cause; and he perfectly approves of him, after a minute
investigation of his character and connexions. He has even promised, as an
addition to my fortune, to present my intended to the living in his disposal,
provided an union should take place between us.

This generous offer I have communicated to my reverened swain; which was
highly gratifying to him, as it testified my consent, in the most unequivocal
terms, to bestow on him my hand.

Still, however, he laments that his situation is so inadequate to mine, and
expresses his fears that I should hereafter look on him in the light of an
adventurer or fortune hunter. Though I approve of the delicacy of his
observations, I endeavor to discourage such suggestions.

I doubt not of his sincerity, when he assures me, as he often does in the most
positive terms that he should be happy to become mine, though I did not possess
a shilling in the world; not doubting but his endeavors would at least procure
a competence and happiness.

He wishes to settle the whole of my fortune, which you know is considerable,
upon myself; but I reprobate such an idea; scorning to act a mercenary part
with a man of so liberal a disposition, and a man who, I am convinced, loves me
for myself alone.

He heartily acknowledges that at present, his chief clerical emoluments arise
from a small curacy; and exclusive of that, he has only a fellowship in St.
John's college, Oxford, which of course, terminates with his marriage. -- But,
what of that! He is a gentleman, in its most extensive acceptance, and, with a
due estimation of his merits, I think him my superior.

Your opinion, my Louisa, upon a matter of this importance, would be
acceptable; and yet, if it did not concur with mine, I believe I should reject
it; but, if it should, as I know you would give it me ingenuously, it would
afford me infinite satisfaction, and encourage me to proceed. At all events,
however, favor me with your sentiments.

Though I am happy at having procured, by my advertisement, one worthy man, I
lament that I have exposed myself to the sneers and insults of the malignant
and the vulgar. In addition to the catalogue of characters, which I have
already given you, an impertinent auctioneer has had the audacity to send me a
letter, replete with derision and vulgarity. He impudently offers, his services
to fell me by hand, by auction, or by inch of candle. Thank heaven these
infamous fellows know nothing of me, but my christian name!

It pleases me exceedingly, my Louisa, that my uncle so well approves of the
man of my choice; and he approves of him from a conviction of his deserts. Had
there been a blemish in the character or conduct of Mr. Proby, my uncle's
penetration would have discovered it; but they have stood the test of the
severest examination, and he is pronounced immaculate.

You will perhaps accuse me of incoherency; and indeed, with justice you may
accuse me: But indulgencies are allowable to persons in my situation -- I had
almost said to lovers. Though intent upon one object, they ramble from
circumstance to circumstance, that ultimately tend to the same point.

I fear you will think me tedious, my Louisa; but, on so interesting a theme,
you must excuse my prolixity. Our cases indeed are somewhat similar, and no
difficulty can occur in framing excuses for each other.

In one of your epistles, you mentioned purling streams, enamelled meadows, and
amaranthine bowers. From such a specimen of your abilities, as a pastoral
writer, I expected soon to have received from you some picturesque description
of the enviable state of happy lovers, interchanging vows beneath the fragrant
jessamine, or breathing tender tales in a forest of woodbines; whilst the
harmony of the feathered choir, as if celebrating the natal day of some
neighboring shepherdess, adds dignity and simplicity to the scene.

Are you not surprised, Louisa, that an inhabitant of the metropolis, like
myself, pent up within the bills of mortality, should be able to form even a
tolerable idea of rural matters? But all lovers delight in pastoral prospects
and descriptions.

Mr. Proby is this instant arrived; therefore suffer me to take my leave,

Yours sincerely, BELINDA.
P. S. After having finished this letter, a fresh packet of billetdoux arrived
in consequence of the advertisement; but none of them I believe will make me
change my resolution respecting Mr. Proby.



LETTER XXVI. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
THE last post conveyed an epistle from Belinda to her friend Louisa; the
subsequent mail contains dispatches from the same correspondent, and to the
same respected friend.

Wonder not Louisa, that I did not wait till I had received your answer to my
last before I imposed another heavy task upon you. I hinted to you in the post
script, that another large packet of letters had arrived from my dispersed
lovers; but I have some further particulars to mention with regard to my new
wooers. Not many of them are inhabitants of London, or its environs; many of
them, indeed, reside at a considerable distance from the metropolis, as appears
by the place whence they are dated, as well as from the corroborating postmark.

That these billets did not arrive sooner, is easily accounted for: Some days
must have elapsed before the newspaper, in which my advertisement appeared,
could have been circulated over the distant counties; a further delay must have
been required, to enable my rural adorers to pen one of their best epistles;
and no inconsiderable time was necessary to convey them from the respective
towns and villages, to the grand center of correspondence and communication.

Upwards of one hundred and fifty proposals have I received by the general
post, all franked by the payment of the postage; the revenue will therefore be
somewhat enriched in consequence of my singular project.

Had I not proceeded so far with Mr. Proby, I might doubtless have made a
prudent choice among these new candidates. -- Many of them appear to be
comfortably situated, and independent; others heartily and ingenuously state
their difficulties, as well as their prospects; but most of them exhibit strong
traits of integrity and honor. To enable you to judge of the difference between
my London and country correspondents, I have enclosed those dispatches, which
seem most to claim attention. Copies of my London declarations of love, you are
already in possession of.

LETTER XXVII. HENRY HEATHFIELD, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
ENCOURAGED by your address to the public, I have ventured as an individual of
that public to offer you my devoirs. -- Supposing you in earnest, I take the
liberty of informing you, that I am as willing as yourself to alter my
condition.

I flatter myself that you can have no objection to my situation; as I am far
removed from poverty, and rather border upon affluence. I have an estate of one
hundred and thirty pounds a year, which I keep in my own hands, and manage in
the most advantageous manner that I am able. Being my own landlord, my stock or
movables can never be distrained for rent, a circumstance which affords me no
inconsiderable consolation.

But, though the soil is my own, as it consists principally of grazing land,
some money is necessary to enable me to stock it as it ought to be. If I cannot
purchase sheep and cattle to be fattened on that land, the emoluments which I
shall derive from it will not support me, and much less a family: I am
therefore inclined to think that your money, joined to my estate would place
every thing upon a proper footing, and enable us to live comfortably and
genteely. Perhaps, however, you may think differently: If you do, I must look
out for some other worthy woman, who has got a few hundreds.

Till we agree about pecuniary considerations, I would not wish to have an
interview. I am so sensible of the influence of beauty against my strongest
resolutions, that all my cautions and stipulations must be exercised during the
epistolary treaty.

Having mentioned my possessions, you will perhaps expect some account of my
person, and such other particulars as are usually the topics of investigation,
previous to an union of hands and fortunes.

I cannot send my picture, as my figure has never been delineated by a
Reynolds, a Gainsborough, or any other artist. The following, however, are the
genuine outlines of my person, for I never flattered any man: I am rough and
unpolished, as you may well imagine, having received my education among the
fens in Lincolnshire. I am just now entering my twentyfifth year; am about five
feet eight inches in height; and rather thin than corpulent. I have a homely
country face, with a dark brown head of hair, unfashioned by the hands of the
frizzeur.

To you it may seem extraordinary that I cannot make a proper matrimonial
connection in my own country. Though this observation might naturally occur to
many persons, yet in this part of the world it is not applicable; except
absolute paupers, here are but two classes of women, the rich and the middling.
By the former I am considered as infinitely their inferior, and any overtures
of marriage made to any of them, would be pronounced an insult not to be
forgiven; though, perhaps, in point of fortune, I am equal with the greater
part of them. To the other class, my pride will not suffer me to descend, as I
should be unhappy with a woman wholly unaccomplished; I would wish her to
possess a cultivated mind.

That you are an object of attraction, I cannot doubt: With a becoming modesty,
you acknowledge it. If you think me entitled to your slightest notice, favor we
with a line, to which I will render due obedience.

I must do myself the justice to declare, that, though I am a plodding farmer,
I have had the education of a gentleman. This information is not given from
motives of vanity, but to convince you that an alliance with me will be less a
degradation to your family.

I am, Madam, with great deference and respect, Your most obedient Servant,
HENRY HEATHFIELD.
Beachgrove, near Stamford, Lincolnshire.
LETTER XXVIII. EPHRAIM STEER, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
I HOPE you will not engage yourself before Monday next, as I shall then attend
Smithfield market in London. As soon as I have sold my bullocks there, I will
meet you at any place you shall please to appoint; and, if you and I can agree
upon terms, I will be your chapman.

I never love to haggle over a bargain, but to be off or on, as a body may say,
in the twinkling of an eye. If so be as you and I likes one another, why we
will compare notes, and if every thing turns out right, well and good: If it
does not, there is no harm done. Then you know you may keep your own money in
your pocket, and that which I shall take for the beasts will be mine.

If you should happen to have disposed of yourself before I comes to London,
pray send a line for me, to be left at the Bear and Ragged Staff Inn, in
Smithfield, directed for Ephraim Steer. They knows me there.

I am your humble Servant, to command, till death, EPHRAIM STEER.

LETTER XXIX. PETER TROTEUS, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
ACCEPT of me as a correspondent, in answer to your alluring advertisement. To
show what pretentions I have to a preference in your choice, it may be
necessary to mention who and what I am. That task, however, will be attended
with some difficulty, as I hardly know who and what I am myself, having been in
such a variety of situations, during the short period that I have existed.

Having been pretty liberally educated, I was first apprenticed to a surgeon in
the country; but I had too much timidity and tenderness in my disposition to
arrive at any degree of eminence in that butcherly business; I therefore
quitted it, and engaged in a trade equally sanguinary. My father purchased a
pair of colors for me in a marching regiment, and with my scarlet uniform,
epaulette, and flaming cockade, I cut a most tremendous figure.

Feeling the consequence of a military character, I sometimes ventured to
hector and bluster, among those whom I supposed had not a sufficient share of
spirit to call me to an account for my insolent behavior. For a long time I
enjoyed the reputation of valor, and was in hopes that no one would ever put my
courage to the test. At length, however, I received a formal challenge, from a
young gentleman whom I had insulted, and I did not feel myself bold.

I condescended to ask pardon in the most humiliating terms, but my petition
was rejected with contempt. What was to be done? I knew myself possessed of a
natural mildness of disposition, and could not bear the thoughts of drawing
blood from any human creature. I remonstrated with my antagonist, who also bore
the king's commission, on the impropriety of exposing two military lives to
danger, in consequence of a foolish private quarrel, when there was an
appearance of their services being speedily required, to chastise the insolence
of the enemies of their country.

These arguments, instead of abating, roused the rage of my challenger; he grew
bold, in proportion as I exhibited signs of fear and trepidation.

He threatened to post me for a coward, if I would not meet him at a certain
hour in Hyde Park; adding, that I might rely on finding him and his second
there at the appointed time.

Not wishing to purchase honor at the risque of my life, I soon came to a
resolution how to conduct myself in this business. I knew that, if I refused to
fight my man, my military profession was no longer tenable. Instead of meeting
the hero and his second, I went to a proper agent to find a purchaser for my
commission.

My commission having been bought, I was permitted to dispose of it; but had it
been given me, no such indulgence would have been permitted; I must have
resigned with infamy.

I was not greatly chagrined at this occurrence. Finding that a man of a
forgiving turn of mind, was a despicable character among soldiers, I was
determined to enter into a line of life, where a man might dare to be a coward
without becoming infamous. My next step was to qualify for the church. A few
lessons from an old clergyman, with whom my father was acquainted, enabled me
to rub up my Latin and Greek, and I found no great difficulty in getting
ordained.

Here I indulged my talent for declamation without control, and without danger
of murder or assassination. I declared instant war against Satan and his
ministers; and made it, for ^^^e time, my whole study to blacken those
characters, though they never had offended me. I knew myself perfectly safe, in
this kind of scandal and abuse, as I had no apprehensions of a summons to Hyde
Park.

My salary as a curate, for I never had either rectory or vicarage, was about
equal to the pay I had received as an ensign; and I had some casual extra fees
on performing certain ceremonies annexed to my clerical function. I now thought
myself happy and independent; but, hearing that many clerical gentlemen had
worked themselves into a good fat living by abusing the ministry, I set to work
immediately; and, if abuse is worthy of a reward in proportion to its rancor, I
ought at least to have had a mitre.

I proved that there was not a man of integrity or understanding in the
cabinet; that the bishops had no charity, and the maids of honor no chastity;
and that neither our admirals or generals could endure the smell of gunpowder.

Not thinking I had gone far enough to be noticed, I even scandalized a few
princes. This indeed occasioned my strictures to be attended to, and I was
promoted to -- a place in Newgate. An information was moved against me for
defamation: I was arraigned for having published a fal^^ scandalous and
seditious libel; and though I attempted a justification, and to prove the truth
of what I had asserted, I was found guilty; It appeared, indeed, in the course
of the trial, that, could I have proved the truth of every syllable which I had
advanced, I should have been equally culpable; it being a maxim in law, that "a
libel is not the less a libel for being true."

It would not have become me to contend with my judges; therefore, as a means
of mitigating damages, I urged the plea of poverty; no man could have see forth
such a plea with more propriety than myself, for my little all was distributed
in fees among the black gentlemen in Westminster Hall. My whole personal estate
(and I had nothing real) did not at that time amount to more than nineteen
pence three farthings.

Having proved myself a pauper, by affidavit, I thought I was perfectly secure
from having any pecuniary penalties imposed upon me; but when I reflected on
the probability of substituting imprisonment for fine, I felt myself a little
uneasy. Imagination presented the word NEWGATE before my eyes, in very large
legible characters.

I was anxious, however, to be made acquainted with my doom; but, as the usual
forms were not (...) be dispensed with, I was for the present ordered to be
carefully preserved in the Maison de Force, that due deliberation might be had,
in order to proportionate my punishment to my offense.

At a day appointed, I was presented before the solemn tribunal, as a culprit
convict, to be made acquainted with the punishment due to my demerits. With
great humanity, I was informed, that, previous to the pronouncing of the
sentence, I was at liberty to say any thing which I supposed might tend to
extenuate my guilt.

Imagining that a real statement of facts might probably answer my purpose,
better than a string of improbabilities which I could easily have invented, I
related to my judges, "the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth."

"Gentlemen," said I, "I paid my addresses to an amiable young lady, and
flattered myself with the appearance of encouragement, so far only as respected
herself; but upon application to the lady's father, and answering a few
interrogatories concerning my circumstances, I received a positive discharge
from his premises; accompanied with a threat of a degrading punishment, if ever
I should again presume to mention the subject of love in the presence of his
daughter. Finding it impossible to obtain this accomplished female, till I had
proved myself her equivalent in point of fortune, and the old gentleman
expected guinea for guinea, I resolved to have recourse to my pen, as the most
rapid means of acquiring riches.

"I knew a gentleman who wrote himself into an annuity of three hundred pounds,
by a little well timed abuse, in a letter addressed to a certain great man. A
second epistle, addressed to the same illustrious personage, was threatened in
a few days. Some truths or falsehoods were alleged in the first which were not
relished by the man in power. The specimen he had given was indeed so highly
disapproved, that the author was sought after, found, and rewarded in the
manner which I have mentioned.

"It was a kind of negative reward for the services he had rendered, by
withholding his satirical lash. He was not expected, in consideration of the
annual emolument he received, to be daily varnishing the character of his
benefactor, according to the usual practice; it was his silence only that had
been purchased, his silence only was required.

"Recollecting the particulars of this business, and with what ease a
comfortable independence might be acquired, I commenced scribbler, and produced
the pamphlet which, from what at present appears, will turn out much less
advantageous to me than I expected.

"Believe me, gentlemen, this is the real fact: I had no malice against any of
the persons whom I have vilified. I meant no injury to them: I wished only to
benefit myself, and to become an adequate suitor to the lady whose hand I had
solicited."

I concluded by observing, that, if I was not thought entitled to a reward,
like the fortunate friend I had mentioned, I hoped the court would not think me
deserving of further punishment, having been already under lock and key for
upwards of seven weeks.

Having, as I supposed, spoken much to the purpose, and excited the compassion
of my judges, I expected a sentence of the most lenient kind. One month's
imprisonment, and a fine of thirteen shillings and fourpence, was the utmost
that I dreaded; but I found myself exceedingly mistaken: -- The composition by
which I thought to have raised an independance, if not affluence, procured me
the following sentence. To be two years imprisoned, to stand twice on the
pillory, to pay a fine of six shillings and eightpence, and to find sureties
for my good behavior for seven years.

I was struck with astonishment, and indignation, at the apparent severity of
this judgment; but I was compelled to be obedient, and to repair immediately to
the miserable mansion destined to receive me.

The loss of liberty I could have submitted to with some degree of composure;
but the idea of exhibiting my face to the multitude, through an ignominious
wooden frame, was insupportable. Is this my reward, exclaimed I, for turning
politician? For my attempts to regulate mankind, and point out their duty and
defects, I am to have the elevated station of surveyor of the pavements!

After innumerable applications to my friends and relatives, some of whom move
in a sphere truly respectable, I obtained a remission of the ignominious part
of my sentence; the pillory was therefore removed from my affrighted
imagination.

By affected sorrow and contrition, and repeated protestations that I would
never more appear in the character of a politician, further indulgences were
extended to me: After the expiration of one year, instead of two, I was set at
liberty; and even without entering into a recognizance, with surities for my
future good "abearing."

Finding myself in the wide world much sooner than I had expected, I had not
planned a mode of life which would enable me to procure subsistence: My mind
had been so humbled by my sufferings, that I had no ambition beyond that of
being enabled to get my bread. The flame of passion, which beauty had raised
within my bosom, had become perfectly extinguished. My apparel, like myself,
had lost much of its bloom, and I knew the world too well to expect civility
and attention in a threadbare coat. Besides, the residence which I had quitted,
did not reflect any considerable degree of honor upon its tenants; I could not
therefore build any pretentions to commiseration on that account.

I directed my steps from prison, to the house of my sister; a worthy creature,
and a person for whom I had much affection and esteem: Our tenderness for each
other was indeed reciprocal; for, though she knew me to be eccentric, she knew
also that I was rather an oddity than an infamous abandoned calumniator.

So rejoiced was she at my liberation, that, as soon as she beheld me, she
threw herself into my arms, and felicitated me heartily on my accession to
liberty, regardless of my disgusting appearance. A suit of clothes of her
procuring, clean linen, and every comfortable appendage, enabled me to cast off
my wretched covering, in which poverty and filth were too conspicuously
portrayed. With my ragged and dirty habiliments. I also shook off a train of
attendants, which never fail to be in the suite of wretchedness and misery.

But though I was received with affection and regard by my beloved sister, and
might have quartered myself upon her for a long time, before she would even
have hinted any disapprobation of my conduct in so doing; I had too much spirit
to live upon alms, and resolved speedily to engage in active life.

To my clerical profession it was impossible for me to return: My crime and
punishment, and more particularly my sentence, had stamped my character with
indeliable infamy, and rendered me unworthy of appearing in an ecclesiastical
habit. Could I have had the audacity to reassume the sacred robe, the ordinary
would doubtless have stripped me of it with indignity and de^^adation.

While I was ruminating on these, and other disagreeable circumstances, an
overture in one of the public prints particularly arrested my attention: An
itinerant company of comedians, at no great distance from the metropolis,
wanted a gentleman to engage in their little troop, a vacancy having been
occasioned by the desertion of one of their principal members. Nothing was said
about terms; but it was requested that no person would apply who had not a
competent knowledge of theatrical concerns, and was able to give satisfaction,
both in tragedy and comedy, to a genteel and brilliant audience.

Having always delighted in dramatic poetry, and perfectly remembering the most
striking scenes in Shakespeare, O^way. Congreve, Sheridan, and other celebrated
writers, I thought I should soon be capable of appearing in some of the most
striking characters; especially as I fortunately possessed a quick as well a
retentive memory.

I repaired to Hendon, whither the advertisement directed me, and was
ceremoniously introduced to the two managers. After some conversation on this
important business, a rehearsal of some passages was required, by way of
specimen of my theatric taste and talents. Luckily my endeavo^^^ were approved;
terms were proposed, and I acceded to them. In consideration of my great merit,
(as these dramatic sovereigns expressed themselves) I was to receive seven
shillings a week, and to have a clear benefit, at every town or village in
which they thought proper to perform.

That no misunderstanding might happen between me and my august masters, I was
informed, it was expected that I should find my own clean linen and stockings;
but with regard to every thing else, I might depend upon a proper supply from
their extensive wardrobe.

Preliminaries being thus adjusted, I entered upon my new duty, and, as I
thought, performed wonders. I shone forth in the characters of Lear, Richard
the Third, Hamlet, Macbeth. Kitely, Abel Drugger and Marplot. To the audience I
gave uncommon satisfaction, and commanded from them bursts of applause,
whenever I manifested a nice discrimination of character, and gave evident
proofs that I entered into the spirit and meaning of the author.

Thinking I had now got a permanent employment, though not a very lucrative
one* I found myself somewhat happier than I was in Newgate; but, so uncertain
are all human affairs, my merit, in my new profession, was my destruction. The
managers, notwithstanding the theater was crammed every evening on my account,
began to look on me with a jealous eye. Their nightly receipts doubly exceeded
the sums which they had ever taken, but that was not thought a sufficient
recompense for the loss of fame and consequence: They had been accustomed to
share the plaudits, as well as the profits of the house; but now their finest
acting was disregarded, and I engrossed the whole of the applause.

I now perceived that I was in danger of expulsion from our society. I was so
critically situated, that I knew not what steps to pursue. My offense was of so
singular a kind, that I could not correct it, without reducing the income of my
masters, and exposing myself to ridicule and contempt.

I daily expected a discharge, but my governors were so far actuated by the
principles of honor and conscience, that I was first permitted to have a
benefit; and that benefit was much more productive than I expected. Believe me,
Madam, I received the neat sum of seven pounds, nineteen shillings, and
sixpence. So prodigious an accumulation of cash, in one evening, is not extant
in the annals of our company.

Early the next morning, my two governors dispatched a messenger to my
apartment, to inform me that my attendance on them was expected at a certain
hour, which they had appointed. I obeyed the mandate, and was received rather
ceremoniously than cordially. Appearing in a subaltern character, I requested
to be favored with their commands.

The senior of these two kings of Brentford, after having thrice stroked his
chin, deigned to address me thus, "Far be it from us, Mr. Proteus, to complain
of the manner of your conducting business; your abilities, as a comedian, are
great, very great; they are of the first magnitude. We cannot therefore think
of retaining a gentleman of such distinguished talents, in our vagrant troop.
Your efforts cannot fail of placing you at the head of one of the London
theaters; and we should act a villainous part to rob you of your deserved
emoluments, or to deprive persons of distinction of that satisfaction which
your performances cannot fail to give. Permit me to add, Mr. Proteus, that
human nature, is human nature; we have all a spice of vanity in our
composition, and a man does not like to be totally eclipsed, after having been
allowed to shine with some degree of luster for many years. To be plain with
you, Sir, your talents are too splendid for our plain company. -- While you
continue with us, the audience come only to see and hear you: When you are gone
they will, as before, be satisfied with our poor exertions, and sometimes
condescend to favor us with their plaudits. I believe, Mr. Proteus, I need not
explain myself any farther; your penetration can easily discover my meaning. In
short, Sir, it will be for our mutual benefit and satisfaction to separate as
soon as possible."

The other manager bowed assent; and I did not oppose my discharge, it was
conveyed to me in such flattering terms. The conduct of my masters reminded me
of that of the late British Roscius, who, thinking another player superior to
him in a few characters, engaged that player at a large salary, to lay him on
the shelf, as it is termed. By this step he prevented a formidable opposition
at the other house; and he completely prevented it on his own boards, because
he was limited to an inferior cast of characters.

My vanity feasted not a little, on the idea of being discarded for having too
much merit; and I was the better reconciled to my destiny, as my benefit had
lodged a few shiners in my pocket.

After thanking my governors for their civility, and receiving a balance due to
me of a few shillings, I took my leave of them, and bade adieu to the wooden
theater of Hendon.

No expense attended my removal; my goods and chattles were all personal, my
whole wardrobe being upon my back.

Not thinking so highly of myself, (notwithstanding the flattering
circumstances which I have mentioned) as to suppose I was qualified to make my
appearance at either of the royal theaters, I took the direct road to Bath. I
thought myself, at least, capable of being transplanted into that flourishing
theatrical garden.

I remain at present in that city, and expect daily to be incorporated and
enrolled with the persons of the drama, who perform alternately there, and at
Bristol, another city at the distance of about twelve miles.

Soon after my arrival here, madam, chance threw your advertisement before my
eyes. I resolved immediately to become your correspondent, called for pen, ink
and paper, and wrote this long epistle, perhaps too severe a trial for your
patience.

Though I am a whimsical kind of being madam, I would scorn to impose on any
woman. I have given an honest, candid, and ingenuous account of myself; and if,
after due consideration, you think I have any claim to your attention, you will
probably favor me with a line. If, on the other hand, you should deem me an
impertinent puppy, you are at liberty to burn this letter, which cost me
upwards of two hours labor, and with it all remembrance of your itinerant
correspondent.

You, Madam, are now in full possession of my genuine history. I have not
attempted to gloss or misrepresent a single circumstance. It will, however,
convince you, Madam, that if misfortunes arrive, I have always my shifts and
resources at hand. Should I be ever so much laden with distress, I shall never
sink under my burden; being always sure of finding out some expedient to keep
me above want. With your ready cash, and my knowledge of the world, we might
become an enviable and a happy pair. If you refuse to accept of me as a
husband, permit me to subscribe myself,

Your most obedient humble Servant, PETER PROTEUS.
Salisbury, 1st March, 1791.
LETTER XXX. THOMAS APRICE, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
PERMIT a Welchman to be one of your wooers. Though my income is not very
considerable, I am a gentleman from my profession. I am a clergyman, and the
vicar of a parish. Many years have I been curate, but I am now preferred to a
living of ten pounds a year clear of deductions.

Had I continued in the humble sphere of a curate, I should not have had the
presumption to address a lady of your fortune; especially with such
accomplishments as you seem to possess, if any judgment is to be formed by your
elegant little billet in the newspaper.

Besides the living which I possess, I have the prospect of another advancement
in the church; an advancement equally honorable and lucrative: It is no less
than a prebend, to the amount of four pounds nineteen shillings per annum. With
my own income, and the interest of your money, we can afford to make a very
respectable figure in this country. Very few could equal us in splendour and
magnificence, and hardly any would be able to excel us.

I am a widower almost without encumbrance, being left with only two boys and
the same number of girls: So small a family will not, I hope, be considered as
any obstacle to our nuptials.

If you should have any objection to coming into Wales, I am not so
particularly attached to my native air and soil, as to refuse my assent to any
place of residence you may think proper to approve, having it always in my
power, for a small annual sum, to procure a curate to perform duty on my living.

As there is a possibility of our not concluding the business, on which we are
now treating, I think it fair and equitable for each party to pay half the
postage of this letter; I have therefore paid my moiety, and caused the words
half post paid to be written on the outside, not doubting but you will advance
an equal sum. Should this affair terminate agreeably to my wishes, we shall
find no difficulty in adjusting the expenses of this correspondence.

If you meet with a more advantageous proposal, than what I now offer, you will
doubtless close immediately with that, and reject mine. If you do not, a line
directed to the Reverend Mr. Thomas Aprice, at the sign of the Nag's Head, at
Dhthwsy^^y, in the county of Carmarthen, will be sure to find,

Your most obedient humble Servant, THOMAS APRICE.
(...), ^ March, 1791. St. Dav^d's Day
LETTER XXXI. THOMAS ALDER, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
THOUGH an inhabitant of a forest, I sometimes get an opportunity of taking a
peep at some of the London papers. In one of those I saw your advertisement,
and am therefore encouraged to become your correspondent.

I have no great quantity of cows or sheep, but my premises are completely
furnished with animals of inferior magnitude; all of which are my own property,
when I can catch them. Thousands and tens of thousands compose but a very
inconsiderable part of the number of my live stock.

To come to the point at once. Madam, I farm an exetensive rabbit warren, and
should think myself very happy if you would condescend to be mistress of it. I
find it sufficiently lucrative to enable me to live decently and comfortably;
but, with the addition of your money, I could also take a considerable farm,
and we might then fare sumptuously.

My house is delightfully situated on a pleasant spot, remarkable for the
salubrity of the air. If I could entice you, by any means, into these regions,
it should be my study to make you happy; if I cannot, I shall not condemn
myself for the attempt, especially if you should be so obliging as to favor me
with any kind of answer. In humble expectation I remain,

Madam, your obedient servant, THOMAS ALDER.

LETTER XXXII. MR. PLOWDEN, to BELINDA.
YOUR advertisement, madam, has induced me to commence this suit. I much
approve of your declaration that you are weary of a single life, and therefore
I have a sufficient plea for sending you this rough draft of a letter. If you
think proper to put in an answer to it, I hope I shall have no cause to take
exceptions to it, but at all events I must crave permission to amend my bill

If you wish to have counsel's opinion how to act in this business, be pleased
to draw up your case forthwith. I should be happy to bring this cause to a
speedy issue, and the sooner we have a hearing the sooner I may hope to obtain
judgment. As I mean to act upon honorable terms, I care not how many witnesses
there may be with regard to my proceedings.

Any interrogatories touching my character and circumstances, shall be answered
by satisfactory depositions. I defy any man to charge me with having been
guilty of an unjust or dishonorable deed, or of any unfair practice: My word is
my bond.

I am ready to give any security for my appearance to any card, summons, or
other process, which you may think proper to serve me with, how quick soever it
may be returnable.

Believe me, Madam, since your ingenuous advertisement first arrested my
attention, your dear ideal image has engrossed the whole of my thoughts and
meditations. Imagination has given me a fair copy of your person, and I peruse
it frequently.

What a delightful employment should I find it, to draw marriage articles
between Belinda and myself? Supremely happy should I be, if she would
condescend to come to my chambers, and give me instructions for that purpose. I
assure you, Madam* I am an earnest solicitor in this action on the case, which
is truly special, and hope no proceedings may be quashed for want of form.

I am, Madam, Your obedient humble servant, RICHARD PLOWDEN.
Hilary Term 31 G. 3. Plowden (...) Be^inda P. S. My address is Richard
Plowden, Gentleman, Paper Buildings, Temple.



LETTER XXXIII. SOLOMON SHRIVEL, to BELINDA.
MADAM,
I HAVE twice ventured within the pale of matrimony; and am now, for the second
time a widower. The connubial state is a happy one: Of this I am so much
convinced, that, even at my advanced period of life, I cannot endure the
thought of remaining single.

You will be surprised, Madam, at having a man of ninety, among your train of
admirers. To that age I am now arrived; and if you are a steady, prudent lady,
you will not object to that age. I have got rid of those hoity toity boyish
actions which render young men ridiculous; and I have clipped the wings of my
extravagance, which formerly conducted me into every species of riot and
dissipation.

There is another consideration, Madam, worth attending to, and which will
doubtless have its due weight with you, as a woman of discretion. There is not
so much danger of having a large family of children, as there might have been,
supposing I was sixty or seventy years younger. A dozen or two of children are
not to be supported with a trifle, at the rate provisions now are, and
therefore they would be an encumbrance to us.

Some inconsiderate women would perhaps object to my age, but what is ninety
years! I am but a boy among some of my acquaintance! a mere chicken! If the
lady I am thus addressing, has any knowledge of the world, (and I am convinced
she has by the terms in which her advertisement is couched) she will take an
early opportunity of sending a line to her most humble Servant,

SOLOMON SHRIVEL.


Such, my Louisa, are the epistles which I have lately received, but they are
not the whole: They are a few selected from several large budgets or packets;
the cream, the quintescence of the whole. Imagine then, my dear girl, what
trash the others must have contained!

If the perusal of the transcripts of letters which I have now sent you, should
afford you any diversion or amusement, my purpose is answered; I had no other
motive for undertaking the task of copying them.

I have the satisfaction of acquainting my Louisa, that the tender negotiation
between Mr. Proby and myself, seems to advance rapidly, without obstacle or
interruption. You and I, my dear friend, are steering for the same haven. May
no adverse and tempestuous winds drive us again into the ocean of uncertainty,
and dash us against the rocks of disappointment.

I shall impatiently expect an answer to this letter; and surely I have an
immediate claim to one epistle, now you are too long ones in arrear. Let me
entreat you to give a circumstantial diary of every transaction of importance
in your part of the world, since the date of your last. When I say, "every
transaction of importance" I mean every transaction of what kind soever; for
every thing must be of importance to me, which in the least concerns my Louisa.

Among the billets, which this post conveys to you that from Peter Protius is
certainly the foremost in point of literary merit. Whether in jest or earnest,
there is something pleasingly whimsical in the character he has given of
himself; and he heartily acknowledges, without a blush, that he is an arrant
coward. He has ventured, however, to give me a challenge; but were I to accept
it, perhaps he would flinch as he did when his military antagonist dared him to
the field: In love, as well as war, there are many who pass for daring or
blustering heroes, who show strong symptoms of timidity, when honor calls them
upon actual duty.

My lover of ninety might perhaps stand a chance, if he was the only man
existing upon earth. His argument on the method of avoiding encumbrances, will
not be much attended to. You will think I have no mercy on you, if I do not
instantly resign my pen. It will have performed its task for the present, when
it has again assured you that I am

Your affectionate Friend, BELINDA BLACKET.

LETTER XXXIV. LOUISA LENOX, to BELINDA BLACKET.
MY best thanks are due to you, Belinda, for your very obliging letters; but
how am I to make an adequate return! If you expect sheet for sheet, or line for
line as you strongly intimate, to whom can I apply for materials? In a remote
part of the country, a dearth of incidents is to be expected and I hope my
Belinda would not wish me to invent tales, or even to adopt exaggeration upon
facts, purely to swell out an epistle.

I have regularly communicated to you our progress in the road to happiness. I
can have nothing fresh to impart to you on that business (highly important
business to me!) till it is concluded, confirmed, and ratified. That day of
accomplishment is not far distant -- "Fly swiftly, ye minutes!"

As you have frequently expressed a desire to know the method of killing time,
amidst the woods and groves, I think I can convey an idea of it, by relating to
you the particulars of a splendid entertainment, to which I was invited as a
guest.

Sir Thomas Dighton, just come of age, acquired his father's dignity about
three years ago, but could not fully possess his large estate till he attained
the age of twentyone years. On Wednesday last he arrived at the period which
legally pronounced him Man; and the happy day was ushered in with the ringing
of bells, dancing round the maypole, and every rustic method of expressing the
most lively demonstrations of joy. Sir Thomas's generosity on this occasion was
unbounded. Particular invitations were given to all the genteel families in the
environs of his seat, and a general proclamation was circulated, that all his
tenants, servants and neighbors, were expected to repair to Dighton Hall, to
partake of the festivity of the day: So extensive was his idea of bestowing
plenty and good cheer, that peasants and paupers were not excluded!

Auxiliary cooks from the metropolis were engaged upon this joyful occasion;
and, that the ears of the company might be feasted with extatic sounds, the
best vocal and instrumental performers were procured from the same great
capital.

Every luxury of the table was abundantly supplied. Wines of the most expensive
kind, were as liberally bestowed as if they were estimated but as water. This
was peculiarly the case among the first class of the visitors, who attended.
Those who were deemed the second in rank, were entertained in an apartment less
magnificent, but their fare was hardly inferior to that which was provided for
those who moved in a more elevated sphere of life.

A third class was entertained with almost equal pageantry and profusion; and
the last division, far exceeding all the others in point of number, were
abundantly supplied with good Old English provender, and fine sparking ale;
some of the latter was as aged as the young baronet, whose majority they were
celebrating.

The park and gardens received the overflowings of the mansion: Many hundreds
of the delighted neighbors regaled themselves el fresco, under the shade of
trees and shrubberies* the soliage of which became tremulous by the gentle
breeze fanning and refreshing the company in the performance of their task;
that of quaffing frequent libations to the prosperity of their generous and
indulgent host.

Cheerfulness, with her endearing smiles, sat enthroned on every countenance.
All was joy, harmony, pleasantry, jocularity and glee. The adjacent country
seemed to partake of the general satisfaction; the woods, the copices, the
gardens, and the enamelled fields, as if clad in their holiday habiliments,
appeared to have been arrayed for the festive purpose, and to have poured forth
all their perfume, with their splendid trappings.

The birds, as if intuitively become acquainted with the cause of the grand
assemblage, joined in the general harmony, and from every tree and bough issued
the vocal warblings of feathered choirists. To complete the scene, the weather
kindly contributed; an unclouded sky, a serene temperature of air. refreshed by
soft breathing zephyrs, perfected the elysium of Dighton Hall.

This is the general account of occurrences on that auspicious day. I will now
endeavor to be circumstantial. I had the honor to be classed among the first
rank of visitors, and partook of a most elegant and excellent repast. On this
occasion the gentlemen and ladies associated; but, shortly after dinner,
etiquette seemed to point out that it was expedient for the latter to retire, a
proper apartment having been reserved for that purpose.

The propriety of this step was tacitly acknowleged, hardly a syllable being
mentioned, by any of the gentlemen present, which could be construed to oppose
our departure. A ceremonious separation took place, and we repaired to the
scene which had been provided for us. Our select sisterhood consisted of about
thirty members, and for our accommodation and entertainment, a small band of
music attended. Madam Mara was the only vocal mercenary; her professional
talents were rewarded with that liberality which they justly merited. Many
volunteers, however, inlisted in our vocal corpse.

A beautiful young lady, of the name of Harcourt* sung most divinely. Nothing
could be more enchanting than her voice, except the irresistible graces which
accompanied it, and the angelic figure which so perfectly accorded with her
celestial harmony. All was supernatural and adorable! she seemed in every
respect, superior to beings merely terrestial: Were she a man, she should be
the god of my idolatry!

After Miss Harcourt had enraptured every auditor and beholder, I was solicited
to contribute my vocal mite; I pleaded hard to be excused* but, perceiving that
rudeness only could exculpate me, I reluctantly complied with the unanimous
wishes of our fair society. But oh! what a falling off! I detested my own weak
endeavors to please, and condemned my effrontery in presuming to enter the
lists with a person so infinitely my superior. I lamented that I did not submit
to any censures, rather than contrast the croaking of the raven, with the
silver sweetness of the nightingale.

Perhaps, my Belinda, you may be surprised at these observations, knowing that
I have hitherto entertained no contemptible opinion of my musical
accomplishments, and thinking, as you have flatteringly assured me, that my
exertions in that line have been more than tolerable. But I now hang down my
head abashed. Miss Harcourt is "the fairest among the fair." -- She is "angelic
among angels!" -- Mediocrity is the utmost excellence that I can ever hope to
arrive at.

Madam Mara, as usual* gave perfect satisfaction. Miss Dighton* sister to Sir
Thomas, without much voice, displayed great musical taste, and afforded
entertainment. Several other ladies were entitled to applause* for their
assistance in our little concert, and the moments glided away with great
rapidity. At length a promenade was proposed, and agreed to: We repaired to the
shrubbery; and, shortly after our arrival there. Sir Thomas Dighton, having
obtained leave of absence from the gentlemen, hastened to pay his respects to
us.

With unaffected politeness and affability, he severally addressed our little
coterie, and thanked us for the honor we had conferred on him by our visit.
Some general conversation ensued; after which I was selected from the groupe by
Sir Thomas, and conducted to a remote corner of the plantation.

Without much preamble, Sir Thomas made positive professions of attachment to
me; said he had long been a silent admirer of my person and perfections; and
had now come to a resolution to solicit my hand in form. Whatever might be the
amount of my fortune* he assured me that he was perfectly indifferent on that
score, having more than an ample independance of his own; but if I would
condescend to be the mistress of Dighton Hall, as I was already the sovreign
possessor of his heart, he should think himself the happiest of mankind; if, on
the contrary his suit should be rejected, he should be one of the most
miserable of the human race. He concluded with an earnest wish, that, if I did
not wholly disapprove of his addresses, I would give out a ray of hope that
there might be a possibility of his succeeding, after the usual assiduities
essential in so tender a negotiation.

I thanked Sir Thomas for his flattering partiality in my favor, and earnestly
besought him to seek for a person who had a better claim to the title of Lady
Dighton; one whose birth and fortune placed her on a footing with himself. I
expatiated on the impropriety of the alliance he proposed, and begged for his
own personal honor and emolument, that he would not urge the proposal which he
had so inconsiderately made.

He protested that nothing should divert him from his purpose, if I would
vouchsafe to hearken to his petition; but, as I was so injenious in framing
objections for him, he feared I was averse to the overtures he had made.

I repeated my observations with additional energy; but he still persisted in
his resolution* if he could be favored with the most distant prospect of being
attended to. After many protestations of inviolate attachment* if I would
condescend to h^arken seriously to the dictates of his passion. I told him
ingenuously that I was incapable of attending to his tale; that I had not a
heart at my disposal; that solemn engagements had been reciprocally made,
between me and one whom I preferred to all the world; and that nothing* on my
part, should cancel those engagements; that I was sensible of the honor which
he intended to confer on me; but though he was truly amiable and respectable,
and infinitely beyond what my most aspiring notions had ever aimed at, yet I
was indispensibly obliged to discourage addresses which could only feed my
vanity, without a possibility of altering a tittle of my sacred vow; or to have
the least bias on my affections.

He heard me with astonishment and concern. He was so greatly agitated, that he
frequently attempted to interrupt me; but finding, at length, that I was
peremptory in my resolves, and that it would be equally ungenerous and
ungenteel to attempt to argue me into a breach of articles, he barely expressed
his sorrow at the intelligence he received* and, with a sigh of resiganation,
abandoned all prospect of success; declaring that the barriers between him and
happiness were insurmountable.

This unexpected overture from a man of rank and fortune, could not but awaken
my vanity, and atone* in some degree, for the mortification I had received in
submitting to be a foil to Miss Harcourt. I began to entertain a more exalted
opinion of myself than I had hitherto done; and gave myself credit for
attractions of the superior kind, without considering that men are as
frequently governed by caprice, as by the influence of beauty and
accomplishments.

I must admit, however, that, though I enjoyed the triumph over Sir Thomas, I
felt a pang for the disappointment he had sustained. Though I exulted on my
power of inflicting wounds* I had not a wish that the sufferings and smarts
which he endured should be too severe. Had I not been engaged, irrevocably
engaged, to a man whom I had every reason to adore, Sir Thomas Dighton's bait
would perhaps have been too alluring for me to reject. Let me tell you, my
Belinda, a young man just twentyone years of age, with an agreeable person, an
immense fortune, and a title, are no despicable ingredients in the matrimonial
ragout.

This flattering preference in the opinion of Sir Thomas, in the presence of
many beautiful and accomplished females, made my little heart palpitate with
joy. It furnished me too with an opportunity of convincing Mr. Graham that I
was not merely induced by prospects of advantage to accede to his proposals of
matrimony. I shall now take the earliest opportunity of informing him, that I
have refused the addresses of Sir Thomas Dighton, infinitely his superior in
point of fortune.

Little did the young baronet expect that he should meet with a repulse from a
person of small fortune, and perhaps smaller perfections. As soon as he had
received the final sentence from my lips, he started another subject of
conversation; we intermixed with the throng, and no particular attention,
during the remainder of the day, was bestowed by Sir Thomas on your Louisa.

A ball concluded the festivity of the day; and it was not till after the
arrival of the succeeding morning, that the well pleased guests could prevail
upon themselves to retire from the hospitable mansion.

The length of this letter will sufficiently apologize for my concluding it,
without exhausting all my store of materials, which may be required in my next
epistle.

Though I have refused the honor intended me* it is with pleasure I inform you
that I might have been Lady Dighton; and that I am, and ever shall be,

The most affectionate of Your friends, LOUISA LENOX

LETTER XXXV. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
IN a former letter, my Louisa, I gave you a long account of my reverend swain,
and the methods I intended to pursue to procure a living; but you have been so
much engaged on your own affairs, that our little insignificant advances seem
hardly entitled to your attention.

I hope Sir Thomas Dighton's civilities will neither prevent nor retard the
proposed union between Mr. Graham and my Louisa. A little vanity may be
permitted to reside in a female breast, and that little must have been highly
gratified by the young baronets ingenuous declaration; but I hope you will
remain firm to your first engagement. To prevent even a possibility of
wavering, under such tempting circumstances, let me earnestly recommend to you
an immediate compliance with Mr. Graham's request; accompany him instantly to
the altar.

Pardon me. Louisa, for supposing you capable of infidelity, or breach of vow.
I only hint at possibilities, not probabilities. There are persons who,
situated as you are, would cancel the most solemn asseverations, and plead the
cause as an ample justification of such conduct. But I will venture to
pronounce that you are not one of those persons, and that, attached as you are
by pure affection to Mr. Graham, no allurements or advantages can warp your
inflexible mind.

Your narrative of the proceedings on Sir Thomas's attaining his majority,
entertained me much: Your kindness in giving it so circumstantially was very
flattering to me, as it convinced me that you did not grudge the time devoted
to my gratification.

I hope the enamored baronet will not renew his attack. If he does, my Louisa,
be firm and resolute in resisting his pretentions: Convince the world that
nothing can make you deviate from the paths of rectitude and honor, and that
you still merit the warmest degree of friendship, from

Your ever faithful BELINDA.

LETTER XXXVI. LOUISA LENOX, to BELINDA BLACKET.
YOU did me injustice, Belinda, to suppose me capable of encouraging the
addresses of any man, after the solemn contract between me and Mr. Graham.
Believe me, my dear friend, to be seated on a throne I would not deviate in the
least from my engagements with that amiable youth.

Your tender concern on supposing me exposed to the most trying temptations, is
an additional proof of your esteem for me. I am not therefore displeased at
your intimations of fear and apprehension, that I should be unequal to the task
which had been imposed upon me.

I shall dwell no longer on this subject, having matters of more importance to
relate to you. I am obliged to Sir Thomas Dighton for the honor he intended me;
but pursuant to your advice. I have put it out of my power to become Lady
Dighton.

I was entertained, Belinda, with a portrait you sent me of your clerical
swain, in a former letter, before you favored me with your fresh packet, and I
admire your great prudence and generosity, in procuring a living for him. He
ought to think himself a very happy fellow, to find a patron in a lover. I mean
not to insinuate that he is a a mere mercenary lover, but certainly a good
living is a very desirable acquisition. Who would not resign a fellowship, for
a beautiful young lady, and a fat benefice?

I admire the generosity, or rather the gratitude, of your "deserving man." as
you emphatically call him, when he makes a voluntary offer of settling your
whole fortune upon yourself; and your noble and spirited refusal to accept of
such conditions, reflects equal honor on yourself.

Your resolution of destroying the letters, which you may happen to receive
from future correspondents, I greatly approve.

And now, my Belinda, permit me to acquaint you, that I have exchanged the name
of Lenox for that of Graham. Yesterday's sun saw me, with sacred solemnity,
initiated into the mysteries of matrimony. The ceremony was attended by the
most respectable nobility and gentry in the neighborhood, and a smile of
satisfaction appeared on every face.

The husbandman forsook his field, and the shepherd his flock, to join in the
festivity of the day, and mix in the procession. -- Mr. Graham is the idol of
all who know him, from the nobleman to the humble cottager: undissembled joy
was therefore testified, by every means that could be contrived, on that
auspicious day, which united me to the best of men.

On our return from the altar, we partook of some refreshment at Mr. Graham's
house; and* after taking and airing, came back to a sumptuous dinner, provided,
upon the occasion, for the most respectable of our friends. Another extensive
table was spread in the great hall, for those of less opulence, and who moved
in an humbler sphere; and a third for the peasantry, and others. Barrels of
beer, and plenty of all kinds of provision, were also distributed to the
populace without doors.

In the evening we had a ball, which was composed of the first characters in
this part of the kingdom, and was remarkably splendid.

Congratulate me, my dear Belinda, on this transcendantly joyful occasion; for,
believe me, I am the happiest of my sex!

My situation, in all respects, is realy enviable; the house or which I am now
legally constituted the mistress, is an antique but elegant building, and is
situated in a paddock, at a proper distance from the road. -- Many of the rooms
are spacious, and furnished in the modern taste; the others are neat, simple
and convenient; the decorations less splendid, though equally pleasing. A
pleasure garden of about three acres lies behind the mansion, and is laid out
with infinite elegance and judgment. It abounds with variety of the choicest
shrubs, fruittrees and flowers, among which are many curious exotics.

Here, in the sweet society of my dear and amiable companion, the hours glide
happily away. Like another Eden, our garden appears a paradise to us, whence
there is no danger of being driven, as we touch not the forbidden fruit.

A Summerhouse, beautifully constructed, embellishes one corner of the garden;
whither we can repair when sultry Phoebus is too powerful, or when a shower of
rain renders such retirement necessary. The murmuring of a little rivulet which
meanders near this little structure, has a pleasing effect, especially in hot
weather.

An orchard, now rich with autumnal fruit, joins to our pleasure garden. It is
pleasing to the view, and promises to furnish our table with a luxurious
dessert.

Sometimes, to vary the scene, I accompany Mr. Graham in his phaeton (the only
carriage he at present possesses) to take the air, and occasionally to visit
some hospitable and friendly neighbor.

Not above half a mile from our residence a transparent river runs through the
verdant meadows. This stream is often visited by the ladies and gentlemen in
our vicinity, for the sole purpose of angling. -- I have been many times
prevailed on to be one of the party upon these occasions, but I cannot deem
that a diversion, which inflicts death or torture on any animal, however
insignificant it may appear to us of the human race.

Whilst more innocent amusements are to be found, I shall not in future be
easily prevailed on to join fishing parties. But, as I would not affect to be
over delicate, I shall decline such engagements, by making any apology that may
occur to me.

Indeed, Belinda, home has so many charms for me, that I seldom am induced to
quit it. If I have the company of my good man, I have not a wish beyond it; he
is all the world to me!

Mr. Graham's sister, whose perfections I have already mentioned to you, shows
every attention to me in her power; she is so capital in the musical line, that
I have solicited her to become her pupil. She politely thanked me for the horor
I proposed to confer on her, and gladly took me under her tutorage. For the
short time that I have applied myself to the study of that pleasing science,
she flatters me with having made a considerable progress. I hope I shall in
time, become a proficient, as I would joyfully embrace every opportunity of
rendering myself more worthy of Mr. Graham.

My musical tutoress sometimes accompanies her brother and myself in a rural
promenade about the hamlet. In these limited excursions we are saluted with the
clumsy bows and courtesies of the inhabitants, who frequently receive small
bounties from us, in return for which we have their fervent prayers,
articulated in homely but in heartfelt accents.

Such an honest simplicity of manners prevails among our peasantry, so much
innocence appears in all their little pleasures and pursuits, as to convey an
idea of the harmless shepherds on the Arcadian plains, so much celebrated by
our pastoral poets.

A theft or robbery is hardly ever heard of among us. Contented with the scanty
but wholesome food which their own industry supplies, they never think of
invading the property of others. We might even sleep in security with our doors
wide open.

How different is this, my Belinda, from the state of rapine which reigns in
the metropolis! Where vice not only lurks in obscure corners, but stalks forth
in open daylight, and danger is to be apprehended in your public streets, Even
the utmost vigilance of the police cannot protect you from the depredations of
the robber and the assassin.

Suffer me to prevail on you to visit these happy regions. You have my earnest
invitation to make your abode here, as long as you may find it agreeable; and
Mr. Graham, on his part, will exert himself to hinder your departure.

But* should you bestow your hand upon Mr. Proby, which appears to me more than
probable, I fear you will not be able to comply with my request, as his
residence will perhaps be required on the living, to which he is to be
presented. Of that you will inform me hereafter.

You ask my opinion on the proposed match between you and the reverend youth
whom you so much esteem. My opinion will certainly be acceptable, because it
corresponds entirely with your own. Wed him without unnecessary delay! If he is
as worthy as you represent him (and I never had any reason to doubt of your
veracity) be careful not to lose him. He is a man worth any woman, and his
equal may not easily be found.

I wait impatiently for your letter of congratulation on my becoming a bride. I
know you will rejoice at my happiness; and, I assure you, if there is a
possibility of rendering it more complete, the joyful tidings of your being
happily united with the man you love, alone can do it.

Permit me, my Belinda, to affirm, that you will ever have the second place in
my esteem, which is all that can be reasonably expected from

Your unalterable friend, LOUISA LENOX.

LETTER XXXVII. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
I HEARTILY congratulate you, my Louisa, on the celebration of your nuptials
May your happiness be proportioned to your deserts! Celestial joys would then
await you! You would be beyond the reach of those sorrows and disappointments
which usually embitter the cup of life! serving as alloy to those pleasures
which must not be permitted to exceed the terrestrial standard.

Again must I entreat your pardon for supposing there was a possibility of your
breaking your faith with Mr. Graham; but for those we esteem our fears are
alarmed on the most insignificant occurences; the most distant danger gives
birth to anxieties; and we censure the gentle breeze, lest it should inflict a
cold on the object of our attention.

Frequently, my Louisa, have you enjoined me to furnish you with intelligence
from the metropolis, the source of adventure and intelligence; and I have
always endeavored to oblige you, as far as the limits of a sheet of paper would
allow me. A mysterious affair has lately given rise to much conjecture, and
some altercation; but the mystery begins to be unravelled, and the doubts seem
to be superseded by stubborn facts.

A young lady, beautiful, nobly allied, and only in her twentysecond year,
thought herself neglected by the youths of quality of the other sex, and
therefore, if she could not have the satisfaction of procuring an actual wooer,
she was determined at least to enjoy the reputation of being wooed: She
therefore conjured up a man of quality, no less than the heir apparent of a
puissant duke. To give the appearance of reality to the imaginary courtship,
she did not confine herself to the bare method of communicating the pleasing
tidings by the lips; she produced letters, not only from the supposed enamored
swain, but even from the head of the most noble house. Corroborative epistles
were also circulated in variety of forms and places; insomuch that the tale was
almost universally believed, and a speedy union was expected to have taken
place between the young nobleman, who was utterly a stranger to the affair, and
the young lady who planned and projected the whole business, and wanted to pass
upon the world for a marchioness elect.

Happy, no doubt, at being thought the enviable object of an amiable young
nobleman's addresses, she produced many documents to keep afloat the story
which she had circulated; well knowing that as soon as the eclaircissement took
place her triumph would be at an end.

At length, however, the narrative passed through so many channels of
communication, that it found its way to the ears of those who were supposed to
be the parties. Wholly unacquainted with every syllable that had been related
to them, and the imaginary rise and progress of an hymeneal treaty, they
naturally expressed their astonishment at the ingenuity of the fabricator.

A discovery was now made that all the reports, epistles, billets, etc. had
been fabricated. The marriage articles which had been signed, the jewels, and
the bridal habiliments, were found to have been only in the epistles circulated
by the young lady; and all her ideal rank and consequence vanished instantly
into air.

Though the fair adventuress knew that it was impossible for her to escape
detection in the end, she flattered herself with being somewhat longer in
possession of this ideal happiness and splendour; but, as a developement was
manifest, she, with infinite address, endeavored to make it appear that she had
been imposed on as well as the noble lord; and for a time the public opinion
was in equipoise whether she was the imposer, or the object of imposition.

The young lady had many advocates, who endeavored to affix the odium, due to
the fabricator of the story, on another quarter. But the charge of delinquency
is now generally directed to the heroine of the romance, and she will find it
no easy task to get acquitted of the offense for which she is now arraigned
before the public.

I wish it may hereafter appear that she is perfectly innocent; or, if not,
that she should not incur the detestation of the world, for the exercises of a
species of folly which could not be injurious to any one. A beautiful young
woman wishes to be noticed; she thinks herself fully entitled to the
attentions, and almost to the adorations of young men; she thinks she has so
good a claim to their assiduities, that if they neglect their duty, it is but
doing justice to her charms to create ideal lovers; that she may at least
appear to possess what she has an indubitable claim to.

Perhaps, my Louisa, I may not be perfectly orthodox in the creed of love; but
I hope you will admit there is no great impropriety in the argument I have
ventured to advance in this business. It would afford me infinite pleasure if
the young nobleman, whom the lady thought proper to be in love with, and to
make the affection reciprocal, would actually realize the tale, and readily
conduct her to the altar. He must be convinced that she has a regard for him,
or she would not have selected him for her hero.

I have been thus particular in my little narrative, because it is now the
general topic of conversation among the great and little world in our extensive
capital.

Though in a former letter I mention my resolution of destroying any future
billets that might be addressed to me, I have taken the liberty of reserving a
few of them, but they are not very remarkable for their brilliancy. The
contents of some of them, however, may probably amuse you. I have transcribed a
few of the best of them, and hereby faithfully promise you* never more to
trouble you with the effusions of any more of my newspaper lovers; they are
literally as follow.

LETTER XXXVIII. HARRY HOUNSLOW, to BELINDA BLACKET.
MADAM,
I SAW your advertisement in the World, but business of some importance put it
out of my power to pay the attention to it that it merited. To tell you the
real truth Madam, I was taken that very day into the hands of the officers of
police. Some accusations were made against me in Bow street; and though the
charges were not fully substanciated, I was ordered into confinement.

Prisoners of war are sometimes suffered to be at large on their parol, but
gentlemen of the road are not thought entitled to such indulgences. I hope,
Madam, you will think I have made a sufficient apology for not sooner
endeavoring to find you out, and throwing myself at your feet.

My business, Madam, is honorable, but angerous; the late extravagant
improvements, particularly in the environs of the metropolis are very
disadvantageous to persons of our calling. Formerly a gentleman might collect a
few purses on the road, and the danger of detection was so inconsiderable as
not to demand a serious reflection; but now so many snares are laid for us, so
many illuminations are exhibited, and so many bloodhounds are in pursuit of us,
that I have almost come to a resolution of relinquishing my present trade, and
engaging in something that may be less lucrative, but may not be attended with
any fatal consequences.

Mercy, my dear Madam, is an attribute fit for the gods, and, as the divine
Shakespeare affiruis, blesses both the giver and receiver. If you would deign
to have mercy upon me Madam, you might relieve me from the crimes and
consequences of depredation, preserve me from a premature and ignominious
death, and by a life of purity and integrity render me a fit candidate for the
realms of blessedness above.

Perhaps, Madam, this may appear to you as a very singular mode of courtship. I
am indeed of the same opinion; but as I have pointed out a plan by which you
may become entitled to everlasting happiness, I ought to claim a little of your
attention. To save a life would afford consolation to a humane breast; to save
a soul would gladden that breast exceedingly; but how infinite would be the
future rewards for such exemplary pious actions!

I was bred and educated as a gentleman, Madam; from my infancy I was taught to
believe and expect, that when I approached the state of manhood, I should have
been furnished with a liberal provision for my support, in a mode of life to
which I had been accustomed; but before that period arrived, death deprived me
of both my parents, and my father, with his last breath, lamented he had
nothing to leave me, having broke into the last hundred of his cash, and his
acres and houses had been long disposed of.

Entertaining an affectionate esteem for my father, I felt the loss of him as a
very great calamity; but losing with him all expectations of an independency,
my situation was indeed deplorable. In a word, I was presently made acquainted
with my real situation, and that the author of my being, sensible that he had
consumed a patrimony which was to have been transmitted to his posterity,
literally broke his heart.

Trained to no business, employment, or occupation, to what could I apply
myself to procure a maintenance? Drudgery or hard labor I could not prevail on
myself to submit to, or to appear in any situation which might be thought
degrading to a gentleman. Though educated at an university, I had been too
indolent to bestow close attention to the sciences, and therefore only acquired
a little smattering in them; a little superficial knowledge which it would be
disgraceful for a gentleman to be without.

Destitute of money, resources, or expectations, I was not long in forming a
resolution to enlist myself among the cavalry. My credit was not so much
impaired by my misfortunes, but I still found I could be entrusted with a
horse. A pistol, and some other implements, adapted to the profession in which
I was about to engage, were soon procured.

Thus, determined to procure a precarious support, by borrowing a little from
the affluent, purely to preserve existence, I set out with great composure in
pursuit of my daily bread.

I resolved however, before I entered upon my new calling, never to exercise
the least cruelty, or to make use of such menacing language as might create
terror in the persons on whom I might make a demand. This resolution I was
determined invariably to abide by, whatever might be the consequences. In a
lane, leading from Harrow to the Uxbridge road, I made my first essay; I
overtook an old gentleman on horseback. and my salutation was an observation on
the weather. "'It Is a fine day, sir," said I. "Very fine, indeed," replied the
gentleman, of whom I meant to borrow a few pieces.

I told him that distress had induced me to undertake a new business, and
therefore if I did not acquit myself with so much adroitness as one who had
been longer in practice, I hoped he would make a proper allowance for my
inexperience.

The traveller seemed alarmed, but did not perfectly comprehend my meaning. I
therefore entreated him to furnish me instantly with what cash he could spare,
and I would gladly repay him if fortune should ever put it in my power. I
further informed him that any unnecessary delay, on his part, would oblige me
to produce a shining assistant from my pocket, which would enforce obedience to
my request: I hoped, however, that I should not be compelled to act uncivilly;
but that depended on his readiness to administer to my necessities.

The astonished yeoman (for so I supposed him to be) could no longer
misunderstand the drift of my business, and with the utmost expedition
delivered me his purse; in which, on examination, I found the sum of seven
guineas and an half. After politely taking leave of my benefactor, and thanking
him for his seasonable supply, we separated* the gentleman proceeded on his
journey, and I thought it prudent to take a contrary course.

Pleased with the encouragement I had met with on my first attempt, I began to
be a little reconciled to my new calling, and meant to return immediately to
the capital; having, as I thought, a sufficient quantity of cash to support me
for several weeks, and not intending to take the road again till necessity
should compel me so to do. I did not become a plunderer to enable me to launch
into extravagancies and follies, but to procure a bare subsistence, and to keep
me literally from starving.

But while my mind was occupied with these reflections, riding at my ease
without apprehensions of danger, I heard the sound of the feet of horses coming
furiously behind me; guessing their business with me, I set off full speed, and
we had an excellent race for about a mile and an half. At length I was
overtaken, and I recognized among my pursuers, the gentleman of whom I had
borrowed the yellow shiners.

Luckily for me, I had thrown away the purse; and though the booty I had taken
was found upon me, pieces of coin cannot possibly be sworn to, unless they have
been previously marked. I had also put on a wig over my hair, which I had
carried in my pocket for that purpose. This made so great an alteration in my
figure, that my accuser could not positively swear to the identity of my
person, but said he believed I was the man who had robbed him of his purse and
money.

I was conducted to a place of safety, and the next day exhibited at a public
office; where many persons appeared who had experienced recent depredations.
After having been minutely surveyed by every one present, none of whom could
charge me with any offense, I passed an examination before a magistrate, and,
suspicions being very strong against me, was committed to a mansion of
security, that I might receive the judgment of my peers at the approaching
session.

At the tribunal of Oyer et terminer I appeared, was arraigned, tried,
acquitted, and discharged.

Being now perfectly at liberty, madam, I should be happy to receive your
commands. If you will permit me to attend you, I flatter myself you will not
think contemptuously of me. Except the offense which I have mentioned to you,
with all its particulars and consequences, I know not that I have ever violated
the laws of morality or society. If you can overlook that single crime, and
suffer me to partake of your independence, you will save from perdition, and
fill with gratitdue, the bosom of your unfortunate, but not unprincipled
servant,

HARRY HOUNSLOW.

LETTER XXXIX. SIGNIOR SQUALLIT, to BELINDA BLACKET.
MADAM,
I AM a vocal performer at the Opera house, and have a salary equivalent at
least to your fortune. I have sung at the courts of Vienna, Berlin and
Versailles, and am considered as one of the premier warblers in Europe: If you
delight in harmony, Madam, I dare promise to render you one of the happiest of
your sex.

Though a foreigner, I have been so long resident in England, that I can speak
the language of the country with great purity, and with a proper accent.

There is one circumstance which perhaps ought to be mentioned, in a
negotiation of this kind; to qualify me for the most extatic vocal strains, a
kind of operation was performed on me in my youth, and I sustained a trifling
loss; but my powers of voice will more than compensate for a little diminution
of person. It would not be acting with candor or propriety to suppress this
circumstance, for though it would not be considered as any obstacle by a modest
prudent woman, yet some of the sex have an aversion to things which have
suffered mutilation.

But I suppose I am now addressing a lady of understanding, who cannot be
influenced by such paltry prejudices. If you think you can be happy, Madam,
with a man of my description, a line addressed to Signior Squallit, etc. will
be respectfully attended to, by

Your obedient servant, AUGUSTINE SQUALLIT.

LETTER XL. PETER BRAY, to BELINDA BLACKET.
MADAM,
I KEEPS a show of wild beasts, and travels from fare to fare all round
England, from one end to the other, and I gets munny like dirt. I have got a
lion, brought all the way from Africa, and he rores like a nitenguel. I have
got a fox, and I be very fond of he. The people calls him a minority fox, but
the major part of the people say he is a cunning cub.

I have got a rare sight of munkees, and they chatter away at a strange pace;
but they be like some of the folks at Westminster, and don't know what they be
chattering about. They be as full of their tricks as a pettifogging attorney,
and almost as full of mischief; but I am fain to look sharp ater um.

Among my other wild beasts, I have got a lam with two heads. Though small, it
is a very great curosity. I am fond of a lams head, and wish it was the fashun
for every lam to wear too heads.

I have a tigur from Ben Gall, and another from Mad Drass, and I have got a
tigur woman from the coast of Billingsgate. She is one of the most ferocious
beasts in my whole collection. I have got a white black burd, and a black
swan; a tabby male cat, and a singing raven. I have got a pig that can play a
solow on the German flute, and a bare that can step a minuet with elegance and
grace.

But I be the most extraordinest beast of the whole collection, for I be their
suvren and keeps um in order. If you should like to be a show woman, you shall
command all these beasts, and,

Your umble servant, PETER BRAY.


I shall trouble you with no more of the late epistles with which I have been
favored, as no more of them are worth transcribing. The highwayman, if I had
not been previously engaged, had not much chance of being a successful
candidate for my hand; and the Italian squaller would have been rejected with
contempt. Peter Bray, though illiterate, possesses a fund of shrewd
observation. If their billets have afforded you amusement, the wishes are
accomplished of

Your ever affectionate friend, BELINDA.

LETTER XLI. LOUISA LENOX, to BELINDA BLACKET.
YOUR letter, my Belinda, enclosing three of those which you have lately
received from your curious correspondents, sufficiently demonstrates that you
do not consider any thing as labor, which you undertake to gratify my
curiosity, or afford me information or amusement. The long epistle of Harry
Hounslow must have taken up many of you precious moments, and could not be a
very pleasing task for a person of your imagination. It is a slavish business,
at best, merely to transcribe, though the subject may be ever so entertaining.

Happy beyond expression, and wholly engaged in receiving the congratulations
of my neighbors, I cannot at present find leisure to keep pace with you in
epistolary matters. When I have given audience to all my ceremonious visitors,
and submitted to the bridal etiquette, I shall have it in my power to show that
I am not inattentive to my Belinda.

What I have already said will, I hope, be considered as a sufficient apology
for so abruptly informing you, that I am, and ever shall be,

Your most affectionate LOUISA.

LETTER XLII. BELINDA BLACKET, to LOUISA LENOX.
ACCEPT my congratulations, most amiable Louisa, on the celebration of your
nuptials! may you, and the fortunate possessor of your hand and heart, be as
happy as you deserve to be! -- Your recital of the particulars on the festive
day of marriage, delighted me exceedingly -- it conveys a pleasing idea of
northern hospitality, and of the gratitude of individuals, in testifying their
joy for the happiness of their benefactor.

You describe, with elegance and precision, the family mansion, and its
agreeable appurtenances.

Your observations on the diversion of angling, are such as I should have
expected from my Louisa. They do you honor, and are an additional proof that
mercy and tenderness, so amiable in a female character, inhabit your benevolent
bosom.

Your reason for becoming a pupil to your sister in law, does you infinite
credit; and your comparative view of the Northern and Middlesex inhabitants, is
too just to be questioned or contradicted.

I thank you for your obliging invitation to your agreeable mansion; but
whether I can accept of it, depends wholly upon circumstances.

I have followed your example, my Louisa, and am, like you, become a wife. My
hand was given last monday to Mr. Proby; my heart was his long before. Our
nuptials were solemnized at St. James's church, and celebrated at the Star* and
Garter in Richmond; but not with that splendour and parade which was exhibited
on your bridal day.

My uncle, and a few select friends of both sexes, assisted at the ceremony,
and passed the remainder of the day with us, with that cheerfulness and
satisfaction, usually attendant upon such occasions.

Believe me, my Louisa, my happiness is now complete, for I enjoy the full
fruition of all my wishes. Mr. Proby is every thing that is amiable, and my
uncle has been liberal beyond my expectations.

A few days prior to our marriage, a long contested suit in chancery was
determined, in which my worthy man was one of the parties. A decree was made in
his favor, which gives him an estate of fifteen hundred pounds a year, besides
a considerable sum in the consolidated annuities. This cause has been long
pending, the person who had usurped the estate, having taken every measure of
delay which the court of chancery would permit.

Added to this, my own fortune is five hundred pounds a year real estate, and
ten thousand pounds in cash; exclusive of a bank note, of a thousand pounds
value, presented to me by my uncle, on my wedding day; who has also caused Mr.
Proby to be inducted to a valuable living.

Thus situated, my Louisa, every thing that is desirable is within my reach.
Wedded to the best of men, whose fortune united with my own, readers us
independent and even affluent, we may adopt any mode of living consistent with
our annual income.

Though Mr. Proby knew of the decree in his favor on the day it was given, he
did not communicate that intelligence to me till after dinner on our wedding
day. The news was therefore doubly welcome to me; in the first place, it must
have proved to my good man, that I did not marry him on the ^^ore of fortune;
and in the next, I was pleased at so sudden an unexpected an accession of
property.

You and I, my Louisa, owe our obligations to the fates -- never were two
friends more equally attended to by the blind goddess, than we are! -- dare you
presume to say, that our merits' have a claim to such distinction? -- for my
own part, I heartily acknowledge that the project I engaged in, was a
ridiculous one, however fortunate the event.

It was solely owing to the caprice of the blind deity that I have been
successful; but you, my Louisa, have sufficient merit to entitle you to her
best gifts, without creating even a suspicion of partiality.

I am now like a turtle lamenting the loss of my mate. Mr. Proby has been
absent from me these three days; his attendance being required in
Northamptonshire, on some material business relative to the living he is
shortly to possess.

Soon after his return, we have fixed upon a Western tour, but our headquarters
are to be at Bath; where we expect to pass our time very agreeably; afterward
we shall revisit the capital, and endeavor to learn from some of the public
prints, whether any tolerable handsome mansion is to be sold, which, (if we can
find one to our taste) we mean to purchase for a summer residence. We would not
wish to have it more than fifteen miles from London, nor, less than ten or
eleven.

You must not be surprised, Louisa, if we should accept of your obliging
invitation, and pass the next summer with you in the North. The supposed
impediment, which you mentioned in your last, cannot hinder Mr. Proby from
accompanying me on such a visit; for, having a chaplain's scarf, his residence
on his living may be dispensed with.

You draw so delightful a picture of your village and its inhabitants, that I
should be anxious to behold so enchanting a spot, even if my Louisa was not
there; but, such a magnet as you, must at all times, most powerfully attract
me. Suffer me, however, to propose conditions upon this occasion, which I shall
rigidly expect to be complied with on your part, that if I pay a visit to my
Louisa in the north, she must accompany her Belinda on her return to the south;
where, during the inclemency of winter, populous cities are not without their
charms. In that dreary season, the country has lost the power of pleasing;
grown cheerless by the long absence of the enlivening sun, life cannot be
enjoyed in the northern regions, though it may be endured; the trees, stripped
of their foilage, present a melancholy prospect; the birds no longer delight
the ear with their harmonious notes; the earth ceases to teem with her rich
produce and becomes steril; and the face of it often covered with a mantle of
snow. The purling steams are arrested and silenced by the chilling influence of
the frost, and all nature seems an universal blank.

On the annual return of these gloomy and unpleasant prospects, my Louisa would
do well to quit the joyless scene, and direct her steps toward the capital;
there a kind of artificial summer is ever to be found, and mirth and festivity
chase away the thoughts of unpropitious winter, with all her haggard train.
Deign thereof to make my house your residence on these periodical returns, and
you may rely on my paying you, as frequent visits when the country is clad in
its best attire, when the woods are become vocal by the feathered warblers, and
the zephyrs regale the senses with their rich perfumes. Happy shall we be in
reciprocally communicating our joys, and in expatiating on the virtues of our
good men, who have raised us to an enviable state of uninterrupted happiness.

That our felicity may long continue unimpaired, and that all who merit so
blissful a state may enjoy it, is the earnest wish of your

BELINDA.

FINIS
PRINTING IN ITS GREAT VARIETY PERFORMED IN THE NEATEST MANNER ON THE MOST
REASONABLE TERMS AT THE PRESS OF ISAIAH THOMAS, Jr. WORCESTER. NOVEMBER 25,
1799.


