The Author Shipwrecked on the Coast of Ireland near Portaferry on the 13th of
Oct. 1788. Page ^6^


THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES OF JOHN WILLOCK, Mariner* INTERSPERSED With Remarks
on different Countries in Europe, Africa, and America; WITH THE CUSTOMS AND
MANNERS OF THE INHABITANTS; AND A NUMBER OF ORIGINAL ANECDOTES.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR GEORGE GIBSON, By HOGAN and M'ELROY, No. 222, South
Third-street. 1798.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. AN Account of the Author -- His manner of going to Sea -- A Voyage to
the West Indies, and America -- Anecdotes of Mr. KEMP -- Ludicrous account of
passing the Line -- Shocking barbarity of the Captain; with several Occurences
which happened in the Course of the Voyage -- Return to PORT-GLASGOW, page 13
CHAP. II. A Voyage from Glasgow to New York -- Obliged by stres^ of weather to
go into Lisbon -- Description of that plac^ -- Character of the Inhabitants --
Remarkable P^^cession -- Sails from Lisbon, and arrives at New Yo^^ where the
Author leaves the Vessel and enters into (...) service of the American States
-- Sails for Alexand^^^ in Virginia, and from thence to Philadelphia -- S^^^
account of that City, CHAP. III. The Author returns to Virginia -- A Voyage
from thence (...) Spain -- The Azores, or Western-Islands, described -- A^rives
at Cadiz -- Account of a Bull fight -- Character of the Inhabitants -- Sails
for the Island of Teneriffe, and on the way is captured by a Barbary Corsair.
77 CHAP. IV. An Account of what happened to the Author and his Companions after
their capture -- Arrival at Larache -- Description of that place -- Interview
with the Governor -- Treatment while there -- Ordered for Morocco -- Journey
thither -- Description of the Country -- Generous behavior of the Sardinian
Consul -- Various Incidents -- Arrival at Morocco -- Interview with the Emperor
-- Friendly behavior of Mr. Chapman, 93 CHAP. V. The Author and his Companions
are detained some Weeks in Morocco -- Description of that city -- Its ruinous
state -- Account of the Royal Harem -- Remarkable Story of a young Jewess --
Several Incidents -- Journey to Mogodore -- Sufferings on the way -- Arrival at
that City -- Generous and humane behavior of two English Gentlemen -- Capture
of ten Frenchmen -- Dissentions among the Prisoners -- Arrival of the Emperor
at Mogodore -- Cruel punishment of an old Bashaw -- Arrival of a British
Ambassador -- Disappointment of the Prisoners -Plan of an Irishman to effect
their escape; with a number of other Incidents and Adventures, 128 CHAP. VI. A
short Des^^iption, o^ the Empire of Morocco -- Customs and Manners of (...)
Inhabitants; Government, Punishments, Religion, etc. etc. -- The Author and his
Companions, by means altogether unexpected, obtain their Liberty, and leave the
Country in great haste, 177 CHAP. VII. The Author and his Companions sail to
Cadiz -- Their Transactions there -- Character of the Spaniards -- They return
to America, from whence the Author sails for Britain, and after a troublesome
Voyage, arrives in his native Country, 201 CHAP. VIII. A Voyage to Canada. 223
CHAP. IX. A Voyage to the Hebrides, Denmark, and Prussia, 239 CHAP. X. A Voyage
to Ireland, in the Course of which the Vessel was cast away, and all hands
perished except the Author. 236
VOYAGES, etc.
CHAP. I.
An account of the Author -- His manner of going to sea -- A Voyage to the
West Indies and America -- Anecdotes of Mr. KEMP -- Ludicrous account of
passing the Line -- Mutiny on board the Ship -- Shocking barbarity of the
Captain; with a variety of other Occurrences -- Return to Port Glasgow.

ON my first setting out in life, I possessed no inconsiderable share of what I
suppose is common to all at the same age, -- a high opinion of my own
abilities. The world was new to me; I knew nothing of the difficulties I had to
encounter in it, nor imagined there was to be found in it all a wiser lad than
myself. But time, and intercourse with my own species, have totally reversed my
opinion; and taught me, that it requires a very large share of wisdom to steer
through the tempestuous ocean of life with any tolerable degree of safety; and
no inconsiderable degree of fortitude, to encounter the various evils to which
human life is exposed. Of these propositions the following simple narrative
will fully demonstrate the truth.

I was born in Ayreshire, in Scotland, of respectable parents in their station,
which was of the middle rank in society. Having acquired an education suitable
to my years and expectations, I was given up by my father to a neighboring
surgeon, who had taken a fancy to have me, at eleven years of age. My worthy
master, and all his family, gave me every indulgence my tender years required.
Rigidly virtuous, and regular in his morals, my master took every opportunity
of seasoning my young mind with the best advice, and of instructing me in every
religious and moral obligation. Both he and my good old mistress, often
expressed their delight at seeing the attention and respect I paid to their
injunctions; and in order to preserve me from the contagion of vice, and keep
me under their own eye, they constantly took me along with them wherever they
went.

It was the intention of my master to instruct me in his own profession, and
happy had it been for me if I had been ruled by his advice. But I had got an
early bias for a sea faring life, and the more than parental kindness of my
master and mistress was totally lost upon me; for while they made it their
daily study to promote my happiness at home, I was eagerly watching every
opportunity of disengaging myself from a yoke, which to me seemed intolerable.
A mind determined will seldom be long at a loss for an excuse. A slight quarrel
with my master's son effected my purpose; and though the blame was wholly on my
side, I told him, I never would stay another day in his father's house. The
young man reported this to his mother, who instantly sent for me, and in the
most earnest language, laid before me the hardship and danger of a seafaring
life: and often, when I have thought of her kind remonstrances, have I
regretted the fatality, that they should have only served to confirm me the
more in my resolution. Taking therefore a hasty leave of this good family, I
paid a visit to my father, who, though much enraged at the part I had acted,
was, in a few days, prevailed on to rig me out after the manner I wished: and
as I still dreaded a more serious opposition to my favorite scheme from my
parents, than I had met with from my master and mistress, I set out one morning
before the family were out of bed, for Por^ Glasgow; where I understood there
was no dange^ of being long at a loss for want of employment. A son-in-law of
the doctor's, my late master, was the only acquaintance I had in the town; and
as he was the owner of several ships in the West India trade, I thought him the
most likely person to whom I could apply. He eagerly embraced my offer, as at
that time they were much at a loss for hands, and desired me to lodge at his
house for a few days, till some of his vessels returned, and I should go in the
first that came. I instantly wrote to my father, informing him of every thing
that had passed; who seeing no better could be done, sent me my clothes, and
such necessaries as he judged proper for my new occupation.

Next day my indentures were made out; and in fourteen days a vessel arrived.
Never did the heart of a bridegroom exult more on the morning of his nuptials,
than did mine at the sight of a fine large ship, in which I was to make my
first voyage to sea. The world I had left behind me never cost me a sigh; the
wooden world was all to me: But alas! I had not yet seen the dark side of the
picture. Few repairs were necessary, and in a short time we began to take in
our loading for the West Indies, where we were to dispose of it in the islands
of Barbados, Antigua, and St. Kitts. On the first of May we completed our
cargo, and on the 10th of the same ^onth, 1781, we weighed anchor. Our crew
consisted of forty men, besides fifteen passengers of both sexes; among the
latter was a Mrs. Murray, of a remarkable size: she had lived the greater part
of her time in the West Indies; but the warm climate so far from reducing her
to a skeleton, as is the case with many Europeans, seemed to have agreed very
well with her, as she measured in height five feet five inches, and round the
smallest part of the waist, six feet and an half. When the boat that brought
her came along side, she called out to the mate, in a voice like thunder,
desiring him to be sure every thing was right, and the tackles strong enough to
hoist on board twenty-two stone, as that she said, was her neat weight two days
ago. It required some strength to hoist her on board; but the difficulty did
not end here, for upon my showing her the room appropriated for her, she could
not, with all her art, get herself squeezed in at the door, till the carpenter
was obliged to widen it. There was likewise a young passenger of the name of
Kemp, who had been bred a weaver, but had given up his loom with an intention
of pushing his fortune in the West Indies, as a clerk. This young adventurer,
from a total ignorance of the world, added to an ardent desire to appear a
gentleman, furnished the crew and passengers with daily entertainment, during
the whole voyage.

At the mouth of the Clyde, lies the rock of Ilay, remarkable for the vast
number of solan geese, and other sea-fowls, which continually resort to it. A
proposal was made by the captain to send the boat on shore, as the weather was
moderate; and several of the hands arming themselves with muskets, Mr. Kemp
enquired into the business. The captain pointed out the rock, telling him, it
was a desert uninhabited island, where lions and tigers abounded in great
numbers; and that if he had courage for an attack, he would furnish him with a
gun. Accordingly he put into his hands an old rusty musket, bayonet, and
hanger, and on his head a grenadier's cap; he likewise advised him to exchange
clothes with some of the sailors, as the sight of a sailor's dress, he said,
would fright the most ferocious wild beast in the world. Thus accoutred, Mr.
Kemp joined the party that were going ashore, declaring himself ready to attack
the first wild beast that came in his way. The sailors began on their passage
ashore, to propose bets who should kill the first game. Mr. Kemp immediately
accepted a wager of half a guinea, that the first should be killed by himself:
but upon loading their pieces, Mr. Kemp, for the first time, made the discovery
that his gun wanted a lock; he therefore insisted the bet should be drawn; but
the captain willing to entertain himself a little longer at his expense,
accommodated him with his own. The first object that presented our adventurers
upon their landing, was a few sheep, which the captain persuaded the credulous
passenger, were so many white boars. Kemp creeping upon his knees till he got
within gunshot of them, let fly among them; the affrighted sheep fled at the
report of the gun, but one of them being a little lame, could not run so fast
as the rest: Our sportsman called out with great self-complasency, that he had
got the wager, as he had hit one of the boars. His companions, after indulging
the laugh at his expense, told him that his game was no other than a sheep.
"But," says the captain, "if you will go to the top of the rock you will find
plenty of game," and at the same time pointing out the nearest road to him. The
credulous young man mounted the rock, but no sooner was he got out of fight,
than his companions made off in the boat, and left him to find game as he
could. Upon missing the boat, he fell into a state little short of distraction:
nor did the captain for some hours, think proper to relieve him; and when he
ordered the boat ashore for him, the sailors found him sitting on the rock in a
state of absolute despair. After he got on board, the wind springing up from
the southward, we intended going out of the North channel, and this we rather
would do, as there was less likelihood of meeting with any of the enemies'
ships. I need not inform my reader, that at this period, Great Britain was
engaged in a war with America, and three of the greatest maritime powers in the
world.

May 15th, at 3 o'clock, A. M. we discovered a vessel crowding all the sail she
could to come up to us. All hands were instantly called; the decks were
cleared; muskets put into the hands of the passengers, and every thing ready
for an engagement; but about 8 o'clock she hailed us, when we discovered her to
be the Hind sloop of war, then stationed in that channel. The wind blowing
somewhat fresh, we parted, and proceeded on our voyage. The weather for some
days continuing favorable, and every thing succeeding to our wishes, our
captain returned to the malicious amusement of roasting Mr. Kemp. He had
observed this young adventurer pay much more attention to his dress, and wash
himself more frequently than is commonly done at sea; and one day he told him,
he would furnish him with a wash for his face and hands, that would totally
take away the appearance of the mechanic, and give his skin a smoothness and
delicacy equal to any lady's. As nothing was more agreeable to Mr. Kemp than
the prospect of a gentleman-like appearance when he got to the West Indies, he
loaded the captain with a profusion of thanks, and told him he could not do him
a greater favor. I was ordered to prepare the wash; which was a panful of
oatmeal and water, mixed without salt, which, when going to bed, he was to
spread upon his handkerchief and apply to his face; and fill his stockings,
into which he was to put his hands, and in that manner to sleep all night. Kemp
begged my assistance in the application of it, and went to bed in high spirits,
expecting to appear an Adonis in the morning. Next day the captain had prepared
the company for his appearance, and as he had not been seen till the whole of
the passengers were assembled to breakfast, I was ordered to call him. He
instantly obeyed the summons, and placing himself at the table, presented to
the company the appearance of an old man of ninety, or an hundred. The
application of the poultice had contracted the skin, and pursed it to such a
degree, that it would have been impossible for any of his overnight
acquaintances to recollect the smallest traces of his former face. The laugh
against him was long and loud, without his being able to discover the cause,
till rising from the table, and applying to a looking glass, it presented to
him a hideous form with which he had not the slightest acquaintance. Enraged to
the highest degree at the loss of his beauty, he began in the bitterest terms
to revile the captain; swearing, he would make him pay dearly for his usage on
their arrival at Barbados. He then went upon deck, asking every one he met, if
they knew any method of restoring him to his natural complexion: One of the
sailors, who was as much the wag as the captain, told him, he knew of an
infallible method; and gathering up a kind of blob, common in those seas, known
to the sailors by the name of the Portuguese-man-of-war, desired Mr. Kemp to
rub his face with it. The poor simpleton took his advice, and immediately his
face was all over in a flame. This drove poor Kemp almost to distraction; but
as the laugh, at his expense, had been general all over the ship, and no means
of revenge occurring to him, he retired, sullen and disgusted, to indulge his
private thoughts in his own apartment. In this manner our time passed, our
captain ever fertile in expedients, to entertain one part of his passengers at
the expense of another.

The day at last arrived when we were to cross the line, and as this day is
spent, time immemorial, in a species of humor peculiar to a seafaring life, I
shall give a short account of it, for the benefit of those who never were at
sea. The great bugbear of the ocean is Davie Jones. Whence this old gentleman
had his origin, I cannot certainly say. It must be granted, that we sons of
Neptune have no inconsiderable share either of superstition or credulity; and
it is most probable one or both had the principal hand in bringing him into
existence. However that may be, at the crossing of the line, he has often been
found an existence not merely ideal. The day before, great preparations are
made for passing this old gentleman in the most respectful manner. Mats, swabs,
skins, or whatever comes first to hand of dark color, are laid in readiness to
dock out two of the sailors, who are to represent him and his wife, who must be
present on the occasion. The passengers are, if possible, kept below at the
approach of the supposed boat, when the farce is to be acted; and when every
thing is in readiness, one of the hands runs up and down the deck making a
great noise with a trumpet, and calling out, that Davie Jones and his wife are
coming on board, and that every thing must be made ready for their reception.
Every passenger, who knows no better, is made to believe that this good old
couple keep a kind of turnpike-gate here, which it impossible to pass without
paying something to secure their friendship. Passengers, or sailors, who can
afford it, pay a small ransom and are free; but such as will not, undergo a
very rigid discipline. They are first of all brought upon the deck blindfolded,
then led to a large tub full of water, across which is placed a stick, upon
which they are forced to sit down. Old Davie then makes his appearance in the
character of a barber, a tub being placed by his side full of tar, grease, and
lampblack, into which he dips a brush, and with this compound lathers the face
of the unfortunate passenger, and then proceeds to apply a razor to his face,
which is generally a piece of an old hoop, or some rusty iron. The devil is
said once to have shaved a pig, and after the operation, to have observed,
there was more moise than wool. So it generally force with old Davie, and those
upon whom his operations are performed. My reader will easily conceive the wry
faces, and horrid exclamations made on this occasion. After the shaving
operation is over, it is necessary to wash them, and for this purpose, the
stick upon which they sat is pulled away, the consequence of which is, they are
soused over head and ears into the tub of water over which they were placed,
and immediately a scramble takes place for all the water on deck, every one
throwing as much as he can upon his neighbor, till all are completely
drenched; and the business ends in a hearty cann of grog. Such has heretofore
been the manner of crossing the line.

The bad consequences, however, attending this rough procedure, passengers
sometimes suffering severely in the experiment, has of late years, made the
captains of ships discourage this species of humor; and the fine of half a
crown, or even a shilling, is now deemed sufficient for Davie and his wife,
without having recourse to the shaving operation at all. On the 22d of June, in
the morning, we made the island of Barbados; but were under the greatest
apprehensions about landlag, as a number of war-ships were lying in
Carlisle-bay, and we were afraid of having our men pressed into the service.
Our fears were not groundless. The fleet lying here, consisted of twenty-six
sail of the line, which in a few days expected to attack the French fleet then
lying at Dominica, and hands were much wanted. From one of the ships we were
saluted by a gun, and ordered to come to anchor; which we had no sooner done,
than we were boarded by all the boats belonging to the fleet; every one
striving who should get most of our men. They took from us nine, and departed,
leaving us barely as many as were sufficient to navigate the ship. Next day we
put ashore our passengers, and begun to unload so much of our cargo as was
configned to this island, which we accomplished in six days. Barbados is the
most easterly of all our West India islands, lying in 59 degrees west
longitude, and 13 degrees north latitude. It is about 21 miles long, and 14
broad. The capital of the island is Bridgetown, situated at the head of
Carlisle-bay. Here the governor resides. The bay will contain a very great
number of ships, which can anchor in from ten to thirty fathoms water, and a
tolerable bottom. Two large fortresses command the harbor. The island produces
sugar, cotton, and coffee. They export likewise large quantities of rum; though
it is considerably inferior to that of Jamaica, or even of Antigua. The climate
is healthy; and the native of Britain, of which a considerable number are
settled here, seem to be lively, active, and happy.

A fleet being preparing at this place to sail to the leeward, we made all
imaginable haste for the benefit of their convoy; and on the first of July,
every thing being in readiness, we set sail for Antigua, being in all thirty
merchant ships, under convoy of the Boreas, Sable, and La-fortune frigates. The
fifth of July we parted from our convoy, their destination being for St. Lucia,
and on the sixth we made the island of Antigua.

This island is situated in 60 degrees west longitude, and 17 degrees north
latitude. It is of a circular form, being nearly 20 miles in diameter, and the
country rather mountainous, though the soil is in general very good. It
produces sugar, cotton, and coffee, and on the island a considerable quantity
of rum is made, but a little inferior to that of Jamaica. The climate is
healthy, and the inhabitants, in general, live to an old age. The negroes, of
which there are a great number, appear happy, notwithstanding the wretchedness
of their condition. They are, in general, allowed a small lot of ground, and
have one day in the week, namely Sunday, for its cultivation, and their masters
sometimes indulge them with a small morsel of pork, or a salt herring, but
these are luxuries they are not every day accustomed to.

English Harbor, situated on the south side of the island, is well adapted for
the accommodation of ships of war for repairing; but St. John's is the capital
for trade. There is only another small harbor, on the north-east side of the
island, called Param: but as the entrance is dangerous and difficult, few ships
of any considerable burden attempt it, but commonly send their boats for what
loading they take in there. This island is generally kept in an excellent state
of defense; and in time of war, when the alarm is made, every fortification can
be in readiness in the space of an hour. The greatest difficulty under which
the inhabitants of Antigua labor, is a scarcity of water: there is not a
spring upon the island, the only supply therefore they have, comes immediately
from the clouds.

On the twenty-seventh of July we weighed anchor, and on the twenty-ninth we
made St. Kitts, or St. Christopher's, so called from the famous Cristopher
Columbus, who first discovered it. This island is situated in 62 degrees west
longitude, and 17 degrees north latitude. It is about fourteen or fifteen
leagues distant from Antigua, and is twenty miles long, and nine broad: the
west end of the island is very mountainous, and the woods abound with vast
numbers of apes and monkies, which the negroes lay hold of very readily, by the
following stratagem: -- They have cocoanut shells prepared on purpose, with a
hole in each, so large as to admit the paw of the animal: into the shell they
put a lump of sugar, of which the monkey tribe are so exceedingly fond, that
when they once discover their prize, they make various efforts to get it out,
and will sooner allow themselves to be taken, than leave it before they made
good their purpose. For a monkey or baboon some of the sailors will perhaps
give a bottle of rum, or something of equal value, and this a negro deems an
ample compensation.

If no men of war are in the harbor here, the strongest of the merchant ships
generally lies guard. On the twentieth of September it was our turn, when we
discovered to the westward a brig, which we suspected to be French, or
American, wanting to cut some of the fleet out of the harbor. Having alarmed
the fleet, we lay that night upon our guard, bringing on board a number of men
out of the smaller vessels that lay to the shore of us. About twelve o'clock at
night she entered the harbor, when we discovered her to be a sloop of war,
belonging to Britain. Her lieutenant came on board our ship, and requested the
favor of our boat for a few hours, to go through the other ships with a view
of impressing men, assuring our captain at the same time, he would take none of
his. This was readily granted, and in a short time he returned with about
forty-men, after which they immediately left the harbor. There are in St.
Christopher's several harbors, but the most commodious for trade is
Bassaterre, in which we now lay. Notwithstanding this harbor is the most
frequented, it is very inconvenient for loading and unloading: a continual
surf, or swell, making it very unsafe, on some occasions, to venture ashore.
The negroes, however, who are by no means afraid of dying by water, perform,
upon these occasions, what would be very difficult to any other person. They
are very dextrous in the management of their canoes, which though so small as
to contain only one hogshead or two puncheons, will live almost in any sea.
When they get them ashore, a number of them seize upon them, and haul them out
of the way of the surf, where they take in their loading, and wait the
smoothing of the sea; and the moment they have a proper opportunity, they all
join in pushing them into the water. Each canoe is manned by two negroes, who,
in an instant leap on board of her, and proceed to whatever ship they are
destined.

On the twenty-eighth of September we sailed from St. Kitts, and proceeded to
the northward, with a brig under our convoy. We set out with a very fine
breeze, which carried us across the Trades, but which was succeeded by a
violent gale of wind, in latitude 29 longitude 50, which greatly disabled us:
in the course of the gale we had parted from the brig, and did not see her till
the second day after.

On the 25th of October, in the morning, we descried two brigs standing to the
southward, and we soon found them to be Americans, and entertained the most
sanguine hopes of making them prizes. We fired a gun at the first, which she
not seeming to mind, we gave her a broadside at once, upon which she hoisted an
American flag. We made a signal for our brig to cut her off, and were preparing
to give chase to the other; but instead of observing our signal she still kept
under our stern: seeing this, we instantly put about, but a short chase soon
convinced us, that we were by no means a match for the enemy at sailing, and by
the obstinacy of the brig, we lost both our expected prizes.

When we found this we stood on our course, and the wind being fair for a few
days, we expected to make our port without any further interruption. But on the
second of November, we were overtaken by a very heavy gale of wind, which
obliged us to heave our ship, as we could no longer carry any sail. In this
condition we lay for the space of fourteen days, the wind constantly blowing
from the north west. The sixth day after the gale came on, our captain judged
it proper to put us all upon short allowance, as there were on board sixty two
persons, and but a very moderate quantity either of water or provisions. Our
ship's company was made up of men from different nations; among others we had
eight Dutchmen, who disliking the allowance assigned them, determined upon
raising a mutiny; and in all probability would have effected their purpose, had
they not been detected by a soldier who was our passenger, and who overheard
the whole of their plot. They had determined first to make themselves masters
of the arms which were on the quarter deck, after which they were to proceed to
the cabin, and murder all who would not join their party; then they were to
seize upon the ship, and ran her into the first American port. The soldier who
overheard them, took the first private opportunity of reporting what he had
heard. The captain was determined to try them to the last, and at the same time
to take such precautions as should prevent the effects they intended. When
night came on, he had the rest of the hands disposed of in such a manner as to
secure them with the greatest possible case. The hour arrived when their
operations were to commence, when proceeding to the arm chest they found it
empty, and going down to the cabin, the men who were waiting to give them a
proper reception, seized upon them and brought them upon deck. They were
chained two by two for the space of seven days; but being unable to work our
ship without their assistance, we were at last obliged to release six, leaving
the two ringleaders, to suffer a punishment little short of death: for so
inclement was the season, that any water that happened to wash the deck, was
ice in a moment. Our captain, of whose barbarity and inhumanity every day
brought fresh instances, would not, during the space of fourteen days, allow
them to change their clothes, though they were often drenched over head and
ears: but I shall have occasion soon to mention other instances of his cruelty,
and shall for the present proceed with my narrative.

On the twenty-second of November we were chased by a large Dutch-built ship,
which appeared to be coming up to us very fast. At the sight of her, the eyes
of the two Dutchmen chained to the fore-castle, sparkled with joy. Upon this
occasion however their assistance was wanted, and our captain very generously
set them at liberty. The passengers were all furnished with small arms, and
every man ordered to his post. At this time I acted in the capacity of
cabin-boy, and the captain calling to me to bring him a speaking trumpet, in
the trepidation and hurry I was in, I unluckily appeared in his presence
without remembering to pull on my cap; but he soon gave me reason to repent my
forgetfulness, by dealing me a few hearty blows, which cut me most
unmercifully, and laid me almost speechless at his feet. After the ship that
had so alarmed us came up, she proved to be a British vessel from New York,
bound to the West Indies. After discoursing with one another for a little, we
parted, wishing each other a good passage. We directed our course for the port
of New York, whither we were bound; and having a brisk gale, on the
twenty-fifth of November, we discovered land, which proved to be Never Sink;
but night coming on, obliged us to heave too, till the morning of the following
day, when we found ourselves in less than ten fathoms water, but the wind
abating and veering to the north-west, we then came to anchor, to prevent our
being drove farther off the shore. On the twenty-seventh, at four o'clock, A.
M. four men of war ships coming out of the harbor, one of them made right to
us; and making a demand of men, our captain delivered up the whole of the
Dutchmen concerned in the late plot. But this not satisfying the lieutenant,
who had boarded us, he took so many of our other hands, as rendered it
impossible for us to navigate the ship into port. The captain found it
necessary to apply to the commodore, who ordered the same ship to send men to
conduct us; the lieutenant quarter master, and sixteen hands therefore coming
on board, took the command of our ship, and on the morning of the twenty-eighth
brought us safe into Sandy Hook. The men however, willing to indemnify
themselves for their trouble, had, in the course of the seven or eight hours
they were on board of us, made free with twelve cases of our gin. When they
were about to leave us, the lieutenant, to whom I had rendered some little
menial services, expressed an intention of taking me along with him; but the
captain, who was unwilling to part with me, offered him another in my stead. We
were all obliged to range ourselves on the deck, when the lieutenant made
choice of a boy who had been in the service before, and to our great
satisfaction bade us adieu.

On the twenty-ninth we weighed anchor and stood for New York; but as the ice
in large quantities was coming down the river, we were obliged to bring to
anchor again till the tide flowed, when we expected to meet with less
opposition. Next morning at two o'clock we again weighed anchor, and at four,
A. M. we arrived at the port.

A few days after our arrival, die brig we parted with at sea, arrived also, in
a very leaky shattered condition, having lost a part of her sails, one of her
masts, and part of her rigging. There was at this time a very great demand for
our cargo, and we began to unload with all possible speed.

As the city of New York stands at the mouth of Hudson's river, its situation
for trade is admirable; a communication is thereby opened with Albany, and many
other inland towns toward Canada, and the Lakes; and as the conveyance is so
commodious and easy for all sort of goods, the quantities that pass through
this city, are immense. The houses, in general, are elegant; and the city,
though irregularly built, forms a beautiful prospect from the river. The export
trade of New York, consists of wheat, flour, skins, and furs, and a variety of
other articles. Its markets are well supplied, as it has in all seasons of the
year, a short and easy passage to the ocean; and commands the inland trade of a
great proportion of the best settled, and best cultivated part of the United
States. Hudson's river is navigable for vessels of 80 tons, as far up as
Albany, which is one hundred and sixty miles north of New York; and for ships
of any size to Hudson, which is about one hundred and thirty miles. To a person
fond of angling, a sail up this river affords excellent past time. In the
Mohawk river, which empties into the Hudson, there is a large cataract, where
the water falls thirty feet perpendicular; but including the descent above the
fall, sixty or seventy feet. The rock over which the water pours, extends
almost in a line across the river. -- But I return to my narrative, hoping the
reader will excuse this digression respecting a country for which I entertain
the greatest partiality.

Before we left the harbor of New York, our captain ordered me one day to have
an hundred oysters ready for him by nine o'clock in the evening. I took care to
have every thing ready at the appointed hour, when he entered, handing into the
cabin two ladies of the Cyprean corpse, who without any ceremony sat down with
him to supper. During their repast, he ordered me to bring him a pair of
candle-snuffers: I went to find them, but not immediately succeeding, he took
his watch out of his pocket, and swore a most tremendous oath, that if I did
not bring them in five minutes, he would shoot me dead on the spot. Still I
continued my search, and the time expired without my being able to find then.
He instantly seized me, and leading me to one side of the cabin, ordered me to
strip. I was under the hard necessity to comply, and fixing me to a ring, drove
into one of the beams, he gave me a flogging, which had nearly deprived me of
life: afterward he drew me upon deck, naked as I was, where he left me in a
very inclement season, in a state which I am unable to describe. In this state
I was forced to remain for two full hours, when the captain's voice again
struck horror to my heart. With many horrid oaths and imprecations, he ordered
me down to the cabin, threatening to toss me overboard if I did not immediately
obey. This however was not in my power; the stripes he had given me, and the
excessive cold, had almost deprived me of sense and motion. My tyrant was not
yet satisfied, but coming upon deck, found me out, and kicked me from one end
of it to the other with his feet. The noise brought all hands upon deck; but
though every one pitied me, no one durst interpose, well knowing if they did,
he would soon send them on board a man of war. At last, having glutted his
revenge, he pulled me upon my legs, and giving me a quarter-dollar, ordered me
to go on shore and buy him a pair of snuffers. Glad to be relieved on any terms
from his barbarity, I made every exertion my little remaining strength would
admit of, and got ashore, resolving to see him no more: but alas! I was a
stranger, without money or friends, and at so late an hour, no house would
admit me, so that I had no alternative but to return to the ship. A man in the
street directed me to a brazier's, and having purchased a pair of snuffers, I
once more went on board, firmly determined to make my escape in the morning.

By the time I returned, the ladies proposed taking their departure, when I was
ordered to set them ashore, after which I retired to my hammock, with a bruised
body and aching heart. Next morning I took the earliest opportunity of going
ashore, and getting on board a ship where I had several acquaintances, passed
that day and the next night with them; but I had left my clothes, and several
articles on board my own ship, which I was unwilling to lose, and I could
devise no method of recovering them without returning myself. I was in hopes of
obtaining my object without the knowledge of the captain, but one of the men
suspecting my intentions, would not permit my going ashore again; and the
captain over-hearing our altercation, ordered me instantly into the cabin; he
asked me in the sternest manner my reason for quitting the ship: I told him the
reason was, a dread of loosing my life, and in the state to which he had
reduced me, I was good for nothing, and my loss could not be felt. The captain,
whose passions were all subservient to his interest, finding that, while we
were in ^he harbor at least, harsh measures would not answer his purpose,
immediately began to footh and coax me, declaring himself sorry for what he had
done, and assuring me I should never have reason for the future to complain. By
such flattering promises I was easily induced to forget the injuries he had
done me, and once more to repair to my post, in hopes of more humane usage
during the remainder of the voyage. We were in hopes of being freighted in the
transport-service, but, upon inspection, our ship was found unfit for it, being
old and incommodious. We were therefore obliged to return to the West Indies,
as one of our owners lived in Antigua, who would find us a loading for Britain.
Leaving the wharf therefore on the 13th of Jan. 1782, we went into the river
Mohawk; where we were to take in our ballast. About six hours afterward, the
tide beginning to ebb, brought the ice down in such large quantities, as made
us tremble for the safety of the ship. All hands were employed with large poles
to ward it off, but in spite of every effort, the large sheets of ice cut our
cables, and drove us on shore among the rocks. All hopes of saving the ship,
where now almost at an end; the Chatham and Experiment lying in the river,
observing our distress, sent their boats with twelve men, and a lieutenant in
each, to offer their assistance, but to no purpose, till the tide returning,
raised us up again, and brought us off without any material damage. We then
proceeded to a creek on Long Island side of the river, about one mile above
New York; but having lost our anchors, we were obliged to run our hawfer on
board the prison-sh^^* The frost at this time, set in very intense; the river
was frozen over, and we, as well as all the victuallers, and transports, which
generally lie here, were for some weeks blocked up. Our captain, during this
interval, was very much out of humor with every one around him; and was daily
giving proofs to every person on board, of a capricious temper. It went much
against his nature to feed the men without giving them plenty of work. One day
he would send a party to the woods to bring fuel, which they were obliged to
drag upon the ice, or to carry on their backs; next day he would employ them in
cutting a passage through the ice, for the boat to go ashore; but as the
distance was about a mile, and the ice of an amazing thickness, they could only
make small progress in one day; and what they did was to no purpose, as it was
sure to be hard frozen again before next morning. Thus during five weeks which
we lay here, did this restless unhappy man, make every man's life as miserable
as possible; till at last, on the 17th of February, the ice began to break, and
the prison-ship letting go our hawser, we drifted out of the creek; and being
drove into the ebb tide of the Mohawk river, we got happily down to New York
again, where we took on board the remainder of our ballast; and having got all
clear for sea, we only waited for a fair wind.

On the first of March, we weighed anchor, and set sail, and the day being
pleasant, afforded us a most enchanting prospect of the beautiful country we
were leaving behind. Between New York and the ocean, lie Governor's-Island,
Staten-Island, and Sandy-Island. During the war, the sick and wounded of the
army and navy, were kept on Governor's-Island, on account of its healthy
situation, and the ready supply of provisions they had from Long Island. After
you pass Sandy-Island, the sea opens into a large sound, having Long Island on
the one side, and New Jersey on the other. Sandy Hook is a low point of sandy
ground, which runs into the ocean: from this point we took our departure the
second of March, directing our course for the island of Antigua.

During three weeks nothing material happened, and wind and weather favoring,
we were likely to make a very pleasant voyage; but the captain was determined
to make it very unpleasant to me; for when we got as far as 23 degrees. lat. a
number of whales were playing around us, and having never seen one, I was
resolved to satisfy my curiosity; and going up the shrouds a little for this
purpose, the captain coming on deck espied me. From the time I had left the
ship at New York, he had taken every opportunity of revenging himself, and I
was certain my present curiosity, however natural, would cost me dear. I was
not deceived: the captain ordered me to be called, and when I approached him, I
saw him prepared with a rope's-end, which he began to make use of with all his
might for a considerable time. He continued his discipline till he rendered me
incapable of moving, and when he let me go, he ordered me to quit his presence;
which I being unable to do, he laid hold of a log of wood, and striking me over
the head with it, I fell upon the deck as senseless as the wood with which I
received the blow. In this situation I remained for a considerable space; the
blood which flowed fast from my wound, overspread a part of the deck, and not
one of the hands durst sympatize with, or lend me the smallest assistance.
Whilst I lay in this wretched condition, a captain Campbell of the sixty-ninth
regiment, one of our passengers, coming upon deck perceived me, and imagining
me to be dead, enquired into the business: and being informed by one of the
hands, of my crime and punishment, he kindly made up to me, and taking me by
the hand, raised me on my feet, and endeavored to restore me to my scattered
senses. It was sometime before his endeavors were successful, and when they
were, he advised me to lock up my clothes, bloody as they were, till we got to
Britain, where I might produce them as evidence against the captain, and get
ample satisfaction. With a kindness and humanity, which I shall ever bear in
grateful remembrance, did this gentleman assist in dressing my wounds; and when
I was somewhat recovered, he put a guinea into my hand, and spoke the first
consolatory words I had ever heard from any one since my first setting out.

At this time I was only thirteen years of age, and the voice of tenderness by
degrees reconciled me to life: I made the best acknowledgments I was able to my
benefactor, and told him, I should in every respect follow his advice. He
afterward went to remonstrate with the captain about the usage he had given
me, and told him it would be remarkable if none of my friends brought him to
punishment on our arrival in Britain. The other answered, he did not believe
they should, for he certainly would kill me before ever I reached them; adding,
"Had any one given me, as much as I have done him, I should have been dead
myself." From what captain Campbell had seen and heard, he had little doubt of
his putting the threat in execution; and in the evening he took an opportunity
of charging me, as I valued my own life, to study every method of pleasing him,
and to bear his usage with all the patience I could muster, as a little time
would bring us to the end of our voyage, and put it in my power to take ample
revenge. Encouraged by these hopes, I resolved to conduct myself strictly by
the advice I had received, and my worthy benefactor leaving me to rest, I the
next day, though extremely weak, attended at the call of my tyrant.

On the 28th of March we passed Deseada, an island belonging to the French,
lying in 59 degrees. west longitude, and 17, 30 degrees. north lat. It is distant from
Antigua about 30 leagues, E.S.E. is seventeen miles long, and at the part that
is broadest, about twelve miles. It produces cotton, and some small quantity of
sugar; but little of the latter is sent out of the island. Running down the
north-side of Antigua, we passed the island of Barbuda: this is a small flat
island, about twenty miles long, and from ten to twelve broad. The only service
derived from this island, is a supply of fresh provisions and fuel, for
Antigua, especially for the town of St. John's. Upon the first of April we
arrived at Antigua, and getting into harbor we began to repair our rigging,
which with getting out our lumber, and making other preparations, kept us
employed till the twentieth of May. The evening of that day we were surprised
with the appearance of a remarkable light from the head of the town, which
gradually increased, till at last, with a tremendous noise, it burst out, and
the flames ascended to the clouds: it had broke out in a gentleman's rum store,
and as the wind happened to blow from the end of the street, where the store
was, it reduced in a short space of time one of the finest streets in the town,
to a heap of ashes. Here the houses are only built of wood, and the stores very
plentiful. The conflagration therefore was beyond all description, rapid and
dreadful; and the shrieks of men, women, and children, running about in a state
of distraction, to save their relations, their property, and their lives, added
to the horrors of the scene. A few of the stores, to which the flames were
directing their course, were emptied of their contents, and the casks rolled
into the sea. But as the conflagration was making rapid strides toward the
harbor, all the ships were obliged to hold themselves in readiness. Very
luckily however, it stopped at the water's edge, without doing any damage to
the shipping. Never was I witness to a more awful spectacle, than the morning
presented to our view; nor perhaps did ever any country produce a more wretched
group of distracted, miserable mortals, than presented themselves upon the
present occasion.

On the eighth of June, another melancholy accident happened to a brig, lying
along side of us. She was that day to set sail for the island of Newfoundland,
and having cleared out of the harbor, they only waited for the captain and
some passengers, to come on board. A quantity of powder which they had that day
got on board, was carelessly lying on the cabin floor, till they got time to put
it into the magazine; and the two mates, going down to the cabin, began to
examine some pistols which lay beside them; and snapping one of them, the fire
unhappily caught hold of the powder, and in a moment blew the vessel into the
air. The dreadful explosion alarmed the whole harbor, and casting our eyes to
whence it proceeded, we discovered the smoke rising in a vast cloud, but the
vessel was gone, all but the bottom. There were twelve men on board, and five
of them being on the fore-yard, were taken up, without receiving any material
damage, the rest were never seen more. Some minutes after the explosion, a
large piece of her fell near the place where she lay; other parts of her were
carried to the distance of a mile. What is remarkable, the captain, with a
lady, her maid, and a young gentleman, who were going passengers, were within a
pistol shot of her, going on board, when the accident happened. A boat, in
attempting to pick up a dead body, supposed to be one of the unfortunate
sufferers, was pursued closely by a shark, and almost overset by it. The shark
was allowed to be about fourteen feet long, which for that fish is a remarkable
size. -- By this time we had got the half of our cargo on board; and as it was
reported the fleet would sail by the first of July, we made all imaginable
haste to be ready to sail in it. This fleet was to comprehend all the ships
from the West India islands, from Barbados to Tortola: and was to be protected
by one seventy-four gun ship, one of fifty, and three frigates.

During our stay here, nothing more happened particular; and by the time
appointed, we were ready for sea. Our cargo consisted of sugar, rum, and
cotton, which we were to discharge at Liverpool, and Glasgow. Our supply of
water here, was scanty, and bad as can be imagined; it was taken from a pond,
full of mud, and dirt, and sold at the enormous price of six dollars a cask; we
therefore took in only so much as would carry us down to the leeward. On the
tenth of July our convoy arrived from St. Lucia, and brought with them thirty
sail; they were joined by forty more from this port, and on the fourteenth, we
all set sail from Antigua, for St. Christopher's, where we were joined by
twenty-five sail more; and here we took in a plentiful supply of water. Leaving
St. Christopher's, we proceeded to the Virgin-Islands; and in going to the
leeward, we had a view of St. Eustatia, which lies about three leagues to the
westward of St. Christopher's; we likewise passed St. Bartholomew's, St.
Martin's, and the Dog and Prickly-Pear; these two rocks are remarkably steep
and bold, and lie close together. Some vessels through curiosity, pass between
them, which in mild weather they may do without danger. St. Bartholomew is a
low island, about twelve miles long, and five broad, and produces some small
quantity of cotton, and considerable quantities of salt are made, by the heat
of the sun. There are settlers here, from different nations, but the principal
part are Danes. St. Martin's is somewhat better than the former; it is about
ten miles long, and seven broad; it produces small quantities of sugar, cotton,
and coffee; and exports a considerable quantity of salt. The Virgin-Islands,
which are numerous, lie to the eastward of Portorico, but two of them only are
of any note; namely, Tortola and St. Thomas's. Tortola produces only a small
quantity of sugar, but it is the mart of all British goods for the other
islands; and they take in return, sugar, coffee, etc. Hence the trade of this
island is pretty considerable. The whole produce of the island of St. Thomas is
trifling, and their trade carried on chiefly with the Spaniards; the town and
harbor lie on the south side of the island, where there is a large bay,
commanded by a fort and battery: their trade consists chiefly of mahogany,
logwood, etc. which come from Portorico, and Hispaniola, in the Spanish main,
and is carried on at a considerable risk, on the part of the sailors; for if
taken they are committed for life to the mines, the trade being prohibited. St.
John's, a small island, in length eight miles, and in breadth two, lies on the
east of St. Thomas's. Crab-Island lies on the south of Tortola: these two
island form the eastern entrance into what is called the Virgins. In sailing
through this, and approaching toward St. John's, the passage becomes very
narrow, and there is constantly a strong current. Our fleet being so very
numerous, required particular attention to keep the vessels clear one of
another; and night comings on, every one crowded all the sail he could, by
which means considerable damage was done to several of the ships. However,
about seven that evening we got clear of the islands; and next day, being the
eighteenth of July, we took our departure from them; our fleet, consisting of
one hundred and fifty sail, was commanded by the honorable captain Crosby, of
the Robuste; an officer who, by his care and attention, showed himself worthy
of so important a charge.

We proceeded across the trade-winds, directing our course to the eastward, for
the space of eight days, when we got into the variables. We had, among other
passengers, one of the owners of the ship, with his wife and brother-in-law.
One day as I stood attending them at dinner, the captain began to quarrel with
me about his fork; telling me, with many oaths and imprecations, that it was
not clean. I answered nothing, remembering the advice given me by captain
Campbell; and the assertion he had made him, that he would never let me see my
friends. The captain immediately got up, and aiming a blow with the fork in his
hand, struck it into my body: every one seemed alarmed, and the owner espousing
my cause, I told him, that was but a small specimen of his bad usage, and that
if he would step to the steerage with me, I could give him proofs of his
barbarity. His wife rose from the table, and pulling the fork out of my breast,
gave the captain a severe reprimand, charging him, while she was on board,
never to let her see such another instance of cruelty.

About this time another incident happened, which showed his disposition in a
just light. One of the passengers had a negro maid servant, who having in
something or another disobeyed her mistress, was severely reprimanded by her:
the captain said, that if she belonged to him, he would certainly give her a
good flogging; her mistress told him, she would be much obliged to him if he
would. Now it happened a few evenings before, that the captain had asked a
certain favor of this same negro wench, which she had thought proper to
refuse; this had turned the love he bore her into the most violent hatred: glad
of an occasion of revenging himself, he embraced the opportunity which the
sanction of her mistress afforded him; and getting her upon deck, he tied her
to one of the pumps, and was going to proceed. The passengers were all
assembled to see the operation, and none of them could forbear execrating the
cruelty of a man, who in cool blood, and without any provocation, could so
deliberately think of inflicting such a punishment: one of the passengers
stepping forward, charged him at his peril to touch the girl, and ordered me to
take her down. I proceeded to obey him, and the captain running to prevent me,
was laid hold of by the passenger, and a furious scuffle ensued, in which the
passenger was victorious, and gave him a hearty drubbing. Upon a promise of
better behavior the passenger let him go.

On the twentieth of August we were met by a heavy gale of wind, in which two
ships of the fleet, belonging to London, steering different courses, ran foul
of each other, by which accident one of them was severely damaged; the men
during the whole night labored at the pumps, and with the utmost difficulty
kept her from sinking. Next morning the Lizard frigate got along side of her,
to the great joy of the crew, who by that time had almost given up all hopes of
life, and were in a situation truly deplorable. In a few minutes after they
left her she sunk. The gale continued seven days, and at the end of it we found
ourselves near the coast of Ireland.

September the first, we fell in with a frigate, sent out from England, to
order us to take the north channel, as the French fleet was supposed to be in
the mouth of the south channel; but on the seventh, a lugger, which had
likewise been dispatched to meet us, ordered us to steer for the south channel,
which we did, and and on the twelfth we discovered land, and found it to be
Cape Clear: while we were four leagues distant from land, several boats were
sent off with fresh provisions, such as butter, eggs, potatoes, etc. which
proved very acceptable to the passengers. On the thirteenth, the commodore made
a signal for all the fleet to proceed to their respective ports. One of the
frigates was to go to the Bristol channel, the other to the North, or St.
George's channel, and the commodore to the King's channel. We parted from the
commodore on the fourteenth, along with six other merchant ships, and proceeded
up St. George's channel, under convoy of the Lizard. We mounted sixteen guns,
and had on board between thirty and forty men. On the evening of the fourteenth
we were saluted by a strange ship, who run up along side of us, and fired a
gun. All hands were immediately called to quarters, and we gave her a whole
broad side, which made her sheer off; but in the course of a few minutes, she
returned, when we discovered that we had been engaged, not with an American
privateer, for such we imagined her to be, but with a British sloop of war, the
Bonetta mounting eighteen guns, and then in the impressing service. On the
fifteenth we had got as far in the channel as the banks of Dublin, when the
commodore made a signal for us all to heave too, which we obeyed; and having
gone through all the ships, and taken some men out of each of them, he directed
us to proceed.

On the seventeenth we got as far as Beau^^^ris, where we took a pilot on
board, and arrived at Liverpool. At our entrance, the custom-house officers
finding more spirituous liquors than the legal allowance, on board, seized the
ship, and prevented us from entering the dock; but the owners upon application
to the board, got the vessel cleared, by paying a sum of money, and loosing all
the stores. During the time we lay here, discharging our cargo, the captain was
become as mild and gentle in his treatment of me, as before he had been
tyrannical. He seldom went ashore that he did not take me with him: in all his
transactions he consulted me, and was now quicker sighted in discovering
virtues, than he had hitherto been in finding faults. Every day brought me some
fresh present from him; clothes, shirts, shoes, every article of wearing
apparel, he now loaded me with, and in every respect behaved with such a degree
of servility, and meanness, as would have astonished me, had I not known
perfectly how to account for it. He suspected, and justly, that I had preserved
my bloody clothes, to produce as evidence against him. And one day after he had
expressed a wonderful degree of affection for me, he desired me to show him all
my clothes, and shirts, that he might see, what I wanted, and have me properly
equipped. I showed him all I had on board; but upon our first landing, I had
carried those he wanted to lay hold of, ashore, and placed them out of his
reach. Thus by his cruelty, and barbarity, had this (...) man put himself in my
power; and the extreme servility with which he treated me, convinced me of a
truth which I have often since had occasion to remark, viz. that the greatest
tyrants are the greatest cowards.

On the twenty-eighth of October, we were ready for sea, having unloaded so
much of our cargo, as was intended for Liverpool, and as the rest was consigned
to Port-Glasgow, we set sail for that place. The extreme kindness of the
captain, during this voyage, had entirely obliterated the remembrance of his
former usage; and in consequence I had seriously determined to forgive him. He
had however, bribed the other apprentices to discover my bloody clothes, and
one of them succeeding, carried them on board to him. He had no sooner laid his
hands upon them, than calling me to him, desired me to take a last look of
them, and in the greatest triumph, threw them into the sea. From Liverpool to
Port-Glasgow, we had on board only seven men, and nine boys, who had left the
latter port with us, when we first set out, and had escaped being pressed; with
these, however, we made out to navigate the ship, and on the fifth of November
we landed at Port-Glasgow, after a voyage of near eighteen months, disagreeable
on account of the tyranny and caprice of our captain.

The most absolute monarch on earth, has not his subjects more completely in
his power, than the captain of a vessel those under his command, when in his
own element: he can render them happy or miserable at pleasure. And surely
never man abused this power to greater excess, than did James Clarke, (for that
was our captain's name): he understood the art of tormenting in perfection; and
no doubt I fell into his hands, as a just punishment for my headstrongness, in
engaging in this way of life contrary to the wishes and injunctions of all my
friends. Should this account fall into his hands, (for he is I believe still in
existence) he will, if he chooses to recollect himself, find that I have done
him no more than justice. -- But, reader, this was but a small portion of what
I had to suffer -- only the beginning of sorrows, as you will see by and by:
however, having given you a faithful account of my setting out, I shall close
the narrative of my first voyage.

CHAP. II.
A Voyage from Glasgow to New York -- Obliged by stress of weather to go into
Lisbon -- Description of that place -- Character of the Inhabitants --
Remarkable Procession -- Sails from Lisbon, and arrives at New York; where the
Author leaves the Vessel and enters into the service of the American States --
Sails for Alexandria, in Virginia, and from thence to Philadelphia -- Short
account of that City.

WHEN we landed at Port-Glasgow, I obtained leave of the gentleman, to whom I
was bound, to visit my friends; whom I found all well, and rejoiced to see me
once more at home. I enjoyed their society only about a fortnight, when I was
summoned by my master to repair to my post; and upon my visiting him, I was
informed, that he had purchased a schooner of 100 tons burden, which he
intended to send to New York. As the war still continued, and hands were
uncommonly searce, he ordered all the apprentices who had been in the ship I
last sailed in, to prepare for the voyage. We were nine in number, and with the
addition of a captain, mate, and carpenter, were to constitute the crew. At
Greenock, we took in a loading of coals, which we were to discharge at Cork,
and to take in a cargo of butter, beef, pork, etc. for the Bristol army at
New York. Every person reprobated the idea of sending so small a vessel deep
laden, manned as ours was, across the Atlantic, at so late a season of the
year; for it was on the twenty-sixth of November, 1782, that we weighed anchor,
and got under way; but the wind coming contrary, we were obliged to put in to
Fairly-road, a harbor on the east side of the mouth of the Clyde. On the
twenty-ninth, the wind coming favorable, we put to sea, and proceeded so far
as the Mull of Galloway, when we were again obliged by contrary wind, to put
about for the harbor of Campbletown. This harbor is about two miles long and
one and a half broad, to the east side of the Mull of Kyntyre.

Here we remained till the third of December, when we again set sail, and
getting through the channel with a steady breeze, we arrived at the Cove of
Cork on the tenth, where we came to anchor. Next morning, with the first of the
tide, we proceeded to the town of Passage; and on the twelfth, began to
discharge our cargo into lighters, which carried the coals up to the city. I
need scarcely inform my reader, that Cork is the second city in Ireland, for
magnitude, grandeur, and trade; it lies one hundred and twenty miles south west
of Dublin, and contains upwards of eight thousand houses; its haven is deep and
well sheltered, but small vessels only can get to the city, which lies seven
miles up the river Lee. Large vessels load and discharge their cargoes at Cove
Passage, and the Rock. The small craft, of course, are very numerous upon the
river, every merchant having one or more for his own use. As this is the chief
port in the kingdom, for victualling ships, their trade in this way is immense:
almost every vessel, bound from Britain to America, the West Indies, or the
Mediterranian, takes in the greatest part of its stores here. Cork is well
built, and stands upon a rising ground: the principal streets are broad and
elegant; but like most of the houses, have a mean appearance at the
extremities. There are seven established churches, six Roman Catholic chapels,
one society of Quakers, and two Presbyterian meeting houses. The peasantry are
very healthy, athletic, and strong, and embrace every opportunity of trying
their strength one against another, especially if they have had a sufficient
dose of their favorite liquor, wiskey: but to strangers they are generous,
humane, and hospitable, to a proverb. It was not till the twenty-eighth of
January, that we finished our lading, and were ready to sail; on that day we
left Cork, and having a favorable breeze from the northward, we got as far
south as cape Finistere on the fifth of February; that day however the wind
veering ^o the south-west, began to blow a hurricane, which soon obliged us to
heave our ship too; and on the sixth, we were struck by a sea, which totally
disabled us, and rendered it impossible for us to proceed, having sprung our
foremast, and bow-sprit, and carried away the cabin scuttle, raf^er, binnacle,
and companion, and almost foundered our little vessel. We had no time for
hesitation, but repairing our damage, in the best manner our situation would
admit off, we bore away before the sea, for Lisbon, not without the greatest
apprehensions of going to the bottom before we reached the port, the water
being four feet deep in the hold. On the eighth we fell in with a large cutter
from Guernsey, in a pitiable condition, as she could not run for any port, the
sea ran so high; and being extremely low in the stern, she was not capable of
sounding. Our condition was so extremely bad, we were incapable of affording
her any relief. During all that day, the gale continued to increase, and night
brought with it the most dreadful apprehensions; nor was it till the morning of
the tenth, that we made the Rock of Lisbon. The entrance into this harbor is
dangerous, on account of a number of sand-banks, which lie at the mouth of the
river, and frequently vary their position; as we were all strangers, and no
pilot boat durst venture out, our situation was sufficiently precarious. There
remained nothing for us but to make a bold push on a venture, which we did, and
were lucky enough to get safe over the bar. The Rock of Lisbon, remarkable for
its height, stands at the mouth of the river Tagus. Upon entering the river, a
beautiful view of the city presents itself, together with the different
fortresses, that guard the passage up to it; one of them, called Fort-Petre,
stands upon the left hand, and contains near one hundred pieces of cannon,
placed in three rows, one above another; we passed this and another of less
note, and went up as far as Belisle-Castle, when we were obliged to bring to
anchor, till we got a permit. Here we lay for three days, and having obtained
our object, we proceeded to the harbor to repair our damage.

Lisbon, the capital of Portugal, stands upon the river Tagus, and before the
year 1755, when it was almost destroyed by an earthquake, it was a large,
magnificent, and strong city. It is situated about ten miles above the mouth of
the river; and the harbor, when once the ships get over the bar, is perhaps as
good as any in Europe, and capable of containing several thousand vessels. The
city stands upon sloping ground, which rises gradually from the river, and
presents to the eye the whole of it at one view, where palaces and churches,
squares and public buildings, form a most beautiful prospect. Though the city
is far from being so large as it was before the earthquake, yet that dreadful
visitation has had the effect of rendering it more beautiful; as the streets,
in that part of the city which was destroyed, are considerably widened, and the
houses built in a very superior style. They are mostly four or five stories
high, remarkably uniform, and all built of a kind of white stone, which has the
appearance of marble, at a little distance. The churches are numerous, and have
excellent bells, which are almost continually ringing. The royal palace stands
conspicuous, on a beautiful eminence, and has a most delightful appearance.
Strangers are readily admitted to see both the house and gardens, on giving a
small gratification to the keepers. The climate is mild; and numbers from the
northern countries of Europe, carry hither a broken constitution to get it
repaired, and return with a new lease of life. Here the earth spontaneously
produces all kinds of vegetables, fruits, and flowers; but whether it be that
the soil, or the extreme indolence of the inhabitants, prevents the growth of
corn, certain it is, that it is always a scarce article in Portugal, unless
imported from foreign countries. Indeed agriculture, and all the useful arts,
are esteemed altogether below the dignity of the rich and the noble; and the
poorer sort are so cramped by the despotism of the government, and their minds
so debased by the shackles of superstition, that every thing noble or useful is
lost in the will of the sovereign, or the influence of the priest. To divert
their minds from reflection or study, public entertainments are tolerated and
encouraged, which tend only to sink them still deeper in the abyss of brutality
and insensibility. One of the principal squares in the city is set apart for
the inhuman amusement of bull-baiting, from which they go with the greatest
devotion to a religious procession, and fall squat in the dirtiest part of the
city, at the image of our Savior, the Virgin Mary; or indeed so little sparing
are they of their clothes, that they scruple not to dirty them for the meanest
saint in the calendar. But notwithstanding their devotions, no country in the
world, perhaps, abounds with more slagitious crimes. Murder is so common, that
in its most aggravated sense, it excites but little emotion. Strangers in
particular run the greatest risk: if found in the streets at night, they are
dispatched without noise, plundered of any thing valuable they have in their
custody, found dead in the morning, and buried without any further enquiry.
Night seems to be the only time they are capable of enterprise; listless and
indolent during the day, they doze away the hours in sloth and inactivity, and
even frequently lay themselves down to sleep in corners of the streets. The
same listless spirit, seems to pervade every department of society, and even
their government seems half asleep. It is true, when they do punish, their
punishments are inflicted with the utmost severity; but this happens seldom,
and has very little effect upon the morals of society. Indeed the holy fathers
of the Inquisition form one exception to the general character of the
Portuguese; for did their salvation depend upon their exertions, they could not
be more active in punishing evil doers: but so long as the people meddle not
with the religion as established, attempt no philosophical experiments, and
speak with reverence of that venerable body, they may break the whole
decalogue, without coming under that denomination.

Whilst we continued at Lisbon, an English frigate arrived with the news of a
peace between England and the other powers, with which she had been at war, and
though the Porteguese had no hand in the quarrel, the intelligence was received
with a general joy. The English merchants, residing here, and captains of
trading vessels in the harbor, were loud in expressing their satisfaction; and
all ranks and degrees seemed unanimous, in hailing the return of tranquillity
and peace. Intelligence was immediately dispatched to the queen, who was then
at Braga, and who instantly came back to the metropolis, to join in the public
rejoicings. She performed her journey, which was about one hundred and eighty
miles, by water. She was attended by a number of barges, decorated in a very
elegant manner; but the barge which contained the royal passenger, was grand
beyond description. It was beautifully painted, and gilt, and considerably
larger than the rest, with an elegant apartment raised over it for the
accommodation of the queen and her suit. The rest of the barges were filled
with the principal nobility and gentry, and were in general about one hundred
feet long. Each of them had from sixty to eighty oars, rowed by men, all
dressed in white clothes, with black caps upon their heads. The whole city was
in a bustle, and the people assembled in crowds, in all the public places,
where there was any chance of seeing their sovereign. She landed a little below
the palace; all her guards were ready to receive her, every ship in the harbor
hung out colors, ships of war gave her the royal salute, as did also the
castle, and fort. She was received by a guard of one thousand horse, and three
thousand foot, in the middle of which she took her station, and the procession
marched slowly on to the palace. The calvalcade was joined by coaches and
horses, and an immense multitude of both sexes, and all denominations, followed
in the rear; and from the curiosity expressed by the crowd, one would have
imagined they had never beheld their sovereign before.

After witnessing this scene, I was about to return to the vessel, along with
some of my mess-mates, who like myself, had come ashore to gratify our
curiosity. But we had not proceeded far, when our ears were saluted by
something like the sound of music; turning round we saw about two hundred men,
dressed in the clergical habit, marching along the street. As they approached
us, we discovered the crowd fall postrate; and when they came up to us, all our
neighbors were lying among our feet. As none of us had ever been in the
country before, we were at a loss to assign a reason for this extraordinary
humiliation, and we did not think proper to follow the example. The procession
was preceded by twelve flambeaux, which were followed by twenty priests, every
one carrying an image in his hand. The Virgin Mary, with a number of
attendants, and three flambeaux, followed next, and after all, our Savior upon
the cross, surrounded by a number of flambeaux, all carried by young men.
Hitherto we retained our upright posture, but had soon reason to repent our
singularity; for a few ruffiian-like fellows came up to us, and knocked us all
down. They stripped our jackets off, made free with our hats, and left us to
bewail our misfortunes, and scramble to our boat in the best manner we were
able. For my own share I received such a blow, as I would not have had
seconded, for a sight of the Virgin Mary, and all the other saints in the
calendar. Upon our relating our misadventure to the captain, he told us we
might think ourselves extremely lucky, in getting off at so cheap a rate, and
that the wonder was we were not sacrificed, to appease the fury of the offended
saints.

The natives of Portugal, are of a dark swarthy complexion, and few of them
grow to what an Englishman would call the middle size. They are in general,
proud, vindictive and cruel; and though the women have a greater degree of
liberty here, than in Spain, the men are not a little addicted to jealousy.

Soon after we arrived here, our captain and mate, upon some slight difference,
had come to high words, and the mate had left the ship, to the great grief of
the other hands, with whom he was a particular favorite. Our captain finding
he could not well do without him, or perhaps afraid the owners would blame him
for parting with a man of considerably greater experience than himself,
determined to find him out, and make concessions to him; in this he succeeded,
before the necessary repairs were finished. On the fourth of March we weighed
anchor, and bade idieu to this land of superstition, with a fine easterly wind,
which brought us as far as the island of Madeira, on the fourteenth. This
island is of a triangular form, and was discovered, as it is said, by an
English gentleman, in the year 1344, and conquered by the Porteguese in 1431.
The latter kindling a fire in a forest to warm themselves, it continued to burn
for a considerable number of years, by which means the island was much
fertilized. The air is temperate and serene; and no kind of venomous animal is
to be found in it. Here are produced oranges, lemons, pomegranates, corn,
wheat, honey, etc. But what renders this island most famous, is the wine it
produces, which takes its name from that of the island, and is much relished in
Europe, especially after it has been carried to the West Indies. There is only
one town on the island, called Funchal, situated at the bottom of a large bay,
on the south side of the island. It is defended by batteries, and is the only
place where even a boat can go ashore; and that itself is not practicable at
all times, as there is a continual surf beating upon the sho^^. There are
merchants settled here, from every nation in Europe, but the greater part are
British, who carry on a considerable trade to the West Indies. The inhabitants
are in general Portuguese, and the island is subject to the crown of Portugal.
In the neighborhood of this island lies Porto-Sancho, about fifteen miles in
circumference, where are plenty of wild hogs, and a vast number of rabbits. It
has excellent mooring in the road, in which ships to and from India generally
stop.

Leaving Madeira, we directed our course westward, for the coast of America,
and being for some days favored with pleasant weather, we amused ourselves by
striking fish, particularly the porpoise, great numbers of of which daily
surrounded us. But upon the twenty-eighth we discovered a vessel steering to
the westward, at some distance a stern of us, and being a remarkable fast
sailor, we found she must speedily come up to us. Upon her nearer approach, we
suspected her to be an American privateer. Our captain being a very young man,
with rather more valor than discretion, wanted to have a brush at her, though
he had heard of the peace at Lisbon; and a very pretty battle we should have
made of it, three or four men, and nine boys, to oppose thirty stout seamen,
and fourteen guns. Upon coming up to us we hailed her, and to our great
satisfaction, found her to be a brig belonging to the same owners with
ourselves, and bound to the same port. She had it seems, been purchased after
we sailed from the Clyde, and sent to Cork to take in a cargo, seven weeks
after our departure. With this vessel we kept company till we reached our port.
On the thirteenth of April, we made the coast of America, but found ourselves
south of New York. As we stood to the northward, we were met by an American
privateer who had been from her port about eight weeks: she had heard nothing
of the treaty of peace, and immediately she boarded us, and in spite of all our
remonstrances, made us her prize; till another privateer coming up, told her
they had the intelligence of peace from an English privateer of much superior
force, who would have made a prize of them, if the information had been false.
The frigate which boarded us, was the Assurance, captain Evans, who put us all
on board his own ship, and used us with the utmost civility during our
captivity. Upon receiving the above intelligence, he made a signal for our
vessel to heave too, and putting us on board of her, wished us a good voyage.
When we began to examine our own vessel, we found several things missing, such
as clothes and stores, and not doubting but the American sailors had made free
with them, we complained to captain Evans, who immediately caused the strictest
search to be made, and every thing to be restored to the rightful owners. On
the fifteenth of April we arrived at our intended port, and came to anchor near
the place where we were to discharge, and next day put into a wha^^ where we
were to lie till our cargo was cl^ared out.

The unconquerable desire I had always entertained of seeing the world, was not
yet gratified. I had no wish to return to my own country, without having a more
extensive view of the new world; and without imparting my intention to any of
my mess mates, I I began to mediate a design of making my escape. As I was
still very young, I had but little hopes of receiving any encouragement from a
stranger; but I was resolved not to make many words about the article of wages.
One day as we were getting some lumber out of a small vessel, from New London,
I asked the master what wages would be given in that country, to such a lad as
I was: he answered without hesitation, that he would give me eight dollars per
month. This gave me all the encouragement I wished, and made me seriously
resolve, the first favorable opportunity that occurred, to become my own
master. After our cargo was disposed of, our captain had orders to expose the
ship to sale; but not meeting with a purchaser, his next orders were, to
proceed to Antigua. I had delayed my scheme of eloping, till the evening before
the ship was to sail. The master of the little American vessel who offered to
engage me, proffered his assistance, and getting as many of my clothes smuggled
out of the ship as I conveniently could, I left her in the evening; and next
morning, to my great satisfaction, saw her set sail for Antigua. During the
day, as I was patroling the streets, I met with three of my shipmates, who told
me they had left the ship immediately after me. Our meeting was joyful: only
one thing sat heavy upon our spirits -- among us all we had not two dollars.
The little we had, however, was common, and enabled us to spend the evening
together; but a new day brought with it new wants, and we were all obliged to
be as expeditious as possible in finding employment. Hands were now very
plentiful, the peace having thrown numbers out of employ; and for three days no
one would have any thing to say to me. By this time I began to repent my
rashness, in leaving my own vessel. The American captain, who had proffered me
such handsome wages, was sailed I knew not whither, and I began to think my
case desperate enough.

On the morning of the fourth day, I went along side of a brig, which was
taking in ballast, and inquired of one of the men, if the captain wanted a
hand. He told me he did, and he believed I would answer his purpose. As the
captain was gone ashore, I resolved to wait till his return, and the more to
recommend myself, I began with all my might to heave in ballast. It was not
long till the captain came on board, and inquiring who I was, I told him I
wanted to go a voyage with him, and should make no terms with him, but take
whatever he chose to give me. He liked my proposal, and told me I should not
fare the worse for my diffidence in asking. -- Mr. Seaton, for that was our
captain's name, had something in his appearance and manners, inexpressibly
engaging. He was about sixty years of age; his looks and behavior to his crew,
had more of the parent than the master in them. Every word he spoke commanded
respect, and in all his actions he displayed the integrity and simplicity of
the honest uncontaminated American. From the first moment I saw him, he drew
from me something like a filial reverence. This made me assiduous to please,
and I found myself extremely happy in being told my endeavors were successful.
The vessel he commanded, had, during the war, been captured from the Americans,
and sold at New York, about six months after she had been built, and at this
time she was not above a year at sea: the gentleman who had bought her lived at
Alexandria, in Virginia, and thither we were bound. During our passage the
captain treated me with marks of distinction, which were highly flattering. He
would often call me into the cabin, and chat away whole hours with me; or make
me read to him, when we found nothing to say; and, in short, made me as happy
as I possibly could expect to be, in the line of life I had chosen.

One day as we were chatting together, he told me, he had taken a particular
fancy to me, and the reason was, that I resembled a son of his so much, that
every time he saw me, he thought he was risen from the dead. He told me, this
son, though but very young, had dissuaded him with all the rhetoric he
possessed, from the only action of his life of which he was ashamed, and which
would embitter all his future days. In the course of his conversation, I
learned that he had been entrusted with the command of a ship in the service of
the American States, but that in the course of the war he had become so violent
a royalist, that he had settled an account with his conscience, and run the
vessel into New York, where she was delivered to the British by his particular
desire; and now he was entrusted with the command of this present ship, only to
navigate her to Alexandria. The owner of this brig intended her for a coasting
trade, from Virginia to Philadelphia, and the abovementioned circumstance had
put it out of our captain's power to go to the latter place, or even to make a
public appearance in the former. Toward the end of our voyage he had me
constantly with him, and often asked me, if I would consent to remain with him,
assuring me at the same time, that I would meet a kind reception from his wife,
and in every respect be put upon the footing of a son. I had no intention of
complying with his request, and therefore made no positive promises. My extreme
desire of seeing the world, did not at all agree with his plan of settling in
America; and though I am certain I lost the whole of his fortune by not
complying, which was not inconsiderable, I persevered in my resolution of
seeing more of the world.

He told me he was to return no more to New York, as that town was now to be
given up to the Americans; but was to go to the British settlements, where he
was allotted a portion of land, as a refugee, and that to the last moment of
his life, he should regret the unlucky transaction, that rendered a
reconciliation with his former friends impractable. On the fourteenth of May,
we passed the two points of land, called Capes, which open a passage into the
bay of Chesapeak; into which many large navigable rivers empty themselves, such
as the Potomak, James' river, York river, etc. which are all navigable for many
miles up the country. On the fifteenth we got as far up the bay as the
Windmill Point, which lies at the mouth of York river, and here we came to
anchor, and took on board a pilot to carry us up the river Potomak. On the
sixteenth we weighed anchor, and had the pleasantest passage imagination can
paint: the country on either side is delightful; it is mostly cleared of wood,
and furnishes a most beautiful landscape. Here the banks of the river are
interspersed with country seats, surrounded by gardens, which produce all the
vegitative luxuries of nature. In all my wanderings through this world, I never
met with a man, I thought so truly happy as an American farmer. His looks are
the index of health, and his manners of independence. The pride and soppery of
European nations are here unknown, but all the solid advantages of life are
enjoyed in the greatest perfection. The earth bountifully rewards the toil of
the husbandman; his farm supplies him with food, his orchard with drink. A
moderate share of labor only is necessary -- nature does much. He is looked
upon as the most respectable member of society. At home he commands a kind of
patriarchal reverence, and abroad he neither is obliged to give, nor receive
that fulsome adulation, that language of art, which reduces men below the
dignity of nature; and a moderate share of application and frugality, enables
him to leave the world, with the pleasing prospect of bequeathing to his
children, a competency to enable them to set out in life, when he shall be no
more.

In our passage from the Capes to Alexandria, we passed several towns in
miniature, both in Virginia and Maryland. Alexandria, the principal trading
town, is distant from the Capes about three hundred miles. It is built upon a
bank, rising gradually from the river. The plan intended seems to resemble that
of Philadelphia, the streets intersecting one another, at right angles. On our
landing here, the captain renewed his solicitations for me to go into exile
with him, for so he termed the settlement allotted him in British-America; but
as I continued firm in my resolution, he gave over pressing me; and after
giving me a pecuniary mark of his respect, and many wholesome advices in
private, with a heavy heart he bade us all adieu. We were now left without a
captain, but the mate assuming the command, we began to take in our cargo,
which consisted of tobacco and wheat; and in a little time after our cargo was
completed, a captain came on board. The gentleman proved to be good-natured,
and agreeable. The behavior of my commanders, since I entered into the trade
of America, had made me still fonder of the life I had chosen, and had made me
totally forget the miseries of my first setting out; I determined therefore not
to be in haste to leave this country. We sailed from Alexandria on the
eighteenth of May, and proceeded for Philadelphia. After we had passed the
Capes of Virginia, in the course of the night, we struck upon a bank of sand,
which lies fourteen leagues east of Cape-Charles, and about twelve miles from
the shore. The weather being favorable, however, we kept in the vessel,
resolving to wait the issue of the next tide. This answered our wishes, for
next day the tide rising higher, and the wind taking a favorable direction,
she was got off without any material damage. For several days we were tossed
about by contrary winds, and having only laid in provisions for eight days, and
being twice that number at sea, we were all put upon short allowance. We passed
the two points of land called Cape-Henlopen, and Cape-May, which form the bay
of Delaware. This bay is extremely dangerous, on account of a number of shoals,
banks, and ridges of rocks, with which it abounds. One of the latter, called
the Drying Pan, extends half across, and is in length about fifteen miles. It
is covered at half-tide, and ships that have no pilot on board, are obliged to
go by soundings. The river Delaware divides the state of Jersey on the east,
and Maryland on the south and west, from Pennsylvania; and is navigable one
hunand fifty miles from the sea. This river opens an easy communication with
the inland country.

On the fourth of June, we came to anchor, at the mouth of the Delaware, till
the tide made next morning, when we weighed anchor, and sailing up the river we
passed Ready-Island, a small spot, which in the memory of some persons still
alive, was covered all over at low water, and is now from two to three feet
above the surface of the water in the highest tides. It is all covered with
reeds, and is every year growing somewhat larger. Immediately after this, we
passed the town of Newcastle, which stands close by the riverside. The country
on both sides is cleared of wo^d, and presents a beautiful, and rich prospect.
The river at this time was much incommoded by a number of chevaux-defrize,
placed by the Americans to prevent the British fleet from getting up to
Philadelphia. Opposite to these stands fort Mifflin, on a small island, which
is the only place of strength in the river. In the year 1777, the British were
enabled to take this fort by the following stratagem: -- The island was
fortified only on the side next to the great body of the water, as they had no
suspicion of an attack from the other side. But as the sinking of the chevaux
de-frize had obstructed the main current, and diverted the water into a new
channel, an American pilot undertook to carry a vessel of a certain draught of
water, up the back side of the island; and a ship of sixty-four guns being cut
down for the purpose, she proceeded to the attack, while three sloops of war
began to batter the fort in front, to divert their attention. The stratagem
succeeded: the surprise of being attacked from a quarter they least expected
it, and the want of time to remove their artillery to the other side, obliged
them to surrender, though not till after a smart engagement, and a considerable
number had been killed on both sides. Passing this memorable spot, we in a
short time made up to the much famed city of Philadelphia. This metropolis of
the American States, has so often been described, that I shall be very brief in
my account of it, and with this shall conclude the present chapter.

Philadelphia is seated between the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill. Its form is
an oblong square, being two miles in length, and one in breadth. The principal
street is in the center of the city, and is one hundred and thirteen feet wide.
Parallel to this, from north to south, run twenty-three streets, crossed by
nine at right angles, all of them fifty feet wide. This is its original plan,
laid out by William Penn; but the inhabitants, finding it more convenient for
trade, have extended the buildings north and south on the river Delaware, far
beyond this plan. In the midst of the city is a public square of ten acres, in
the front of which stands the State-house Here the account has been
considerably shortened, as has also that of several other places in America.
The work was originally intended to have been published in Britain, where a
minute description of Philadelphia would have been very acceptable; but here
such descriptions are frequently to be met with, and would prove uninteresting
in this place. Indeed, its elegant public and private buildings, numerous
humane and useful institutions, places of worship, etc. erected both before and
since the peace, would far exceed our limits to detail.
. The market place is the most convenient and beautiful of any in America, or
perhaps in the world. It is extremely commodious, and is abundantly supplied
with all the necessaries and luxuries of life. The wharves are commodious, and
vessels of five hundred tons burden can lie at them quite secure. The country
above Philadelphia is well cultivated, and peopled with settlers from many
European nations, particularly from Germany; the religious persecutions of that
country, having formerly induced many colonies to emigrate to this land of milk
and honey; and as they are very industrious, and the soil productive, they are
every year enabled to export vast quantities of grain to all parts of the
world. The population of Pennsylvania, and especially of Philadelphia, has had
a more rapid increase than that of any other of the States, owing to the
amazing multitudes which flock to it from Europe. Scotland and Ireland furnish
a very ample share. Many of the emigrants from these places are redemptioners,
that is, they agree with the captain in their own country for a certain sum, to
have a passage to America; who carries them over, and if they can find any
person upon their landing, to indemnify the captain, they agree to serve their
new master for a limited time, till the money he paid for them be made up. If
they cannot find any such themselves, they are at the captain's disposal, till
he can indemnify himself. The inhabitants are sober, industrious, and frugal,
and of consequence wealthy and substantial. As the country produces abundance
of all kinds of materials and food, they have very few demands from abroad. --
A Pennsylvania farmer keeps but one table, at the head of which is placed his
wife and himself, next to them their children, and at the foot of the table
their servants place themselves, who all share of the same food, and are
entertained in the same manner as their master and mistress. Whether or not
this kind of levelling behavior be proper, I take not upon me to determine;
but certain I am, no people in the world are served more faithfully, or obeyed
more punctually. -- The sky is clear and serene: the winter continues from
December to March; the frost being often so severe as to freeze the Delaware
over. In the months of July and August, the heat is so intense, that in the
year 1763, twenty persons dropped dead upon the streets of Philadelphia This
could only have happened by an imprudent use of cold water.
. Various kinds of fevers begin their ravages during the hot months, but vanish
at the approach of the more temperate season; and the winter commonly finds and
leaves the inhabitants of Pennsylvania in a state of health and happiness.

CHAP. III.
The Author returns to Virginia -- A Voyage from thence to Spain -- The Azores,
or Western-Islands, described -- Arrives at Cadiz -- Account of a Bull-fight --
Character of the Inhabitants -- Sails for the Island of Teneriffe, and on the
way is captured by a Barbary Corsair.

ON the eleventh of June we left Philadelphia, and without any material
accident arrived at Virginia. Before our arrival, our owner had determined to
send the vessel with a cargo to Spain: for which purpose every thing was got in
readiness, with all possible expedition. July 9th, 1784, our ship's company,
consisting of captain, mate, and seven men, received pay in advance, at our
merchant's house, and took a part of our cargo on board at Alexandria* from
whence we were to proceed down the river Potomak to Dumfries, and take in the
remainder. Our cargo consisted of flour, fish, tar, and oil, with which we were
to proceed to Cadiz. Our stay at Dumfries was short, as the cargo was in
readiness. Five other ships lay at anchor here at this time; one from France,
one from Glasgow, and the other three from England. The second day after our
arrival at Dumfries, I went on board the Glasgow vessel, where I spent some
time very agreeably with my countrymen, who had some casks of liquor for sale,
with several other articles which I stood in need of, and taking them off their
hands, I gave them tobacco in exchange, of which I had a small quantity. On the
fifteenth we went ashore, and laid in a plentiful allowance of fresh stock,
such as pigs, turkeys, geese, and various kinds of poultry; and having obtained
stores of all kinds sufficient for our voyage, we only waited for a fair wind
to proceed to sea. In the mean time, I had an opportunity of viewing this
little town.

The town of Dumfries is, like many other of the American towns, still in its
infancy. It is delightfully situated, at the head of Quantico creek, and the
country is clear of wood, to a considerable distance from the town. In the
neighborhood are many rich planters, who send the greater part of their
produce, to be shipped at Alexandria, as the water scarcely ever rises to more
than seven feet, so that only small boats can get up to the town; consequently,
the trade of this place is inconsiderable; their principal traffic is in fish,
of which they take great quantities, as they have nets and wiers placed in such
a manner, as to make sure of all that enter the creek. They will draw their
nets two or three different times during an ebb, and are always sure of a great
draught. The drum fish and sturgeon are very plentiful here, as are also rock
and perch. The noise of the drum fish to a person unacquainted with it, appears
very strange. A vessel once arrived here from Bermudas, and after getting a
pilot on board, the captain went to take a little rest, but he had not reposed
long before a shoal of these noisy animals assembled about the bottom of the
vessel, and began in their usual method to make a drumming and thumping, which
exceedingly alarmed the captain; upon which he immediately flew to the deck,
with many hearty imprecations on the pilot, for letting the ship get a ground:
nor could he be persuaded that all was well, till he ordered one of the men to
heave the lead overboard. The sturgeon is larger than our salmon, and has the
largest scales of any other fish that ever I have seen, every one of them being
about an inch in diameter.

Seven miles above this stands the seat of the great WASHINGTON, at a little
distance from the river Potomak. It is seated on a rising ground, having an
easy descent to the river, and is surrounded by groves of trees, delightful
gardens, and enchanting walks; and furnishes a beautiful prospect from the
river. To the character of the proprietor, whose merits command the admiration
of a world, my slender tribute of praise can add nothing. If it be true,
however, what some author says, that servants and near neighbors, are best
qualified to give a man's real character, his will suffer nothing from being
brought to the test; for General Washington, at the head of his army, or
President Washington at the head of the American Congress, never commanded the
admiration of the world in a greater deg^^^ than F^rmer Washington, on the
banks of the Potomak, does the love and admiration of his neighbors and
dependents. At the foot of an avenue, which leads from the house to the river,
is erected a fort, defended by twelve pieces of brass cannon: this during the
war was manned by the general's own negroes, who had been carefully trained for
the purpose. I spent a day in viewing the residence of this truly great man,
and returned very much pleased, that the contrary wind had afforded me so good
an opportunity.

On the seventeenth, our captain's patience began to exhaust, and he resolved
to tide it down the river. The first tide we made Port-Tobacco creek, at the
distance of eighteen miles. This creek, which lies on the Maryland side of the
river, is seven miles long, and navigable for small vessels to the town of
Port-Tobacco, which stands at the head of it. Considerable quantities of
tobacco, wheat, Indian corn, etc. are annually exported from this creek, and
vast quantities of British, French, and Dutch manufactures are imported here.
On the eighteenth we had a fine breeze of wind, which brought us as far as the
cliffs of Noman, and on the nineteenth we got into the bay; but on a sudden the
wind coming round, blew a hurricane, attended with thunder and lightening, and
forced us to think of making for a port; and as Little-Yeockomaeo was at no
great distance, we made for it with all expedition, and came to anchor about
three o'clock. Here we lay till the twenty-first, when the tempest abating, we
hove up, and stood down the bay, in company with the Congress, of Philadelphia,
from Baltimore to France, laden with tobacco.

On the coast of America, this is generally the worst month in the year, for
thunder and lightening, sudden gusts, whirlwinds, and water-spouts; at present
however, appearances were favorable, and we stood to the eastward with a fine
breeze. We kept company with the Congress till the second of August, when we
were obliged to part, as she was going more to the northward. At night it
became almost calm, and the wind veering to the south-east it began to blow and
rain, accompanied with lightening, and tremendous peals of thunder. The gale
increased, and blew violently, and before we could get our sails taken in we
lost both our jib and foretop-sail. On the third it became more moderate, and
the wind getting back to the south-west, permitted us to pursue our course. The
wind continued with us till the ninth, when according to our reckoning, we
found ourselves in lat. 38 north, longitude 39 west; but at two o'clock a man
at the fore-top-mast-head, called out land, when according to our captain's
reckoning, there was no land within four hundred miles of us: upon going up the
rigging, however, every one could plainly discover it, and lucky it was that we
discovered it in day light, as we were steering right upon it, and must have
got on shore in the dark. This land turned out to be the Western-Islands, or
Azores; which lie between twenty-five and thirty-two degrees west longitude,
and thirty seven and forty degrees north latitude, nine hundred miles west of
Portugal, and as many east of Newfoundland.

These islands are nine in number; viz. Santa Maria, St. Meguel, or Michael,
Tercera, St. George, Graciosa, Fayal, Pico, Flores, and Corvo. They were
discovered in 1439, by some Flemish ships, and afterward by the Portuguese in
1449, who took possession of them, and have hitherto retained them. They are
extremely fertile, and subject to a governor, who resides at Angra, in Tercera;
where also a bishop resides, whose diocese extends over all the islands, and
whose income, which is paid in grain, amounts only to two hundred pounds per
annum. On each of the islands there is a deputy governor, and a judge in the
law department, from whose decisions an appeal may be had to the general court
at Tercera, and from thence to the supreme court at Lisbon. St. Meguel, the
most easterly, is the most populous. In Pico, there is a remarkable
promontoray, or peak, which in clear weather, may be discerned one hundred
miles distant at sea. The natives, like the Irish, have an opinion, that no
serpent or venomous animal will live in any of these islands, but will expire
immediately upon their being landed. One tenth of all the productions of the
Azores belong to the crown, and the article of tobacco, which is monopolized by
it, brings a very considerable revenue. From eighteen to twenty thousand pipes
of the wine called Fayal, is annually made in the island of Pico, which is the
largest of all these islands; every pipe of which, when sold on the spot, will
bring the proprietor seven pounds sterling. The Azores are blessed with a
salubrious air, though the violent earthquakes, which frequently happen, render
them but an unpleasant residence.

Leaving these islands, we held on our course without interruption till the
twelfth, when we discovered a cutter standing after us, and crowding all the
sail she could to come up. The captain proposed lying too for her, but all
hands opposing the measure, we crowded all the sail we could, and altering our
course, we perceived that she followed our example: we suspected her to be a
pirate, and the sequel proved we were not mistaken. About four o'clock a breeze
sprung up, and our ship being a very swift sailer, we soon lost sight of her.
On the fourteenth we spoke with the Antonia, a Spanish frigate of thirty-six
guns, to whom we mentioned this cutter, who told us, he would use every
endeavor to come up to her. Nothing material happened till the twenty-seventh,
when we got in sight of the land, to the eastward of Cadiz, and though we came
up to the light house that evening, we did not choose to venture in till day
light. Accordingly, on the morning of the twenty-eighth, we came to anchor in
the bay, but were obliged to perform quarantine till the first of September,
then we weighed and came to anchor again off the pier-end; when the captain
went ashore, and related to the governor, upon oath, the circumstan^^ of a
pirate being in those seas. Several ships of war were lying in the harbor
ready for a cruize, four of which were immediately ordered out in quest of her.
Another vessel arrived the same evening with intelligence, that they had seen
her likewise, and had been so near her as to discover that she carried eighteen
guns; but they had likewise outsailed her. The squadron ordered out, sailed
next morning.

September the third, we began to unload our cargo, and continued to discharge
till the seventh, when our merchant ordered us to stop for a few days from
unloading our fish, as he expected in a little time a much better price for
them, the superstition of the Spaniards rendering it an article of general use.
On the tenth, a signal for a fleet was made from the lighthouse: they soon
reached the harbor, and proved to be the four vessels, ordered out in quest of
the pirate, with their prize along with them, in a very shattered condition.
They had fallen in with her on the sixth, and upon seeing them, she had made
all the sail she could to get away, but they had given chase and come up with
her. When they hailed her, to know from whence she came, she told them she came
from Leghorn, and was bound to Dunkirk. When the evening came on, they ordered
her to keep close by them during the night, which she promised to do; but
notwithstanding, she made several attempts to give them the slip. In the
morning, when they found it impossible to get away, they grew desperate; and
when the commodore ordered their captain on board, he flatly refused, and told
him, he would never surrender so long as he had a man able to fire a gun. A
smart engagement ensued, in which the captain, mate, and several of the men,
had paid for their obstinacy with the forfeit of their lives. They were at last
obliged to strike, and the survivers ordered on board the commodore, who gave
the following account of themselves, viz. That they belonged to Dunkirk, and
having been unsuccessful by privateering during the war, they had determined at
the close of it, to try their fortunes in this manner. They had sailed from
Dunkirk in April 1783, and had been till then cruising in the Spanish main, and
taken some prizes; but before they left those seas, they thought proper to sail
toward the western isles, and try their fortune a little longer; after which
they were to sail for the north of Scotland, and run the vessel ashore. It
likewise appeared that these desperadoes had taken some rich Portuguese vessels
from the Brazils, which they had plundered and sunk, putting their crews to
death. No fewer than ten vessels, according to their own accounts, had fallen
into their hands. When they left Dunkirk, they had on board one hundred and
fifty men, commanded by a captain Dodd, a man about thirty-six years of age,
who was born in Guernsey; and the mate, they said, was a native of Ireland.
Such was the account the prisoners gave of themselves. Ten of them supposed to
be officers, were sent to Madrid, to receive the reward of their demerits, and
the rest, sixty in number, to the galleys. Upon searching the vessel, goods and
money were found to a vast amount.

On the thirteenth, our captain and four of us went ashore, and as the captain
had business, that we knew would detain him some time, we agreed to go and see
the fashionable amusement of Spain, a bull-fight, having heard there was to be
a great entertainment of that kind, that same day. The place appropriated to
this purpose, stands at the outside of the town, and is of a circular form, and
seated all round for the accommodation of the spectators. The charge at
entrance depends upon the seat, and like our theaters, the seats are
accommodated to the different ranks, for at this polite amusement all ranks
attend. We paid a pistreen each, (about eleven-pence sterling.) and took our seats
accordingly. On these occasions, a young cavalier has it in his power to
recommend himself to his mistress by his prowess and skill. In Britain, a man
recommends himself by the number of females he has ruined; but in Spain he
recommends himself to his mistress, by the number of bulls he has killed. A
young Spaniard becomes the object of female notice, in proportion to the number
and fierceness of the animals he has conquered; and is honored, proclaimed,
and rewarded accordingly. Previous to the combat, some pains and time are
requisite to adjust the weapons, and the manner of conducting it. The
two-legged combatants take their seats in the center, and with seeming ease,
loll on a table, and drink a glass of wine and sugar; the quadruped is led to
the door, and immediately let loose among them. They are generally prepared
with darts, which if the bull seems of a tame disposition, they stick in his
sides to rouse him up, and enrage him to the utmost pitch; and having gained
this point, they mount their horses or mules, armed with swords or spears, and
the battle begins. One bull frequently kills two or three horses, and wounds
the rider in a shocking manner; if he has agility enough he can prevent this,
by getting into a hole made for the purpose, and while the bull is in pursuit
of one cavalier another combatant attacks him behind, to divert him from his
object, and makes him face about. In this manner the combat is conducted, till
some cavalier more lucky than the rest, puts him to death, and receives the
plaudits and acclamations of the spectators: after which the bull is carried to
the market, and sold at a cheap rate to the poor; and as that class of men are
very numerous over all Spain, they are sure to find plenty of customers. This
is an amusement which a Spaniard doats upon, and I believe there is not a town
of any note in all the kingdom, where there is not a house or square set apart
for the purpose: Even in the most insignificant villages, the inhabitants will
enter into clubs, to procure an ox or bull, and fight them mounted upon asses,
when a horse cannot be got: or rather than want the diversion, they will
venture on foot. Their general fondness for this amusement, can only be
accounted for from a cause already mentioned, namely, procuring them a
recommendation to the other sex; for a spirit of gallantry prevails much among
them, and it is displayed in a more quixotical manner than in any other nation
in Europe.

The Island of Cadiz is about eighteen miles long, and nine broad at the one
part of it; though it does not exceed one where the town stands. Two forts
guard the passage into the harbor, the one called Puntal, and the other
Malagorda. The town is said to have been first built by the Phoenicians, and to
have been afterward possessed by the Romans. Some Roman antiquities are still
to be seen on the island. It is a bishop's see, and has a communication with
the continent by means of a bridge. The bay is twelve miles in length, and six
in breadth. All the Spanish vessels in the West India or American trade resort
to this port, as also all trading vessels from every country in Europe. Though
the town is rich, handsome, and populous, the country part of the island is
extremely barren. There is not a drop of fresh water to be sound on it, nor any
thing like agriculture to be seen. An Irish gentleman, who was at this time
governor, had excited a spirit of emulation in gardening. He had got a piece of
ground walled in, collected manure to enrich it, and planted herbs, flowers,
and fruit trees, which in a short space of time, had arrived at great
perfection. In the year 1778, he began his work, and in the year 1782, he had a
considerable produce of grapes, and other kinds of fruit; and in the year 1783,
he had oranges in abundance. The gentlemen upon the island, fired by his
example, began every one to enclose a spot of ground, who could command it; and
this year, there was not less than twenty gardens in the neighborhood of the
town, all in great forwardness. Water is here a very scarce, and sometimes a
very costly article. It is all brought from the continent in boats, and the
Levant winds frequently prevent them from passing for a considerable time. The
town stands on the west end of the island. The streets are so narrow, that two
wheeled carriages can with difficulty pass each other in the broadest of them;
and till the present governor came upon the island, they were always kept
shamefully dirty. The town is surrounded by a wall, which is at the lowest
parts of it twenty feet high, and in some places almost forty; the thickness of
it, two thirds of the circumference, is from thirty to forty feet, and it is
one entire battery. The pier is about two thousand feet long, all built with
large square stones, and is about thirty feet wide. Here lie all the
guard-ships and boats, the small craft that trade to the coast of Barbary and
the Mediterranean. In the wall are only two gates, by one of which people enter
into the town, and by the other go out. Upon entering, officers appointed for
the purpose strictly search them, if strangers, for prohibited goods; and as no
one is allowed to take Spanish money out of the kingdom, people disposing of
their goods here, must either take goods in return, or bills of exchange. The
market place is a large square, tolerably supplied with beef, mutton, and
venison, none of them of the best quality; but they have fish and poultry in
the greatest perfection. The inhabitants of Cadiz are a strange mixture of
French, Portuguese, Italians and Moors, Irish adventurers and English
smugglers. Pride, laziness, and filth, are their characteristicks. They have
much external sanctity, and on some occasions are very devout. Here are seven
churches, one of which has been upwards of fifty years in building, and is not
yet near finished; it is of an octagonal form, and is about sixty feet high,
all built of a kind of marble. Upwards of five hundred clergymen, of different
denominations, are in this town, many of them mendicant friars, who are more
troublesome to strangers, than our street beggars in England. I was one day
accosted in English by a man well advanced in years, and upon entering into
conversation with him, he told me he was a native of Leith, in Scotland; that
at an early period of life he had come to Cadiz, in the capacity of a common
sailor; and that an old lady had taken a fancy to him, and found means to
signify her wishes. That he had been induced to become Roman Catholic, and
marry her; and that she had left him in excellent circumstances. I observed to
him, that I had no objections to any part of his conduct but the change of his
religion. "As to the matter of that, says he, I give myself no manner of
trouble. I had made but small proficiency in any religion when I came to this
country, and had but little to renounce; and so far as I can yet judge, two
hundred per annum, which I received by my marriage, will make up for the
difference between the two religions." As I found we should not agree in our
sentiments about religion, I wished him good morning, and we parted.

September twentieth, our cargo being discharged, we began to prepare for sea;
and taking in some salt for ballast, with some boxes of silk, and a few pipes
of wine, we set sail on the 10th of October for the island of Teneriffe, where
we were to take in the rest of our cargo. But a dead calm prevented us from
proceeding farther than the mouth of the harbor that evening. About three
o'clock next morning, however, a gale sprung up, when we weighed anchor and
stood on our course. At five o'clock, Cadiz light-house bearing N. E. distant
about three leagues, we discovered a vessel to windward lying too; who upon
seeing us, began to crowd all her sail and come down upon us. The captain had
heard before we left Cadiz, of an English ship lying off the harbor, and
taking it for granted that this must be her, he made not the smallest effort to
get out of her way; on the contrary, as he had some particular message to send
to England, he rather waited for her coming down. The sun was rising, and as
she was in a line between us and the east, we could not make out her colors,
till coming within gunshot, we received two shots from her, and could plainly
perceive Turkish colors. We all insisted upon our captain to run, but by some
strange infatuation, he delayed it till we were totally in her power. We were
ordered to hoist out the boat and go on board of her, which, though much
against our wills, the captain, three other men, and myself, were obliged to
do; and no sooner had we set our foot on board, than the captain declared our
ship a prize, and ourselves prisoners of war. We now, to our sorrowful
experience, found ourselves in the power of a master, from whom we had nothing
like mercy to expect. Slavery for life was all we could promise ourselves, and
death alone could set us free. With such prospects before us, my reader will
easily imagine, that this day, and many that succeeded, were miserable in the
extreme. -- As the sequel of our captivity will take many pages to relate it, I
shall reserve it for another chapter.

CHAP. IV.
An Account of what happened to the Author and his Companions after their
capture -- Arrival at Larache -- Description of that place -- Interview with
the Governor -- Treatment while there -- Ordered for Morocco -- Journey thither
-- Description of the Country -- Generous behavior of the Sardinian Consul --
Various Incidents -- Arrival at Morocco -- Interview with the Emperor --
Friendly behavior of Mr. Chapman.

WE were now in the hands of savages, belonging to a country where mercy was
never shown to Christians -- doomed to we knew not what -- to suffer, perhaps,
immediate death -- to be reserved for the most debasing species of slavery --
to drag out a life of untried misery, far from our own country, where our
friends could never more receive intelligence of our being in the land of the
living. Alas! conjecture was vain; we dreaded the worst that could possibly
befall us, and the rapid succession of dismal apprehensions brought with it
last complete stupefaction.

They placed us upon the breast of the quarter deck, giving a negro the charge
of watching us, while our captain, along with twelve of their men, went on
board of our vessel. They soon returned, bringing along with them our two
mates: the rest of our men they left on board the prize to navigate her, for
the conducting of a brig was what they were unacquainted with themselves, that
being rather beyond the abilities of a Moor; and after giving strict charge to
the prize to keep company with us, they set sail for the coast of Barbary. Soon
after, the boatswain, or countermaster, (as the word in their language
signifies) along with two others, came up to us, and divested us not only of
every thing that was in our pockets, but of the pockets themselves. They stripped
us of all our clothes that were good for any thing, and as the operation was
last performed on me, I had reason to be convinced, that no situation is so
dreadful, that the prospect of immediate death will not add to its horrors; for
just as they had stripped off my handerchief from my neck, a fellow of
Herculean appearance, and a terrible countenance, came upon deck with a hatchet
in his hand, and stood for some time eyeing us with the most Jack-Ketch like
face I ever beheld in my life; and bad as my situation was, I confess I never
felt greater pleasure, than when I saw him, instead of applying his hatchet to
our necks, take up a log of wood to split it for fuel. After we had got time to
ruminate on our unhappy condition for about the space of an hour, the captain
accosted us, and talked to us for some time in his own language, which we
neither understood nor attended to; at last the boatswain beckoned us to follow
him, and taking us to his own apartment, presented us with oil-olives and
bread, neither of which could we taste; we were too full of grief to think of
any kind of food, and the boatswain having left us, we threw ourselves upon the
floor, and in the most sorrowful accents bewailed our wretched condition.

Nature at last became exhausted, and all of us sunk down to sleep. This happy
interval of care lasted till morning, when we awoke, and found ourselves in a
most shocking situation, being all covered over with vermin; but as the Turks
had not left them many clothes to take shelter in, we soon disengaged ourselves
from such disagreeable companions, and went upon deck. We were anxious to see
if our own vessel was still in company, but soon found she was not in sight. We
were extremely impatient to know what was become of her, but could not fall
upon any method of receiving information, nor durst we show any anxiety about
her, as we imagined our men, who were left on board of her, had been too many
for the Moors, and carried her off to some other port, and we dreaded the
consequences that might result to ourselves. At all rates we gave up the hopes
of seeing our companions again, and could not but regret the unlucky fate, that
singled us out of all the ship's company for slavery, whilst they, as we
conjectured, were enjoying the sweets of liberty. The call of hunger is
irresistible, and now we began to feel it make powerful demands. We had tasted
nothing from the time we came on board; the boatswain coming across us, we made
signs to him for something to eat; he set down the bread and oil-olives we had
formerly refused, and I never remember to have made a more satisfactory meal on
roast beef and plumb pudding, though it was the first time any of us had fed on
such fare. Soon after the captain called us all on deck, and taking our mate by
the hand, led him to the helm, and made a signal for him to steer. After he had
been at the helm about ten minutes, he made another take it, and so on till he
had tried us all. Finding us all better qualified than his own men, he gave us
the charge of the helm, and became very kind to us, every now and then offering
us food and tobacco. We soon began to think our situation was not so desperate
as we had at first imagined, and by degrees became somewhat better reconciled
to our fate.

On the fourteenth we made the Barbary coast, to the southward of Salee, and
standing to the northward all that day, we came up to the port of Larache, to
which port we were bound. We were obliged to come to anchor, as no vessel can
enter this port but upon one tack, it being exceedingly narrow, and the entry
confused. On the sixteenth, however, we got into port, not without some danger
of the ship's being dashed to pieces by the unskilful management of the Moorish
sailors. As soon as we came to anchor, the captain and some of the other
officers went ashore. Two of our number projected a scheme of running away with
the boat, which we might easily have accomplished, but for the second mate, who
had a brother on board the prize, and as we did not know for certain that she
had got clear of the enemy, the mate resolved at all events to stay and share
his fate. The success he said was uncertain, and should we succeed, he dreaded
that his brother's life might pay the forfeit. As we could not bring him to our
mind, therefore, we resolved unanimously to submit to our fate, whatever it
might be, with fortitude. The port of Larache is situated in north lat. 35
longitude 7 west of London. When we entered the port, we were saluted by a fort
with nine guns, which compliment was returned with six. The entrance into this
port is extremely narrow, insomuch that two ships cannot pass each other. On
the one side is a low point or neck of land, which forms a semi circle, in
which is a basin or harbor, which perhaps might contain one hundred sail of
ships, though there are seldom in it at one time above five or six, which,
together with two which constantly lie at Mogodore, form the whole of the
Moorish navy, and excepting one vessel which mounts twenty-six guns, not one of
them carry more than sixteen. The town of Larache is defended by this small
battery of nine guns, already mentioned. It is of a square form, with a wall
round it, having two gates in each square

On the nineteenth in the morning, we were put into the boat and ordered to go
on shore. As soon as we were got seated in the boat, the ship fired all her
guns, and when we reached the shore, we found the governor, with all the
officers and soldiers of the fort, ready to receive us. They were in number
about six hundred, all under arms. The governor and officers were all mounted
on fine Arabian horses, and led the van in a kind of procession, which was
immediately begun. The crews of the ships which were in the harbor, formed a
circle round us. They were again surrounded by the military. If we seemed
objects of wonder to them, they were no less so to us. For what purpose we were
thus guarded, we could by no means conjecture. For about 100 yards we marched
slowly on, the multitude in a kind of musical tone crying out, Laca laca la^e
fide Mahomed; or, "Long live king Mahomed." After this we made a full stop,
when they opened the ranks, and twelve men with loaded muskets in their hands,
pointed to our faces, came running up to us with an intention, as we imagined,
to blow out our brains; when they came within two yards of us, they lowered
their pieces, pointing them to the ground, and fired them (...) before our
feet; these fell back, and other twelve performed the same ceremony, and so on,
till all those in front of us had done the same thing, after which they all
turned their faces (...) the east, and in a very devout manner offered up
ejaculatory prayers. They led us all round the town, making a full stop, and
praying at each of the gates, till we arrived at the gate we set out from, when
the soldiers opening to the right and left, lined on each side the passage to
the governor's house, and we were marched up between the ranks till we came to
the governor, who with several other great men, was standing in the outer
court, before his own door. He sat down when we approached him, crosslegged, as
the Moorish custom is, having only a kind of mat or sopha spread underneath
him; and an interpreter being called, he, with great dignity in his manner,
began to question us; and as we did not know but he was going to pass sentence
of death upon us immediately, we made rather an awkward appearance. The
following dialogue passed between us. Of what country are you? We answered from
America. What kind of a country is America? A woody country. What is your
religion? but I suppose you worship the trees. We answered we were Christians.
Are you connected with England? Our country is principally peopled from thence.
Is the king of England your king? No, but he lately was. Why is he not now? He
now gives us leave to govern ourselves. How do you like this country? It is a
very good country. Will you embrace our religion, and prevent yourselves from
being slaves? We are not yet acquainted with it. After putting a number of
similar questions, he asked us, If we would eat any thing? We told him we were
very hungry; upon which he ordered each of us a piece of bread, and rising with
great stateliness, walked into the house. Immediately we were led to a jail,
with the portion of bread assigned us in our hands, and here, if we had no
other comfort, we had at least the uninterrupted society of one another. The
jail in which we were lodged was dark, dirty, and every way uncomfortable. We
did not see a human face till late in the evening of the day in which we
entered it, when a man made his appearance, bringing us a dish in great
estimation in that country, called cuscos^^. It is made of flour, wet in the
manner we do it to make bread; after which they rub it between their hands,
till it forms itself into small portions like barley corns, they afterward
spread it on the bottom of a pot, made on purpose with holes in it. Underneath
it they flew a fowl, mutton, or beef, with onions, pepper, salt, and a pumpkin,
the steam of which gives a nice relish to the small particles above, and make
them very delicious. They were delicious at this time, to us all at least, and
we made a very comfortable meal; after which the keeper took away the dishes,
and carefully locked the door. We then began to look about for beds, but
nothing of that kind being to be found, we stretched ourselves on the cold
stones, and slept as well as our cares would let us. Next morning a man entered
with a cake for each of us, and a small portion of butter and honey, which he
set down and disappeared. We made an excellent breakfast of this delicious
fare, not without thanking Providence, that our treatment hitherto had so much
exceeded our expectations. At noon the same person entered the prison with
another dish of cuscosoo, and placing it upon the floor, withdrew to the door.
We had never seen either a knife or spoon, and when he was gone, we began to
look about for a piece of wood to make something to answer our purpose as a
substitute. We began to split it, when the jailor appeared and made signals for
us to eat our victuals. We gave him to know what we wanted. He took up the
dish, and gathering up a handful, threw it into his mouth, giving us to
understand that this was the method of eating it. We could by no means
reconcile ourselves to this method, and with a great degree of obstinacy, more
than prudence, persisted in preparing our wooden spoons, upon which he ordered
our provisions to be taken away, and we neither received any more visits from
him, nor any more food during the remainder of that day.

Next morning, after passing a night of complete mortification, we received
from a beautiful young woman, a visit upon spiritual business. She was, it
seems one of the saints, or enthusiasts of that country, who had given up the
pleasures of the present world, with a view of preparing herself and others,
for the enjoyments of the next. She had in her hands a piece of bread, which
when she had spit upon she divided among us, and we were very glad to see it,
and devoured it greedily. Afterward she wet her fingers with her spittle, and
rubbed our temples, frequently breathing upon us as she did it. She had brought
a negro as an interpreter, who told us, she wanted to make us proselytes to the
religion of Mahomet, and that all the gestures and absurdities she practiced,
were done with this view. She made him promise us great honor and preferment,
both in this world and the next, if we would acknowledge and embrace the
religion of the prophet; but finding us obstinately determined to adhere to our
own faith, she gave us up for lost, and went away greatly disappointed. During
all this day we got nothing to eat, we had indeed plenty of tar water, and that
was all our drink. Next morning a man coming in, brought us each a small cake,
not much larger than a sea-biscuit, and left about a farthing's worth of
tobacco, to be divided amongst us. Night came on without bringing us any more
visits or victuals; and next morning the same man entered, bringing us the same
quantity of bread, and at the same time gave to understand this was to be our
daily allowance. We had the liberty of five rooms, and in one of them, we had
with chalk, made an imitation of a chequer-board, on the floor, and cutting
some corks into small pieces, amused ourselves in the best manner we could, by
playing at this game.

This morning we agreed to reserve the half of our cakes till the evening, and
left them behind when we went to our game. Whilst we were amusing ourselves
with this diversion in another room, the guard, who had us in charge, came into
the one which we had left, and made off with the remainder of our cakes, which
we had preserved for our evening's repast. This therefore, was a miserable day
with us, and to add to our grief, we had to suffer cold in the extreme, for it
was now the most inclement season of the year, and as I already observed, we
had been stripped of all our clothing that was worth taking. The little we had
left was all over vermin, and next morning we were obliged to reserve the water
that was brought us to drink to wash our shirts: after which we cut off our
hair to prevent them from finding shelter among it, so that the figure we cut
was truly ridiculous. On the twenty-fifth our second mate, who was naturally of
a very happy disposition ^^gan to sing, and all the rest of us fell to dancing.
This brought a great assemblage of Moors to see us perform. Our woe-worn faces
excited compassion in some, who brought us bread (...) tobacco. We tried the
same experiment for some days with the same success, but they soon became
accustomed to it, and by its loosing the charm of novelty, it ceased to produce
any good effects.

Thus we were obliged to drag out a miserable existence till the twenty-ninth
of November, when the governor gave orders to have us taken out to get a little
fresh air, and this day, for the first time, we received accounts of the rest
of our crew. A caravan had just arrived from Tangiers, and one of the men who
guarded it, came to us, and in broken English began a conversation, in the
course of which we learnt, that the prize had been carried in there sometime
before, that the rest of the crew were all to be sent here in a few weeks, when
we were to go to Morocco, and be kept prisoners, till the United States should
send over an ambassador to make a treaty of alliance with the emperor. The only
comfort we derived from this intelligence, was the hope of seeing our
companions: as to gaining our liberty, the prospect was as distant as ever, for
it was uncertain when the Congress would send an ambassador to Barbary, or
whether one might ever be sent. Patience is a cure for all distempers, to this,
therefore, we were forced to have recourse, and leave the event to the Supreme
Disposer of all.

On the twelfth of December, the same female devotee, who had visited us before
^gain made her appearance, bringing with her two others of her own sex, and the
same negro interpreter. She began to anoint our temples in the same manner as
before. They then buffetted us with their hands, and each of them pulling out a
short dagger, threatened as if they meant to stab us, and, at every interval,
made the negro ask us, if we were yet willing to embrace the religion of
Mahomet. When they found their threats ineffectual, they began to coax,
flatter, and promise, and made use of every argument they could suggest, with
as much earnestness as if their own salvation had depended on their success.
They told us, if we complied, we would immediately be restored to liberty, that
we would be advanced to honor and dignity in the country, and receive from the
hands of the emperor, the most beautiful wives. This last argument they
repeated so earnestly and so often, as convinced us, they thought it one of the
greatest blessings that could be conferred. Finding us obstinate, they left us
to our own meditations.

The next day a message was sent to me from the captain who had taken us
prisoners, to go to his house. He had, it seems, laid up his vessel for the
winter, and as he expected to go to Morocco, he wanted to have some tents in
readiness, to shelter him and his men during (...) long and tiresome journey.
The reason of my being sent for, was, that I might give him some assistance in
finishing them, having observed me when at sea, sewing sails with more
dexterity than his own men. I was obliged to obey the order, not without some
apprehensions, as I was not made acquainted with his intentions till I went to
the house. When I arrived I was obliged to stop in an outer court, till they
apprized him of my coming, and got the women all put out of the way; for they
will not suffer them either to see Christians, or be seen by them. I was at
length permitted to enter, when the captain, who was an old man, received me
with a smiling countenance, sitting upon a straw mattress. He asked me in
Spanish, to sit down. I knew a little of that language, and was glad to hear
him speak it. He then told me the business he wanted me to perform; and
accordingly I entered upon my task immediately. I had not been long at work,
when the captain sent me a dish of macaroone and milk, and after I had finished
my day's labor, he again sent me two cakes to carry with me to the jail. These
I accepted with a joyful heart, happy to be the instrument of a small relief to
my fellowsufferers. On the twentieth of December our work was finished, and I
was remanded back to my confinement.

On the twenty-second, we were allowed to take an airing on a rising ground
between the town and the sea, where we had a most delightful prospect (...)
both. In a little time we perceived two vessels crowding all the sail they
could, the one flying and the other pursuing, and heard the report of several
guns. Next day we learned from some fishermen, that they were a Spanish
merchantman and an Algerine cruiser; that the latter had been for two days in
chase of the former, but that a breeze of wind had luckily sprung up, and
enabled her to make her escape. In our return to our prison, we were met by the
governor, who asked us by an interpreter, how we liked his country, and that if
it was not the best we had ever seen? We told him we liked it much; though our
hearts gave the lie to our tongues, for in our situation, paradise itself would
have been disagreeable. He desired us to make ourselves as happy as we could,
and said he hoped all would be well. We returned to our prison, and in a short
time the governor sent us about one pound of tobacco, which was a very
acceptable present, as our scanty allowance of food required such a substitute.
In this country, acorns and nuts of all kinds are very plentiful, and extremely
large, and for some days we had a slender relief from the children, who threw
handfuls of these in at our windows, and entertained themselves by seeing us
scramble for them in a very ravenous manner. Had we not been supported by good
constitutions, and stout hearts, we must inevitably have sunk under the extreme
cold and hunger we were forced to undergo, for all the clothing we could
muster among six of us, was not suffic^^^t for the comfort of two; but we
danced to keep ourselves warm, we chewed tobacco to allay our hunger, and we
comforted ourselves with the reflection, that whatever might be our future
fate, we could not well be worse.

On the twentieth of January, we were informed, that our messmates were on
their way from Tangiers to join us, and that we were all to be sent off to
Morocco, by a caravan, which was soon to leave this place. The thoughts of this
journey almost distracted us. At this season of the year it blows the most
dreadful hurricanes in Barbary, attended with thunder, lightning, and rain; and
accoutred as we were, it was likely to be a very uncomfortable journey, through
a desert country, without the convenience of an inn to rest or refresh at. We
cast many a wishful look toward the shore, never expecting after our removal
to see it again.

On the twenty-fifth we were made happy by the sight of the captain and the
rest of the crew, and whilst we were recounting to one another the hardships we
had undergone since we parted, an order was sent for us to appear before the
governor. He desired us to hold ourselves in readiness, for next morning the
caravan was to set out for Morocco, and we must go along with it. We returned
to our prison; but as horses and mules could not be got in the morning, we were
obliged to put off our journey to another day. During this day our captain
wrote a letter to the American consul at Cadiz, which all of us signed,
acquainting him with our captivity, and present circumstances and prospects;
and requesting him to apply to the Congress, to take measures in our behalf.
The consul, whose name was Mr. Harrison, was part owner of our brig, and upon
receiving our letter, he took the readiest method of relieving our necessities,
by sending fifty dollars; which the captain afterward receiving, applied it to
his own purposes, without giving us any share of it; a conduct which was the
more unpardonable, as his folly had been the original cause of all our
misfortunes.

On the morning of the twenty-seventh, at an early hour, a vast concourse of
men and women, horses and mules, were assembled in the street, opposite to our
place of confinement. The governor, the captain of the ship which had captured
us, with several officers of inferior rank, came into the prison, and asked us
what we thought of an excursion through the country as far as Morocco; and
without waiting for an answer, they ordered us out, and mounted us upon camels,
when our march began for the city of Morocco, and we bade adieu to Larache,
with hearts full of anxiety and grief.

The caravan consisted of about two hundred horse-guards, seventy camels, and
thirty mules. The first day we traveled about twenty miles, when we came to a
valley called Zedith, and pitched our tents for the night. The form of our
encampment was this: The grand bashaw, who commanded in chief, pitched his tent
in the middle, and all the other tents, to the number of thirty, were pitched
in a circle round him, at a little distance. The provisions, baggage, etc. were
brought into the center, and the cattle let loose to feed. One half of the
soldiers mounted guard, and during the night patrolled round the tents, calling
out every now and then in their own language, "All is well." About four o'clock
next morning, we struck our tents, and were ready by five to continue our
march, which we did till about ten, when coming to a spring of water, (an
invaluable luxury in this country) we stopped to refresh ourselves and horses.
After we had received our small portion of bread, which was soon dispatched, we
began to look out for some wild fruit. About one hundred yards from the road,
we espied a little grove, and two of the soldiers accompanying us, we found it
produce grapes, pomegranates, figs, and oranges, but only the last were ripe.
We took as many along with us as we could carry, and found them of infinite
service to us upon the road. Joining the calvacade, we continued our march, and
that night halted at a place called Mossata, which is named after a saint of
that name, who lived and was murdered here, as it is said, and to whose memory
a tomb is erected. Next morning we started at the usual hour, and traveled
through a delightful country, exceeded perhaps by no part of the globe. At
every little interval we passed a grove, where all sorts of delicious fruits
grew wild, and invited us to taste; and cattle, sheep and horses were scattered
all over the plains. This evening we pitched our tents by the side of a wood:
we did not start next morning till seven o'clock, and by twelve we reached
Mamora, a small town, one hundred and fifty miles north of Salee, consisting of
about one hundred houses, and defended by a small fort of six guns. Passing
this place, we arrived about six in the evening at Zeriff, a river which takes
its rise in the kingdom of Fez, and empties itself into the western ocean. The
banks of this river abounding with all sorts of ferocious animals, such as
lions, tigers, leopards, and wolves, it was judged improper to form an
encampment here, on account of such dangerous neighbors; we therefore marched
on five miles farther, till we came to a small plain, where we pitched our
tents till next morning. At nine o'clock, we again set out, and about ten came
to a place called Fedela, where the foundation of a fortress was laid sometime
since by Sidi Mahomed the reigning emperor, but on account of a war breaking
out between him and his son, it never was finished. We traveled on till five
in the evening, when we came to the only fresh water lake in all that country.
Its water has a taste somewhat like our English Spa-waters, owing to the vast
quantities of saltpeter, with which the country abounds. It is only about a
mile and a half in circumference, and abounds with a variety of fish. We had
seen many large flocks of sheep in our journey, but I never in all that country
saw a shepherd, but upon the side of this lake. Here, however, they think their
flocks worth the tending; and their mode of living deviates as little from the
original simplicity of nature, as the manners of the shepherds in the
patriarchal ages.

On the morning of the thirty-first, being heartily tired of riding on the
camels, we obtained leave of our guards to walk for sometime, and entertained
ourselves running after the amazing swarms of rats, which overspread all the
country. Their numbers are incredible, and one reason for their amazing
increase may be the mode of thrashing corn practiced here. After it is out down
and bound into sheaves, they let it stand for a few days, after which they lay
down the sheaves in a circular form, in the field where it grows, and tying two
horses together, lead them round and round, till they tread the grain totally
from the stalk; after which they dig a pit, into which they throw the grain,
which owing to the dryness of the soil, is safely preserved till they have
accasion to take it up. The rats therefore can find food in every field, and
consequently resort but little to the habitation of man. We frequently met them
in large bodies, some of them of an enormous size. They stood surveying as with
great composure, showing as little dread of us, as we did of them. When their
resources fail in one field, they will travel in thousands to another; for like
the inhabitants of the country, they are every where at home where grain is to
be had. -- At five o'clock this evening we arrived at a valley, called Kora,
where finding water, we filled our pitchers, and got each a large supply of
excellent fruit, and after traveling seven miles further, we pitched our
tents. Next day we traveled through a country, beautiful beyond description.
For this garden of the world, nature has done every thing; and yet a Briton,
accustomed to arts and industry, could not but behold it with an eye of
commiseration. Not less than two thirds of the land lies waste, unoccupied, and
uncultivated. A lawless banditti occupy the mountainous parts of the country,
who prey upon the industrious inhabitants, carry off their cattle, destroy
their grain, and often leave behind them dreadful traces of brutal ferocity, by
murdering whole families or villages. Happy is the country where life and
property are secured by wise and wholesome laws.

We envy not the warmer clime that lies,
In ten degrees of more indulgent skies;
Nor at the coarseness of our heaven repine,
Though over our heads the frozen pleiades shine;
It Is liberty that crowns Britannia's isle,
And makes her barren rocks and her bleak mountains smile.'
ADDISON. On the morning of the second of February we ascended a hill, where we
had a view of Salee and Rabat, and about eleven o'clock we came to the river
Guero, on the opposite shore of which stands Rabat. This river is by the
inhabitants supposed to be one of the largest in the world, though it is only a
streamlet, compared to most of the rivers in America.

Bashaw Zeriff, commander of the caravan, ordered the camels and mules we had
brought with us, to be sent back, and fresh ones to be got at Rabat to carry us
forward the rest of the journey. We began to send over all our baggage and
provisions, and as there was only two passage boats, it was evening before we
all got landed on the other side. None of our party had tasted food during the
day, and had we not had a few oranges in our pockets, we must have perished
with hunger and fatigue.

Salee is seated on the north side of the river Guer^, upon a sandy level, and
like all other Moorish towns, is surrounded by a strong wall. One part of it is
occupied by Moors, and the other by Jews. Within the walls there are only about
three hundred houses. It has long been famous for its pirates, or rovers, which
make prizes of all Christian ships that fall in their way, unless they are
protected by a treaty. The harbor, when ships get in, is commodious and safe,
but it is a very difficult matter to get entering it, on account of a bar which
lies across the mouth of it, insomuch, that ships of the smallest burden are
obliged to take out their guns before they can get over it. They have docks for
building ships, but they are seldom made use of, for want of skill and
materials. This is a place of no kind of trade, only a few Spanish sloops enter
the port, carrying powder, shot, and some articles of hardware, which they sell
or barter for the produce of the country.

After we had crossed the river, we entered the town of Rabat. Among other
spectators who were present at our landing, was the Sardinian consul, a native
of France, who had for some time resided ^^re. As soon as he discovered us to
be Christians, he hastened to meet us, bringing with him a Jew interpreter. He
first spoke to us himself, in French; but as we could not answer him in that
language, the interpreter told us, he asked what countrymen we were? We gave
him a brief detail of our country and misfortunes, and as we did it, his eyes
were moistened, and he could not refrain from dropping a tear. He told us, he
sincerely sympathized with us, and wished he could assist us, but was sorry he
had so little in his power; what he could do, he told us, he would, and in the
mean time we should be his guests; for which purpose he would solicit the
bashaw. This was the first Christian face we had seen in this country, and his
looks, manner, and kind expressions, had so much of the philanthropist, that we
were convinced he was possessed of a warm benevolent heart. He left us not a
little surprised and pleased with his generous offer, and went to the bashaw,
who readily complied with his request. He then came up to us, took us severally
by the hand, and desired us to follow him to his house. We set out for the
habitation of our benevolent friend, and were shown into an elegant apartment,
ragged and dirty as we were, where a plentiful supper was set before us of
different kinds of meat, with a variety of fruit, and two large flagons of
wine. This was the first time we had it in our power to eat a hearty meal in
the country, and we indulged appetites, long unaccustomed to indulgence, with
rather too much freedom; for in a short time every one of us began to be racked
with pains, so that we could neither speak nor keep upon our seats. Our kind
entertainer soon came to ask how we liked our supper, when he found some of us
sprawling on the floor in the utmost agony. He asked the captain if we had
wanted food long before, and being told the truth, he prescribed a bumper or
two of brandy to each of us, which soon had the desired effect, and restored us
to tranquillity and ease. Our stay at Rabat was prolonged to four days, owing to
a scarcity of camels, and during all that time did this generous man entertain
us in the same sumptuous manner. He gave us many friendly advices respecting
our conduct in this country; in particular he begged us to be cautious of
having the smallest intimacy or connection with the Moorish women, whatever
advances they might make to us, as the laws of their country made it death to
any Christian, found intriguing with them, and the Moors certainly would avail
themselves of this privilege. We did not fail to observe his precaution during
our residence. in this country. One day our benevelent host (who devised every
method he could to sweeten our stay with him) proposed to entertain us by a
country walk, and taking us along with him, we passed through the streets to
the gate, the crowd staring at us like wild beasts all the way. He led us to
the top of a mount, by an easy ascent, where stands a fortification, if one may
give it the name, of very little strength. Here we had a view of the town and
the most enchanting country I ever beheld -- its wall all one garden. The most
delicious fruits of all kinds every where presented themselves. In short, did
the industry of the inhabitants, in any degree, second the bountiful hand of
nature, this country would be the garden of the world. We pulled as much fruit
as we could conveniently carry, and bringing it home, our landlord, after
dinner, made each of us drink a bottle of wine to help to digest it. But our
happiness here was too complete to be of long duration. On the evening of the
fourth day, captain Rice Hammond, paid us a visit and told us, we were to march
next morning. All the remaining part of that evening, did the worthy consul
spend in our company, making use of every argument his imagination could
suggest to cheer our drooping spirits: he told us, he was certain we would not
long be slaves, but as he assigned no reason for his assertion, we imputed it
to his good nature only. He often expressed his wish he could speak English,
which made us imagine he had some scheme for our emancipation, which he durst
not impart through the medium of an intepreter. We left our kind entertainer
next morning with a tear of gratitude in each of our eyes. But his kindness was
not limited to the time of our stay with him; he had got prepared for us four
large pots, full of boiled meat, five gallons of wine and one of brandy,
together with sixty pound weight of bread, and each a pound of tobocco.

After this gentleman's behavior, no man shall ever persuade me, that
disinterested benevolence is not a plant of this world, nor that any country is
so barren that it will not produce it. Full of gloomy thoughts and dreadful
apprehensions, on the eighth of February, we entered again upon our hopeless
journey. Our ignorance of the language of our companions made every enquiry
fruitless respecting our future fate. We had still one half of our journey to
perform, and whether it should terminate in liberty or slavery, life or death,
we were totally ignorant. The first night we reached a plain, twenty-four miles
from Rabat, where we pitched our tents; as the wind was easterly that evening,
we were much infested with vast swarms of locusts, who flew about our ears,
making a kind of humming noise. I had the curiosity to kill several of them,
and examine them minutely. They are generally from two to three inches long,
their head resembling that of a horse: they have four feet, and a tail
gradually tapering to the end. They are of a greenish color, intermixed with
streaks of black and brown: they have a near resemblance to the larger kind of
our beetles in size and form. The following night we pitched at Arbodia, said
to have been once the finest town on the coast, but a war breaking out between
the emperor and his brother, the army of the latter laid it in rains. It
consisted of three hundred houses, and now there is not one left standing to
show where the town stood. European vessels used to trade to this port for
grain, but since the destruction of the town, the harbor is totally deserted.
Still however a great number of families resort here, at certain seasons of the
year, for the amusement of fishing, hunting, etc. It is like our watering
places in England, a place of fashionable resort, and at this time a vast
number of tents, were erected, and an incredible number of people had come to
enjoy the amusements of the country. Immediately after we had pitched our
tents, a young man of a very graceful appearance, with something in his air and
manner above the common rank, came out of a tent, followed by a great retinue.
Bashaw Zeriff Hammond no sooner espied him, than he hastily made up to him, and
kissing the ground before him, soon gave us to understand that he was some very
great personage; and in a little we learned that he was son to the emperor. He
took a walk round all the tents of the caravan, in company with the bashaw, and
the captain of the ship who had taken us, surveying us with a very inquisitive
eye, and asking a number of questions, as we imagined, at the captain.

We had the greater part of the gallon of brandy we brought from Rabat still
with us, and though we knew the Alcoran strickly prohibits the use of spiritous
liquors, yet as we had seen Rice Hammond use them with the greatest freedom, we
desired him to offer a glass of our brandy to the prince. He did so, and it was
accepted with pleasure. By this time he had sent for an interpreter, who fell
down before him, and kissed the ground. He asked us how we liked the country,
and whether it was not the best we had ever seen? We told him we only wanted
liberty to make us think it so. He then desired the interpreter to inform us of
his rank, and of his connection with, and friendship for the English. The
interpreter then proceeded to inform us, that he was the favorite son of the
reigning emperor, by an English woman. About thirty years ago, says he, a
number of English ships were cast ashore on the coast of Barbary, the crews of
which were all taken up by the emperor, who having so many British subjects in
his power, took occasion to declare war against that nation. He marched them
all to Morocco, and made slaves of the men, expecting them to be ransomed at a
high rate. Among the unfortunate sufferers, was a beautiful female, whom the
emperor no sooner beheld, than she entirely gained his affections. He ordered
her to be sent to the seraglio, and for many years, her good sense, and
unassuming behavior, maintained the conquest which her beauty had gained. By
that lady the emperor had this prince, who is generally expected to succeed him
on the throne. The emperor, who has between eighty and ninety sons, shows a
greater degree of fondness for him, than for any of the rest; and as he is a
very great favorite in the empire at large, the emperor's declaration in his
favor will be highly relished, and warmly supported by every individual in the
country. We gave the interpreter thanks for his intelligence, and paid our
respects to the prince in the English manner; who desired the interpreter to
tell us, that he looked upon every Englishman as his friend, and that he should
be happy to have it in his power to be of service to us; upon which he left the
tent, and we found means to detain the interpreter for a little, wishing to
receive every possible information respecting our future destination. He told
us, if this prince should ever come to the throne, the English might assure
themselves of the best treatment from him; that it was happy for us we were in
the power of his father, who, he said, was a very humane prince, and that if we
had been taken by a subject of the dey of Algiers, our fate would have been
much harder. When you go to Morocco, says he, you will not have much work, if
you have any, and I am persuaded the emperor will not sell you to any other
master. Perhaps he will grant you your liberty at once. It is fortunate for you
that you have seen his son, who it is more than probable will intercede for
you; at all rates, endeavor to make yourselves happy, and whatever your
sentiments may be, let your looks be cheerful.

We parted with the interpreter, and some of our number could recollect the
circumstance of the Litchfield man of war being cast on that coast, in the year
1755, together with several transports, on an expedition to the island of
Goree. This corroborated the story we had heard, and convinced us, that the
fair sultana must have been one of the adventurers in that unfortunate
expedition. Before we went to sleep, (bed we had none since we left our own
vessel) the prince paid us another visit, in company with the bashaw, and
captain Rice Hammed, and giving them strict charges to be kind to us on our
journey, he bade us adieu. Next morning at seven o'clock, we began our march,
and passed through a country extremely fertile; we came to a valley, between
two hills, where we espied a great number of huts, inhabited by a very
savage-looking race of people. The day following we entered a very spacious
plain, named Zebra, about nine o'clock in the morning; and when we stopped in
the evening, we were seven miles on the other side of it. It is from cast to
west thirty miles long, and twenty-five broad from north to south. On the south
side of it runs the river of Lions, so called from the vast number of those
animals that resort to the banks of it. We durst not go nearer than within
seven miles of this river, to form an encampment, as they generally go abroad
in the night to hunt for their prey. We were informed, that near two years
before this period, about twelve families lived on the plain, at no great
distance from each other, and that one evening, an assemblage of wild beasts
came down, and destroyed upwards of sixty camels, a great number of sheep, and
two or three of the peasants. We had to cross part of the forest in the day
time, and even then were alarmed with the roaring of lions, the barking of
wolves, and the screaming of leopards and tigers. The soldiers however were all
on on their guard, and nothing appeared to molest us but one wild boar, which
was instantly shot. On the thirteenth, about ten o'clock, we reached the plain
of Morocco, and could discover the cloud-capt Atlas, at a very great distance,
terminating this immense plain on the south. From this much famed mountain, or
rather chain of mountains, the Atlantic ocean takes its name.

The vast plain upon which we now entered, is ninety miles long and forty
broad. On the north it is bounded by a chain of very high hills, called the
Valena mountains, and on the east by a part Egypt. In the middle, between the
mountains of Atlas and Valena, stands Morocco, the capital of this vast empire.
We encamped about five miles from the city, at four in the afternoon, when
dispatches were sent to the emperor, to inform him of our arrival. Next day
about ten o'clock we received orders to enter the gates of the city, and were
marched through the streets, in the midst of an innumerable crowd of
spectators, till we came to one of the emperor's gardens, where we were ordered
to pitch our tents till the emperor's further orders were received. We lodged
here for that night, anxious for the light of another day, on the event of
which every thing that was dear to us depended. The important day at length
arrived, and at eleven o'clock, a guard of soldiers came into the garden, and
gave orders for us to march. We passed through several divisions of the garden,
and came to the side of it next the palace, where was a square of about two
miles in circumference, in which were ranged some thousands of soldiers, all
under arms. Old captain Rice Hammed, with the other officers of his vessel,
marched in our front. Here we were detained for the space of an hour, without
exchanging a word with any one; till at last the old captain came and told us,
that the signal for the emperor's appearance would be a camel drove out before
him, that the army might be in readiness to receive him. In the middle of this
large area, was a summer shade, beautifully painted and adorned, to which the
emperor frequently resorts, to review his troops; and round this were planted
all the cavalry. The camel at last made its appearance, and was followed by the
monarch, riding in a two-wheeled chariot, drawn by four Arabian mules of a jet
black color. He was followed by a body guard, consisting of about one hundred
men, who besides their arms, were furnished each with a stick in his hand. He
moved slowly along, surveying every thing with a quick, penetrating eye; the
army at every little interval, calling out in their own language, "Long live
the emperor Mahomed." When he came to the distance of about twenty yards from
us, the chariot stopped, and about twenty of the footmen came running toward
us, and each of them taking one of us by the hand, led us forward, together
with the Turkish sailors; the cavalry at the same time contracting the circle,
and coming as near as they could: when we came to the distance of about seven
yards, all the foot guards and Moors of every denomination, who were in the
park, fell down upon their knees, and kissed the ground three times. We paid
our compliments in the manner of our country, by uncovering our heads, and
bowing very profoundly. The emperor, who seemed to have his eyes constantly
fixed on us, returned our compliment with a smile, which we (who watched his
looks with no small degree of anxiety) interpreted as a good omen. An
interpreter was called, who asked us, of what country we were, and and of what
religion? where we were bound to when we were taken? and what was our cargo?
Our captain who was chief speaker, told him, we were from America, that we had
landed a cargo in Spain, and were hound to Teneriffe, when we were taken. He
asked us, if we did not belong to the British government? We told him we
belonged to that part of America, which had become independent of Britain? How
happens it, says he, that your nation have not secured my friendship before you
attempted to come upon my coast? To this (as we knew not what to answer) we
were totally silent. The interpreter then, by his order, asked if we would
conform to the religion of the country? To which we answered, Our consciences
would not allow us. He did not seem to resent our answer, and the interpreter,
a Mr. Chapman, who was a native of Genoa, and agent to the emperor, afterward
told us, he would have despised us heartily if we had given him any other
answer. I do not mean, says the emperor, to treat you with severity; the power
I have over you shall not be abused: you shall not be sold to another, nor kept
in a state of slavery by myself; but I must detain you in my country till I see
whether your nation chooses to send an ambassador to enter into a treaty with
me: you may retire, and I shall give orders to the proper persons to dispose of
you. We left his presence, and retired to to our first station, where we stood
till we saw the emperor ride round the park, and return to the palace. No
sooner was he gone than Mr. Chapman, the interpreter, came to us, and
congratulated us upon our favorable reception, and the mildness of our
sentence. I have orders, says he, to prepare a house for you, to supply you
with food and other necessaries, and I shall endeavor to make your stay in
Morocco as pleasant as your situation will admit. We returned our warmest
acknowledgments to this gentleman for his proffered kindness, and bidding adieu
to old Rice Hammed, and the rest of the crew, we followed our leader with
exalting hearts. He led us out of the gardens, and brought us to a house,
which, he said, had formely been a mass house for the Spaniards, in which were
several apartments. He made an apology for leaving us for a little, telling us,
he would return immediately. And now, for the first time, we began to recollect
that none of us had eaten a mouthful that day, and to be anxious for Mr.
Chapman's entering upon the benevolent part of his office. He soon returned,
followed by a Jew, carrying a large basket full of bread, and a pot of butter,
making many excuses for having nothing better to offer us, and assuring us we
should have plenty of beef next day, with coals and utensils for cooking. After
this he sent for a pound tobacco, and distributed it among us, and then left us
to our own meditations.

We now gave way to the most abounded joy; we had anticipated our reception at
Morocco with horror, but how very different was our present situation from what
we expected. True, we still were deprived of liberty, but we had a house which
we could call our own. We had the assurance of the comforts of food and fire;
and the gentleman to whose charge we were committed, was a Christian, and had
promised to be a friend. We resolved therefore to enjoy the present with
cheerfulness, and leave the future to the disposal of that kind Providence who
had hitherto protected us. We had heretofore always a scanty allowance of
bread, but butter was a luxury we had seldom seen, and we did not long delay
our repast. The variety of dainties which load the luxurious table of the
epicure, are insipid to appetites palled with variety; but we had the sauce
which is ever sure to give a relish to the coarsest food -- we were almost
perishing with hunger.

CHAP. V.
The Author and his Companions are detained some Weeks in Morocco --
Description of that city -- Its ruinous state -- Account of the Royal Harem --
Remarkable Story of a young Jewess -- Several Incidents -- Journey to Mogodore
-- Sufferings on the way -- Arrival at that City -- Generous and humane
behavior of two English Gentlemen -- Capture of ten Frenchmen -- Dissentions
among the Prisoners -- Arrival of the Emperor at Mogodore -- Cruel punishment
of an old Bashaw -- Arrival of a British Ambassador -- Disappointment of the
Prisoners -- Plan of an Irishman to effect their escape; with a number of other
Incidents and Adventures.

IN every part of this empire there are vast numbers of Jews, who have a
quarter of every town set apart for their residence. In the city of Morocco,
they are very numerous, and are extremely useful to the Moors, especial in
money transactions, and accounts. A Moor is generally too indolent, or too
little informed to transact his own business. A Jew in this, as in all other
countries, is shrewd, cunning, and well versed in the management of business;
and renders himself necessary to a rich African, too fond of ease to mind his
own concerns. In general, however, they are despised, degraded, and insulted,
without daring to complain, or seek for redress.

The house allotted to us stood in the Jewish quarter of the city, or as it is
called, the Jews'-town, and we were allowed to associate with them at pleasure.
We found them extremely ready to cultivate our acquaintance, and oblige us in
small matters that cost them nothing. We had likewise permission to walk
through every part of the city, Mr. Chapman giving us the same caution the
Sardinian consul had formerly done, respecting the Moorish women. The ninth
night of our residence in our new habitation, we eat our supper and went to
sleep; but we had not been long gone to rest, when we were roused by a very
loud rapping at the gate, which continued so long that we were forced to get up
and enquire what it meant. Instead of going to the gate, however, we went up to
the housetop, where we discovered not less than twenty Moors, standing and
calling out for admittance. We dreaded they had some evil design against us,
and returning to our apartment we found a large log of wood, which we laid at
the back of the door, to prevent their breaking it open. They continued
knocking for the space of an hour, but at last finding they could obtain no
answer, they retired. They had observed us on the top of the house, and two of
them had, by some means or other, got into the yard; for after we imagined they
were gone, one of our number opening the door, and offering to go up the stairs
which led to the top of the house, was suddenly seized by them. He called out
for assistance, and we all immediately went up to him, seized the Moors, and
taking them to our own apartment, detained them till daylight. Mr. Chapman,
who made his appearance at an early hour, was not a little surprised to find we
had made two prisoners; and enquiring into the business we gave him a brief
account of their behavior. He immediately ordered them to be carried to the
presence of the emperor, who made them give up the names of their accomplices,
and Mr. Chapman told us, they were all immediately bastinadoed with great
soverity, as a warning to others, not to disturb us for the future. This
however, was an unlucky accident for us; it created us many secret enemies; we
could scarcely walk through any street in the city without being insulted, and
even the Jews, from a desire of pleasing the Moors, did us every injury in
their power. We suffered, without complaining, as long as we could, but were at
last forced to make our case known to Mr. Chapman, who immediately reported the
matter to the emperor. The emperor told him he would order us to be sent to
Mogodore in a few days, where we could live unmolested, and enjoy the society
of Europeans and Christians, of whom a great number are settled there.

Previous to our departure, Mr. Chapman obtained liberty for us to visit all
the curiosities of this large city, and appointed a guard of Moors to protect
us from insult. Our first excursion was to see the emperor's collection of wild
beasts, which is I suppose the largest in the world. The place in which they
were kept, is very spacious. On the right hand were lions, wolves, tigers,
cats, bears, etc. on the other side were a collection of tame beasts, with a
great variety of fowls of various kinds. I was much struck with the appearance
of the antelope, which I suppose, has been called the unicorn, for that animal
is not now at least to be found in the world, and this in some respects
resembles what it is said to be, particularly in its having a horn right in the
middle of its forehead. It is of a light brown color, somewhat resembling the
deer of this country. The antelope of Barbary is considerably smaller than that
of the south of Africa or Egypt. One of the latter country was likewise in this
collection, which was of a delicate gray color, dark on the back, but
gradually becoming lighter toward the belly. The horn is in general five or
six inches long. It would take a volume to describe the great variety of
animals contained in this collection. I shall not therefore attempt it, but
proceed to our next day's entertainment.

We arose in the morning, and directed our course toward the seraglio, but our
guards were particularly cautious of allowing us to approach it. This large
building or square, is surrounded by a wall of fourteen feet high, and is
inaccessible to all but the emperor and his emissaries. We were told it
contained near one thousand persons, but I do not suppose the man from whom we
received our information, could by any means ascertain the number. The place
where the emperor's women are kept is called the HAREM, and forms a part of the
palace, or seraglio. LEMPRIERE, in his tour to Morocco, lately published, has
given a particular account of this place. He was sent by the governor of
Gibraltar, in 1789, as physician, to attend Muley Absulem, a favorite son of
the late emperor, at the particular request of that prince, whose health was on
the decline. While at Morocco, waiting the emperor's dispatches to return home,
he was called to attend one of his principal sultanas, who was laboring under
the effects of a dose of poison, administered to her by some of her jealous
companions. The admission of an European, and one of the male sex, into the
Royal Harem, is a thing, we believe, unprecedented; but whatever induced the
emperor thus to violate Moorish decorum, it enabled the writer to furnish the
world with a particular account of this seat of eastern debauchery; of which we
shall present a brief abstract.

"The public and usual entrance to the Harem," says Lempriere, "is through a
very large arched door-way, guarded on the outside by ten body guards, which
leads to a lofty hall, where the captain or alciade, with a guard of seventeen
eunuchs, are posted. Upon entering the court into which the women's apartments
open, I discovered a motley group of concubines, domestics, and negro slaves,
who were variously employed. Those of the first description had formed
themselves into circles, seated on the ground in the open court, and were
apparently engaged in conversation. The domestics and slaves were chiefly
employed in preparing their cuscosoo. My appearance in the court soon attracted
their attention, and a considerable number of them, unacquainted with the means
by which I had been admitted into the Harem, retreated with the utmost
precipitancy; while others, more courageous, approached, and enquired of my
black attendant, who I was, and by whose orders he had brought me thither. The
moment it was known that I was of the medical profession, parties of them were
dispatched to inform those who had fled, that I was sent in by order of the
emperor, to attend Lalla Zara, [Lady or Mrs. Zara] my intended patient's name,
and requesting them to come back and look at the Christian. Seranio Tibib!
Christian Doctor! resounded from one end of the Harem to the other; and in the
course of a few minutes I was so completely surrounded by women and children,
that I was unable to move a single step. Every one of them appeared solicitous
to find out some complaint on which she might consult me, and those who had not
ingenuity enough to invent one, obliged me to feel their pulse; and were highly
displeased, if I did not discover some ailment or other. All of them seemed so
urgent to be attended at the same time, that while I was feeling the pulse of
one, others were behind pulling my coat, and entreating me to examine their
complaints, while a third party were upbraiding me for not paying them the same
attention. Their ideas of delicacy did not at all correspond with those of our
European ladies, for they exhibited the beauties of their limbs and form with a
degree of freedom that in any other country would have been thought indecent;
and their conversation was equally unrestrained." But in this "they were not
conscious of trespassing the limits of decency." This was evident on other
occasions, "wherein they manifested a singular attention to what they conceived
to be decorum;" for "when I requested to see the tongues of some patients who
complained of feverish symptoms, they refused to comply, considering it as
inconsistent with their modesty and virtue.

"From the first court into which I had been introduced, I passed through two
or three similar, till I arrived at the chamber of my intended patient. I found
the lady sitting cross-legged on a mattress placed upon the floor, and covered
with fine linen, with twelve white and negro attendants, seated on the floor
also, in different parts of the chamber. A round cushion was placed for me next
to the lady, on which I was desired to be seated." He then proceeds to give
some account of his patient, who a few years previous to this, had been
remarkable for her beauty and accomplishments; on which account she was then in
every respect the favorite wife of the emperor. This exciting the jealousy of
those whose charms were less conspicuous, they had effected her ruin by mixing
poison in her food, which, though not sufficiently strong to take away her
life, had completely destroyed that beauty, which had been the fatal cause of
her misfortune. After which, being strongly solicited, he visited several other
ladies, in their own apartments, though at a considerable risk, and without the
knowledge of the emperor. Most of these were exceedingly corpulent, which they
consider as a mark of beauty, and use various means to attain. Some of them
possessed considerable accomplishments, and were polite and attentive in their
behavior. One of them, from her being able to read and write well the Arabic
language, was considered by the other females as a superior being.

"The apartments," continues he, "which are all on the ground floor, are
square, very lofty, and four of them enclose a square court, into which they
open by means of large folding doors. In the center of these courts, which are
floored with blue and white tiling, is a fountain, supplied by pipes from a
large reservoir on the outside of the palace, which serve for the frequent
ablutions recommended by the Mohammedan religion, as well as for other purposes.
The whole of the Harem, consists of about twelve of these square courts,
communicating with each other by narrow passages, (...) access from one part of
it to another, and of which all the women are allowed to avail themselves. The
apartments are ornamented with beautiful carved work, much superior to any I
have ever seen in Europe. Most of the rooms are hung with rich damask of
various colors; the floors are covered with beautiful carpets, and there are
mattresses disposed at proper distances, for the purposes of sitting and
sleeping. The apartments are also furnished at each extremity with an elegant
European mahogany bedstead, hung with damask, having on it several mattresses,
placed one over the other, which are covered with various colored silks; but
these are merely to ornament the room. Some of the rooms were garnished with
large and valuable looking-glasses, hung on different parts of the walls. In
others, clocks and watches of different sizes, in glass cases, were disposed in
the same manner;" with a variety of other ornaments. "The whole Harem was under
the management of the principal sultana, without any particular control over
the other woman.

"Each female had a separate daily allowance from the emperor, proportioned to
the estimation in which they were held by him." This allowance was exceeding
small; therefore their chief dependence was "on the presents they received from
those Europeans and Moors who visited the court, and who employed their
influence in obtaining some particular favor from the emperor.

"The ladies separately furnish their own rooms, hire their own domestics, and,
in fact, do what they please in the Harem, but are not permitted to go out
without an express order from the emperor, who very seldom grants them that
favor, except when they are to be removed from one palace to another. In that
case a party of soldiers is dispatched a little distance before them, to
disperse the male passengers in particular, and to prevent the possibility of
their being seen. This previous step being taken, a piece of linen cloth is
tied round the lower part of the face, and afterward these miserable females
cover themselves entirely with their Haicks, and either mount mules, which they
ride like men, or, what is more usual, are put into a square carriage, or
litter, constructed for this purpose, which by its lattice work allows them to
see with^^^ being seen. In this manner they set off under the charge of a guard
of black eunuchs. This journey, and sometimes a walk round the bounds of the
palace, is the only exercise they are permitted to take.

"The emperor's Harem consisted of between sixty and a hundred female, besides
their domestics and slaves, which were very numerous." However it must be
observed here, that the number of females frequently change, some dying, and
others being repudiated. The emperor only visited the Harem occasionally: It
was "usual for him to give notice to those ladies whose company he wished, to
attend in his apartment; when they made a point of setting off their charms to
the best advantage. In his presence they showed him every attention which a
common slave would do to his master, and never attempted to offer their
opinion, except by his approbation.

"The dress of the ladies consists of a shirt, with remarkably full and loose
sleeves, hanging almost to the ground, the neck and breast of which are left
open, and their edges are neatly embroidered with gold. They wear linen
drawers, and over the shirt a-Caftan, which is a dress something similar in
form to a loose great coat without sleeves. A sash of fine linen or cotton is
tied gracefully round the waist, and its extremities fall below the knees. To
this (...) two broad straps are annexed, and passing over each shoulder, form a
cross on the breast, and to that part of it which passes between the breast and
shoulder of each arm is fixed a gold tortoise, carelessly suspending in front a
gold chain. Over the whole is extended a broad silk band of the Fez
manufacture, which surrounds the waist and completes the dress, except when
they go abroad, and then they invest themselves in a careless manner with the
Ha^ck. The hair is plaited from the front of the head backwards in different
folds, which hang loose behind, and at the bottom are all fixed together with
twisted silk." -- LEMPRIERE's TOUR, page 218 -- 279, Philadelphia edition.


The building is overlooked by a spire, about 100 feet high, with a large
globe, said to be of gold, on the top of it. We passed the backside of the
palace, which has but a very indifferent appearance, and in some parts of
England would not be thought good enough for the residence of a country farmer.
Our guard afterward carried us to see a wall, which they told us was built by
the English, after the year 1755, when the unfortunate sufferers belonging to
the Litchfield, etc. were made prisoners. This incloses a delightful garden of
a square form, containing ^^out eight acres of ground, and produces all kinds
of adoriserous plants, fruits and flowers; dates, almonds, peaches, palms, etc.
on every side surrounded us. Through the mid^^ of the garden runs a rivulet,
branched out into small streamlets, through different parts of the garden to
water it. Our unhappy countrymen must have had many wretched days enclosing
this large piece of ground, for the wall is of a great height and thickness*
(...) our way home we passed through the Jews' burying groun^ where we saw
great numbers of women, leaning over the graves, on which a stone is laid,
which they can remo^^ (...) pleasure: to this they apply their mouths, ^^d
(...) their complaints into the cold and silent ^rave, and talk to their
lifeless relatives, as if they could hear or answer them. Many of them showed
symptoms of the most unaffected sorrow. I felt myself (...) to be infected with
the contagion and retur^^^g to our lodging, I tried in vain to dissipate the
gloomy thoughts which this scene had created, during the rest of the day.

Next morning we took a view of the south side of the city, which overlooks a
rich extensive plain, that appears a dead level, till Atlas rises and
terminates the prospect. This plain, which extends, as I already observed, from
Morocco to the Atlas mountains, twenty miles, is but thinly inhabited, and the
reason of this is, a numerous banditti of Arabs, outlawed, and disaffected
persons, have, time immemorial, inhabitated the mountainous part of the country
These were, sometime before this, headed by one of the emperor's sons, who
wanted to dethrone his father, and assume the government. His plot had been
conducted with some degree of art. He had rendered himself extremely popular
with the soldiers, and getting himself appointed (...) of (...) caravan, that
was to convey a large quantity of military stores, ammunition, etc. to a town
on the south coast; he got them conveyed to some convenient (...), and sending
back a message for his friends to join (...) they all took to the mountains,
a^^ were joined by vast numbers of the wild Arabs, and mountaineers. They
instantly made a descent into the plain, where they put to death all who
refused to join them, and burnt and destroyed every thing that came in their
way. They we^^ ^^^^osed, and met with a partial defeat by the emperor's forces,
but the ringleader escaped, to keep his father in perpetual disquiet; for he
was soon joined by many more of the banditti; who are perpetually making
inroads through the country, plundering and destroying whatever they could lay
hands on; and at this time they were still unsubdued, and in a state of actual
rebellion. It is therefore dangerous for any family to think of living in the
country, and this is one reason why so much of this beautiful empire is totally
deserted. We had taken some refreshment in our pockets this day, and wandering
into the country a considerable way, we did not think of returning home till
the evening. It was almost dark when we entered our habitation, when we were
alarmed by the violent screams of a woman. We instantly made toward her,
asking what was the matter? She begged us, in Spanish, to give her a knife; we
did so, and she no sooner received it, than she cut the back of her hand,
across, till it bled violently. We attempted to hold her, and to stop the
blooding, but she begged us to let her alone, telling us, she had been bit by a
scorpion, and there was no other way of easing the pain. T^^ woman proved to be
a young Jewess, who some^^^^^ lighted our fires. She told us, she was groping
in a dark corner for the lamp, which she was going to light, when this vicious
animal had seized her finger, and if we were not cautious, we might sometime or
other share the same fate, as there were thousands in the house. As we never
had seen any, we were astonished at her information, and could scarcely give
(...) ^^^dit. She told us, they never ventured out of their lurking places till
it was dark, but that she could easily convince us she had told us the truth,
if one of us would get the lamp lighted. We did so, and she pointed out several
holes, into which we pushed our sticks, when several issued forth, which we
took care to kill as soon as they made their appearance. We killed ten
scorpions, and two snakes, the latter from two to three feet long. The
knowledge we had gained of our fellow-lodgers, made us afraid of sleeping in
the house, though we had done it often before with no bad effects: We therefore
went upon the housetop, and slept in the open air, and this we continued to do
every night, during our residence at Morocco.

Though the bite of the scorpion is often almost instant death, yet the
precaution of this young Jewess, who was as sensible as she was beautiful,
prevented the poison from taking effect. After having scarified her hand, she
bound up her arm very tight, which prevented the poison from circulating
upwards, and in about seven days she was entirely freed from its effects, and
the wound healed.

It is indeed shocking to see this great city, the capital of a vast empire, so
dreadfully overrun by all sorts of venomous animals. It presents to an
European eye, a painful prospect, to look at a great metropolis, nearly two
(...) of which is in ruins; the ruins not cleared away, but lying as a
receptacle for all sorts of poisonous reptiles, which infest every part of the
city. From the materials of which their houses are built, one cannot not expect
to see them kept very clean. They have stones in abundance, but do not use them
in the way of building; preferring a mixture of clay, mud, sand, and lime. The
lower orders commonly build their houses of sods and clay, which moulder down
into heaps of the vilest rubbish, and the inhabitants are too indolent to have
it cleared away. This city, upon the whole, presents a very gloomy appearance,
nor is it possible for a humane traveller, to view the wretched condition of
the inhabitants, without a commiserating eye. But in a country where liberty,
arts, and industry, are so imperfectly known, what can be expected. The will of
the monarch, is the only law known in the country; and whilst he is gratified
with the enjoyment of every luxury his heart can desire, no matter what becomes
of his wretched subjects; who, to use again the words of Mr. Addison, Are in
the midst of nature's bounty cursed,
And in the loaded vineyard die for thirst.


The city of Morocco is built nearly square, enclosed by a wall, which, if
possible, adds horror to its inside appearance. It is twenty feet high, and
twelve thick, built of the same materials as the houses; having three gates in
each quarter, making twelve in all. Round the wall are three different ditches
or entrenchment about twenty feet deep, and sixteen wide, which were made, like
most of their public works, by Christian slaves. The streets intersect each
other at right angles, and on the outside of each gate are drawbridges over the
entreachments. It is indeed impossible, at the present day, to say what the
appearance of this place has been, as whole streets are lying in ruins,
swarming with poisonous reptiles. The wall however, is nine miles in
circumference, and my reader may form some idea of the present state of the
city, when he is informed, that from upwards of 400,000 inhabitants, which it
is said once to have contained, they are now reduced to twenty, or at most to
twenty-five thousand. The principal street consists almost entirely of shops;
many of them belong to the emperor, who is the chief trafficker in the country,
as he receives one tenth of all the goods of his Mohammedan subjects, and seizes
as much from the others as he pleases. But as I shall have occasion to speak of
the government of the country, and the manners of the inhabitants, afterward,
I shall at present go on with my narrative.

On the second of February, we were told by Mr. Chapman to hold ourselves in
readiness in the morning, to march to Mogodore, where he told us we would be
much happier, as the situation was healthier, and the society we would have,
would be mostly Christians. He begged us to live peaceably one with another,
and to be obliging (...) the inhabitants of the country. He entreated us not to
think of making our escape, lest we should fail in the attempt, in which case
he gave us to understand, that we should suffer the most cruel death that could
be devised. He assured us, that whilst we observed his injunctions, we might
always look upon him as a friend, and he would take care that we should not be
put to any kind of slavery. After this he gave us a letter, addressed to the
Venetian consul at Mogodore, who, he told us, was his own brother, and would
befriend us as much as lay in his power. We returned our warmest
acknowledgments to this worthy gentleman for his kindness, when he wished us a
good journey, and left us.

About sunrising next morning, we were ready to proceed on our journey,
accompanied by an alcaide, fifty horsemen, and twenty camels, loaded with corn,
bread, water, tents, and every other necessary for our journey. We soon set
out, and having traveled for four hours, the alcaide, whose name was Saliber,
gave orders to stop, and refresh the men and horses. We were served each, with
a small cake, about the same size of that we used to receive in the prison of
Larache. We consoled ourselves with the hopes of its being repeated in the
course of the day, but night came on without bringing us any more food. We were
again called to stop, in the middle of the day, when the meridian sun was
scorching beyond measure. We unloaded all our camels, and let them loose to
feed; and a grove of figs being in the neighborhood, we took shelter under the
branches for ourselves. Here we found some oranges growing, with which we
refreshed ourselves, taking as many along with us, as we conveniently could.
After we had rested about two hours, we were summoned to proceed on our march,
which we continued till, ten o'clock, when we halted by the side of a small
river, called Niffis, which has its source in mount Atlas, and runs westward
from this place, nine leagues, when it joins another river; and after many
windings, it falls into the Atlantic ocean, thirty leagues north of Mogodore.
One would expect to find plenty of fish in such a river, but the Moors informed
us, there was nothing but eels and water-snakes to be found in any river in the
country. Whether some of the great variety of metallic substances, with which
this country abounds, may not prove fatal to the finny tribe, I take not upon
me to determine. Certain it is, the rivers in this empire are different from
all other running water I ever saw. After rain, they are of a high red color,
and in dry weather thick and muddy.

Next morning, about seven o'clock we set forward on our journey, and traveled
about three miles on the banks of the river, through a beautiful country which
the spring had begun to decorate with all the sweets of nature. Before we
parted from the river, we stopped to refresh ourselves, and wandering about the
banks of it, we picked up several ostrich feathers, and collected from the
(...) large quantities of silk. One of our men laid hold of a camelion, the
first I had ever seen. This little animal is about seven inches long from the
top of the nose to the end of the tail. Its head resembles that of a frog, and
it has four legs, very short, with feet which likewise resemble a frog's. One
remarkable property of this animal, is its changing its color. It is generally
found in a woody country, most commonly on a bush or tree, and its color is
sure to resemble the fruit produced by the tree where you take it. It is said
to live upon air. Certain it is, it is never seen to eat any thing, and it is
probable the flies and other insects that inhabit the air, answer all its
purposes; in the course of this journey, we should have been happy in
discovering the art of making them answer ours; for our stated allowance was
very inadequate to our wants. About six o'clock this evening we came to a
village of about twenty houses, where we were ordered to pitch our tents. The
inhabitants came flocking around us, every one showing a degree of curiosity to
see the Christians; some of them gave us small pieces of bread, and others of
tobacco, which by this time were very acceptable presents. Next night we
encamped at the foot of a little hill, the most beautiful eminence I ever
beheld; it is half a mile in circumference, and by an easy ascent of about
fifty paces, we got to the top of it. Here we found a beautiful plain,
surrounded by a grove of vines, and in the middle of it a well, which we were
glad to see, and made toward it to drink. But just as we were about to quench
our thirst, the Moors called us back, telling us, that this was the burial
place of several saints, who had blessed the water, and none but Musselmen were
allowed to taste it, and that if either Jew, or Christian, presumed to drink of
it, the saints would be enraged, and must put the transgressor to death. We
would very gladly have risked the anger of the saints, but the vengeance of the
Moors, was a more serious business, and though our thirst was extreme, we were
obliged to suffer, with the temptation of excellent water before us. We pulled
a few bunches of grapes, and returned to the encampment.

Next day at noon we rested by the side of a rivulet, which no saint had
meddled with. We took with us a large supply of that necessary article, as our
guides told us, we would not meet with any again for some time. In the evening
we encamped on a very barren plain, where neither water, nor fruits of any kind
were to be found. Here, however, were great numbers of antelopes, one of which
a soldier shot and brought to the camp; but in all this plain we could not find
as much wood as would make a fire to roast it. The soldier therefore cut it up,
and putting it in his sack, reserved it for the next night, when we were
invited to partake of it, and in all my life, I think, I never eat a better
supper. The flesh of this animal is delicate beyond any thing I ever tasted,
and as it was the only animal food, we received during our journey, it was a
welcome morsel. Next day we had to travel over a long and dreary desert; we
therefore, started betimes in the morning, that we might accomplish our journey
before night. This desert extends about thirty miles on the road we had to go,
and about fifty miles along the coast, from north to south. It is impossible
for the imagination to conceive a more dreary waste, than that which this day
presented itself. We had to travel over mountains of sand, on this extensive
desert, where the rapid whirlwind sweeps every thing before it, and where the
helpless traveller is frequently buried, never more to rise. Here the wind
often raises vast quantities of sand, and carries it about, till exhausting
itself, the sand falls down; and not unfrequently, a whole caravan disappears.
As the sand is perpetually varying its situation, it is no easy matter to keep
in a direct road, so that one may travel thirty miles without advancing ten,
toward the place of their destination. Our guides, who had often traveled
through this desert before, were frequently at a loss which way to turn, after
holding consultations among themselves, and often very irresolute and
undetermined; whilst we, with a burning sun over our heads, and almost fainting
with thirst and hunger, became totally indifferent about the preservation of
lives, which yielded us so little comfort. Frequently we could not for some
minutes open our eyes, and when we did, could not see six yards before us. At
last, about four o'clock, one of our guides discovered the island of Mogodore,
which is high land, and discoverable at some distance. This gave hopes that we
should reach the end of our journey before dark. This hope was our only stay;
for we had tasted nothing to support nature, during that whole day, except an
orange or two each, which we had luckily preserved.

About six o'clock we reached the town, but were obliged to stop on the outside
of the walls, till the al^^ide went to the governor to acquaint him of our
arrival. He did not return for the space of an hour, by the end of which, the
little spark of life that remained to us, was almost extinguished. Whilst we
were ruminating on our wretched condition, we observed two gentlemen approach
us, in the habit of Christians, and on their coming nearer, could hear them
talk English. The sight of an European, of whatever country, was a joyful
discovery; but the most delicious music could not equal the sound of the
English language. The two gentlemen came up to us, and asked what bad fortune
had reduced us to our present condition. We gave them a brief detail of our
situation and sufferings. One of them, Mr. Bain, a native of Ireland, heard us
with an emotion, which he could not conceal. "Alas!" says he, "I have been at
the school of adversity myself, and most sincerely do I sympathize with you in
your misfortunes. At present my circumstances are easy, and happy shall I
esteem myself, if I can by any means lighten the burden you are doomed to bear.
Follow me, my Christian friends, my house and heart shall be open to you; your
misfortunes are the best letter of recommendation you can bring, and if I
cannot procure your liberty, I will at least endeavor to make your bondage
less irksome." We were endeavoring to find words to express our gratitude,
when the other gentleman, whose name was Hutchison, prevented us. "Mr. Bain,"
says he, "the goodness of your heart, hurries you in this instance beyond the
bounds of prudence. These unfortunate men, must not upon any account, leave
this place, till the alcaide returns, otherwise he will be enraged, and perhaps
cause the governor to punish them severely. Let them remain where they are at
all events; only take one of the soldiers with you, and send some relief to
their present necessities, which I plainly perceive are very pressing; and when
the governor has assigned them their residence, we shall soon know where it is,
and be able to give them what support they stand in need of." Mr. Bain thanked
him for his caution, and assenting to his proposal, immediately went to send us
the relief we stood so much in need of; and happy it was for us that he went;
for I believe there was not one among us had as much remaining strength, as
w^^^d have carried him a mile from the spot. A Jew, who was the messenger, soon
returned, bringing a large piece of beef, with bread sufficient for a whole
day, and a bottle of excellent brandy. I am certain I owe it to this worthy
person that I am at this moment alive, and able to write his name; and never
shall I write or mention it without the tear of gratitude, while memory holds
her seat. The alcaide gave himself no trouble about us, as a man possessed of
the least spark of humanity, would have done, after the dreadful day we had
passed; he went away, and returned without offering us a morsel of food, and
stood very deliberately with the governor surveying us, and telling him our
history, for at least, another hour after he returned, before we were ordered
to march to the place assigned us. After we had staid long enough to gratify
public curiosity, we were at last taken to a house, which the governor informed
us was to be our residence, where they left us, and in a short time we were
again visited by our two benevolent friends. Mr. Hutchison informed us, he had
been with the governor, and made enquiry what was to be done with us; and that
he had informed him, he had no particular orders concerning us, further, than
that we were to remain under his care, till the emperor should further signify
his pleasure. "And now," says he, "my dear fellows, consider you are in the
midst of enemies, who will take every opportunity of working your ruin. On your
behavior much depends. There are many Christians in this town, but the most
independent among us, are obliged to walk with the utmost circumspection. The
very name Christian, sounds odious in the ears of a Moor. Be strict observers
of the laws of morality, preserve unanimity among yourselves, and trust to that
good Being, who will sooner or later reward the virtuous, for a happy issue to
yourselves." He then desired to know, if any of us belonged to Britain: I told
him, I did, and pointed out another young man, a native of England, and a third
who came from Ireland. He then pulled out of his pocket, three dollars and gave
it to us to purchase, as he said, pipes and tobacco. You will have many dull
hours, said he, to pass by yourselves, but all of you I hope can read, and some
of you no doubt can write. I have a large collection of books of all kinds, and
shall be happy in seeing you pass your time in reading, rather than enter into
the company of your enemies, who, from your ignorance of the language, and
customs of the country, will have many advantages over you, of which they will
avail themselves. Employ your leisure hours in books, you will find them
innocent companions; such of you as can write, shall be furnished with
necessaries for, that purpose. These amusements will both help to make your
time pass agreeably, and be a source of improvement for your understandings, a
treasure no accident can deprive you of in all time coming. If any of you wants
any thing else, be not backward in letting your wishes be known. Mr. Bain and I
have it in our power, to add considerably to your happiness, without injury to
ourselves; and while you continue to befriend yourselves, you shall never want
our best offices.

We attempted to thank these worthy gentlemen, but for my own part language was
too imperfect to express my feelings. I had, all my life, accustomed myself to
reading, when my time would permit, but this was a pleasure I had been totally
deprived of since I came into this country. I therefore told Mr. Hutchison, I
would accept his kind offer with the greatest pleasure. He went away, promising
to send us a little library next day, with writing utensils. He punctually
observed his promise, and now I thought my situation more comfortable than it
ever had been since I set my foot on this inhospitable shore. I had from my
first going to sea, kept a journal of the little transactions I had witnessed,
and gone through; and as I was now considerably behind, I thought this was the
most proper time to make up my leeway, as our sea phrase is. I continued my
journal, therefore, from the day we were taken by the corsair; which, without
any material alterations, is the same I now offer to the public. Next morning
Mr. Hutchison called to see how we were employed, and taking a look at my work,
he encouraged me to go on with it, promising me any information I should wish
for, as my present circumstances put it out of my power, to go abroad into the
country for that purpose; and to him I am indebted for several circumstances I
could not otherwise have known. In this manner I continued to amuse myself for
about the space of a month, at the end of which, we were joined by ten French
sailors, who were in as bad a plight as ourselves, and had met with a still
harder fate.

In the year 1783, they had sailed from Bordeaux for the coast of Guinea, but
as they drew near it, there arose a heavy gale of wind from the westward, which
forced them upon this dreadful shore. The captain no sooner found his ship
aground, and like to be lost, than he flew to his cabin, grasped a pistol, and
lodged the fatal contents in his own brain. This rash act, which no distress
could justify, totally robbed the crew of their remaining spirits, and reduced
them to a state of stupefaction. But the ship was going to pieces, and time was
precious. They hoisted out the long boat, and made toward the shore, which by
that time was crowded with the inhabitants of the country, and though they
expected little mercy, they were willing to protract the span of existence to
as great length as possible. In the most beseeching posture, therefore, they
made their approaches to them; but they had not long reached the shore, when a
quarrel arose among them, the cause of which they could not discover: after a
bloody battle, the victorious party seized and bound them, and in that
situation left them, and went down to the beach.

By this time the ship was gone to pieces, and the wreck coming ashore. Among
other things a puncheon of rum was cast out, which they seized upon, and began
to drink, till they were all in a state of complete intoxication: they then
continued to rage about for some time, after which they all fell fast asleep.
The unfortunate Frenchmen, who had anxiously watched their motions, no sooner
observed this, than they disengaged themselves from their shackles, and fled to
the mountains. By day they hid themselves, and by night they journeyed through
the most desolate uninhabited parts of the country, depending upon nature's
spontaneous produce, for the scanty nourishment they received. Thus they
existed for three weeks, when one day as they were seeking for food, they were
surprised by a party of the mountaineers, who, as I already observed, are
headed by the emperor's son. They kept them in their possession for some days,
and then carried them to the prince, who was glad of such a prize, knowing that
his father would purchase them at almost any price: accordingly he sent to
inform the emperor, and to offer to sell them to him at the rate of two hundred
dollars per man. The bargain was struck, and the men sent down, by the
emperor's orders, to Mogodore. Neither their situation nor ours was enviable at
the time when we met, and yet. I suppose, it gave each party pleasure to meet
with the other. There is a pleasure in society, even in the most wretch^d
condition. Neither party were acquainted with the language of the other, but to
make up for this, the greater part of us understood Spanish, and in this
language we recapitulated our misfortunes, and felt a mutual pleasure in the
sympathy they excited. It unfortunately happened, however, that they had
neither so much liberty, nor so many friends as we had; and as the emperor had
purchased them at so high a rate, they despaired of ever obtaining their
liberty, and expected nothing else but to end their days in a state of
wretchedness.

Six weeks after their arrival, we had an addition to our society of ten men
more. These were the crew of a vessel, which had been out fishing; they
belonged to the western isles, and had been put on shore by the heavy gales,
upon this coast; and being taken up by the inhabitants, were likewise made
prisoners by the imperial order. The Spanish language was now become pretty
familiar to us, and these last perfected us so much, that in a short time we
could converse with fluency and case: and though we were of different countries
and religions, both national and religious differences were lost, in the
consideration that we were all Europeans and Christians.

For several weeks we spent our time in the utmost harmony, till one day our
captain was invited to dine with Mr. Hutchison, and returning home in the
evening, heated perhaps with liquor, he began to abuse a young man, who was a
great favorite with us all, to a degree that was insufferable. He had
conceived a dislike to this young man, which had manifested itself in many
instances during our voyage; and now, though they were on a footing, he began
to speak to him in a manner, which the high mettled youth could not bear. He
told him he was not now subject to his authority, that he was as much a slave
as any of his men, and he should certainly cure him of his impertinence if he
heard any more of it. The rest of the hands all espoused the young man's cause,
which the captain perceiving swore he would revenge himself on us all, by
having us put in chains next day; which, he said, he could easily get done by
speaking to Mr. Hutchison. He did not forget his threat in the morning, but
went to Mr. Hutchison to complain. This worthy gentleman was much hurt at
hearing there was any dissension among us and dismissed the captain with a
sharp reprimand; desiring him, in his present state, to consider himself on a
footing of equality with his men, and not assume a power over them, till he got
them again on his own element. He was ashamed, he said, to hear of Christians
in our situation quarrelling among themselves, and if the governor heard of it,
we should all be put under the yoke immediately. The captain returned very much
dissatisfied and out of humor; which the hands perceiving, and partly guessing
the cause, gave him a very hearty drubbing. The French and Spanish sailors, who
were present, gave an unanimous decision against him, and the captain led but a
very uneasy life ever after, as the Christian merchants, who had paid him some
attention before, totally deserted him, and of all that were in the prison,
scarce one would speak to him. One very bad consequence of this dispute,
however, was a suspension of Mr. Hutchison's friendship, who, together with the
worthy Hibernian already mentioned, had supplied us liberally with food, and
many other necessaries. They did not for many days come near us, and we were
obliged to fall upon many schemes to get ourselves supported. I lost my supply
of paper, and was obliged to give up the business of writing.

Necessity is the mother or intention -- I went to a cooper, and getting small
pieces of wood fit for my purpose, set about making little ships, and got them
rigged with some old rags of linen. I soon became a proficient at the business,
insomuch, that I got a decent subsistence by selling them. I have sold my
vessels, sometimes, at six and seven dollars each, and even a very indifferent
one brought me four or five. Thus I got myself plentifully supplied with paper
and many other things I stood need of, and was sometimes enabled to assist a
neighbor. This too afforded me a little variety, for when I was tired of the
carpenter business; I took to writing, and when I grew weary of study I again
became a mechanic.

For several weeks I carried on this traffic, during which time, neither of our
good friends had ever called to see us; at last Mr. Hutchison surprised us with
a visit. He found me writing, and began to enquire how I had found materials. I
told him of my carpenter scheme with which he was highly pleased. He promised,
that for the future, I should be under no necessity to rack my invention, for a
small supply of money. He then gave me three dollars as an earnest of future
favors, and giving us many good advices, and putting a dollar into the hand of
each of the rest, he bade us adieu.

We were one day availing ourselves of the liberty granted us of walking in the
Jew's-town when we discovered a large vessel, making toward the harbor. The
hopes of her being an American, for a few minutes raised our spirits; but we
soon came to learn, that she brought the Dutch ambassador and his suit. Upon
his landing, he went to a house prepared for his reception, and as this was the
first European vessel which had arrived during our stay in the place, we cast
many a wishful look toward the harbor, and sighed bitterly for that liberty,
which we began to fear we should never regain. One of our number suggested that
the Dutch ambassador might easily obtain our liberty, if he could be prevailed
with to ask it. It was agreed, at all hands, that an application to the
ambassador could do no harm; and as he was to set out next morning for Morocco,
we thought no time was to be lost. We went to his lodgings, and were readily
admitted to his presence; he heard our story with a Dutch indifference, and
when we had told it, he promised, courtier-like, to do every thing in his power
for us: and courtier-like, I suppose, thought no more about us, for we never
heard another word of the business. Soon after this, the Portuguese ambassador
arrived, and to him, we made a similar application, with the like success.
Still, however, we were in expectation of the arrival of ambassadors from
Britain and America; from either of which we made ourselves certain of
obtaining every thing we wished.

About this time orders were sent to Mogodore, to prepare for the reception of
the emperor, who meant to pay a visit to this part of his dominions, which he
had never seen before. The town for several days, was all bustle and uproar,
preparing for his reception. At last the important day arrived that was to give
the inhabitants a sight of their sovereign. The road for many miles was lined
with spectators. Among others, a large body of Jews went out to meet him, but
to their great mortification, he sent orders for them to disperse immediately,
before they approached him. The hills on every side were covered with the
impatient multitude, who, with loud and repeated huzzas, hailed his approach.
About noon he made his appearance attended by an army of fifteen thousand men,
nine thousand of which were infantry, and the rest cavalry. This guard, great
as it may appear, was but a small part of his forces, for he generally keeps a
standing army of one hundred thousand men, the most of them blacks, or slaves.
The state kept up by an eastern monarch appears incredible to such as never
have seen it. It is customary for the emperor, when he visits any town in his
own dominions, to do some generous act or other, such as giving some
magnificent present, granting liberty to slaves, or advancing some of his
subjects to some dignity or preferment. The wretched lay hold of shadows -- for
several days we indulged a hope that we could be of the number of them who
would receive the royal clemency; but alas! no such good fortune awaited us.
The emperor entered the city in the middle of a long procession, riding in a
chariot, drawn by four beautiful Arabian horses. After him in other chariots
followed five of his wives. And when all his guards had entered the gates, the
nobility, who had assembled from many parts of the empire, with a long list of
bashaws, governors, etc. brought up the rear. About four hundred camels, loaded
with provisions, corn, tents, etc. were left on the outside of the gates. The
emperor went straight to a now fortification, where apartments were provided
for him.

After witnessing this grand display of imperial dignity, we retired to our
apartment. Scarcely could we close our eyes during the whole night for
alternate hopes and fears about our freedom, but in the morning, hope began to
preponderate, when a message was received for all the Christian slaves in
Mogodore to hold themselves in readiness to appear in the royal presence. Then
we almost made ourselves certain that the happy hour was come. He received us
in a garden sitting cross-legged in the Mohammedan manner, on a rich carpet
spread upon the ground, with many of his nobles about him, and part of his
guard ranged behind him at some distance. We were marched, up within a few
yards of him, and stood in the form of a semicircle. He first addressed the
Spaniards -- "An ambassador from your country is soon expected here, when you
will be at liberty to go off with him. You, Frenchman, must remain till your
king thinks proper to send his usual tribute to me, which has been several
years neglected. As for you, Englishmen, (for so he always called us) I have
suffered you to live at your case, and you appear to be healthy and well fed. I
have already told you, and I again repeat my promise, that you shall not be put
to any kind of slavery; but I must, and will detain you, till that country of
yours shall send an ambassador to treat with me, and secure my friendship and
protection for your trade." He sat for sometime surveying us, and afterward
rising and walking toward his guard, we were remanded to the house of our
captivity, which we again entered with heavy hearts.

During the emperor's stay at Mogodore, he inflicted a most cruel punishment
upon one of his bashaws. He was commander of the bashaw's band, and perhaps one
of the best officers the emperor had. On their way from Morocco hither he had,
by some irregular step, incurred the emperor's displeasure; for which he was
resolved to punish him. Yet the emperor found it necessary to act with caution,
and did not attempt this till some time after his arrival here. Having ordered
him to be seized and brought before him, he sentenced him to have his beard
pulled out by the roots. He was accordingly taken from the royal presence into
a large square, which was lined with bashaws, and there openly exposed to the
cruel operation; after which he was for ever discharged from the presence of
his royal master.

Whilst the emperor remained at Mogodore, two large ships entered the harbor
with English colors flying. One of our men who had been out walking, observing
them, came running in with the news, when we all walked to the harbor, and
learnt, to our great satisfaction, that the English consul, or ambassador was
in one of them. This we looked upon as a joyful event, as we made ourselves
believe our liberty now was certain. The guards were drawn up in order to
receive this representative of his Britannic majesty, the ship saluted, and the
forts returned the compliment, and a great number of the nobility attended to
welcome him ashore, and conduct him to his lodgings. We did not for some days
think proper to trouble him, till he had time to get a first audience of the
emperor, and deliver his presents; which were twelve brass cannons, with a
large quantity of powder and shot, two eight inch mortars, an elegant time
piece, and a musical instrument. The emperor liked no music so well as the
sound of a cannon, consequently the musical instrument was given to his wives;
and the people observed that the English consul must be a man of consummate
address, who could find out the secret of pleasing, at once, both the emperor
and his wives. After the first audience was over, we made it our business to
pay our respects to this great man; and our two worthy friends Messrs. Bain and
Hutchison, did us the honor to accompany us. We gained admittance, after he
had kept us long enough at the door to convince us of his dignity; when in the
most moving terms our imagination could suggest, we preferred our petition.
With all the hems, and haws, which great men make use of on little occasions,
he heard our story. "You sailed in an American bottom, you say? Why do you not
apply to the great Mr. Washington? he is the most proper person to procure your
liberty." One of the Americans answered him, that Mr. Washington had already
convinced the world, that he had too great a regard for liberty to have any
human being in slavery, if he had the same opportunity that he now had of
setting him free. "Well," says he, "you had better apply to him. Had your
country remained under the British government, you might then have had some
claim upon my friendship, but as matters now stand, if one word from me would
procure you liberty, you should not have it." I then told him, that other two
young men and myself were natives of the British dominions, and were willing to
enter on board of a man of war, if he would procure liberty for us; but without
deigning to answer us, he turned round, and with a stately air-walked into
another apartment.

Half frantic with grief, rage, and disappointment, we returned to our own
house. Our high-built hopes were now levelled with the dust, and nothing but
perpetual bondage could we perceive between us and the grave. In a few days
afterward, the English consul left Mogodore, and sailed for Gibraltar; and on
the same day the emperor took his departure for Morocco. We had been confined
to our prison ever since the arrival of the emperor, but were now indulged with
the liberty of walking as usual; and going one day to the Quay, to see a boat
land, a man in a Christian habit came ashore, and surveying us with attention,
asked how we happened to come to this country. We were happy to hear him
address us in English, and told him our story. "I am heartily sorry," says he,
"to find you in a country, where, in all probability, you will be confined for
life. I think there is a possibility of your escaping, and if you do not get
off in that manner, you may lie here till you rot. I think it is in my power to
effect your escape, if you have spirit to follow my advice." We hesitated in
returning an answer, not being certain, on so short an acquaintance, whether or
not we might trust him. "Blood!" says he, "what are you afraid of? am not I
your friend and countryman, a native of Ireland? and before I Would betray you, I
would lose my heart's blood. I am pilot of a Portuguese schooner which lies off
this harbor, take a walk and show me where you live, and my life for it, I Will
do your business in the course of a few weeks." We showed him our house, when
he hastily took leave of us; telling us he would see us again. We knew not what
judgment to form of this man. His scheme he had not told us, consequently we
could be no judges of its practicability; we therefore determined, at all rates
to say but little about the matter, till time should enable us to judge of his
honesty, and the possibility of making good his promise.

Next morning he paid as a visit, and placing himself on a seat without
ceremony, he pulled a bottle of brandy out of his pocket. "Come my boys," says
he, "this will make us understand one another better than a whole days
conversation. Here is liberty to all who dare contend for it." And putting the
bottle to his mouth, took a hearty swigg; after which he handed it round, and
invited us all to follow his example. In the course of conversation, he told
us, his name was Griffiths, that he had been several years in Portugal, but was
heartily sick of the country, and would take an early opportunity of either
returning to his own country, or of going to America. In the mean time he was
sure he had hit upon a scheme for obtaining our liberty, which could not fail
of success; and if we had but spirit to undertake it, he would defy either the
emperor of Morocco, or the grand Turk himself to thwart it. He desired us,
however, to be cautious of saying a word about it, till we heard farther from
him. We told him there would be no danger of that, as he had not yet imparted
it to ourselves. He told us, he did not mean to impart it to us till nearer the
time of its execution, and pulling another bottle of brandy out of his pocket,
drank success to all good intentions. When he had finished this, he took his
leave of us, bidding us keep up our spirits and trust to an Irishman for once.
-- There was a (...) and honesty visible in the countenance and behavior of
this worthy Hibernian, which entirely banished all suspicion of his having any
designs to betray us, and made us resolve to trust ourselves entirely to his
management and directions.

Next day six of us agreed to take a walk into the country, we wished to have
some Moors of our acquaintance along with us, but not finding any willing to
go, we set out by ourselves. We extended our walk to the distance of four or
five miles from the town, on the road leading to Saffic, and going carelessly
on, were suddenly alarmed with the appearance of a caravan of mountaineers, to
the number of twelve, who had been at the town disposing of their oil and corn.
We immediately made off, to avoid them, and getting into a little plain between
two rising hills, resolved to wait till they should pass us: but all of a
sudden we were alarmed with a dismal scream, which was succeeded by a shower of
stones, and immediately perceived them all running in upon us. We were certain,
if they could lay hold of us, they would carry us into the country; and though
it was only exchanging one species of bondage for another, we were afraid that
their treatment of us might not be so mild as that we had hitherto experienced;
and what was worse, our chance of getting out of the country was lost for ever.
We resolved, therefore, to defend ourselves to the last, and taking up stones,
began a battle which lasted for an hour. On our part we maintained a kind of
running sight, till we had got between them and the town, and finding we had
gained the point, we attacked them vigourously, and, though they were twice our
number, they were obliged to make a precipitate retreat, and leaving their
camels behind them, which we immediately drove off, intending to take them
along with us to the town. We drove the camels on without interruption till we
were within a short distance of the town, when we espied at a distance, another
body of the same kind meeting us, and not caring to be attacked in both front
and rear at once, we quitted our booty, and made off the road till they passed
us, when we made the best of our way to the town. It was (as Mr. Hutchison
afterward informed us,) a fortunate circumstance that we came off so well, for
had we been taken, we would in all probability have been carried to Algiers,
and sold to hopeless and perpetual slavery.

A few days afterward, we took a walk on the other side of the town, toward
the burying ground. In this excursion we were met by crowds of women, who had
been visiting the silent habitations of their deceased relations. Five of them
coming up to us, made a stand right before us, and taking off their veils,
showed us much handsomer faces than we expected to find in that country. They
made signs for us to stop, and though they were unable to converse with us by
words, they made use of a language universally understood -- the language of
the eyes -- and most eloquent and persuasive their rhetoric was. We had
scarcely seen a Moorish woman's face, since we entered the country, and were
strongly tempted to take up the gauntlet. But we dreaded the consequences, and
fled from these bewitching Sirens with the utmost precepitation. We pursued our
rout till we came to the burying ground, where great numbers were scattered up
and down, bewailing and lamenting in the most pitiable manner over their
deceased friends. On our way home, we had several recounters similar to that
already mentioned, the women always beginning the attack by taking of their
veils and showing their faces; but as we suspected they only meant to lead us
into trouble, we withstood every temptation. -- The Moorish women, so far as we
could judge, would be beautiful, had they only the delicate complexions of our
fair country women, to set off the most regular features in the world. But, The
sun that rolls its chariot over their heads,
Brings too much fire and color to their cheeks.
They are generally tall, straight, and well formed, with a luxuriant crop of
black hair, hanging down, almost to their heels.

Returning to our habitation, we found our good friend Mr. Griffith's had got
possession of it before us. He had as usual, brought an antidote against care;
having lined his pockets with two bottles of brandy, which, he told us, he had
purchased of a Jew, who made it himself; for, though the laws of Mahomet
strictly prohibit the use of spirituous liquors and wines of all sorts, the
Jews in this country make large quantities of both, and sell them at a very
cheap rate. The brandy is commonly sold for two ounces, or one English shilling
the quart, and wine proportionably lower. Mr. Hutchison had enabled us to ask
our new friend to dine with us; and after we had finished our repast, we were
joined by two English, who, each of them brought a bottle in his pocket, by the
assistance of which, we were enabled to forget our cares, and to spend the
afternoon together with the greatest hilarity.

Next morning Mr. Hutchison paid us a visit, and informed us, that a consul or
ambassador from Sweden, was just come into the harbor, and would come ashore
immediately. We all repaired to the harbor to see his landing. In about an
hour's time he came ashore, attended by thirty other gentlemen, some of whom
meant to make a tour through Barbary; and others to return with the consul to
their own country. He was received with all the compliments usually paid upon
the like occasions, and conducted to his lodgings by a number of bashaws,
alcaides, etc. attended with a strong guard of cavalry. His coming was a joyful
sight to one of our mates, who being a native of Sweden, began to entertain the
most sanguine hopes of obtaining his liberty. Next morning he took the
opportunity of calling at his house, and telling him his story. The ambassador
told him to make himself easy, as he would certainly apply for his liberty, and
had little doubt of obtaining it. He set out the next morning for Morocco, and
in a short time a guard arrived, to conduct our companion thither, with
intelligence, that the ambassador had applied and been successful. We parted
from him with heavy hearts; but sorrow was unavailing, and we were obliged to
submit to our fate. We had no other hopes but from Mr. Griffith's scheme, and
what that scheme was, we were still ignorant, but we all determined to ask him
seriously the first time he came to visit us. He did not let us wait long for
an opportunity, as he visited us daily. We told him we were very impatient to
know by what means he intended to effect our escape. "Well," says he, "I mean
to gratify you, -- my scheme is this: The schooner to which I belong lies in
the bay. Some of you, I doubt not, are expert at swimming: I will give you
notice when we mean to sail, and the night before our departure you must all
come down to the shore about twelve o'clock. Let the best swimmer come and take
of the long boat, which shall be riding astern for that purpose, and go ashore
for the rest, and when you get to the schooner, confine us all below and run
off with the vessel. I shall take care to manage the captain, so that no bad
consequences shall ensue, and we can run the ship into Gibraltar or Cadiz, as
circumstances will permit." And now you have heard my scheme, how do you like
it? We told him it would do admirably, and agreed to walk by his directions in
every respect. The schooner, however, he told us was not to sail for a month;
and I resolved to fill up the interim with viewing every thing worthy of notice
about this town, and collect what information I could respecting the customs
and manners of the country. In one of my rambles I happened to pass one of the
churches or mosques, and as I had never seen the form of worship, I felt myself
strongly impelled to enter, and going up to the door, I learned myself against
it, to deliberate whether or not I should go in, immediately the door opened,
and exposed me to the view of a congregation, many of whom began to make
signals for me to enter. Whilst I was hesitating what to do, a Jew with whom I
had some previous acquaintance, came suddenly behind me, and pulling me back
with all his might, laid me sprawling on the ground. His mode of attack enraged
me to that degree, that I got up with a full intention to chastise him, but he
soon pacified me, by letting me know, that if I had entered the mosque, I must
either have turned Mussulman, or I would in all probability, never have got out
alive. Instead of the chastisement I intended him, I took him by the hand,
thanked him kindly for his interference, and inviting him home with me, I
repaid his civility with a bumper or two of brandy. Two English coopers, who
were with my companions, hearing the story, were surprised they had not
followed us, and for some hours I could scarcely persuade myself that I was
safe in our own house.

About this time a circumstance took place similiar to that of the young Jewess
before related, but of a more fatal nature. The Moors from their ignorance and
inattention to all kinds of business, pass away their time in sloth and
indolence, indulging themselves in almost every gratification. They are
particularly fond of sleeping in the open fields, or among the rocks on the
seashore. One day a number of them were enjoying themselves in this manner,
about a quarter of a mile from the town. Now it is usual for them on almost all
occasions, to throw off their slippers, or pampooses; and one of them awaking,
hastily thrust his feet into his slippers* unsuspicious of danger; when he
received the fatal sting of a scorpion between two of his toes. Whether the
sting of this had been more venomous than that of the young Jewess, or whether
the Moor was ignorant of the mode of preventing the poison from operating, I
cannot determine; but it proved almost instant death. His screams awakened his
companions, who immediately came to his relief, but could afford him none; and
in about three minutes he expired, swollen to a shocking degree.

We used frequently to go to the sea side, in a body to wash our shirts, and
after we had performed this operation, and laid them out to dry, we went into
the water, and amused ourselves swimming till we could put them on; and as the
sun is very powerful in that country, they were soon as dry as we could wish.
One day after we had been thus employed we were returning home, when we espied
a great crowd of people not far from us, and going to see what was the matter,
we observed an idiot standing in the middle of the crowd, holding a large snake
in his hand. His looks and gestures bore evident marks of the most complete
insanity; he frequently put the snake in his bosom, and took it out again,
speaking to it all the while: whilst the crowd, with the most profound
veneration in their looks, seemed ready to worship him. At last he lifted the
snake up to his mouth and bit off its head. It must be observed, that in
Mohammedan countries, a person depri^ed of the use of reason is generally
esteemed a saint among them, and treated with the utmost respect and
veneration. "Saints in Barbary," says Lempriere, "are of two kinds. The first
are those who by frequent ablutions, prayers, and other acts of devotion, have
acquired an extraordinary reputation for piety. Too many of these are artful
hypocrites, who under the mask of religion practice the most flagrant
immoralities. There are, however, instances of some among them, whose practices
accord in general with their profession, and who make it their business to
attend upon the sick, and assist the necessitous and unhappy. From such as
these the severe spirit of philosophy itself will scarcely withhold respect and
veneration. -- Idiots and madmen form the second class of saints. The Moors
consider these unhappy persons as being under the special protection of heaven,
and divinely inspired. In consequence of this prejudice, the most friendless
and unprotected race of mortals find friends and protectors in the populace
themselves. They are fed and clothed gratis wherever they wander, and are
sometimes loaded with presents. A Moor might with as much safety offer an
insult to the emperor himself, as attempt by any severity to restrain even the
irregularities of these reputed prophets -- Besides these, I may mention under
the head of saints or prophets, the Marabouts, a class of impostors who pretend
to have skill in magic, and are highly esteemed by the natives. They lead an
indolent life, are the venders of spells and charms, and live by the credulity
of the populace. -- There is also among these people a set of itinerant
mountaineers, who pretend to be the favorites of the prophet Mahomet, and that
no kind of venomous creatures can hurt them. But the most singular of this
class are the Sidi Nasir or snake-eaters, who exhibit in public upon market
days, and entertain the crowd by eating live snakes, and performing juggling
deceptions. I was once present at this strange species of amusement, and saw a
man, in the course of two hours, eat a living serpent of four feet in length.
He danced to the sound of wild music, vocal and instrumental, with a variety of
odd gestures and contortions, several times round the circle formed by the
spectators. He then began his attack upon the tail, after he had recited a
short prayer, in which he was joined by the multitude. This ceremony was
repeated at intervals, till he had entirely devoured the snake." -- TOUR to
MOROCCO, page 33 -- 35.
This, however, we were ignorant of, and after we had seen this poor maniac
bite of the head of the snake, one of the Moors asked us, in Spanish, if we did
not think him a very great saint. One of our men answered he thought him a very
great fool; upon which they began to spit in our faces, and to deal out some
hearty cuffs, with unsparing hands. We knew it was unsafe to retaliate,
especially as the odds was greatly against us, and therefore bore all with the
patience of Job, till we made our way through the crowd, and retreated to our
lodgings. I mention this, and several other little circumstances, to give my
reader some idea of the peculiarities and characteristics of this land of
ignorance and folly; for a more particular account of the customs and manners
of the people, I refer him to the next chapter.

CHAP. VI.
A short Description of the Empire of Morocco -- Customs and Manners of the
Inhabitants; Government, Punishments, Religion, etc. etc. -- The Author and his
Companions, by means altogether unexpected, obtain their Liberty and leave the
Country in great haste.

THIS vast empire, including Fez, Tablet, Sus, and the province of Dara,
extends six hundred and twenty miles from north to south, and six hundred and
fifty from east to west. It is bounded on the north by the Mediterranean sea,
on the south by Tesser, and on east by Segelmessa and Algiers. The Algerines
inhabit a large extent of country, extending along the coast of the
Mediterranean four hundred miles, and in breadth from fifty to one hundred. The
Turks, who have the government of that country in their hands, are not above
seven thousand in number, the Moors, or native Africans, have no share in it.
It is a kind of ill-formed republic, under the protection of the grand Signior;
but the government may be said to be totally in the hands of the Janissaries,
who advance or depose, elect or put to death the viceroy at pleasure. They
lately murdered four, and deposed two of their deys, and all this happened in
the space of twenty years. Fez, which makes a part of the empire of Morocco, is
two hundred and fifty miles long, and about as many in breadth, bounded on the
east by Algiers, and on the south by Morocco. The air of this country is mild,
temperate, and pleasant, except in the months of July and August, when it is
extremely sultry. This country may be said to have but one harvest, which
continues all the year round, for in every season one may find grain or fruits
of some kind or other growing in full perfection. At the time I was there, the
then emperor, father to the present, appeared to be a man about sixty years of
age, six feet high, majesty in his appearance, though mild and gentle in his
words and looks. He governed a country, which may be termed the garden of the
world; but the nature of the government, and the want of laws, render it a very
unpleasant country to reside in. Liberty, property, life, and death, every
thing dear to man, is in the power of the sovereign, or his substitutes. The
only restraint upon the will of the monarch, is the dread of assassination, and
the vast guard that continually surrounds him, is by no means a security
against such a catastrophe; for what can be expected from a guard of slaves. A
people enjoying the sweets of liberty, are anxious for the safety of the
sovereign, that maintains it, but the slaves of despotism can hardly alter
their condition for a worse. Like the ass in the fable, they must carry their
panniers, into whose hands soever they fall. The government has a very visible
effect upon the appearance of the country. Nature does much, but nature is no
where seconded by arts or industry. Who, indeed, will cultivate fields or plant
vineyards under a burning sun, unless he expects to reap the fruits of his
labors; besides the people are the most indolent perhaps on the face of the
globe. A Moor, in the hot season, seems to rise but little above vegetative
existence, unless, indeed, he is mounted on a horse; but in the exercise of
riding, he is active to an uncommon degree. Their horses, or as they are called
in Europe, barbs, are famous over all the world for their beauty and
unparrallelled swiftness, and the riders in the management show the utmost
skill and agility. Few horses in this country, are put to any kind of drudgery;
camels, dromedaries, mules and asses, answering the purposes of carrying
burdens. As they are, in a great measure, exempted from the drudgery to which
that animal is subjected in other countries, it is less to be wondered at, that
their breed of horses has been so long famous. Notwithstanding the extreme
laziness and indolence of the inhabitants of this country, they are enabled to
export great quantities of corn, oil, hides, fowls, and fruits, such as
citrons, lemons, oranges, dates, figs, raisins, almonds, etc. etc. to Italy,
Spain, Portugal, Gibraltar, and many other parts of Europe. They likewise
export some woolen cloths, leather, which bears the name of the country,
indigo, cochineal, ostrich feathers, flax, and hemp.

The Mohammedan religion, is the religion of the empire, and this strictly
prohibits the use of wines and spirituous liquors; but this prohibition of the
prophet is very little attended to by the rich, who indulge in private, the use
of them, with the utmost freedom; and the Jews, who are the principal
distillers in the country, and them a plentiful supply. Many European
manufactures have been attempted here, but except the weaving branch, few of
them have arrived at any perfection. A merchant is a respectable character in
this country; perhaps the more respected for having the emperor at the head of
his class; for in every town and village throughout his vast dominions, he has
shops kept open, some of which are managed by Moors, and others by Jews, who
are very ready in case of fraudulent dealing, to inform against each other, as
a mortal hatred subsists between them.

The inhabitants are obliged to carry arms, if required, and to march wherever
the emperor gives orders; but as I already observed, the greater part of the
standing army consists of slaves, and this amounts to one hundred thousand men.

The natives of Morocco are swarthy and very dark complexioned. The Arabs, who
are the Aborigines of this country inhabit the mountains, and have a kind of
government of their own. I have already mentioned the circumstance of the
emperor's son having gone to head them, and at this time there was something
like discipline kept up among them, and a kind of traffic carried on between
them and the other inhabitants of the country; but this by no means tends to
create friendship, on the contrary, they hate, despise and overreach one
another; and the mountaineers are everlastingly pillaging and destroying the
property of the peaceful inhabitants of the plains, to such a degree, that they
have depopulated a great part of this fertile country. The dress of the
mountaineers is very simple. A long coarse woollen robe, thrown about them in a
careless manner, constitutes the whole of it; but this is sufficient to gratify
the wish of unambitious nature; and in this garb, which serves them for every
occasion, they are as happy as the most foppish European, in the costliest
attire that ever was invented. The clothes of the women are as coarse as those
of the men, only they have drawers made of linen, and, these excepted, there is
but a small difference in their dress. The women have most delicate features,
but the sun gives them a tawny complexion. They spare no pains to please the
lords of the creation; even the art of painting is not left untried. Where
three or four women are, each make it the study of the day, to outvie one
another, and to be chosen the companion of the night by the man, whom all wish
to please; one need not therefore wonder, that every art should be employed to
captivate.

In gaining this point, two passions are gratified, and, perhaps, disappointing
their rivals is not the least agreeable of the two. It is only on particular
occasions the women are allowed to associate, or sit at table with the men,
both poor and rich looking upon them as no better than servants, or merely as
toys, made for the amusement of the other sex. They spend very little of their
time with them by day; but should an opulent Moor take a fancy to dine with one
of his wives, he gives her previous notice of his intentions; and a visit from
a king would not make her exert her talent of pleasing more, than a visit from
her lord and master. The most delicate dishes are provided, and all the arts of
cookery made use of to render them palatable. Among the higher ranks, a wife is
permitted to fit at the table, and partake of the banquet which she has
prepared; but among the lower orders, the wife stands at the back of her
gormandizing husband, till he has eat his dinner, and then she will perhaps be
admitted to take her own.

The Jews form a very large body in this country, though they are kept in a
state of subordination, which would weary the patience of any other people on
the face of the globe but themselves. If any part of a town to is be cleared,
the town major summonses the Jews: and however troublesome the task may be, or
whatever their avocations are at the time, they are obliged to attend; and
during the time they are performing their work, they are abused and insulted
with the most opprobrious epithets, and often beat unmercifully without any
fault. They are obliged to take off their slippers upon passing a mosque, or
the house of a governor, bashaw, or alcaide; and even if they meet any of the
above mentioned ranks, they are forced to take them off in the streets. The
Jewish women are generally fair complexioned, open in their countenances, and
engaging in their manners. They make constant use of paint, insomuch, that no
visible part of their body wants its artificial coat.

The Moorish women go constantly masked, but the Jeweses expose their faces
without disguise or ceremony. The men are dressed in a long black robe, which
covers them from head to foot, with a pair of linen drawers and vest. Their
legs are bare from their knees to the feet, and they wear slippers, which they
put their feet into, and can throw them off without any trouble; and this they
are obliged to do so frequently, that they either have them made without any
quarters, or never take them up. The dress of the Jewish women is not unlike
the dress of an English woman, only before they are married, they never wear
any cap or covering on the head, but have their hair plaited down the back,
intermixed with silk of various colors; the richer sort frequently have
tassels of gold or silver hanging down with it. They wear upon their feet small
slippers, which cover the toes, the rest of the feet are bare, only they take
care to bedaub them with a very thick coat of paint.

The Jews are the only mechanics in the country; and the greater part of the
mercantile business of Morocco is likewise conducted by them. The genius of a
Moor, seldom raises him to a degree of mediocrity, either in business or
mechanism. It is to me surprising that they have ever had any kind of success
by sea; as their nautical knowledge is so limited, that it is by accident only,
the greater part of their sailors find the way to their own ports. The miseries
of the soldiers, not in actual service, are great beyond conception. They are
let loose upon the community, with no more than one ducat, or five shillings
sterling, per month, to subsist upon; and as they are obliged to be ready at a
call, they cannot, even if they were qualified, enter upon any kind of
business. Out of this small allowance, they are obliged to buy all their
necessaries, from one or other of the emperor's brokers, who generally take
care to fleece them effectually; and it must be observed, the emperor almost
solely engrosses this business, and has agents in every town to carry it on for
him. Some Jews, indeed, carry it on upon their own bottom, but not without
paying a large sum, annually, into the royal coffers; and in this case they are
allowed to trade without interruption, till they have made a good round sum of
money; which the emperor no sooner hears off, than he falls upon some method of
securing it for his own use. An instance happened at Mogodore, when I was in
the country, which I shall briefly mention.

A Jew, pretty far advanced in years, had an only daughter, on whom his fondest
hopes were built. He had amassed a considerable sum of money, as a broker, and
for this reason was hated by all the Moors who followed the same kind of
traffic. They carried daily accounts to the governor, of the Jew's great
riches; and at last the governor gave intelligence to the emperor, who
immediately sent to demand his daughter, to be taken to the seraglio. The
unfortunate Jew could not think of enduring life without the society of his
darling child. The governor had her taken to his house, and the fond father
followed in an agony of grief and despair. He resolved to try the power of
money, and offered the governor one hundred dollars, if he would intercede with
the emperor to have her restored to him. The governor was glad to find the Jew
fonder of his child than his money, and asked him how much he would give the
emperor to buy her off at once. He said he would willingly give the emperor
three hundred, and the governor should have one for himself. The young Jewess
was in the mean time kept in the governor's house, and her father's proposal
sent to the emperor, who agreed to let him have her back again, upon paying one
thousand, at which the governor had estimated the whole of his property. The
poor old Jew was forced to agree to this inhuman proposal, which stripped him of
the gains of a whole life time, and reduced him to a state little short of
distraction. After the emperor had received his all, he began to think, that as
the Jew had succeeded so well in trade for himself, it might be very proper to
make him an agent for managing his own business. He therefore, very generously
lent him back three hundred dollars of his own money, to trade under the
imperial commission. Indeed the Jews are the only people in the country who
ever think of amassing money, and are therefore subjected to every species of
fraud and oppression that despotism can invent. A Moor seldom lays up for a
future contingency; if he finds money to answer his present necessities, he is
rich enough, and never thinks of tomorrow.

The inhabitants of the inland parts of the country are a harmless, simple,
inoffensive people, and extremely hospitable to strangers. They are as poor as
oppression can make them, but their poverty does not prevent them from enjoying
happiness. Naturally indolent, they enjoy the present, without allowing one
uneasy thought about the future to ruffle their tempers or embitter their
present enjoyments. Placed in a luxuriant country, where bountiful nature amply
supplies their unambitious wishes, without much toil or labor on their part,
nothing creates an uneasy apprehension, but the despotic exactions of the
government, or the dread of a visit from their enemies, the mountaineers. The
men and women dress much alike, only the drawers of the latter are longer, and
instead of the turban, they wear a kind of caul upon their heads. The house of
a Moor is easily furnished, a large carpet or mattrass, spread upon the floor,
serves them for chairs and bed; and there are neither plates, knives, forks nor
spoons to be seen in the house. Their meat is placed in the middle, in a large
dish, and after washing their hands, (which is strictly enjoined by the
religion of the prophet) they make them answer the purposes of knives, forks,
and spoons. Their meat is generally boiled or roasted to tatters, so that it
easily can be divided without the assistance of a knife.

The woods and deserts are full of savage animals, such as lions, tigers,
wolves, leopards, hyenaes, and large wild bears. From the service of the camel,
the African derives unspeakable advantages. This patient useful animal, seems
to have been created on purpose for this very country. Through the barren
desert, scorched by a burning sun, where vegetative life is nipped in the bud;
the camel performs his painful journey, under a heavy load; the thistle or the
thorn which he crops as he walks, is all he requires for food. Nature has
furnished him with a reservoir within, in which he lays up water to quench his
thirst; and with this supply he will travel for thirty days together, through
never cooling sands, which the dew of heaven scarce ever moistens.

The cows here are small, and yield but a scanty portion of milk; but what they
give is uncommonly good. The sheep are large, but their wool is much inferior
to that of Spain. Almost every quadruped, found in Britain, is to be-found
here, together with many which we have not. They have also a variety of fowls,
which are unknown to us. Among these is the Caspa-sparrow, remarkable for its
beautiful plumage, and the sweetness of its notes. It is allowed to be the most
melodious of all the winged tribe, but, unfortunately, it cannot exist but in
its natural climate. The bays of Barbary, and all round the coast, abound with
a great variety of different kinds of fish. I have bought a fish, almost thirty
pounds weight, for a piece of money, equal in value to fix-pence sterling; and
in general, they may be had at the rate of a farthing per pound. The Moors,
though poor and oppressed, are very numerous round the sea coast. Why they
should give a perference to the out-skirts of the empire, I know not, unless it
be to remove themselves at a distance from the seat of a government, readier,
on every occasion, to punish and oppress than to encourage and protect them;
trade with other nations cannot be their motive, as that is but trifling, and
they have no vessels of their own, but for plunder and piracy.

Renegadoes, though not so numerous here as in Algiers, are not more despised by
the Christians than the natives. They seldom arrive at places of public trust
or preferment; but are generally employed in the most degrading offices, and in
time of war, they are sure to be placed where there is the greatest danger.
Slaves here are very numerous, and their treatment such as would melt the heart
of a savage. In Tunis and Algiers they suffer much, but it does not equal their
sufferings here. They are employed in the hardest and vilest kinds of drudgery,
almost without intermission; and their daily allowance is only a pound of
coarse barley bread, steeped in oil, which they are obliged to eat without a
moment's rest, often holding it in the one hand, whilst they are laboring hard
with the other. At night they are loaded with heavy irons, with nothing but
cold earth for their bed and pillow. Their dress consists of a long coarse
woollen robe, with a hood, which serves them for hat, coat, vest, breeches, and
every thing; for they are neither allowed shoes nor stockings. They are often
harnessed in carts with asses and mules, and unmercifully lashed for the very
least intermission from labor. From the readiness of their cruel task masters,
to inflict the lash, one would be led to imagine it the greatest pleasure of
their lives.

Christians of every denomination, are held in the greatest abhorrence by the
Moors; scarcely can they mention the word Christian, without adding to it the
epithet dog, and cursing most vehemently. Even European ambassadors have no
security against public insult, but are sometimes pelted with dirt and stones
as they walk the streets. The emperor who has the sole power of life and death,
appoints the time, place and manner of all public executions. Sawing asunder,
either across or dividing the body at length, hanging them up by the feet, and
roasting them before a slow fire, are the punishments the emperor frequently
inflicts, to the great entertainment of the savage populace. The renegadoes are
put to death in a still more cruel manner; they have a chain fastened round
their waist, by which they are dragged from the prison to the place of
execution, where they are anointed all over with boiling tallow, then drawn to
a stake before a slow fire, where they are allowed to roast while any signs of
life appear, and at last the breathless body is cast into the fire. From such
wanton cruelties the mind shrinks back with horror. I shall therefore change
the subject for one less gloomy, namely, the ceremonial of a Moorish wedding.

In the article of wife, the Koran is very indulgent, and admirably adapted to
the voluptuous desires of men bred in warm climates. It allows to every man as
many wives as he is able to maintain; but the generality find two, three, or
four at most, sufficient for their purposes. As the sexes are kept at a
distance from each other before marriage, a Moor knows very little more of his
future bride, than a British king or heir apparent does about his. Some female
friend recommends his future help-mate, and he is either obliged to take her
upon the word of the go between, or live unmarried. But the latter seldom
happens -- his imagination does every thing -- the bargain is struck, and the
friends meet to settle the preleminaries. The bridegroom sends presents of the
most delicious fruits, or what other entertainments he can afford, and thinks
proper. The day before the wedding, the bride invites and entertains her female
friends, and the bridegroom his male ones, according to their rank, with music,
dancing, and every other amusement they can possibly command. On the following
morning, the bride appears to her friends, (who then renew their visit) dressed
out in all the finery her circumstances will admit of, seated on a sopha or
carpet, surrounded by bride-maids, all as fine as possible. The contracting
parties pass the day, each, with their friends, in their own apartments; but in
the evening the bride is conducted to the house of her future spouse, under a
veil or canopy, or carried in a sedan, and attended by all her female friends.
The bridegroom issues forth with his company, to receive them, dancing to the
pipe and tabor. The happy couple are immediately conducted to a private
apartment, the rest of the company wait till the bridegroom declares himself
satisfied with his bride, when the company parade through every street in the
town, afterward giving notice, that she went to the arms of her husband -- a
maid. But in case anti-nuptial incontinency is discovered, (which indeed very
seldom happens to be the case) she is sent back to her friends with infamy and
disgrace, and for ever shut up from the society of man.

The Moorish physicians confine their prescriptions entirely to simples and
charms; and perhaps they do as little harm as any others of their profession.
However that may be, no man is allowed to go out of the world without their
assistance, if it can possibly be had. A solemn phiz is a necessary
qualification, for professional men in all countries; and in this qualification
the physicians of Barbary are by no means deficient. They attend and prescribe
with an infinite deal of grimace; and when, in spite of all their art, they
find their patient will escape from a bad world, and unskilful physicians, they
turn his face to the east, and apply for superior aid, till he expires. They
then wash the body with soap and warm water, and wrap it up in a long coarse
robe; and when the friends of the deceased are informed of the event, they
assemble and carry it on a bier to the burying ground; repeating in this, as in
most of their processions, "There is but one just God, and Mahomet is his
prophet." When the corpse is let down, every one throws something into the
grave, which is generally a stone, till it is filled up, calling out in their
own language, words which signify, "Light of God," and accompanying every
jesture with violent outcries and lamentations for the death of their friend.

The emperor of Morocco assumes the titles of MOST GLORIOUS, NOBLE AND MIGHTY
EMPEROR OF AFRICA; KING OF FEZ, MOROCCO, TIPHELET, SUZ, DARA, AND ALL THE
ALGARBE AND ITS TERRITORIES IN AFRICA; GRAND SHARIF AND SUCCESSOR TO THE GREAT
PROPHET MAHOMET.

His numerous armies are mostly recruited from Guinea, and consist of slaves,
torn from their country and friends at an early period of their lives; and as
they soon forget that they ever had a country or friends, and are totally
unconnected with every individual in this country, their sole dependence is
upon the favor of the emperor. At first they are obliged to serve in the
infantry, and after continuing in it so many years, or performing some action
worthy of preferment, they are advanced to a corpse of cavalry, which in this
country is esteemed great military preferment. Their education is solely
confined to the use of arms, and the management of a horse. Trained from early
life to pay an implicit respect to the commands of their superiors, they know
nothing but to obey. Their soldiers are variously armed, one part of the
cavalry have a gun, pistol, and scymet^r, and another muskets and lances. The
infantry carry guns, bows, or stings, shortpikes, (...) or broad swords. The
naval force of this country is, as I already observed, on a very despicable
footing, consisting only of seven badly rigged vessels, little better than
entire wrecks. The admiral-ship, which is the largest, mounts twenty-six guns,
and when they are not cruizing, she, with other two, lies constantly at
Mogodore, four of the rest winter at Larache, and one at Salce. They commonly
are laid up in the month of October, and again begin the business of piracy, or
cruising, in March or April. It is perhaps a happy circumstance for Christian
traders, that in all the dominions of Morocco, there is not one good port. If
their ports were better, they would in all probability, make a much greater
figure at sea, and be a still greater scourge upon the rest of the world; but
besides this, they are extremely ignorant of the art of ship building, in want
of proper timber, tackling, sails, and anchors, and have neither powder nor
shot, except what they receive from England or Holland.

The Moors are Mahometans of the sect of Molech, and are, perhaps, the most
superstitious people in the world. They enforce, by the most rigid punishments,
attendance upon public worship. Their mosques are open every day; but the
Sabbath, or day of rest, is Friday. The women are never suffered to enter the
mosque, as they are supposed to attract the attention of men, and fill their
minds with impure thoughts; and as they imagine they were only created for the
pleasure of man, and the propagation of species, they have no concern in the
business of religion.

The Mahometans enter the mosque barefooted, and are said to behave with the
utmost decency and decorum during their stay there. In ordinary life they are
highly exemplary in many respects. They seldom quarrel among themselves; when
they do, they seldom come to blows, and almost never commit manslaughter, or
murder.

Swearing by the name of God, is looked upon as a crime of the deepest die, and
is one which a Mussulman never commits.

When I have said this much, however, I have mentioned almost the whole of
their virtues; to counterbalance these, rudeness, jealousy, lying,
superstition, hypocrisy, dishonesty, and cruelty may be put into the other
scale. To sum up the character of the country and the people -- nature here
deals out her choicest blessings with unsparing hands, yet ignorance,
superstition, and the tyranny of their government, conspire to render Morocco
the most unpleasant residence on the face of the globe.

By this time I suppose, the reader will imagine I have totally forgot my
narrative; and yet I can assure him, I had no wish to stay any longer in this
country than I could possibly get clear of it. He may remember, I told him of
the plan of our liberation suggested by Mr. Griffiths, in the contemplation of
which, we were making ourselves happy. A circumstance however happened, which
thwarted that design, and led, if not to a speedier, at least to a safer
release. We had been about fourteen months in the country, when the Spanish
ambassador arrived, bringing with him fifteen Moors, who had been taken and
detained some time by the Spaniards. These were not the only presents he
brought to the emperor. He brought a great variety of European curiosities,
which he valued more than men, besides a large sum of money. His presents were
graciously received by the emperor; and this prince, like some of the eastern
monarchs of old, desired him, to ASK WHAT HE WOULD AND IT SHOULD BE GRANTED
HIM. With a generosity, which did honor to his feelings, he asked a present,
which the emperor could very well spare, and which showed that the high
character he sustained, had not made him unmindful that he was a man -- it was
liberty for the Christian prisoners confined at Mogodore, belonging to Frances,
Spain, and America. The emperor very readily granted his request, and next day
dispatched a caravan to bring us all to Morocco. The caravan arrived at
Mogodore the very day, on the evening of which, we were to seize, and run off
with the Portuguese schooner, as Mr. Griffiths had directed, and orders were
sent for us to set out immediately, as the caravan was to go eighteen miles out
of town that day.

We were totally ignorant of the favorable turn our affairs had taken, and
such a message, at such a time, was worse than death to us. We made ourselves
certain that the emperor had sold us for slaves to some other master, and gave
up all thoughts of ever seeing our dear native countries more. Messrs. Bain and
Hutchison had befriended us to the last, and now, with heavy hearts we bade
them adieu. Mr. Griffiths entered just as we were about to depart, we told him
our sorrowful tale, but he very good naturedly told us, he had a presentiment
that the emperor meant to grant us our liberty. This kind hearted fellow came
along with us four miles out of the town, saying every thing his friendly heart
could suggest, to remove our suspicions and lighten our sorrow. We parted from
him, not without shedding tears, and pursued our journey. For five days we
traveled through a country already described, almost starved for want of food,
and on the sixth we arrived at Morocco, when we were shown to our former
residence, and left till next morning to our own unpleasant reflections. About
eleven o'clock next day, we were all sent for to the emperor's presence, who
was that morning reviewing a part of his troops, seated in an elegant little
model of an European house, sent him by the king of Spain, and brought over by
the ambassador already mentioned.

It consisted of four apartments, in one of which was a bed, elegantly
furnished. The frame was mahogany, the floor marble, and the roof was covered
with a kind of blue marble which served for slate; and all round the door and
windows was adorned with gilt brass, which in that country passed very well for
solid gold. Upon this present the emperor set a high value; and I doubt not, it
contributed confiderably to the procuring of our liberty. We approached him
with the profoundest respect, which we expressed by bowing almost to the
ground. With a half smile in his countenance, he addressed us by his
interpreter: "I hope your bondage here has been easy -- you are now at liberty
-- I have made a present of you to the king of Spain, and tomorrow you shall
depart with his ambassador. When you go to Rabat, you will receive clothes, and
at Tangiers you shall have those that were taken from you -- you may depart."
Never did I hear such cheering accents, the joy they occasioned was almost too
much for me to bear with moderation: I would have danced, song, and capered
like a madman, had not the presence of this successor to Mahomet kept me within
some kind of bounds. The number of prisoners, upon whom this favorable
sentence was passed, were thirty, and certainly this day was not lost to Sidi
Mahomed, emperor of Morocco, who had in the course of it made thirty human
beings completely happy. What his feelings were on the occasion I cannot
determine, or whether he thought at all about the matter, I know not; but from
what I felt then, and formerly, I could have wished for the supreme power of
that country, for one day in the year, that I might annually, on that day, have
enjoyed the luxury of making the wretched happy.

We were without ceremony hurried from the presence of the emperor, and shown
into that of our humane deliverer, who in the most cordial manner, took us each
by the hand, and congratulated us upon the escape we had made from bondage,
assuring us, at the same time, that he would loose no time in conveying us out
of the country, and that till he had accomplished this, he did not think us
safe. The caravan was ordered to be in readiness at six o'clock in the morning,
and at that hour we were all prepared; but just as we were about to set out, a
guard arrived from the emperor, with orders to detain all the prisoners
belonging to France, as the emperor had determined positively, that none from
that kingdom should leave his dominions till their king sent an ambassador to
solicit their freedom. The Spanish ambassador delayed, for some hours, entering
upon his journey, wishing to inform himself, if it was possible to persuade the
emperor to revoke his orders; but he found there was no hope on that score, and
therefore thought it best to set off, least the emperor should recall us all;
and so great was the interest he took in our behalf, that, during a journey of
four hundred miles from Morocco to Rabat, he scarce allowed either himself or
us to have a reasonable time either to eat or sleep, lest the emperor should
send after us, and deprive him of the pleasure of carrying us to Europe. Our
haste deprived us of the very great pleasure we promised ourselves in calling
upon the Sardinian consul, who had been so much our friend in the time of need;
but our present chance of freedom was not to be trifled with, and as we had
nothing to repay his kindness with but words, we followed our leader, who
thought it unsafe to stop at Rabat, or Salee, but carried us, on the evening of
the tenth day after we set out, seven miles north of the latter. During all
this journey we had never, at any one time, stopped six hours, the benevolent
ambassador, being always more afraid for us than we were for ourselves.

The caravan consisted of about one hundred Christians, and two hundred Moorish
cavalry, commanded by a bashaw and two alcaides. There were likewise one
hundred Jews sent with us, to strike our tents, fill our water-pots, etc. and
one hundred camels to carry our provisions. We arrived at Tangiers the
nineteenth day after our setting out, happy once more to reach a port which
contained a vessel ready to carry us to Europe. The ambassador would not allow
us to stop for a moment ashore, being still afraid the emperor might change his
mind and send after us. We therefore went immediately on board the vessel, in
which we were to sail for Suto, a Spanish settlement on the coast of Barbary,
where we were to perform quarantine for fourteen days, before we sailed for
Spain. After an imprisonment of fifteen months, exposed to so many hardships,
and with scarcely the most distant hope of ever being released, my reader will
easily conceive it filled our hearts with the most exquisite pleasure, to find
ourselves once more at liberty, and likely to revisit our native lands.

CHAP. VII.
The Author and his Companions sail to Cadiz -- Their Transactions there --
Character of the Spaniards -- They return to America, from whence the Author
sails for Britain, and after a troublesome Voyage, arrives in his native
Country.

SUTO is an island, or rather peninsula, on the Barbary coast, a little above
Gibraltar, in the possession of the king of Spain, to which all criminals
banished from Spain, are exiled; and indeed few of any other denomination are
to be found on it besides the banished and their offspring, it is but small,
though strongly fortified. In the middle is a hill, at the foot of which stands
a town; adjoining to this, there is an excellent bay, at the head of which is a
pier about one hundred yards long, which small vessels can lay their sides too,
but those of a larger size lie in the bay. During the fourteen days we had to
stay here, we were allowed to go ashore as often as we thought proper, and in
every respect to be our own masters, and dispose of ourselves as we judged
proper; the ambassador all the while supplying us with plenty of provisions. We
were, however, in a wretched condition for want of clothes, having got no
supply since we entered Morocco. The emperor, it is true, had promised us a
supply at Rabat, and our own at Tangiers, but we were in too great haste to be
out of his dominions, to stop to demand them, and the fate of the French
prisoners had made us somewhat suspicious, that a regard to his word was not to
be named in the catalogue of his virtues. It was very lucky for us that we were
in a mild climate, where much clothing was not absolutely necessary, and the
thoughts of having regained our liberty made up for every thing.

At the end of fourteen days, a frigate arrived from Spain to carry us to
Cadiz, on board of which we embarked, and performed our voyage in twenty-four
hours. On board the frigate, the sailors all strove who could most oblige us,
and every one was anxious to get our history; as we could converse with them
tolerably in their own language, we were able to gratify their curiosity, by
relating the most remarkable circumstances. We no sooner landed than the
ambossador took us ashore and presented us to the governor, and the American
consul. Our dress, as may easily be conceived was not the best in the world,
and not altogether proper for visiting. With a description of my own, as it
will be very short, I shall present my reader; and this with a little
alteration may serve for every one's in the company. I had on the body and part
of the sleeves of an old check shirt, part of a pair of trowsers which had once
been new, but now served more for the purposes of modesty, than for shelter
from the cold, and this was all; jackets, hats, shoes, and stockings, had long
ago deserted their stations; and this was the wardrobe we brought with us to
Europe. The governor surveyed us with commiserating looks, but gave us no
clothing; and after he had conversed sometime with the ambassador, apart, he
told us, we must stay at Cadiz till the king was apprised of our arrival, and
should grant us our liberty.

Dispatches were sent off to Madrid, and as we considered ourselves the
property of the king of Spain, we thought we had no right to take any steps
without his consent or orders. We, therefore, resolved to wait with patience,
in hopes that his answer, would set us at full liberty to pursue our own
inclinations. We were assigned a house for our residence, with a pistareen
each, for our daily maintenance, which furnished us with two good meals, which
we took at eleven and four o'clock, and thought ourselves extremely happy in
having for sauce to them, the air of a Christian country. Here we had no
restraint put upon our inclinations, and consequently walked through the town
separately or together, as we pleased.

One day as I was walking by myself in a street leading to the bay, I was
accosted by a man in a sailor's garb, who told me, he thought my face was
familiar to him, and desired to know my name. As soon as I mentioned it, he
seemed much confounded. "Heavens!" says he, "in what plight do I meet with you?
What unkind fortune drove you to this shore, in this miserable situation?" I
immediately gave him the outlines of my history, without recollecting the
features of the person to whom I directed my discourse. After I had finished, I
requested he would let me know his name, and when he had gratified me, how
surprised was I, to find that he was one of my earliest acquaintances in life,
who had been for some years my school-fellow. He asked me to go on board his
ship, promising me the fight of a number of my old acquaintances; I cheerfully
complied with his request, and found almost every person on board acquainted
either with myself or my friends, for the vessel was from Greenock, and most of
the hands from that part of Scotland.

A long absence from my native country made me anxious to hear news of my
relations and acquaintances, and after satisfying me on this head to the utmost
of their power, they went and supplied me with such clothes as they could
spare, and I stood most in need of. One brought me a jacket, another trowsers,
another a hat, another a pair of shoes. In short, in a very little time I was
as well rigged out as I could reasonably have desired, and after passing a few
hours in the company of my benevolent countrymen, I returned to the companions
of my adventures, altogether a different man, in appearance, from what I had
left them. They were not a little surprised at the figure I cut, and wondered
much how I came by my present rigging I soon satisfied them on that head. Good
fortune, says somebody, seldom come by halves. I took a walk to the harbor
next day, and sauntering along in a careless manner, I was again accosted. -- A
sailor made up to me, and asked me my name and country. I satisfied him in
both, and at his request told him part of my misfortunes. Looking steadfastly in
my face, with a smile, he asked me, if I did not know him? I told him I did
not. "My name," says he, "is Hutchison, I was born within a few miles of your
father's house, and I must beg you to go on board our ship, and allow me to
help to rigg you." We accordingly took a boat, and went on board, where I
received the kindest treatment during my stay, which was very short, as they
were preparing to get under way.

My good friend Hutchison gave me a jacket, a pair of stockings, a shirt, and
two dollars. This was the first time I had been possessed of so much money
since my arrival in Europe. I therefore resolved my companions should share it,
and sending for wine to the amount of it, I told them, I would give them a
treat, which they were a little surprised at, not knowing that I was the
richest man in the company. Next morning one of our company told me, he meant
to be my companion for the day, as he looked upon me to have run away with the
good luck of all the company. We accordingly set out, but after traveling till
five o'clock, we neither met with an acquaintance, nor with any accident worthy
of recording. In the evening, after having fatigued ourselves in quest of we
knew not what, we were returning home, when a person surprised me by giving me
a hearty slap on ^^e shoulder. I turned hastily about, and discovered, to my
great satisfaction, our old friend Mr. Griffiths, the Portuguese pilot,
formerly mentioned. I never in my life recognized an old acquaintance with more
sincere joy. "You will be a little surprised," says he, "to find me in this
country, but I have been in more towns than Tepherary, and botheration to me,
if I am not happy to find that you have got out of the hands of the black
complexioned emperor by fair means, for if you had made your escape by running
off with the schooner, as I proposed, and any of his corsairs had laid hold of
you afterward, I would not have given a roasted potatoe for your chance. But
where are your companions? show me to them, and let me welcome them all to a
Christian country." We made the best of our way to out lodgings, and Griffiths
would scarce speak to any of my messmates, till he ran out and brought us six
bottles of wine, over which we discoursed till toward evening. He told us he
was now at liberty to accompany us to America, as he had quitted the Portuguese
schooner, and might go where he pleased. "But," says he, "if it should be long
before dispatches arrive from Madrid, I will go before you, and tell them you
are coming." We parted with our good friend in the highest spirits, and this
good-natured fellow continued to visit us every day during our stay Cadiz.

It was not long till an order came down from the king of Spain to have us all
sent to America, in the first ship that should sail, at his expense, as he
wished to pay a compliment to his new allies. Mr. Griffiths had not, during
this time, found a passage to the New World, and we were daily favored with
more or less of his company, and now we entertained the prospect of being
fellow passengers in the same ship. My countrymen too, who had so kindly
supplied me with clothes, came one day to visit us, and told us their ship had
been sold the day before, and that they had formed a resolution of accompanying
us to America. A French ship was soon to sail, and the governor sending for us,
told us he had orders to find us a passage in her, and provisions for Virginia.
As we looked upon this province as our home, we were happy to hear of our being
landed there, and waited the hour of our departure with some degree of
impatience.

In the mean while we spent our time very happily together. The British
sailors, who had been paid off when the ship was sold, shared with us the
fruits of their labors; and this, with our own allowance, made us live
comfortable and easy. But still we were unemployed; and the bread that is
purchased at the expense of another, never has so sweet a relish in the mouths
of men, who have inclination and ability to labor for themselves, as that
which is earned by their own industry.

Our stay at Cadiz being ten weeks, I was enabled, not only to view every
curiosity in this place, but to inform myself of the nature of the country, and
of the manners of the inhabitants.

Spain is the most westerly kingdom of Europe, and (...) surrounded by the sea,
except on the side adjoining to France, from which it is separated by the
Pyrenean mountains. On the east and south it is bounded by the Mediterranean,
the Straits of Gibraltar, and part of the Atlantic, and on the north by the bay
of Biscay, and Pyrrenus. It is situated in the the temperate Zone, between the
thirty-sixth and forty-fourth degrees of north latitude, and is in length from
the tenth degree of west longitude, to the third degree of east longitude,
being thirteen degrees from east to west, and nine from north to south.

Most writers, who have undertaken to describe this country, have, in my
opinion, done it very great injustice, by representing the soil as entirely
barren. It must be allowed, the exports from it are so trifling, that people
but little acquainted with the country, may readily conjecture, that there is
but little can be got to export, especially if they are natives of Britain or
America, where they are accustomed to see the husbandman make the most of his
possessions. But in fact the fault lies not so much with the soil as the
inhabitants.

It is impossible for a person, who has never been in Spain, to conceive the
liftless, indolent appearance of the cultivators of the soil. Labor of any
kind seems to be their greatest punishment. The ruling feature of the Spaniards
is pride, or stateliness of appearance* which I really believe has no
particular effect upon the heart, for I imagine the duties of humanity are as
well understood, and practiced among them, as they are among many of their
neighbors: but this stateliness of appearance, and affectation of grandeur,
pervades all ranks and conditions; and even prevents the peasant from giving
that attention to labor which is absolutely necessary, not only for the
cultivation of the country, but for the relief of his own most pressing
necessities.

The most barren mountain in the country will produce something for the service
of the community; but the extreme indolence and pride of the inhabitants, will
not allow them to cultivate even those parts of the country, which with the
smallest assistance, would yield the most luxuriant produce. The richest and
most delicious fruits are to be found in almost every plain, the spontaneous
productions of nature: but tilling the ground, sowing the seed, and reaping the
autumnal fruits, are drudgeries which the indolent Spaniard can by no means
submit to, so that it is no uncommon case to see a family half starved the
greater part of the year, who have thousands of acres lying without
cultivation, producing nothing but food for the beasts of the earth, and the
^^^ls of heaven.

It is possible that the nature of the government may be unfavourable to
industry; it undoubtedly will be so in Spain, and every other country where the
rights of people are not understood nor ascertained; where the monarch can
seize at his pleasure, the fruits of the husbandman's labor; and wherever an
embargo is laid upon human reason by a numerous host of clergy, swarming all
over the country, with the professed intention of preventing man from
exercising the right which he derives from heaven -- of judging for himself.
But these unfavourable circumstances, can never fully excuse the extreme
indolence of the people, who would rather starve than labor, who have the
fairest portion of the globe parcelled out to them, and can neither supply
themselves nor others. Of late years it has been the fashion to decry nobility,
but their class has never been on so despicable a footing in any country as in
Spain. When I say this, I only mean in the eyes of people who have not the same
exalted ideas of that class, as the Spaniards entertain; for a Signior in
Spain, without knowing where, or how to come by a supper, demands and obtains
that respect, which the richest Indian nabob would receive from a populace,
fond of paying every attention to the man who brings to his native country
rupees enough to gratify his own avarice, and his countrymen's vanity. A good
deal of Quixotism still exists in Spain, but if this spirit has its absurdities
and inconveniences, it is productive of many good consequences. A Spaniard
carries about with him an exalted soul; a mean or ungenerous action he can
neither commit himself, nor endure in another. He pays a profound respect to
the other sex. The serious air with which he conducts himself may not, perhaps,
be so congenial to the wishes and expectations of a young woman, as the lively
rattling way of a Frenchman; but if a Spaniard professes to be in love, his
mistress may give him credit: whereas the warmest addresses of a Frenchman,
pass with the other sex as so many instances of unmeaning gallantry. I would
not be thought to insinuate, that an illicit commerce does not take place
between the sexes in this country, as often as in those countries where they
are less ceremonious. No part of the globe has furnished more frequent
instances of amourous improprieties and follies than Spain, nor have they in
any other country, been attended with more fatal consequences. Jealousy is a
powerful ingredient in the composition of a Spaniard. His wife or daughter he
guards with a watchful eye. Locks, bolts, and duennas are employed as barriers
to keep them from the sight of man. But some how or other it happens, that the
castles most carefully guarded, are easiest taken. Women are the same I
suppose, in all countries, and unless something is left to their own mercy,
nothing can ever be made of them.

The Spanish ladies completely verify the truth of this observation. They are
watched and guarded with the utmost attention, and yet they go as often astray
as those of other countries, when they have their time in their own hands, and
their companions of their own choosing. Masked (...) as solicit the stranger at
every corner of the streets, who if he chooses to run the risk of consequences,
may have the chance of performing some action, either in advancing to the
lodging of his dulcina, or retreating to his own, that may either immortalize,
or for ever extinguish his name.

The stateliness of the Spaniard is manifest even in the article of dress.
Their clothes are generally of a dark color, and they wear long black cloaks
over all, which give them a very solemn appearance; but this is only the dress
of the common people. The nobility and fashionable part of the kingdom, have
for some time past, in a great measure, adopted the dress and manners of the
French: so that in the higher circles, the Spaniard has fallen off considerably
from his natural character. Still however he meets you in a kind of reserve. --
You are as well acquainted with a Frenchman at your first meeting, as after
twenty years intimacy; but the character of a Spaniard takes a considerable
time to manifest itself. He speaks but little, and every word with the greatest
caution. But if once you can make him your friend, he will carry his friendship
to the most romantic heights; as he joins to his friendship a high sense of
honor you may entrust him with your dearest (...) and the longer your intimacy
exists, the (...) conversable, and unreserved he becomes, till (...) developes
his whole heart and soul, and confides to your ear his dearest secrets. But
should your betray him, ^^ware of the consequences. His soul is the sent of
(...) and sincerity. He is unacquainted with deceit himself, and should he
discover any thing like dishonor, or a breach of confidence in his friend, his
resentment and revenge know no bounds. The soul of a Spaniard is capable of
rising to the most unparalleled heights in virtue, or in sinking to the
profoundest abyss of vice. He is incapable of committing any of those vices
that have any thing like meanness attached to them; but if his love be once
turned to hatred, he will not hesitate to take the cruelest methods of
gratifying his revenge, but plunge the dagger or stilletto without hesitation
or remorse, into the bosom of the man, by whom he suspects himself injured. --
The discovery of the New World, was perhaps the worst thing that ever happened
for the prosperity of Spain. A taste for adventure and independence, upon
discovery of the riches of Mexico and Peru, took possession of the public mind
in the days of Pizzaro and Cortes, which has never yet been extinguished. This
has made them listless and indolent in the cultivation of a country, which,
with the smallest industry, would be a source of certain wealth, comfort and
happiness.

A taste for gallantry is the universal passion in Spain, but their gallantries
are carried on with an infinite deal of ceremony. They are very fond of the
amusement of dancing; and from this amusement no rank or age think themselves
excluded. The grandmother thinks herself as well entitled to this indulgence
as her granddaughter, and frequently the three generations join altogether in
the same dance.

The Spaniard rises in the morning, adjusts himself for matins, or morning
devotions, which he attends very regularly -- dines at noon -- sleeps after
dinner -- goes to walk, or to vespers in the evening, and so finishes the day.
They are not like the English, fond of discussing politics, or hearing news;
few of the peasantry know any thing of what passes in Madrid, much less of the
transactions of other countries. The ladies are superbly dressed in all visits
of ceremony, though they dress very plain to go to mass, insomuch that it is
difficult at matins or vespers, to distinguish the lady of quality from the
waiting-maid. Men of all denominations wear swords, without which they cannot
be dressed.

Superstition robs the country of a treasure it can very ill spare -- a third
part of the labor of the peasant. The vast number of holy days observed
through the year, are a great drawback upon industry; and the very great number
of priests, friars and nuns, who vow perpetual celibacy, is robbing the country
of its greatest riches, by preventing the increase of population; and when to
these considerations we add the vast emigrations to America, which annually
take place, we cannot wonder that this fertile country should neither be half
peopled nor cultivated. But of all the engines of slavery ever produced in the
world, the terrors of the Inquisition are the most dreadful. The supreme office
of the holy tribunal, as it is called, is in the metropolis; and this consists
of an inquisitor general, five counselors, (whereof one must be a dominican
friar) a procurator, two secretaries of the council, an alguazile, a receiver,
two reporters, two qualificators, and a whole legion of familiars, or spies,
who make it their business to enter into all companies, and watch the unguarded
moment to betray. In most of the cities of the Spanish dominions, offices are
kept open, and branches of this infernal traffic established; and were the
Spaniards as ready to speak their minds, either about religion or politics, as
the English, there would in the course of a year be many an auto de fe. Luckily
for them, however, they are possessed of the negative virtue of taciturnity;
and whatever are their sentiments, they make nobody the wiser.

With regard to the government of Spain I shall say nothing -- only this, that
the king is the fountain of honor; and that to this fountain all the nation
look up: and as honor is in greater estimation than riches, independence is
but little felt, or poverty little complained of, even among the most indigent:
but the time may come when trade and commerce will extend their influence, even
to Spain, and then the infallible consequences will be, the nobility will think
more of the peasantry, and the peasantry lower their notions of the nobility.
But it is time for me to drop the history of a people so well known to my
countrymen, and to proceed with my narrative.

We were all summoned to appear on board the French ship one evening when we
little expected it. Accordingly we repaired each to our quarters, happy in the
thoughts of once more revisiting the land of liberty. There were fourteen
British and American passengers, nine Frenchmen, which was the number of the
hands, and our old friend Griffiths, who had kept his resolution of
accompanying us to Virginia. With a favorable breeze we left the bay of Cadiz,
for the western world, and passed the Madeiras on the sixth day after our
departure. But on the seventh our favorable breeze left us, and a gale blew
from the south; which, nevertheless, allowed us to lay on our course.

We had this wind for fourteen days, when it removed to the east, and would
scarcely carry us through the water three knots an hour. Our captain, who was
the most complete puppy I ever sailed with, began to tell his men he must put
them all to short allowance, as the passage was like to be tedious. He
immediately put his threat in execution, and began to feed his hands with horse
beans, at every meal, and, except now and then, we were enabled to spare them a
small morsel of our allowance, this was the whole of their fare.

Our passage proved most distressing; frequent gales reduced us to the utmost
extremity. Our captain was as obstinate as a mule, and would not be advised by
any one on board, consequently, our dangers were frequent, and our passage, in
even sense of the word, disagreeable.

We had no concern in the management of the ship, but were like so many
passengers on board of transports; and every one of my readers, who has been in
that situation, knows that it is not the most eligible.

Our passage was tedious, but at last we discovered the land; about midnight,
some of the hands giving the welcome intelligence, we all got upon the deck,
and could see the American shore, to the south of Cape Henry. At daybreak we
got a pilot on board, and proceeded up the bay.

Four days afterward we arrived at Alexandria, and were met and welcomed by
every one in the town, who knew, or had ever heard of us. Every one was anxious
to hear the story of our captivity, to relieve our wants, and make us forget
our long and painful bondage. On our part, we were no less happy to meet with
our old friends, and (...) pleasing reception we met with, half-compensated for
all our sufferings.

An American has very little of the Frenchman about him. His invitations are
not ceremonious, but they are from the heart. Many invitations we were obliged
to refuse, for this day at least, as we had agreed among ourselves, before we
cast anchor, to make our first visit to a house where we were all acquainted,
in order to spend the day all together. Thither we went, and were immediately
surrounded by almost every person in the town, who had the slightest
acquaintance with any of us.

We spent the most pleasant day I ever experienced. I had yet neither got
myself rigged out with clothes, nor any birth to enable me to make money to
purchase them; but I was in the land of liberty, plenty and peace, I never
bestowed a thought on tomorrow, and ragged as I was, like the first pair in
paradise, I knew not that I was naked. We told our sufferings to a multitude of
both sexes, and many of our female friends, like Desdimonia, "loved us for the
dangers we had passed:" and "we loved them that they did pity us." After
spending a very jovial afternoon, we sallied forth into the streets, and in
walking down to the river, I was met by an old acquaintance, one Farria, mate
of a brig which traded to Philadelphia. I did not like to make myself known to
him, and therefore took to the other side of the street, but I could not pass
unnoticed. He immediately ran to me, and took me by the hand. I had divided all
the clothes I had got, among my messmates, and consequently my present
appearance did not by any means indicate affluence. "Heavens!" says he, "what a
figure you are! Where have you been? Have the Turks laid hold of you, and left
you no better clothes? I live, says he, near by, here is the house, (pointing
to a store that stood on a wharf) I will not take you from your friends now,
but beg I may see you tomorrow, and I will give you new rigging." I was highly
pleased with the offer, and resolved to accept of his invitation.

We went back to the house we first entered, and spent the evening to our
mutual satisfaction. Our friend Griffiths, who was the merriest man in the
company, helped to enliven us all, by mixing every now and then a stroke of
that humor, which his countrymen bring from the cradle, and by giving us a
bottle of wine to enable us to relish it. For my own part, I enjoyed that
evening a happiness to which I had long been a stranger, and often blessed the
memory of Columbus, for having discovered a country, where so much peace,
harmony, liberty and plenty, may be attained without any violent exertions to
come at them.

The next day we were sent for to the house of our owner, colonel How, who
received us with the warmest expressions of joy for our deliverance. He told
us, he had made several applications to Congress about procuring our liberty,
and was willing to have paid half our ransom out of his own pocket; a person,
he said, was actually nominated to go and treat for our freedom, when the news
arrived of our having obtained it by means of the Spanish ambassador. He
enquired particularly about the treatment we had received, and finished the
interview by putting into the hands of each, a present of eight guineas. This
was a seasonable relief to us all, for my own share I laid out a part of it on
such clothing as was absolutely necessary for the present, and as my fortune
had been so very indifferent in this quarter of the globe, I determined at all
events to see my native country. A new vessel was upon the stocks here, getting
ready for British owners. The captain was a countryman of my own, and I
resolved to go as a hand to Port-Glasgow, whither she was bound. It was the
middle of the bleak month of December before we were ready to sail, and on the
fourteenth of that month we left Alexandria, after I had taken leave of all my
friends, particularly of Mr. Griffiths, whom I left behind with the utmost
reluctance; but he was resolved, he said, never to revisit Ireland till he
could purchase a few acres of land, and a little cabin to lay up in during the
winter of life. We had a part of our cargo to take in at Yeokomaco, and it was
not till the fifth of January that we got all ready for sailing. We sailed down
the spacious bay of Chesapeek, and took our departure from Cape Henry with a
favorable breeze. At midnight, however, we were alarmed with a call of "All
hands;" and running upon deck, found both pumps employed, and from three to
four feet water in the hold. After laboring at the pumps for some hours, we
could perceive we were gaining ground, and at last got the vessel almost dry.
At day break, to our great joy, we discovered a sail steering the same course
with ourselves. We hove too for her coming up, and upon her nearer approach,
found her to be the John, of Hull, bound for that port; we told them our
condition, and begged they would stay by us for a day or two, to which the
captain agreed. During all this time we were constantly employed at the pumps,
but we resolved to run every risk rather than desert her; and telling captain
Brown, of the John, our resolution, he wished us a good voyage, and left us.

During the whole of our passage, one pump was kept almost constantly employed;
but our ship was new, our sails and rigging good, the wind was fair, and the
hopes of a quick passage made us submit the more readily to incessant toil and
fatigue. The twenty-third day after our departure, we observed the water change
its color; and trying for soundings, we found, to our great comfort, that we
were in eighty fathoms water, and in one day more discovered the land to the
south of Dublin. The strong gale we had for sometime been favored with, still
continued, and carried us rapidly up the channel, and we landed at Port-Glasgow
the twenty-sixth day after our departure from Cape Henry.

Thus was I once more landed in my own country, rich in experience, but without
any other kind of property; and to mend the matter, the captain refused paying
a farthing of my wages unless I returned to Virginia in the vessel. I never
could worse afford to submit to such a loss. My wardrobe still was very scanty,
and the thoughts of going to see my friends in the plight I was in, but ill
accorded with my wishes or inclinations. For several days I stayed on board,
hesitating what to do, without sending word of my arrival to my friends.
However, a young man from the neighborhood where I was born, had by accident
seen me the day after our landing, and by his means intelligence was conveyed
to my father, who immediately dispatched a messenger, with orders to come and
see him, under pain of his lasting displeasure. I had counteracted his
intentions often before, especially in going to sea at first against his
inclination, and in all the cross accidents of my life, this constantly
reproached me, I determined therefore, neither to add to his uneasiness, nor my
own, by disobeying his injunctions, and leaving my ship and wages, set out for
Ayreshire, where I was received with open arms by all my friends, and supplied
with every thing I stood in need of.

CHAP. VIII.
A Voyage to Canada.

I had not been many weeks at home, when I found myself weary with the want of
employment, and altogether out of my element. I therefore, resolved to embrace
the earliest offer of going again to sea, and an opportunity soon offered from
a port in the neighborhood, to visit a part of America, which I had never yet
been in, namely Canada. -- Four miles north of Irvine, lies Saltcoats, a small
seaport town, the trade of which is under the inspection of the Irvine
custom-house. From this port a ship was soon to sail for the abovementioned
country; and hearing they were in want of hands, I went and engaged as one. We
took on board a loading of coals, to be delivered at Cork, and on the
thirteenth of March, 1787, I again set out for the New World. On the nineteenth
we had got within about a day's sail of the Cove of Cork, when the wind veered
suddenly round to the south, and blowing very hard, we found we should not long
be able to contend with it; therefore we bore away for Dublin harbor, which we
could still command. On the hill of Howth, which lies at the mouth of the bay,
is an excellent light-house, which standing high shows light at a very great
distance at sea, and as night was fast approaching, and the tide answered, we
thought this our wisest course, and accordingly reached the harbor in safety.

Being got into this harbor, we thought it best to dispose of our cargo; and
having done this, we took in ballast, and pursued our voyage to Cork, where we
were to take in provisions for the British army in Canada. Upon the first of
April we sailed from Dublin, and on the third we cast anchor at the town of
Passage. We were employed till the seventeenth in getting our loading on board,
and on the eighteenth we sailed from Cork, with a steady and favorable breeze.

On the twentieth we took our departure from Cape Clear, and directed our
course for the river St. Laurence. At this season of the year in Britain, the
winter generally is over, and the weather grows milder; but we were bound to a
country where winter pays a longer visit. We continued our cruize, and on the
eighth of May we judged, by the extreme coldness of the weather, that we could
not be far from the coast; but on the morning of the ninth we found ourselves
surrounded by several islands of ice, which convinced us the gulf was not yet
passable. On the tenth we came in sight of several ships, some of which were
froze up, and could not move. We began to be alarmed for our own safety, and
making every exertion in our power, we at last got clear, and meeting with the
Mentor of London, the captain informed us of his having been in company with
twenty other merchantmen, who had been frozen up for sometime, and that he
himself had been fourteen days in that condition, and had sustained
considerable damage from the ice, insomuch, that he was obliged to throw a
considerable part of his cargo overboard, in order to find out the holes made
by it. He likewise told us, it would be impossible to reach our port, and for
his part he meant to run for some port in Newfoundland, and wait till the body
of the ice broke. Our captain thought it prudent to follow his example, and
accordingly we both made the best of our way for Port-Amboy, a commodious
harbor for the safety of ships; but the country is uninhabited in the
neighborhood, except in the fishing season, when the fishermen resort to it.
It is situated in nearly forty-five degrees north lat. and is fifty-nine
degrees west of London. Here for a few days, we occupied our time in fishing
and fowling, finding plenty of divertion in either line; scarce a day passed
over our heads that we did not kill great numbers of ge^se, ducks, partridges
and pigeons, which swarm all over this country; and when tired of this
exercise, we took to the amusement of fishing.

One day in walking along the shore, our captain could perceive something at a
distance like part of a ship's wreck, and returning to the vessel, we hoisted
the longboat, and made toward the place, and upon coming up to it, espied
four pieces of cannon; with part of the ropes, sails and rigging of a ship.
These we got on board of the boat, and returned to the ship, well pleased with
our prize.

Whilst we lay here, our fleet was daily augmenting till the twenty-fourth,
when a French vessel arriving, told us that they had come down from St. John's,
and that the gulf was perfectly clear. Upon hearing this, we prepared for
sailing, and early next morning we weighed anchor, and stood up this immense
gulf, till on the twenty-eighth, we arrived at Quebeck the capital of Canada,
where we came to anchor. The river at Quebeck is not above one mile broad,
though at the island of Orleans which is only a little below, it is in breadth
four or five leagues, and from the river narrowing thus suddenly, the city is
said to take its name; Que-beck, in the Indian language, signifying a straight
or narrow place. Our captain immediately went ashore, and was ordered by an
agent from the victualling office, to weigh anchor again, and sail for
Montreal, as the garrison there was in great want of provisions. As the wind
was fair no (...) was to be lost; we therefore set sail next day. Twenty
leagues above Quebeck the tide began to abate, and consequently the current
against us was very strong.

The distance from Quebeck to Montreal is about one hundred and seventy miles.
On the banks of this river the houses are so plentiful; that it appears like
one continued village. Large plantations, and gentlemen's seats appearing in
continual succession. After passing the island of Riclieu, the weather became
so extremely mild and pleasant, that we began to think ourselves transported
into another climate. The island of Montreal is about thirty miles in length,
and twelve in breadth. The town is built at the foot of a mountain, about half
a league from the south shore. It is surrounded by a wall, flanked with eleven
redoubts, which serve instead of bastions. The ditch is eight feet deep, and
proportionably wide. Here is also a citidel, the batteries of which command the
streets of the town, from one end to the other. The town is divided into two
parts, the upper and the lower, in the last of which merchants, mechanics, and
men of business reside. The hotel-dieu, the royal magazines and armoury, are
likewise placed here. In the uppertown however, are the principal buildings,
such as the palace of the governor, the parish church, and free school, besides
many other piles which have a princely appearance, and the neighborhood has a
beautiful aspect; the whole adjoining country being cultivated and interspersed
with many delightful villages. The harbor is formed by a small island, which
lies at a convenient disstance from the beech, and forms a very safe port. A
number of large vessels may lay their broad sides to the beach, so that there
are no wharfs, as in most of the American ports.

Two miles below Montreal are the rapids, a declivity of the river, where the
current runs so strong, that ships frequently lie a long time before they can
get over, having to wait for the assistance of a strong casterly wind. This
current often runs at the rate of eight or nine miles in an hour, and vessels
frequently take six or seven weeks to perform a voyage from Quebeck to
Montreal, though we were lucky enough to accomplish it in thirty-six hours. On
our arrival, we found the garrison had very urgent demands for provisions, and
as we were the first victualling ship that had reached the port for the season,
we met with a welcome reception. The troops joyfully assisted us in discharging
our cargo, and in a very short time we were clear. We employed ourselves for a
few days in cleaning the ship, and overhauling the rigging, and then took on
board part of another cargo, consisting of wheat, and were to stop to complete
our quantity at Quebeck.

In the beginning of the month of July we left Montreal, and had a most
delightful passage down a river, either side of which exhibited a country
adorned with nature's most elegant vegetable productions. Here the spring is
rapid in its progress, and a few days will alter the appearance of the country
so much, that one can scarcely know it for the same; and were not this the
case, in its short stay, it would be inadequate to the providing against a long
and dreary winter, which generally is prolonged for eight or nine months of the
year.

We had to touch at the lake of St. Thomas, but being unacquainted with the
channel, we run our vessel aground; but as the bottom was of soft clay, we got
off without any material damage. Next morning we found out the right channel,
and as we meant to take in a small quantity of wheat here, we sent our boat
ashore, and in the course of the day had what wheat we were to receive all put
on board, and next morning we proceeded for Quebeck, where we arrived safe.

On the morning after our arrival, I had liberty to go ashore, and my first
excursion was to see the ground where the brave general Wolf, in the moment of
victory, courageously fell, fighting for his country. I surveyed the remains of
the ditches and entrenchments which had been formed on the memorable occasion.
On the spot where the general fell, is the remains of a small monument erected
to his memory. I approached the hallowed spot with respect, and felt within me
a secret pride that I could call myself a Briton.

Leaving the plains of Abraham, I viewed the ground on which the French army
had been encamped, which is a beautiful level, under the protection of the city
forts. The back part of Quebeck is enclosed by a wall about sixteen feet high,
and on the top is placed a row of cannons, at regular distances. -- The harbor
is flanked with two bastions, above one of which is a demibastion, and on the
side of the gallery of the fort, is a battery of twenty-five pieces of cannon;
above this again, is a square fort, called the citadel; besides these, there
are several other large batteries and fortifications, which would render the
taking of this place a very difficult enterpri^e.

The most considerable towns in Canada, are Quebeck, Trois Riviers, and
Montreal; but Quebeck is the capital. It contains from seven to eight thousand
inhabitants, and was begun to be built by the French in the year 1608, who had
taken possession of the country in the year 1525, and retained it till 1759,
when it was conquered by the British, and confirmed to them by the peace of
1763. This city is divided into the upper and the lower towns. The banks of the
houses of the latter are placed against a rock, on which the former stands, and
an easy ascent is made from the one to the other, by steps cut out of the rock,
for foot-passengers, and at another place by a gentle declivity, which opens a
passage for all kinds of vehicles.

Here is an Episcopal palace, which stands upon as pleasant a situation as
imagination can conceive. -- On one side of an elegant square stands a
cathedral, and on the opposite side a Jesuit college; the rest of the square is
filled up with very handsome buildings. The hospitable is pleasantly situated,
and contains two wards, one for men and the other for women. There is likewise
a convent, which at this time was said to contain a considerable number of
devotees. To describe every square and public building would be an endless
task, I shall therefore close the description of this city, and give a short
sketch of the country.

The neighborhood of Quebeck, and indeed all the banks of this large river, is
beautiful beyond description. At this enchanting season of the year, the most
luxurious foliage covers the fields, and the meadows send forth the most
delicious flavor. Pears, peaches, plumbs, and apples, with many other kinds of
fruit, are here produced in the greatest abundance. Wheat is sown in the month
of May, and reaped in the month of August. The rivers and lakes are full of
fish of various kinds, which furnish the inhabitants with a constant supply.
This is the appearance of the country in summer; but alas! their summer is but
short-lived, and their winter produces an awful reverse; then the rivers are
all frozen up -- all intercourse by means of navigation is totally at an end.
For six, seven or eight months, every field is covered with snow, frozen as
hard as the surface of the water. The half-frozen inhabitants can hardly find
fuel to keep themselves from starving. All this happens in a latitude, which in
Europe is moderate and pleasant.

The Indians of this country, with whom the European settlers carry on a
considerable trade, are accounted very tractable and humane. -- They are,
during the summer season, to be found upon the river sailing in all directions,
in little canoes, in which they generally carry about with them all their
families, they are extremely fond of spirituous liquors, and a glass or two of
brandy, seasonably given them, will often help the dealer to a very
advantageous bargain. So long as they can by any means obtain this, they are
sure to be intoxicated, and will stay as long in a place as any kind of liquor
is to be had in it, and then betake themselves to their wild habitations.

These aborigines of the country, carry on a kind of barter with the European
settlers, by furnishing them with beaver, deer skin, etc. in return for which
they receive trinkets, and toys of various kinds, coarse duffles, blankets,
hatchets, tomahawks, liquors, and tobacco. The skin of a beaver is one
considerable article of trade from this country to Britain. -- The natural
history of that animal is so well known, that I shall not attempt a particular
account of it. I shall only observe, that in regulating and conducting the
business of their commonwealth, and in constructing their winter habitations,
they not only leave all other gregerious animals, but even man himself in his
natural state, greatly behind them. The Newfoundland dogs, are remarkable over
all the world for their sagacity, fidelity, and usefulness. They are employed
in this country for many domestic purposes, and perform the task required of
them, with a wonderful degree of exactness and attention. They can easily be
taught to carry any thing committed to their care, wherever they are directed.
They have carts and harnessing made on purpose, in which they will transport a
large loading to a considerable distance. By their assistance the butcher and
baker are enabled to convey, with ease, their goods to their different
customers. Masters of vessels, by their means, have all sorts of provisions
brought to their ships; families are by the same means supplied with water and
with fuel. In short, this faithful domestic, with a little training, answers so
many purposes, and is so useful, both by land and water, that an extirpation of
the species would be a very serious misfortune to this country. I have
frequently seen of them in other countries, but I am apt to think they lose
something both of their valor and tractableness, when carried to warmer
climates.

The reptile race is at least as numerous here as in other parts of North
America. The rattle-snake, in particular, seems to thrive remarkably on this
soil. They sometimes are found of the amazing length of fourteen, fifteen, and
sixteen feet, with a proportionable thickness. Fortunately, however, the noise
they make in moving, prevents the bad effects that would otherwise happen, as
they are certain to give warning of their approach, by the rattling of their
tail, by which means the traveller is enabled to avoid their venomous bite. --
The almost inexhaustable forests here, produce a variety of different kinds of
trees. The pines, which are of two sorts, the red and the white, from both of
which pitch and tar may be extracted; several kinds of firs, which grow to an
amazing size, and furnish excellent masts for ships; the cedar and the oak are
likewise both distinguished by the qualities of white and red; and the maple,
which generally grows on an elevated situation, and makes excellent household
furniture, is likewise distinguished by the qualities of male and female. But
it would be an endless task to particularize the various sorts of trees and
vegetables, which cover the face of this wonderful country. I shall therefore
proceed with my narrative.

In a few days our loading was completed at Quebeck, and we lost no time in
weighing anchor. We sailed down the river about thirty leagues, when we stopped
for some time to take in spars. We cast anchor, and seven of us, among whom was
the captain, went ashore and began to cut down trees; but we had not been long
at work, when our captain, who was at some distance, came running to us
breathless, and calling upon us to make haste, as a large body of Indians was
at no great distance. None of our number had a mind to trust to their mercy, we
therefore, with all possible haste got our trees into the water, and tying them
together as well as we could, got into the boat; but we then discovered that
one of our comrades was a missing: we waited for him in the most dreadful state
of anxiety; none of us being hardy enough to venture through the woods in quest
of him. At last we espied him running toward as with all his might, and
reaching the shore, he lea^^d into the boat, begging us for heaven's sake to
pull of, as the Indians had espied him, and were following. He had scarcely
uttered these words when a great number of them came in sight, but before they
espied us we had made off from the shore, to which they came with all
imaginable haste, and shouted, and made signals for us to put back; but as we
did not know whether their intentions were friendly or hostile, we thought it
most prudent to return to the ship. As soon as we had got on board, they
lighted up a fire on the shore, and placing themselves round it, began to
disp^^ch some kind of food, after which they all rose and began to dance to a
sort of music; but as none of us had the least inclination to mix in the dance,
we immediately set sail, and had a very agreeable passage down the river.

We again entered the immense gulf, and having made cape St. George, the wind
setting in from the south east, began to blow very violently. We stood to the
north east, but could only carry a foresail; when we got so near the land as to
discern what part of it we were opposite to, we wore the ship and stood out
again, but the flood-tide dragged us rapidly toward the botto^ ^f the bay,
where we must inevitibly have been dashe^ to pieces. Seeing no method of
avoiding the land but by carrying sail, we set close ree^^d topsails, and so
got clear. Having once more g^t (...) room, and the gale abating, we directed
our course to the eastward, our destination being to the bay of Cadiz, where we
were to deliver our cargo. Nothing remarkable happened during a very pleasant
passage; we reached Madeira on the twenty-eighth of August, and then directed
our course for cape St. Vincent, the most westerly point of Spain, lying in
lat. thirty-seven degrees, and longitude nine, west of London. This cape we
made on the sixth of September, and arrived at Cadiz on the ninth. We did not
get product, or liberty to land, till the twelfth.

Our captain during the time of our discharging, endeavored to procure a
freight either up the Mediterranean, or to the coast of Barbary, but could not
succeed for either. We were therefore, obliged to take in ballast, and proceed
up the Mediterranean to Alicant, where we expected to get a cargo of salt for
Cork. Upon the fifth of October we left Cadiz, and stood for Cape Sparteel, or
the mouth of the gulf, which we made on the seventh. Here the current always
runs eastward, and if the wind happens to be from that direction, it makes a
very crooked sea. Very luckily for us we had a strong gale from the westward,
and upon the eleventh we found by our observation that we were right abreast of
Ali^^^t, which is seated at the bottom of a deep extensive bay of the same
name. On the twelfth we came to anchor in the bay, but upon our captain's going
ashore, he was told, he must go to St. Paul's, at three leagues distance, to get
his loading.

Alicant, in the kingdom of Valentia, lies in latitude 38. 16. north. It is
seated at the foot of a mountain, and is only a small town, but one of the
richest and best defended of any of the fire in Spain. A very considerable
trade is carried on from it to almost every nation in Europe; and the English,
French, Italians, and Dutch, have each a consul resident here.

The castle, like that of Edinburgh, stands upon a high rock, and is,
undoubtedly, a very strong place; notwithstanding it was taken by the English
in the year 1706. It was again retaken by the French and Spaniards, after a
siege of two years; during which, part of the rock on which it stands was blown
up.

Alicant is remarkable for the flavor of its wines, and the excellent fruits
of all kinds it produces. It is, however, greatly deficient in one necessary
article -- fresh water; for in dry seasons, scarce a drop can be got. Large
quantities of fish are brought here from Newfoundland, by the British, in
return for which they take wine, brandy, and fruit, all of which articles are
plentiful and cheap. We removed to St. Paul's on the thirteenth, and in seven
days our loading was co^pleted. On the twenty-first we went along the sho^^ for
some miles in quest of water, but could not get a drop; at last a Spaniard
coming up, directed us to go about two hundred yards and dig in the sand, and
we would get a supply. We did so, and got water of the very worst kind, but we
had no other resource, and were obliged to lay in a supply of it, for at least
a part of our voyage. On the twenty-third we got on board an Irish lady, for a
passenger, one of the most sprightly and entertaining of her sex I ever sailed
with. When the weather would permit, she was constantly upon deck, and in
laying in sea-store she had by no means been forgetful of us.

We arrived at Gibraltar on the twenty-ninth of October, and making all
imaginable haste to get out of the way of the Algerine cruizers, we pursued our
course till the third of December, when we made the land westward of Cape
Clear, and on the sixth arrived at the bay Cork, to the great joy of all on
board, but particularly of our passenger, who seemed quite transported at the
sight of her dear little Ireland. Here we had to discharge one cargo and take
on board another; and after a tempestuous passage, we arrived, on the twentieth
of January, at the port of Greenock.

CHAP. IX.
A Voyage to the Hebrides, Denmark, and Prussia.

THE extreme desire of seeing the world, by which I had ever been governed, was
not yet abated, what I had seen served but the more to increase it; my only
study was how to vary the scene. I had seen the manners of the southern
nations, and now wished to examine those of the northern. I had not been long
at home till an opportunity presented itself of gratifying my desire. A brig,
from the Clyde, was to sail for Copenhagen and Memmil, and as this was a voyage
greatly to my mind. I engaged as a hand. We set sail, with a favorable wind
for the Hebrides, a group of islands on the west of Scotland. The safest and
readiest passage to the north, lies through these islands, as, in case of a
storm, ships can always command a port to take shelter in, all the Hebrides
being furnished with excellent harbors, besides almost every kind of
provisions, such as mutton, fowls, fish and eggs, which are both plentiful and
cheap.

In these latitudes the weather is often tempestuous to a great degree; many
vessels keep to the westward of them altogether, and by that means are deprived
of shelter in the hour of danger, and not unfrequently lose both their lives
and vessels. Among these islands the wind blows in tremendous gusts, but the
intervals between them, are so calm, that one may expose a lighted candle in
their hand, without its being extinguished. But ships run very little risk, for
if the wind should be unfavourable for one passage it generally answers for
another, and in these sounds or channels, there are very few instances of any
dangerous accidents happening. The most southerly of these islands are Jusa and
Ila, in the last of which is a fresh water lake, with an island in the middle
of it, on which may still be seen the ruins of a large building, said to have
been built by Donald, king of the Isles. Between these two islands is the
entrance, known by the name of the Sound of Ila. In sailing to the northward
the island of Mull makes its appearance, which is about twenty-four miles long,
and near twenty broad. Further north lies Lewis, which is seventy miles west of
the main land of Scotland, and is eighty miles in length, and forty-one in
breadth; and Barra, which is five miles long, and three broad. Cod and ling are
caught here in great quantities, and several small vessels come to the island
last mentioned, in the summer, and return laden with fish.

We came to anchor in the harbor of Stornway, on the east side of the island
of Lewis, which is extremely commodious; and in the town of Stornway, which
contains about one hundred houses, provisions are plentiful and cheap. The
weather setting in stormy, we were forced to lie here for fourteen days, during
which time I had an opportunity of informing myself of the manners of those
islanders, and of mixing with such so^^ty as the place afforded.

The inhabitants of these islands still retain a wonderful degree of veneration
for their chiefs, or heads of their clans. -- No Jew ever valued himself more
on his descent from the father of the faithful, than one of these islanders
does, if by any means he can trace back his descent from some lord of a clan;
and this they will go back through fifty generations to make out; and though
poor as oppression can make them, they assume a consequence, from their
illustrious descent, that makes up for the want of more substantial
gratifications. Happy is the man who has had the good fortune to be born a Mac
Donald, a Mac Pherson, or a Mac of any kind; in these islands he is sure to
meet with some illustrious cousins. Their dress perhaps may but ill accord with
their noble extraction, but clothes are but trifles, their views are more
exalted. Allow them to tell you over their illustrious pedigree, and whilst
they are doing it, enliven their spirits with a glass of usquebaugh, or a pinch
of snuff, and the ragged Hebredian becomes as great a man as the cham of
Tartary. -- These remains of feudal idolatry, however, are beginning to wear
out among the rising generation; and as trade and manufactures get footing in
the Hebrides, these ideal advantages will proportionably fall in their value.
At present their principal trade, as well as food, is drawn from the ocean; and
did the industry of the inhabitants, keep pace with their necessities, they
might thence extract vast sources of wealth: nature has brought the means to
their doors, but they are extremely indolent in the application of them.
Accustomed to humble fare, and coarse apparel, their wants are few and soon
supplied. They rise in the morning without many wishes, and go to bed with the
satisfaction of having them gratified. Indolent as they are in application to
business, no men in the world make better soldiers, or endure the fatigues of a
painful campaign, with more unshaken patience and resolution; hunger, thirst
and fatigue, are unable to vanquish their undaunted spirits. Let their leaders
be chosen from their own country, and no degree of danger can affright them.
When they choose to exert themselves, they show a wonderful degree of agility
and activity, and nothing gives such life to their motions as the sound of the
bagpipe. Every chieftian, or great man, has a bagpiper of his own, who
entertains him and his dependents with this animating music, and while he plays
over the peebroch or strath-spay, unless his audience were tied hand and foot,
it would be almost impossible to keep them from dancing. Their coarse food is
generally little indebted to the cook, nor is cleanliness much attended to
among them; they are, however, kind and hospitable to strangers, fond of
showing them every civility in their power, and you cannot more oblige them,
than by sitting down without ceremony, to partake of their humble repast. Their
expert trade consists almost entirely of fish, but this is trilling to what it
might be if the people were industrious, or were put upon proper methods of
taking the vast shoals that visit this coast.

Leaving the western isles, we directed our course for the Orkneys, another
group of islands on the north of Scotland, separated from the main land by the
tempestuous straits, called Pentland Firth, which is twenty-four miles long and
twelve broad. The inhabitants of these islands have been long visited from
almost every nation in Europe, consequently they have in a great measure lost
the originality of manners which once characterized them; and their language
begins to be mixed with that of other nations. They have in particular,
borrowed several words from the Dutch, who, during the fishing season,
constantly resort here.

Almost every Greenland ship calls here, whether outward or homeward bound, for
the purpose of laying in fresh provisions, which are both plentiful and very
cheap; also vessels to and from the different ports in the Baltic, so that in
the summer season, the inhabitants of the Orkneys have no want of company. But
in winter, thick clouds, darkness and storms, continually hang over them. In
the months of June and July they can see to read ordinary print at midnight.
Four months of the year is all the time they have for business, for in the
short visits the sun pays them in winter, he is so exceedingly shy, that they
derive very little advantage either from his light or heat, and the weather is
generally so very tempestuous, that they can but seldom visit one another, much
less their neighbors on the main land. -- The number of islands is
twenty-eight; (...) taking in the very small ones, they will amount to forty.
From these islands two members are sent to the British parliament, one for
Orkney and Zetland, and the other for the burghs of Kirkwall, etc.

In Kirkwall, the capital of the Orkneys, there remains entire, a fine Gothic
building, formerly a cathedral, and now the parish church. It is supported by
fourteen pillars on each side, and is steepled by four. It has three gates,
checquered with red and white stone, embossed and elegantly flowered. -- I need
not spend the time of my reader in an account of a people who are already so
well known, I shall therefore proceed with my narrative.

After waiting at Stormness for some time, we set sail with a fine
south-westerly wind, and passing through Ham-Sound, directed our course for the
Naze in Norway, which we made in two day's sailing; from thence we sailed along
the mouth of the Catigate, and made the peninsula of Jutland. Nothing material
happened us during the rest of our passage, till we arrived at Copenhagen, the
capital of Denmark, where we had to discharge our cargo, which detained us for
several weeks, during which time I had an opportunity, as my custom was
wherever I went, of viewing what app^^^^d worthy of notice in the city.

The excellency of the harbor, and its advantageous situation for trade,
cannot be surpassed. It is guarded on both sides by strong fortifications, and
the entrance is so narrow, that one ship only can enter at a time; and when
once ships get in they are perfectly secure either by night or by day; for at
night the harbor is secured by a strong boom laid across the mouth of it, and
chained at both ends. This large commodious harbor can contain four or five
hundred vessels, and is surrounded by a wooden gallery, to which ships may lay
their broad sides, and where every vessel has her appointed station. -- Were we
to judge of the power or revenues of a monarch from the extent of his
dominions, the king of Denmark would make a very conspicuous figure among the
potentates of Europe. His titles are, King of Denmark and Norway, and of the
Goths and Vandals; Duke of Holstein, Oldenbourg and Delmenhorst: of all of
which he is the actual sovereign. -- But the vast territories he possesses, are
by no means populous, in proportion as they are extensive; and the greater part
of the inhabitants are in a state of real indigence, and in what is commonly
looked upon by other European nations, as a state of real misery.

The kingdom of Norway is of a vast extent, being no less than eight hundred
miles long, and one hundred broad. It is inhabited by amphibious animals in the
shape of men, who, during the short summer, are constantly employed in catching
and eating fish; and in winter sleep, or do what they please. Here, in the
space of six weeks they both sow and reap, but a long and dreary winter
succeeds, and for nine months of the year the ground is covered with snow. The
pitiful inhabitants then retire to their miserable huts, and dream away an
uncomfortable winter, without variety or enjoyment. If ever there was necessity
for a man choosing an agreeable companion for life, it is here: for in this
uncomfortable part of the globe, his wife is for three-fourths of the time his
only companion. The snow shuts him up from all his neighbors; and if he is not
happy at home, miserable indeed must be his situation. -- One thing remarkable
in this country is, that all animals of chase, such as hares, rabbits, deers,
etc. are entirely white; and even any of those animals taken from Britain, in
the course of one season change their color; so that none of them in Norway,
are to be found after a few months residence, in the same colored garb in
which they first visited the country.

The inhabitants of this kingdom are numerous, barren as it is. They multiply
fast; and the nature of the climate, and the food they make use of, I imagine,
are no ways unfavourable to propagation. I need not mention to my readers, that
the climate is beyond endurance cold, and the greater part of their food is
fish. The king of Denmark, therefore, has a numerous body of men yearly
propagated in these his Norwegian dominions; and if the maxim be true, that the
riches of a kingdom depend upon the number of its inhabitants, he has no reason
to complain of poverty. I am apt however to imagine, that men introduced into
the world, in the state his Danish majesty subjects visit it, can do very
little either for themselves or their sovereign. They are produced, it is true,
by their parents, and nursed by their mother, from the same principal, or
instinct, (if my reader will allow the term) that the bears suckle their
offspring, and so their care is at an end. The father instructs them as soon as
they are capable, in the mysteries of handling the oar, and striking the fish;
and when he has perfected them in these manly exercises, he gives up the rein,
and leaves them to the direction of Providence. -- Learning is not much known
or coveted. It is not the fashion of the country to train up philosophers,
metaphysicians, or divines. -- Poets however there are, who relate the
legendary tale, in numbers deemed harmonious: and no people under heaven have
so great a taste for poetry of the mavelous cast, or tell a story so much in
the style of eastern improbabilty, and in such persuasive language, as the
Norwegian poet, or dramatist. -- It is certain, mankind express most forcibly
the passions which they feel most acutely. Savage nations have, without the aid
of refinement or education, sung their battles and amors in strains which the
learned European cannot help reading with enthusiasm. Offian has had numberless
admirers and imitators, but it is more than probable he will never have an
equal. Whether or not the great variety of ideas, avocations, and pursuits,
that a state of polished or refined society opens up to us, deranges and
dissipates those powers that in a state of nature have only one object for
their theme, I leave to my philosophical reader to determine; but unlearned as
I am, I cannot help thinking, that whilst the poets of modern days have found
the way to please the ear, some of them who have only had nature for their
instructress, have found the most effectual key to the inmost recesses of the
heart.

The strange appearance of every thing in nature, in these northern climes,
fills the mind, unaccustomed to it, with wonderful ideas. To behold the sun for
several weeks moving round and round the pole, without ever losing sight of him
altogether, or at most to have only a shy and hasty visit of an hour, or an
hour and a half's continuance, once in the twenty-four, is so different from
what we are accustomed to behold, that one cannot help imagining himself
transported into another world. In summer one may read the smallest print at
midnight with as great ease as they can do in winter at midday. -- The produce
of the land here would be totally inadequate to the sustenance of the
inhabitants, did not the sea, in a great measure, make up for its deficency.
Immense quantities of fish are taken on these coasts, which are spread on the
rocks or sand, and dried by the heat of the sun. A high chain of mountains runs
between Norway and Sweden, called the Dafrine-hills, which are neither
cultivated nor inhabited. In the year 1387, it was united to Denmark; previous
to this period it had kings of its own. In the year 1525 the people embraced
the Lutheran religion, which they continue to profess to this day.

The king of Denmark appoints a viceroy, who has absolute power, and resides at
Bergen, which is the capital of this country. There are in Norway, four general
governments, Aggerhays, Bergen, Drontheim, and Wardhuys, besides the
dependencies of the kingdom, which are Iceland and the Isle of Ferro. The face
of this country presents only forests and mountains, and produces oak, deal
boards, tar and pitch. There are likewise several iron and copper mines in the
country, which produce a small revenue to government. -- The houses are built
mostly upon the side of high precipices, and they are forced to make use of
ladders to ascend and descend. When a person dies, he is commonly let down with
ropes before he is put into the coffin. Many large caves are found in the
mountains, inhabited by wild beasts, such as foxes, lynxes, bears, and wolves,
which make great havoc and devastation among the domestic animals. The people
are almost totally unacquainted with the arts. Machinery is so much in its
infancy amongst them, that a person coming to Bergen from the country, is
amazed at the sight of a two-wheeled carriage or cart. There is in the sea of
Norway, a surprising current or motion, proceeding from a vortex or whirpool,
called the Malestrom; the roaring of which is the most tremendous of any thing
I ever heard. This noise only intermits a quarter of an hour in every six
hours, when the sea is at high and low water, and at these time, fishermen
venture into it. When it is most boisterous, in the time of a storm, it is
dangerous to come within a league of it, for by going too near, boats, and even
large vessels, have often been absorbed. This happens very frequently to
whales, who in their fruitless struggles, make a loud noise, when they find
themselves impelled to follow the current; but it always proves more than a
match for any thing once in its power.

Denmark, including Holstein, is bounded on the north by the Catigate, on the
east by the Baltic, and on the south by the river Elbe, which divides it from
Bremen. The co^^^^y is in general, flat, and the soil a barren sand. It is
almost surrounded by seas, and interspersed with lakes and canals, which
renders the air foggy, and the country unhealthy and disagreeable to strangers,
although the natives of the country are, in general healthy and long-lived. The
kingdom of Denmark, properly so called, is composed of the islands of Jutland,
Zealand, and Funen; each of which have their satellites, or smaller islands, in
their neighborhood.

Copenhagen, the capital of Denmark, is seated in the island of Zealand. This
island, the residence of the royal family, is nearly of a circular form,
measuring about sixty leagues in circumference. The channel, called the Sound,
divides it from Sohonin, a province of Sweden. The soil is by no means
fruitful, especially in dry seasons, on account of its sandy foundation;
notwithstanding the people make all their own bread, but this is the only grain
produced here, sufficient for the consumption of the inhabitants. There is not
one river of any consequence in this island, and but few brooks or rivulets
large enough to turn a mill. There are however, a number of lakes, plentifully
stored with various kinds of excellent fish. Their cattle are small and lean,
owing perhaps to long confinement in winter, for during the space of eight
months of the year they are kept almost continually within doors. A fourth part
of the island, at least, is a forest, in which there are a great variety of
game, reserved, by the royal mandate, for the amusement of the court. The
island is divided into twenty-six districts or bailiwicks; containing thirteen
towns, twelve castles, and three hundred and forty-seven parishers. It produces
great numbers of cattle, which, as I already observed, are small, but their
beef is uncommonly pleasant to the taste. Copenhagen stands in latitude
fifty-six, north, and nearly thirteen degrees east of London. Jutland, the
principal division of the kingdom, is about one hundred and eighty miles in
length from north to south, and fifty in breadth from east to west. To this
part of the country, it is said, England owes its ancient conquerors. The
people in this country are in general red-haired; and in many parts of the
British dominions, particularly in Ireland, their descendants are discoverable
from the color of their hair to the present day.

This peninsula is bounded on the south-east by the Duchy of Holstein, and
surrounded on the other sides by the German ocean and the Baltic sea. Funen, is
separated from it by a strait, called the Lesser-Belt; and from Zealand by
another strait, called the Great Belt. It produces wheat and barley, of each a
considerable quantity. The Duchy of Holstein is likewise subject to the king
of Denmark, in consequence of which he is an elector of the empire. This
country is about one hundred miles long and fifty broad, and is not the most
inconsiderable of his dominions, being a pleasant, fruitful country, and
containing the two excellent harbors, Hamburgh and Lubeck.

The metropolis of this kingdom makes a most magnificent appearance at a
distance. The king's palace, since burnt down, was a very superb building, and
was built in the year 1730. The citadel is a regular fort, defended by five
bastions, a double ditch full of water, and several advanced works. The
exchange and arsenal of the East India company, the king's stables, the
college, the orphan and opera houses, together with the military school are all
of them magnificent structures. Unfortunately for this city however, accidental
fires in one night sometimes destroy as many houses as is built in half a
century. In the year 1728, six thousand houses were reduced by fire to two
thousand two hundred and fifteen. The damage they have sustained in the present
year, from the same cause, must be immense, though the exact amount of it is
not yet ascertained in any account I have seen. This city is about five miles
in circumference; and is said to contain one hundred thousand inhabitants,
exclusive of soldiers and sailors. It is divided into ten parishes, each of
which has a church that goes by its name; but besides these, there are several
other places of public worship; eleven areas, or squares, in which markets are
kept; and one hundred and fifty streets. The city is strong both by nature and
art, the ground being marshy, deep canals are cut all round, and through the
middle of it, which are extremely convenient for the conveyance of goods. The
island of Amak is joined to the city by a bridge, from whence the markets are
supplied with the greater part of their provisions.

The Danes are in general tall, robust and well made. In the summer season they
affect the dress of the French nation; but in winter they are forced to have
recourse to their original furs. Like many other nations, the tables of the
rich and that of the poor present a dreadful contract: the former are spread
with all the variety which luxury can devise; the latter have no higher
ornaments that salt or stock fish, with a piece of rye-bread; and this is the
plebeian fare of Denmark, with very little variety, through the year. In most
northern countries, both men and women are fond of strong liquors. It is said
that in Russia the royal edict went forth, that no lady should appear drunk at
an assembly. I will not aver that a similar order is necessary in Denmark; as I
cannot say that I ever saw any of the ladies intoxicated; but I have seen a
woman drink more strong brandy than would have intoxicated most men of ordinary
constitutions in England, without any visible effects from it. A stranger no
sooner enters a house, then the bottle is presented. The proper hour of
drinking is whenever the liquor is to be had; nor are they so puny as to
require a dilution of water to make it go down, but take it without the
smallest mixture. The higher orders of females commonly leave the table after a
glass or two goes round; but the men drink till they forget that they live in a
cold climate, and are carried to bed in a state of complete stupefaction.

When a young couple agree to be married, a convention of the friends of the
parties meet to settle preleminaries, and if every thing is agreed upon, the
parties contract in the presence of their friends, and often go together
without asking leave of the church; and it is not till the woman is upon the
eve of bringing forth her first child, that the ceremony is performed publicly.
Cumstom sanctions many things in one country, that seem strange in another, for
this anti-nuptial intercourse is neither quarrelled with by laity nor clergy;
and there are few instances of women having cause to repent their credulity,
the men looking upon a contract thus publicly made as equally binding with any
form.

They bury their dead with great funeral pomp, and often keep them above ground
for weeks, or months, or perhaps for a year, that the surviving relations may
gratify their own vanity by getting preparations made for the most magnificent
interment. This folly is however chiefly confined to the rich, for the poor are
consigned to the grave with less ceremony, though even among them, a band of
mourners are hired and paid by the parish, (if the surviving relations cannot
afford it themselves) who accompany the deceased to the grave with the most
doleful exterior, and with cries and lamentations deplore the loss they do not
feel, and wipe away the tears they never shed. It is probable our neighbors,
the Irish, have derived their funeral howl from the Danes when they were in the
country, but this I leave to the antiquary to determine.

After four weeks stay at Copenhagen, we weighed anchor on the twenty-fourth of
October, and set sail for Mem^^el. We made the small island of Mona the same
evening This island lies to the southward of Copenhagen, and produces large
quantities of grain. Passing this we directed our course for the coast of
Prussia, and on the thirtieth passed the islands of Burnholme and Earthholme,
and after a very pleasant voyage we espied land, which proved to be
Dutchman's-Cape, a grove of trees about four miles north of Memmel river. We
soon made the town, and having only ballast on board it was soon discharged.

The town of Memmel is one of the most flourishing places in the Prussian
dominions. Upwards of two thousand vessels are loaded yearly at this port with
the produce of the country. It is extremely populous, though by no means
regularly built, and increases rapidly both in size and population. It is
fortified by three whole and two half bastions, besides strong outworks, and a
regular citadel. On the Memmel side of the river, the land is fertile and
productive, but on the side opposite, it is only a barren sand, producing
nothing either for man or beast. The river is broad and navigable a
considerable way above the town, but no ships go further up, owing perhaps, to
the want of trade in the inland parts of the kingdom: for commerce is almost
solely confined to the towns on the coast.

Dantzick, the largest, richest and strongest town in the king of Prussia's
territories, and the sea of a bishop, is surrounded by a wall, and completely
fortified; and is said to contain upwards of a hundred thousand inhabitants.
Here is a celebrated university, which has long been noted for the learning of
its professors. The houses are built of brick, or stone, and are from four to
seven stories high; and in many of the streets rows of trees are planted, which
in hot weather form a very agreeable shade. -- This city is nominally a
republic, and claims a territory of about forty miles round it. The town is
divided into twenty-six parishes, and contains, among other noted buildings,
several hospitals and convents. It is a free Hanseatic town, governed by its
own laws and magistrates. Their magistracy consists of thirty senators, and
thirteen consuls, and the latter elect four burgo-masters out of their own
body. They likewise appoint all other officers; but one hundred burghers are
annually elected to inspect the administration of government, and defend the
rights and privileges of the people. The vast trade carried on from this port
chiefly consists of grain, timber, and naval stores. On an average, they are
said to export, annually, seven hundred thousand tons of corn, which is brought
down the Vestula in Polish vessels, and laid up in large granaries, to be
disposed of to the foreign vessels, who continually come here to purchase it.
-- Lutheranism is the established religion, but all sects and religions are
tolerated.

Koningsberg, the capital in legal Prussia, contains about three thousand
houses, and about sixty thousand inhabitants. The palace is a very superb and
elegant structure, in which is a hall two hundred and seventy-four feet long,
and fifty-nine feet broad. The tower of of the castle is a very great height,
having no less than two hundred and eighty-four steps from the bottom to the
top, from whence there is a beautiful prospect of a very fertile country. This
city contains eighteen churches, fourteen of which belong to the Lutherans,
three to the Calvinists, and one to the Catholics. The rampart, with which it
is surrounded, is seven miles in circumference, and incloses along with the
city some beautiful gardens and pleasure grounds. It has eight gates and
thirty-two ravelins. The city stands upon the river Pregel, over which are
built seven bridges, which render the communication easy between the different
quarters of it. The exchange is a beautiful edifice, adorned with a great
variety of elegant paintings; and the city has long been respected for its
trade and navigation.

Pillaw is about twenty miles west from Koningsberg, and stands upon a point,
or peninsula. It has an excellent harbor, is a place of considerable strength,
and is looked upon as the bulwark of Prussia toward the sea, being extremely
well fortified. The town is populous, the inhabitants rich, and great numbers
of foreigners continually resort to it.

The kingdom of Prussia, originally insignificant, under the government of
three kings, has grown to a vast extent. The present monarch will add
considerably to its size, if the empress of Russia allows him his share of the
unhappy country they have thought fit to seize upon. The fate of Poland is well
known.
This country is watered by several rivers, the principal of which are the
Vistula, Neimen, Pregel and Memmel, which renders it extremely commodious for
commerce. The soil, in general, is excellent, and produces great quantities of
grain, and the climate tolerably mild.

The kings of Prussia are fonder of rearing soldiers than husbandmen, and
perhaps this may be one reason why a large portion of the land is altogether
uncultivated; for the people are generally more industrious than their
neighbors; but the great armies, which are constantly kept up, must
considerably diminish the number of laborers. -- In the course of the present
century, vast numbers of emigrants from France, Switzerland and Germany, have
gone to settle in Prussia, who have carried the arts and improvements of their
several countries along with them; by which means the natives are become more
civilized and better informed, more industrious and opulent. Most of the
luxuries of (...) which formerly were brought from other countries, are now
produced at home, glass and iron works are erected, as also powder, paper,
brass and copper mills; linen cloth, snuffs and silk, are manufactured with
considerable success. Besides grain and timber, which are the chief articles of
exportation, this country exports wool, honey, wax, pitch, flax, hemp and hops;
potashes, leather, skins and tallow; in short, no European country of the same
size, exports a greater variety of articles, or imports less, than the kingdom
of Prussia, so that the balance of trade is greatly in its favor.

The king, as duke of Brandenburg, is an elector of the empire, and by his
recent connection with the French republic, is likely to gain a considerable
accession of influence in regulating the affairs of the Germanic body. His
revenues arise from excise and custom-house duties, stamps, newspapers, timber
from the royal lands, skins, grain, manufactures, and almost every article of
commerce: and these taxes are laid on with an unsparing hand, and exacted with
rigor.

The constitution of this country, since the year 1702, when the dukes assumed
the title of kings, is absolute monarchy. The late king, with all his great and
good qualities, was extremely tenacious of his prerogative; (...) the present
king is not likely to give up any of those rights and privileges of sovereignty
which his predecessor transmitted to him. The people however, seem happy; and
as provisions are plentiful and cheap, every one, with a little industry, has
it in his power to procure the necessaries of life, so that absolute want is
scarcely known in the country. The domestic animals here are much the same as
in other continental countries; and the rivers and lakes supply them with
abundance of excellent fish; and besides the common kinds of game, they have
elks, wild-asses and uri, in their forests, which last is of a very large size,
something resembling oxen; and their hides, which are a remarkable length and
thickness, are sold to foreigners at a very great price.

The most remarkable production of the country is yellow-amber; some of which
is got upon the mountains, where they find a kind of vicous substance, which
when exposed to the open air, becomes amber; but the greater part proceeds from
the sea, where the peasantry fish for it with long iron rakes. -- Prussia
proper is about five hundred miles in length, and where it is narrowest one
hundred miles in breadth.

It was not till the eighth of November that we completed our cargo, and the
weather setting in very stormy, threatened a disagreeable passage. We set sail
on the tenth, and proceeded down the Baltic with a (...) easterly wind, and
arrived at Elfinore, where we ca^^ anchor, and paid our toll or tribute to the
king of Denmark, which is collected here. Elfinore is next to Copenhagen in
respect of commerce; and contains upwards of five thousand inhabitants. It is
fortified strongly on the land side, and toward the sea by a strong fort,
containing several batteries of large cannons.

After completing our business here, we weighed anchor and proceeded down the
Catigate, with a numerous fleet of British, Dutch, and Danish vessels. The
weather was much better than we expected at this season of the year, and after
a voyage, in which nothing material happened, we arrived safe on the
twenty-sixth of December at the port of Irvine, were the vessel was laid up for
some time, and I determined to pass the rest of the winter in the society of my
friends.

CHAP. X.
A Voyage to Ireland, in the Course of which the Vessel was cast away, and all
hands perished except the Author.

MY life, as the reader may perceive, had hitherto been attended with some
disagreeable circumstances; but I am now to relate an event, which forms the
most tragical part of it, which proved fatal to all my companions, and which
had nearly, proved fatal to myself.

My dear companions now sleep insensible to the pleasures and pains of
mortality. I only was left to tell their affectionate relations their tragical
fate. (...) "the ways of heaven are dark and intrical, puzzled (...) mazes and
perplexed in errors." For what purpose I am reserved, that Power that sent me
into existence only can tell. So narrow and unexpected an escape, however,
ought, while I am endowed with life and being, to excite my gratitude to the
merciful Preserver of my life, and to teach one to devote what remains of it to
the most useful purposes.

On the fifth of October, 1788, I sailed from Irvine in a small vessel, deep
laden, for Drogheda, in Ireland. Our cargo was coals, which always find a
ready market in that country, where they are a scarce and dear article.

Our vessel being only fifty tons burden, a captain, three men and a boy, were
all that was necessary to navigate her. We had a favorable breeze, which soon
carried us across the channel to our intended port, and finding a ready market
for our cargo, we loaded with grain, with an intention of disposing of it in
Liverpool. I had the opportunity, however, of spending a few days in this
ancient Irish city, and I must here frankly acknowledge, that in all the
different places I have been in, I never yet met with so much real, unexpected
and unmerited hospitality.

The city of Drogheda is the principal town in the county of Luth, in the
province of Ulster. It had formerly been surrounded by a wall, the greater part
of which is now in ruins. It contains from six to seven thousand inhabitants,
and has an excellent harbor, from which vast quantities of grain are exported.
The greater part of the inhabitants are of the Roman Catholic persuasion. The
established church is a large and elegant building. Formerly there was a
Presbyterian church here, but the clergyman getting possession of the deed of
the ground and house, and finding he had but few hearers, sold it to a company
of players, who have hitherto used it as a theater.

This city stands on both sides of the river Boyne, but the greater part of it
is on the north side. About a mile and a half above Drogheda, the famous battle
of the Boyne was fought, where king James made the last stand for three
kingdoms, if a stand it could be called, for the man, who in a subordinate
capacity was an undaunted commander, when his all was at stake, retired to the
side of a hill, at a safe distance from the scene of action, where he had a
view of the battle, and stood till he beheld his army routed and put to slight;
after which he, himself, fled with the precipitation of a coward, and made the
best of his way to France, where he dragged out the remainder of an inglorious
life, a dependent upon the bounty of Lewis XIV.

In memory of this famous battle, or as it is said, in memory of duke
Schomberg, who fell in crossing the Boyne, a monument is erected close by the
river side, about twenty-two or twenty-four feet high, exactly opposite to the
spot where king William's army crossed.

The Irish seem to prize the Dutch deliverance at a very high rate, for in most
of the northern countries, and especially in this neighborhood, it is
customary for a whole company of convivial friends to fall down upon their
knees and drink the glorious and immortal memory of king William III. and till
of late, that politics have taken a new direction, this, in almost every
company, was certain to be a toast.

I happened while in this place, one day to fall in company with a Roman
Catholic clergyman, at a gentleman's house. In the course of the conversation,
he entertained the company with the following professional anecdote, which
amused us not a little. "One night lately," says he, "I was sent for, to bless
a piece of mould to put into the coffin of an old woman, about half a mile out
of town, who was to be buried next day. As I had half undressed myself, and was
almost ready to go bed, I told them to go and bless it themselves, and as they
had the orders of a clergyman it would do equally as well as if I was on the
spot. This did not by any means please them, and before the messenger went home
he got another clergy^^n, who went and blessed the mould, and anathematized me.

"Next morning they went and complained of me to the tutelar bishop, who
immediately sent for me, and reprimanded me severely, telling me I ought to
comply with popular prejudices, for the world was not yet ripe enough for the
government of reason, and that it we did not keep mankind in awe by these
little arts, we should soon lose all power over them. I told him, (says the
frair, for such he was) that power so gained was better lost than kept, upon
which we parted very bad friends." I have since been informed that this same
honest friar had, a few months after this, read his recantation in the
established church, and became an orthodox preacher, according to the laws of
the land.

It must be observed, however, that the apostasy of a Roman Catholic priest
has never yet had much effect in hurting the cause they deserted, for the
government of the country obliges the county in which they live, to pay every
one of them forty pounds per annum, till they are provided with a living to
that amount on the establishment. When a priest apostatizes, therefore, they
seldom place his defect to the account of conscience. Our governor says, "They
very well know the value of money, and if our religion was not the best in the
country, they would never give so much to boot." This bribe, indeed, is seldom
accepted by the clergy, and when any one does take it, he is heartily despised
by both parties. The legislative body, at the time this was made, might promise
themselves great effects, as it would be supposed that many of the clergy would
be tempted by it, and many of their hearers would follow their example. But in
my opinion, a small matter laid out in parochial schools, such as are
established in Scotland, would have had much better effect. By these all
sectaries would have been freed from that profound ignorance so visible among
the lower ranks of society; and whatever religion their parents had trained
them to, they would have, in time, been enabled to judge for themselves.

After asking my reader pardon for this long digression, I return to my
narrative. The loading of our vessel engaged us for three days, and on the
twenty-fifth of December, we proceeded down the river, with a good
north-westerly breeze, and crossing the channel, expected soon to reach our
port; but when we had got right abreast of Holymouth, the wind shifted
suddenly round to the eastward, and began to blow most violently; we soon lost
some of our sails and rigging, and began to fear our little vessel would be
overpowered. We found there was no other chance for her than to keep before the
wind; but perceiving we were getting fast to the westward, our captain thought
proper to lay too: finding however, no probability of the wind abating, or our
making a port, we were forced to drift before the wind for the space of eight
days, during the greater part of which we scarcely knew where we were, nor had
any of us a dry shirt upon our back. In this state we continued, half frozen to
death, and scarcely able to stand upon our legs, till the fourth of January,
when the wind veered round to the south, the sea became somewhat smoother, and
the air milder; but our sails were all tattered to pieces and some of them
totally gone. What remained we patched up as well as we could, and at last
reached the bay of Liverpool, more dead than alive. We entered it on the sixth,
but either through ignorance of the pilot, or the carelessness of the man at
the helm, we run upon the rocks, where we lay for some hours, and sustained
considerable damage.

At last we got clear off, and proceeded to the dock, where we unloaded our
cargo. The necessary repairs detained us here for sometime, after which we took
in ballast, but one gale coming after another, our captain judged it very
unsafe to proceed to sea with so small a vessel; and the misfortunes that had
already befallen us, made us all wish for more favorable appearances to set
out with. But our long absence from home, determined our captain to run all
hazards. -- Every person he spoke to, advised him strenuously against setting
out with so small a vessel, in such tempestuous weather; but he was firmly
determined, and no persuasions could alter his purpose.

On the morning of the twelfth a young sailor came on board, and bespoke a
passage to Scotland, which was readily agreed to. -- He went on shore to bring
his clothes, but just as he was about to come on board again he met with the
captain of another Scotch vessel, who was in want of a hand, and offered him
wages if he would go with him. The young man providentially agreed with him,
and by that means escaped, in all probability, the dreadful fate that befell my
unhappy messmates.

This day the wind became somewhat more favouraable, and the weather more
inviting. We set sail, therefore, and the captain took an affectionate farewell
of a son, the captain of another vessel, whom he left behind him in Liverpool
harbor, without suspecting it was to be the last parting. -- With an ebbing
tide and a fair wind we were soon carried clear of all those banks that render
the navigation so difficult and dangerous; when parting with our pilot, we
directed our course for the Isle of Man, but we had not long left the shore,
till a strong gale began to blow, and the sky overcasting toward the close of
the day, threatened us with a dreadful night; and alas! our fears had by no
means magnified our dangers, for a most dreadful night it certainly proved to
us all.

We stood on our course as long as we could perceive which way it lay, but
night brought along with it impenetrable darkness; and now it was that we felt
the horrors of our situation, for indeed a more dreadful situation can scarcely
be conceived. The wind continued to blow with unusual violence, the seas ran
mountains high, we had no hopes of our vessel living long in such
circumstances, nor knew we the minute she might be dashed to pieces against a
rock.

About eleven o'clock at night, the captain alarmed us with the dismal tidings
that the ship was full of water. We flew to the pumps, but the ballast had
shifted, and choked up the pumps so, that all our endeavors that way was in
vain, and we had by this time three feet water in the hold. We began to clear
the hold with canns, and such other vessels as we had on board; but alas! this
was to little purpose, still the water continued to gain upon us. Death now
seemed inevitable. Every face presented the most dreadful picture of horror and
dismay -- the sea was foaming over the deck, and the hold fast filling with
water. -- He only could assist us, who " holds the water in the hollow of his
hand, and says to the raging element, Hitherto shall thou come, and no
further." To Him we addressed our fervent petitions; but alas! at such an hour,
the mind is but little composed. -- The prospect of death in its mildest form,
brings with it uneasy sensations; but the immediate prospect of a violent death
is dreadful in the extreme. How often did we wish for the light of day, and
look to the east for the approach of that glorious luminary, whose presence
animates nature! -- Though, in our present circumstances it could bring no
comfort along with it.

A very thick snow was falling, we had not the smallest idea where we were, and
to add to our horrors, one of the men gave the shocking alarm, that we were
getting fast upon some dreadful rocks. In vain were all our efforts to keep the
vessel off. We did wha^^^^^ was possible to be done in such a situation, but to
(...) purpose, a tremenduous billow cast us upon a rock, and the following wave
overset the vessel.

The captain was washed overboard with the sea that first overset the vessel;
we beheld his struggles, and heard his cries, every one of which pierced us to
the heart; but what could we do? It was out of our power to give the smallest
assistance either to him or ourselves. Another of the hands shared the same
fate; three of us remained in the vessel, casting about us a hopeless eye for
some means of preservation. It immediately occurred to me to cut the lashing of
the longboat, and try to heave her out; one of my surviving companions ran to
assist me, but all our efforts were vain, and we found the vessel must
immediately be dashed to pieces. Another of my companions took to the mast,
which, from the motion of the ship lying upon her broad side, was sometimes in
the water, and sometimes out of it, and at the interval between the waves, I
could perceive him making toward the end of it. The other, who was a boy, held
fast by the rigging, and pierced the air with his cries. I kept by the vessel
till I found her going to pieces, and then followed my companion to the end of
the mast, to which he was clinging close. No other chance remained for me, but
to endeavor to save my life by swimming; and the tremendous appearance of the
ocean made that a very hopeless alternative. I called to my companion to follow
me, and recommending myself to the mercy of the Almighty, plunged into the
ocean.

I neither knew on what shore we were cast, nor what distance we were from it.
The ebb-tide at one time sweeping me at a greater distance from the land then
when I first set out, for after struggling about an hour I found the wreck of
the ship between me and the shore. My strength by this time was nearly
exhausted; I threw myself upon my back and tried to disengage myself from my
clothes; this, however, I found I was unable to effect, and I must inevitably
have sunk to rise no more in a short time, if the returning tide had not
assisted me in making the shore. This in a little time it did, without my being
able to make any other exertion than barely to keep myself above the water. I
reached a rock, but had scarcely strength enough remaining to raise myself upon
my feet, or get to the top of it.

When with much struggling, I got myself seated on it, I began to look about
for my companions, hoping some of them had saved themselves by the same means.
While I sat here, cold, wet, and trembling as I was, I found myself
irresistibly born down to sleep, and had nearly given way to my inclinations,
when it occurred to me that I had not yet reached the shore. I left the rock,
and crossing a small bay, found myself on a sandy beach. Here I threw myself
down, not knowing what to do, or which way to turn myself. The morning was
still dark, and a deep snow had fallen upon the ground; I got up and tried to
walk, but found I was unable to go any distance; I threw myself down again, and
cast many a wistful look toward the sea, for the arrival of some of my
companions, but to no purpose. I found I must attempt to find a house, or my
reaching the shore would be of no consequence, as I must infallibly expire upon
the spot. Once more I got up, and walked as I could, I knew nor whither.
Providence at last directed me to a house. I rapped, and called aloud for some
time. I went round it, and exhausted my little remaining strength, endeavoring
to make the people hear, but could obtain no answer. I then endeavored to find
some place of shelter from the dreadful storm, and at last found a little hovel
with some swine in it; and rough as my bed-fellows were, I found the heat they
imparted extremely agreeable; I fell into a state of slumbering, or rather
stupefaction; nor can I recollect from that moment any thing that befell me,
till I found myself stretched before a large fire, seemingly made for my
account, wrapped in blankets, and surrounded by a number of peoples. It seems I
had neither opened my eyes nor uttered a word for some hours, and when I came
to my senses, and began to thank God that I was in the land of the living,
every one testified the utmost joy. They made the tenderest enquiries how I
found myself. I told them I would soon be well, and thanked them in the best
manner I could for their care and attention.

A worthy man, to whom I afterward found the house belonged, begged me not to
distress myself with speaking. I asked him if he had any spirits in the house;
he told me there was none, but he would soon get some. He immediately
dispatched a man to a house, at the distance of two miles, for some; and in the
mean time they made me drink some warm milk and water; and now, for the first
time, I began to regain the command of my scattered senses. I recollected I had
been cast away, but knew not, as yet, in what country I was. I conjectured it
might be in the Isle of Man, but was anxious to satisfy myself. Upon enquiry,
they told me, I was in the north of Ireland, about six miles from Porto-Ferry,
and three from Balywater. I then enquired if they had heard any thing of my
companions, but on that head received no satisfaction. I had many questions to
ask, but my benevolent host undertook to satisfy me of every thing he knew
concerning me, by the following acccount:

"About seven o'clock in the morning," says he, "the storm was raging with the
greatest violence, and had torn the greater part of the thatch from the house,
so that the snow was coming fast in upon the bed where we slept. My wife and I
got up and went to the stack yard, to get some straw to re-place the thatch.
Upon going nearer the yard, my wife thought she heard the groans of a human
being, we followed the sound, and perceived you creeping in the ditch, grasping
at thorns, and whatever was within your reach. Last year a poor maniac in this
country had frightened many of the neighbors; and my wife at first sight,
imagined you to be him, and was for going off and leaving you. I was convinced,
however, upon a nearer view, that you was some person in the utmost agony; and
desiring her not to be afraid, we went up to you, and lifting you between us,
the few clothes you had upon you convinced of you was a sailor. We carried you
into the house, but your senses were so totally gone, that you frequently
attempted to bite us. After we had brought you in, we alarmed the neighbors,
who gathered all about us, bewailing your fate, as they imagined you in the
agonies of death: you could answer none of our questions, not even by signs,
and indeed seemed totally insensible to every thing that passed. We caused a
large fire to be made, and wrapping you in blankets, began to rub you tightly,
and pour some warm milk and water into your mouth. You became altogether
motionless, and continued for some hours in such a state, that none of us could
tell whether you was dead or alive. At last you made us all happy with the
recovery of your senses, and you can remember what passed since. When you find
yourself able to talk, we will be glad to hear your story, and in the mean time
I shall be happy if any thing in my house can afford you the least comfort."

After thanking the good man again and again for his kindness, I told him as
much as I knew of my misfortune; but when I came to mention my having gone into
the hovel, they imagined I was still deranged, as there was no such place as I
described about the house. While we were discoursing the messenger returned,
bringing some whisky, a glass or two of which did me a most material service.

I was anxious beyond measure to learn the fate of my companions, and in a
short time set out, accompanied by my kind host, and some of his neighbors,
toward the shore; but how greatly was I surprised to find that I was about a
mile distant from it. After we had got more than half way, we came up to a
house, which I was persuaded was the one I had first come to, and there was a
swine hovel exactly like that into which I had first entered. I endeavored to
persuade them that this was my late lodging, but it appeared unaccountable both
to them and to myself, that I should have gone so far afterward, without any
recollection of what had passed; I had some recollection however, of having
thrown off my jacket in the hovel, and begged them to go and look for it. They
did so, and found it, and this convinced them I was not mistaken; but how my
steps had been directed to the hospitable mansion of my present landlord,
heaven only knows. Upon going down to the beach, we found the wreck had come
ashore; and the people in the neighborhood were all scrambling for what they
could get to carry off.

The greater part of what was most valuable was already gone. I began to
remonstrate with some who had got clothes and other things, begging them to lay
them down, but received no other answer than a volley of oaths, and was ordered
to stand off, or they would send me to eternity.

After I saw nothing could be done with them, and had made many fruitless
enquiries about my companions, some of whom, I still hoped, might have reached
the shore, I obtained twelve men to watch over the wreck, and inform me if any
person attempted to meddle with it; then I returned to the house of my
landlord, and consulted with him what was best to be done.

James Baillie, for that was the name of the preserver of my life, was of a
very different disposition from the most of his neighbors. This worthy man, so
far from wishing to enrich himself with the property of the unfortunate,
suggested every scheme he thought most likely to preserve what remained for the
friends of the deceased. He persuaded me to go before a magistrate, and declare
every circ^umstance upon oath, and take a protest. A magistrate, one Mr.
Savage, lived at the distance of five miles, and in pursuance of the advice of
my landlord, I immediately set out for his house; but had not walked two miles
when I was met by Mr. Main, a coasting officer, who told me Mr. Savage, the
justice, was gone from home; but that, if I would return with him, he would
take a particular account of every thing, and I might lodge a protest in his
hands. I agreed to his proposal, and delivered him a protest of all I knew. He
promised to meet me in the morning, and appoint proper persons to take care of
the wreck, and make the most of it for the owners. I returned immediately to
the wreck, and found, notwithstanding of the guard I had appointed, many things
were missing which I had before observed, but I could obtain no redress, nor
even find out the persons that had taken them. I spent the rest of the day in
the boat, grappling for the bodies of my unfortunate companions, without being
able to find any of them.

I met Mr. Main according to appointment, who came to the beach with some other
gentlemen. It was thought proper to carry what portable things had been saved,
to my landlord's barn, which was accordingly done. By Mr. Main's orders, a
strict search was made for the goods that had been carried away, through all
the houses in the neighborhood, but to little purpose, as the depredators had
taken care to conceal them effectually. I was therefore, forced to sit down
contented with what I had done, conscious that I had omitted nothing in the
compass of my power, to secure to the survivors the remainder of my worthy
master's effects.

In the whole of the business, Mr. Main conducted himself with a degree of
attention and humanity which deserves the highest encomiums, and the warmest
gratitude from all concerned. He saw every thing disposed of, and wrote a
letter to the collector of Irvine, at my request, to give notice of the
tragical event. We judged it most advisable to advertise what goods were left,
for sale; and accordingly they were sold for what they would bring, which was a
mere trifle.

For some days I found myself so weak and sickly as to prevent my undertaking a
journey to Scotland; this however I did as soon as I was able; leaving the
melancholy shore where I had lost all companions, whose lifeless bodies had
been diligently searched for every day during my stay.

My hospitable landlord had acquired the rights of a father over me, by giving
me a second existence. He seemed sorry when I proposed leaving him, and did all
in his power to detain me till my health should be confirmed. On my part, I
felt for him all the affections of a son. He had endeared himself to my heart
by many good offices, and our parting was tender on both sides. I had scarcely
a rag of clothes on my back; those I had on when the ship struck upon the
rocks, being all cut and tore to pieces. But the hospitality of my Irish
friends supplied me. One brought me a shirt, another a pair of shoes, etc. and
the captain's great coat, which had been washed on shore, covered all defects.
I therefore parted reluctantly from the good man and woman that saved my life,
and who ever shall be remembered by me with grateful affection, and set out for
Donaghadee, a seaport not far distant, on the twentieth of January.

At this port, which is the nearest to Scotland, packet-boats are employed by
government for conveying the mails between the two kingdoms; and in these
passengers may be accommodated with every thing heart could desire. The fare in
the packet-boats is according to the purses and inclinations of the passengers,
and the accommodations are proportioned to the fare. They can sail in almost
any weather, so that one can never be at a loss, for any length of time, for a
passage between the two sister kingdoms.

On my going on board the packet-boat, I met five unlucky men, who had been as
unfortunate as myself, their ship having been cast away on the coast of Spain.
The similarity of our situations created a mutual sympathy, and we entertained
one another, during the passage, with a recital of our misfortunes. They had
procured a passage in a British ship, and had the day before landed at Belfast.
In the space of four hours we got to Port-Patrick, and as we were all to travel
the same road, we agreed to keep one another company; still however, I found
myself so weak that I was hardly able to keep up with them; my feet and legs
had been cut and bruised so much on the morning our unfortunate accident
happened, it was with the greatest pain I could move a foot.

With much difficulty I reached the place of my nativity, where I was joyfully
received by my friends, who had just got intelligence of our unlucky fate; Mr.
Main's letter having come to hand only a few hours before I arrived. The widow
of my deceased friend, the captain, I found in a state little short of
distraction: and indeed it was no great wonder, she had lost one of the best of
husbands, and a stroke so unexpected must have been severely felt.

He was at the time of his death upwards of fifty, and through life had
retained the most amiable character. Providence had blessed his endeavors, and
enabled him to leave his family in good circumstances; notwithstanding they
sustained considerable loss from this melancholy accident, for the vessel was
solely his own property. The other sufferers on this occasion, though
unmarried, left behind them parents, who had been mostly supported by their
industry; and what is remarkable, they were all widowed mothers. I found myself
very uneasy in my native place for a long time after my return; the fight of me
always producing a shower of tears from the eyes of those unfortunate survivors.

Thus have I given my reader a faithful account of my nautical life and
transactions; and shall be happy if any part of this work affords him a little
entertainment, when his mind is relaxed from more importan^ employments. I can
with confidence assure him, that in the foregoing pages, I have adhered rigidly
to truth; and as there are several living witnesses of many of the transactions
herein recorded, to them I can appeal for a confirmation of what I write.

As I am not to be deterred by the misfortunes of my past life from prosecuting
my favorite employment, but mean immediately to visit some other part of the
globe. I beg leave for the present to bid my reader adieu: if my after life
should be productive of any thing deserving his notice, we may perhaps renew
our acquaintance upon some future occasion.

FINIS.
Subscribers' Names.
Those who do not live in the City have their places of residence annexed to
their names.
JOHN Atkinson Frederick Anthony Robert Apty Rebecca Adams George Alcorn
Christiana Andrews Peter Armbrister John Allen James Adams Thomas Arley Philip
Awald William Ashton John Anderson William Anderson Ludwig Arbegast Henry
Albert
B
Peter Brown Jacob Beasley Martha G. Brand Nancy Barret Sarah Brobston Mary
Bryan Nathan Beebe Ana Barrington Robert Bickerton Francis Barclay Phoebe
Bowers John Buchanan Mary Bennett Joseph Bows Peter Bob William Burns John
Bourk Jacob I. Benner Robert Brewten John Brissin Magaret Burrows William
Butler John Bennet Sarah Berry Christian Beakley Thomas Blair Richard Berwick
Mrs. Brown Hasell Benezet, Bensalem David D. Bartholt, do. James L. Bogart
William Bayles, Bristol John Brown, do. Joseph Broadman, do.
C
Patrick Carr Mr. Connory John Carls Sarah Campbell Lewis Clouse Isaac Chodwick
William Croxford Elizabeth Carr Rofina Clawges Samuel Church Mrs. Maria Course
Isabella Caldwell Matthias J. Conway John Cahill Jos. W. Carteret Elizabeth
Carr William Campbell Jacob Color Richard Culver Severn Custerson Jane
Creighton Thomas M. Corby Elizabeth Cox James Crawford Hugh Carey William
Crosson Henry Cromwell Mary Curtis Thomas Clarke Thomas Cristine John Chestnut
William Chancellor James Corbett Darby Connigan John Caveny John L. Chrisman
Patrick Catcheil Samuel Clark Charles Curry Tamer Cook Joshua C. Canby,
Middleton
D
John Davidson Elizabeth Duffey Helen Demont Elizabeth Dunsee Hannah Dunphy
Sarah Dubs Robert Dinnin Zilpah Dorothy James Doyle. Eliza Davis Archibald
Davidson Elizabeth Davison Dorothy Dissent William Douglas John Dobbin Mary
Dean Kitty During Thomas Durnell Elizabeth Dever's Beninah Davis Ann Deny
Richard Dougharty George Durfer Con. O'Donnel
E
Archibald M'Elroy, Bristol Mrs. Elouis Abigail Evans Adam Eckfeldt Jonathan
Edwards Samuel Etris Joseph Eberth Mrs. Ensworth Mrs. Ettwaen Sophia Essex
Hannah Emerson Eleanor Elmes Mrs. Engles John Easton Frederick Esling Robert
Esdell Hilary Ehrenzeller
F
Thomas Franklin James Farmer Thomas A. Fisher George Fox William Fox John
Fisher Peter Fiss Margaret Finlay Mary Forbes Samuel Finlay Adam Foster John
Francis Robert Fullerton John Francis Mary Farren, eld. Mary Farran, yo. John
Fisher Jacob Fisher William Francis
G
Ezekiel Garman, Bristol Jane Gibbs Fanny Goutty George Greble William Greble
Hugh Graham John Gihon Jehu Graves Sophia Grear Margaret Gordan Jacob Grear
Bruster Gould Alexander Graham Sarah Gr^n Jacob Golding Elizabeth Gilleriss
Mary Garrigues Phoebe Gordon Andrew George Arthur Gilmor John Griffith Michael
Gallaugher James Garliff Amos Gregg, Bristol Joseph Greer do.
H
Josiah Holmes Mary Hem John Helt Gomain Hallet Daniel Haines William Healy
Eliza Humphreys William Hoffner John Harvey William Hutchison Eleanor Hoffman
Michael Hulings Sally Hatchet Barnet Hansell Matthias Harrison Mary Harberger
Sarah Hope Elizabeth Halligood Jacob Horn David Hendrick George Honey Thomas
Harris John Harris Henry Henson Mary Harper Merritt Hutton Samuel Holget
Catherine Hoy Charles Heirold Daniel Hoffman Elizabeth Hooker Richard Holman
Elizabeth Head Ann Hacket Thomas Huntley Elizabeth Hawthorn Richard Howell
Hannah Hutchins Lydia Hilan Elizabeth Henderson Daniel Hunt Samuel Hyndeman
Matilda Harrison Ann Hudner Peter Hicks Sarah Holliday Joseph Horsfall Philip
Haines John Headly, Bristol John Hutchison, Bristol George Helmbold, -- William
Helms, Suffex County, New Jersey Joseph Hutchinson Bristol
I
Hannah Inskeep John Irwin
J
William Justice George Justice Benjamin Johnson Sarah Johnson Philip Jenkins
Sarah Joyce Hannah Jamieson Rosannah Johnson Elizabeth Jones William Johnson
David Johnson Joseph Jeffers William Johnson, Bristol Otto James
K
Eliza Kerlin William Kidd William Knox Charles Kellum Joseph Knox Elizabeth
Keen William Keater William Keates Daniel Kean Harriet Keating Benjamin Kempton
Nicholas Keiser Mary Kinsley Adam Kyle David Kennedy Baltis Keel John Kelly
John C. Keslep Harman Kinsey, Bristol
L
Elizabeth Lever John Lohrman Eleanor Lloyd William Littlewood Sarah Lambert
Esther Lucas Eliza L^^n John Lashet Richard Lapslie Jacob Lentner William Lace
Philip Leese William Ligget Rachel Lawson Eliza Langdon John La^r Charles Lang
Christian Long Hugh Lindsay Michael Lybrand
M
Mary Millar Michael Muley Mrs. Mason John M^ans Charles Mease Robert Mirrie
John Mann George Myer's Joseph Meredith Jacob Marker Robert M'Koy John Morris
Rebecca Mure Jacob Martin Richard J. Marley John M'Kinley Mary M'Master
Margaret M'Do^ Thomas Mingus Anthony Maxwell Mrs. Magee Matilda Millar George
Myers Daniel M'Arthur Rachael Michel Isabella M'Phail (...) Myers ^^rtha
M'Clearey ^^^liam Moore Archibald M'Euen James Matthews Mary M'Craig Hannah
Martin Robert M'Crea Henry M'Euen Loetitia Murphy Walter Miklejohn Henry M'Koy
William Mason Elizabeth Morris Philip M'Ginnes Daniel M'Koy Thomas Middleton
Peter Moser Philip M'Affry James M'Laughlin Daniel M'Cormick Andrew M'Carren
Jonathan Martin John Martin Frederick Miley James M'Cauley Julia Ann Moore John
M'Crea Anthony Marshal James M'Anally William Marlow Hannah M'Donald Catherine
Mincks John Montgomery William Murfin Mary M'Anully Sarah Moxham Robert M'Koy
Alexander M'Arthur John Marsh Jacob Mann Daniel Murphy Caesar Murry William
Mvers Rebecca Millar Mary M'Nultey
N
Jacob Nunamaker Maria Norman Rebecca Nailor Eleanor Norqua Mary Norqua Robert
Noble Eliza Nixon Mary Nicholson Henry Norton William Nichols Francis Nicholas
William Norris
O
Samuel Oliver Rhoda Osly Owe^ Owens Jeremiah Osler
P
Abraham Perkins John Palmer Peter Powel Mary Primrose John B. Palmer Stephen
Payran Nancy Power Joseph Purden Mary Peale Robert Paul William J. Price Mary
Potts Quam Polgreen Elizabeth Philips Jacob Plankenhome Robert Paxton John
Patterson Samuel Pennant
Q
James Quire Nicholas Quash
R
Marcus Richard William Reanhard Patty Rude Henry Ross Henry Robinson James
Russel Margaret Robinson Thomas Rain Hannah Rodgers Mary Ranno Martin Reinhard
Elizabeth Rowland Benjamin Rose Alexander Reed Jacob Randel, Bensalem Benjamin
Ramsey, Bristol township Lewis Rue, Middleton John Ramsey, do. William Rodman,
Bensalem Samuel C. Richards, Bristol John Rambo, do.
S
Lydia Story Rachel Steel John Steel John Schreiner Nicholas Senterling
Catherine Stall Thomas Snowden Rebecca Stirk Sarah Springer Thomas Skelly John
Suter Alexander Stee' Maria Smith Bersy Stillwood Sarah Staples Rebecca Steel
Elizabeth Steward Elizabeth Spencer William Silence Nathaniel Stockly Corn.
William Stafford Bew Sarazin David Smylie Sarah Shepherd William Shriver
Frederick Shutts Jonathan Savage John Stubbs Eleanor Say Jane Smith Samuel
String Douglas Saint Eliza Smith William Smith John Stone Thomas Sisk Joshua
Shane Thomas Scot Ebenezer Stackhouse Joshua Shaw Deborah Sheales James Spruhan
Philip Spiegle David Scot John Speelman Mary Stephens Robert Sanders Amos
Stackhouse, Bristol James Serrel, do. 12 copies
T
John Trueman Hugh Tombs George Tybarth Hope Thomas Roger Tage Ann Twiner
Martha Towban Mary Tart William Thomas Mrs. Rebecca Tree Sarah Tremble
Elizabeth Traner Ann Tate John Tennery John Thibaut James Thorn Henry Trout
Eleanor Thornten Thomas Turner Adam Traquair Ann Thomas John Tailor John
Thomson
V
Henry Voight Elizabeth Vanhozan
W
George White Elizabeth Weave^ Samuel Wilgin Barney Wentz Peter Willy John
Wells John Wallington Thomas Wright Catherine Wright Francis Williamson Sarah
Waters Fanny Watkins Jos. Woodman Samuel Wallis Thomas Wetherill Catherine
Weaver Sarah Williams George Wilson Thomas Wilkins Esther Work Mary Walace John
Wright Joanna Wilkins Isaac Walker Elizabeth Williams John Wood Abraham Walford
Abraham Williams Henry Wallace William Watkins Thomas Williams Robert
Wolfington Thomas Wotherspoon Robert Wood, Benscl^m Austin Willit, do. Isaac
Wilson, Bristol
Y
John Young Lewis Young William Young Christian Young
Z
James Zeckeye Garret W. Van Zandt, Bensalem Amos Van Zandt, Bensalem Garret
Van Zandt, Bristol township.
The Editor has been careful to have all the names printed which have come to
hand, but as numbers subscribed after the names were ready for press, and
others may not have been received, he hopes this will be a sufficient apology
for their not appearing.


