American Independence.

American Independence, IN VINDICATION OF THE PRESIDENT's NOMINATION OF A NEW
EMBASSY TO FRANCE.

As published in the Commercial Gazette, November 21st. 1799.

BOSTON, Printed by JOHN RUSSELL, at his Office, Quaker Lane.

Advertisement.
[THE demand of our Gazette of this day, in consequence of the important
Communication of AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, exceeding the number usually struck
off, we have, to accommodate those gentlemen who wished to be furnished with
copies of this able vindication, been induced to throw it into the present form.

Editor of Com. Gaz.]
Nov. 21, 1799.
American Independence.
IT has been observed by an elegant writer, that as an individual unconnected
with the government, can only reason upon their measures from what is publicly
known, such an one may possibly contribute to weaken the effect of their
authority by an attempt to support it upon ground which they would disclaim. A
good cause is often injured by an unskilful defense, and an unsuccessful effort
always lessons the facility of a practicable operation. With a conviction of
the truth of these remarks strong on my mind, it is not without considerable
reluctance, that I undertake to state certain reasons and facts, to prove the
policy and expediency of the late appointment of an embassy to France. But as
the subject is before the public, and is interesting in an high degree to every
American, what is now offered, cannot be deemed impertinent, and may be useful.

That any favorable opinion in the President of the United States, respecting
the French revolution, or the present government of France, dictated the
nomination, no one in his senses can suppose. His many invaluable writings, his
speeches to Congress, his answers to numerous addresses, all his measures, and
all his conduct, forbid the momentary admission of such an idea. That a man of
his deep political knowledge, proved devotion to his country, incorruptible
integrity, decided aversion to innovation and all the wild doctrines of modern
philosophy; of so thorough a knowledge of the wickedness of the French rulers,
could be taken in by any delusive appearances, could be lulled by any
professions of their sincerity, is not, humanly speaking, within the line of
possibilities.

But a little experience of this world and its ways, is sufficient to convince
us, how seldom the still voice of reason is heeded in the heat of political
dissension. The most important services are forgotten, the most exalted talents
are depreciated, and one single difference of opinion outweighs a life of
virtue, patriotism and use fullness.

These reflections naturally arise out of the subject, but are not the defense
on which I depend. It can I think be clearly shown, without any reference to
the confidence due to the President, and independent of all personal
considerations, that the measure is entitled to our warmest approbation, as
calculated to counteract the hostile designs of France, and promote the best
interests of the United States.

It was not to be expected, that the French would set down easy and contented,
under the disappointment and disgrace which the failure and developement of
their attempts on our independence, peace and honor had brought upon them. We
had every thing to fear from their intrigue, the lust of power, mortified
pride, and ungratified avarice.

The mission of Logan has ceased to agitate the public mind; but those who
think it too ridiculous to be worthy of notice, will some time or other be
convinced of their mistake.

That he was the agent of the French party in the United States, to the
Directory, is beyond a doubt; and it is equally certain that the future
operations of the Directory were determined by his communications.

The plan, I think, will be clearly made to appear by what is herein disclosed;
to be, For the Directory, previous to the adjournment of Congress, to request a
renewal of the negotiation at Paris, and to give the assurances required by the
President, in rather an indirect manner, with the view that he should not
consider them satisfactory, and decline another embassy. Then, immediately upon
the dissolution of Congress to send an Envoy Extraordinary to Philadelphia, to
tell the story of our Government's rejecting the advances of France, and to
solicit a hearing on all subjects of dispute.

It may be asked, how was this known at the time of the nomination? I answer --
a much less degree of penetration than is attributed to the Executive of the
United States, must have foreseen that France would crowd us with offers,
assurances, and embassies. How to meet these was then the question. To refuse
to treat, and afterward be forced into it, would have been a most unfortunate
circumstance. It would have destroyed the work of at least ten years; it would
have taken away the well earned popularity of the American Government, and
restored French influence, with all its attendant horrors. Every body must
allow that for us, Paris is the best place to treat in. It may be urged that as
France had refufed to receive our ministers, we could refuse to receive her
minister. But this is reckoning without the host -- We might have taken this
ground but we never could have kept it. The rights of embassy are well
understood, and France having disregarded them, would be no apology for our
doing the same. It is a general maxim of the law of nations, that, we are not
to refuse admitting and hearing even an enemy's minister. The greater the
calamities of war are, the more is it incumbent on nations to preserve means
for putting an end to it.

It may be insisted on, that the present government of France is an usurpation.
The fact is readily admitted; but it must not be forgotten that the usurpers
have been long since acknowledged sovereigns by the United States, and by every
nation that has had any thing to do with them. Every objection on this score
against the present embassy, applies with equal force, against Mr. Morris's
continuing at Paris after the dethronement of the King, against the reception
of Mr Genet, against the appointment of Mr. Monroe, against the reception of
Messrs. Fauchet and Adet, and against the appointment of General Pinckney, and
of the three Envoys Extraordinary, Messrs. Pinckney, Marshall and Gerry. But,
such an objection has no validity. On the question, "Whether ministers may be
received "from or sent to an usurper" VATTEL lays it down, that foreign powers,
if the advantage of their affairs invites them to it, follow possession: there
is no rule more certain, or more agreeable to the law of nations, and the
independency of them. As foreigners have no right to interfere in the domestic
concerns of a people, they are not obliged to canvas and inspect its economy
in those particulars, or to weigh either the justice or injustice of them. They
may if they think proper, suppose the right to be annexed to the possession.
When a nation has expelled its sovereign, the other powers which are not
willing to declare against it, and would not draw on themselves its arms or its
enmity, consider that nation as a free and sovereign state, without taking on
themselves to determine whether it has acted justly in withdrawing from the
allegiance of subjects and dethroning the Prince. Cardinal Mazarine received
Lockhart, who had been sent as ambassador from the republic of England, and
would neither see King Charles the IId, nor his ministers. If a nation, after
driving out its Prince, submits to another, or changes the order of succession,
and acknowledges a sovereign to the prejudice of the natural and appointed
heir; foreign powers may here likewise consider what has been done, as legal;
it is no quarrel or business of theirs. At the beginning of the last century,
Charles, duke of Sudermania, having obtained the crown of Sweden, to the
prejudice of Sigismund king of Poland, his nephew was soon acknowledged by most
sovereigns. Villeroy, minister of Henry the IVth, king of France, at that
court, in a memoir of the 8th of April 1608, plainly said to the President
Jeannin, All these reasons and considerations shall not hinder the king from
treating with Charles, if he finds it to be his interest, and that of his
kingdom.

This was arguing sensibly. The King of France was neither the judge nor the
guardian of the Swedish nation, that he should, against the good of his own
kingdom, refuse to acknowledge the king which Sweden had chosen under pretense
that a competitor termed Charles an usurper. Had it even been done with
justice, it does not come under the cognizance of foreigners.

Therefore, when foreign powers have received the ministers of an usurper, and
sent theirs to him, the lawful prince, on recovering his throne, cannot
complain of these measures as an injury, nor justly make them the cause of a
war, provided these powers have not gone farther, nor furnished any succors
against him.

I have been the more particular in giving this extract at length, because the
question which it considers, though frequently alluded to, has never been fully
discussed, in any of our political writings, that I have seen.

Let us suppose a French envoy arrived in this country. He is told, that our
repeated embassies have been spurned with indignity, and without a hearing from
the threshold of the Directorial palace, and therefore a Minister from the
Directory could not be received.

The envoy replies, [the more lies the better for his purpose] I am come to
explain, and make atonement for that very thing; you surely cannot refuse to
receive reparation for injuries or insults." And perhaps he might add, the men
who refused your ministers were traitors, enemies to France as well as America;
Merlin, and Treillard, and Rewbell, and Lepaux, and Talleyrand are taken up as
conspirators, and are succeeded by the true patriots, the friends of both
countries, who have sent me to heal all differences, and redress all your
wrongs. Even setting aside, the law of nations and the right of embassy, those
who think our government could have withstood all this, are desired to
recollect townmeetings and treaty remostrances, and if they are still
inflexible, nothing which I can say will affect their opinions.

I have now before me a pamphlet which though I often before heard of, I never
was able to obtain till within a few days. It is a handsome Paris edition.
Several copies of it, directed to different characters in this country, arrived
here about the middle of last summer. Some little was said respecting it at
first, but the work has been kept from the public eye. The reason is obvious.
It being predicated upon the idea that the President would make no nomination,
it could not answer the purposes of the French government, or their friends the
American jacobins. But few federalists, it is presumed, were possessed of a
copy, and those it is probable, were themselves so well convinced of the
protriety of the nomination, that they did not think there was any necessity
for the promulgation of information, which would place it in a more conspicuous
light. It contains three letters, the first entitled Joel Barlow to his fellow
citizens of the United States, dated Paris, March 4, 1799. The second Joel
Barlow to General Washington, dated Paris, Oct 2, 1798, with a note prefixed at
the time of publication. The third Fulwar Skipwith and Joel Barlow to a Member
of the Executive Directory. The book appears to have been written by the
express order of the Directory, with a view of accellerating their plan of
getting a new minister at Philadelphia, under circumstances unfavourable to the
United States.

I shall quote and comment on such parts of the work as will unfold the desing.

Barlow professes a great deal of frankness, and is willing to allow many of
the faults of the French government; a degree of candor, which any who are
acquainted with their system of justice and police, know would be rather too
dangerous an experiment, if they had not some special purposes to answer by
suffering it. The Directory having heard by Citizen Logan and others, what was
consirmed by our warlike preparations, that the spirit of this country was at
length roused by injuries upon injuries, and insults upon insults; were
convinced, that it would not do for. Citizen Barlow, or any other Citizen, to
tell us that France had done us no wrong. This accounts for the following
expressions in the first letter -- How much you have unfortunately suffered
from the piracies carried on under the French laws" p. 4. the attempts which
had been made here to extort from our commissioners a bribe to individuals, and
a promise of a loan to the government p. 5. No man in America could feel a
greater indignation that I did at the piece of villainy therein detailed (in
the dispatches) ibi. I had no knowledge that even a loan was asked for, or
contemplated to be asked for on the part of France. It was my opinion that it
was the policy of the American government under circumstances then existing to
offer a loan ibi. That monstrous system of piracy and plunder exercised toward
neutrals -- all the horrors that have attended this tremendous revolution p. 6.
The innumerable acts of injustice and violence committed under the order of the
2d of March 1797, and the law of the 18th of January 1798 p. 7. The flood of
piracy and plunder let loose upon your property; a scene of wickedness which no
man can abominate more than myself p. 36.

These expressions used by a man in the power of the French government, would
be sufficient evidence, if any was wanted, that the book was penned by their
direction. But the character of Barlow, and his connection with, and dependence
on that government, are so well known to all political men in the United
States, that to them the proof must be unnecessary.

In the letter addressed to General Washington is the following passage, with
the accompanying note, added as before mentioned, when the book was published.
The letter it seems was first sent as a private one. An embargo that had been
laid on American vessels within the republic in consequence of a report that
war had been begun on the part of the United States, was taken off as soon as
it was ascertained that such war had not been begun; and a new declaration was
at that time sent to America of the wishes of France to treat. 1

NOTE. 1. Since writing this letter, I am at liberty to state that the new
declaration, here referred to, was dispatched from Paris through an official
channel about the end of September last. It should seem that it had not arrived
at Philadelphia, before the opening of Congress in December; as the President's
speech alludes to a declaration made to Mr. Gerry in July, but takes no notiee
of this subsequent one, which was perfectly explicit and unconditional. The
letter adds, these facts will doubtless come to your knowledge through other
channels before you receive this letter.

Thus it appears that the Directory had taken measures to spread in this
country the news of their offer, upon the presumption that it would not be
accepted, and that this circumstance would assist their intended mission to
Philadelphia. And it is said that duplicates of the profferred assurances were
read in jacobin meetings in Pennsylvania, previous to the nomination, and that
the worthy members of these meetings only waited for Congress to break up, in
order to blaze them abroad.

But France wanted a salvo, and this was readily furnished by the prostituted
Skip with and Barlow. The following is taken from their letter to a Member of
the Executive Directory; the date it will be recollected was the 12th of
February 1799. The enlightened policy which has ever animated your conduct
toward the United States, and particularly (...) kind reception you gave that
estimable patriot Doctor Logan, which has been followed by the most happy
effects, induce us to address you some reflections on the intelligence lately
received from that country. We shall take the liberty of exposing to you our
opinion relative to the best mode of silencing the enemies of France in
America, extending and invigorating republican principles" etc. etc. The
Congress must rise on or before the 4th of March, (20 days from this) as the
biennial functions of all the House of Representatives, and one third of the
Senate, cease on that day. Should the President therefore be disposed to name a
minister, he cannot do it after that day, without calling a special meeting of
the senate; which delay would necessarily throw that operation into the summer;
and such minister could not arrive in Paris till next autumn or winter.

France, seated on the car of victory, is surrounded with too much glory, to
fear that an act of condescension should be misinterpreted, or ascribed to any
other cause than her own magnanimity. You would abridge the sufferings of your
colonies, revive the manufactures, commerce and agriculture of many parts of
France, give a new triumph to republican principles, and make a better treaty
than could be made under other circumstances, if you would send a minister
immediately to Philadelphia." "If we dared to give a suggestion on an object
still more delicate, we would hazard our opinion relative to the qualities of
the person whom you may charge with this mission to Philadelphia. We should
invite you to choose a citizen whose name and character are known and respected
in America; who by his writings may have merited the esteem of the two
countries; a citizen, if possible, who may have some acquaintance with our
excellent philosopher and patriot, Jefferson; and whose known moderation,
integrity and wisdom shall at the same time prevent his being disagreeable to
the oposite party; a citizen whose enlightened love of liberty, in its most
extensive effects, shall render him proper for a negotiation which may become
the source of the most extensive prosperity.

After reading this, can any one hesitate as to the expediency of the late
nomination? Congress were just about dissolving without declaring war,
notwithstanding the losses and the buffetings we had suffered and endured. The
same constitution which gives Congress the "power to declare war" gives the
President the power by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to make
treaties, provided two thirds of the senators present concur; to nominate, and
by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, appoint ambassadors and other
public ministers, and makes it his duty to "receive ambassadors and other
public ministers. The President was to be left nine months the subject, (I was
going to say the sport) of French diplomatic skill. A citizen whose name and
character are known, and respected in America was designated, to allure us. The
tiger was in fact crouching to leap upon his prey, but our vigilant Executive
discovered his murderous fangs peeping through the downy velvet of his paws,
and checked the hideous monster at the outset.

That great statesman whose writings still illumine the world which his
immortal part has lately left, declares in his celebrated Reflections on the
French Revolution that he would preserve consistency, by varying his means to
secure the unity of his end. He who has the affairs of a nation to direct, must
know to accomplish this, or he will be illy fit for the trust. The feelings and
passions which operate in the common intercourse of mankind, ought to be
discarded when the fate of our country is at issue. Keppel, one of the most
judicious, brave and experienced officers that the naval history of Britain can
boast, being entrusted with the command of the channel fleet in 1778 was
accused of having been guilty of misconduct on the 27th of July of that year.
Unjustly attacked in the house of Commons, by those who neither knew his
difficulties nor resources, he calmly replied, I considered, on that day, that
I had England in my hands.

Perhaps if the tide of success had continued on the side of France, many who
now complain of the nomination, would have applauded it. But I contend, that
the change of fortune among the belligerent powers is an argument in favor of
the policy of the measure. We shall be more likely to obtain justice from
France, while she is going down hill and contending against superior power,
than we should be, were she seated on the car of victory," The differences
betwevn the two nations, must some time or other be settled; and while nothing
is done, contrary to our engagements to other nations, our Government is alone
the judge when to negotiate, or attempt to negotiate. Advantage ought to be
taken, of every conjuncture, which can possibly turn out to our benefit.

If there are any, who wish to hear only one side of the question; such may
say, as the envoys are gone on their mission, why this tedious essay? To these
it is replied, that the objections to the mission have gone forth to the world,
and are circulated in Europe as well as America. And if any misunderstanding,
should arise in consequence of this mission, between us and any other powers,
some of the American objectors will have the merit of having anticipated it,
just in the same degree that the jacobins, have that, of fortelling, French
resentment, and depredations in consequence of the British treaty.

But we are not to consult the pleasure of any foreign nation, in our
negotiations with another -- the moment we do, we relinquish our independence.
National friendship? is alas! to be found only in the imaginations, of
revolutionary fanatics. Interest, is the spring of all national intercourse.
America has paid too dearly for this lesson, so soon to give it up.

American Independence.


