AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN THE BAPTIST MEETING HOUSE, IN THOMASTON, JULY 4th,
1798.

AT THE REQUEST OF THE FRIENDLY SOCIETY, AND IN COMMEMORATION OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE.

BY THE REV. THURSTON WHITING.

Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy
father and he will show thee: thy elders and they will tell thee. MOSES.
HALLOWELL, PRINTED BY HOWARD S. ROBINSON.

At a meeting of the Friendly Society, July 4th, 1798.
Voted -- That Capt. Ephraim Snow, Col. Thomas Starret and David Fales Esquire. be
a committee to wait on the Rev. Mr. Whiting, and in the name of the Society to
thank him for his sensible, well-adapted and animated Address, this day
delivered to them, and to request a copy thereof for the press.

Attest, Samuel S. Wild, Sec'ry pro tem.

To the Committee of the Society.
GENTLEMEN,
It has ever been my sincere aim to cherish the interests -- cultivate the
esteem and friendship -- and conform to the wishes of my brethren of the
"Friendly Society;" if they are pleased to think that giving typographical
publicity to the address I have had the honor, this day, to deliver to them,
will promote any salutary effect, or if it will be a gratification to them, I
shall not hesitate to submit the copy, so politely requested, with all its
imperfections, to their disposal and the candor of the public.

I have the pleasure to be, Gentlemen, Yours and the Society's friend and
brother, THURSTON WHITING.

AN ORATION.
FRIENDS, BRETHREN AND FELLOW CITIZENS!
IT is a dictate of the light of nature -- a universal sentiment amongst
mankind, as appears from the practice of all nations and ages, by some public
monuments, or significant and speaking actions, to recognize interesting events
of a public nature, and to do this at stated returning periods; and this
practice has received a sanction from heaven. The Jews were enjoined to
celebrate the anniversary of their deliverance from Pharaoh's tyranny, by the
paschal feast; and their narrow escape from the sanguinary Haman's perfidy and
cruelty, by observing the days of purim.

It is very obvious that the proper observance of a custom like this, is
calculated to excite and cherish moral and religious sentiments, as well as, in
some instances, to promote objects more purely political.

On this joyous anniversary, dear to all true Americans, we are invited to
commemorate the birth of American Empire. To minds fraught with patriotism and
sensibility, it must be a pleasing and instructive task, to take a
retrospective view of the early settlement of America, by our venerable
ancestors, to investigate their principles and motives, as well as their
sufferings in the arduous enterprise -- to mark the rapid progress of
population -- of agriculture and commerce -- of the arts and sciences, and
their beneficial and embellishing effects in this new world, and to retrace
those signal and interesting scenes, some humiliating and afflicting, and
others brilliant and glorious, which paved the way to, which accompanied, and
which have succeeded the independence of the United States.

The full development, and minute detail of these particulars, is the province
of the elaborate historian. The utmost that the occasional declaimer can
promise, or hope to do, is to designate the great outlines, leading traits, and
most prominent features of the interesting picture.

To this attempt, with diffidence, I now address myself -- and "while we are
musing" on our dear country's past sufferings and dangers, and her present
growing importance and happiness, "may the fire burn" -- may the sacred incense
of devout and humble gratitude ascend from our impassioned bosoms, to that
great Supreme of Beings, and Sovereign Arbiter of nations, who has ever
signalized himself as America's friend, guardian and benefactor; and may this
be accompanied with the flame of genuine patriotism -- the love of liberty --
of republicanism, and of every virtue necessary to make republics or
individuals happy.

The origin and formation of the American nation lie more directly and
completely under the eye, and within the grasp and comprehension of the
historian and his reader, than those of any other nation, whose annals have
been written and preserved. When we trace back the histories of ancient Greece
and Rome to their source, we find ourselves lost in a terra incognita -- in the
regions of romance and fable. We are bewildered in the labyrinths of Minos, and
find ourselves in the company of preternatural heroes and giants, of satyrs and
demigods, of Theseus and Hercules, of Romulus and Remus. These monstrous and
visionary beings had disappeared, and "the age of chivalry was gone by," before
the discovery of America, by European navigators and adventurers; which is but
of modern date, and hence the minutiae of our history and chronology may be
exactly ascertained. The commencement of permanent settlements, and the
formation of colonies in North America, did not take place till after the
revival of learning and religion on the European continent and its adjacent
islands. This revival, however, and the reformation consequent upon it* were
but partial at that period. In England they had thrown off the supremacy of the
Pope, and the tyranny of the hierarchy of Rome -- they had abolished many of
the idolatrous and superstitious rites and ceremonies of that corrupted church;
in short, they had reduced the exorbitant temporal power and jurisdiction of
the clergy and their courts, and recovered some portion of their civil and
religious rights. But, with all these happy improvements and acquisitions, they
retained no small portion of that intolerant, conscience-binding and
persecuting spirit, for which "Mother Church," for many ages, had been so
famous. The dignified clergy of the established church of England were disposed
to treat those that dissented from them with but little more indulgence than
the Catholics did the Heretics, as they termed the Reformers; and sometimes
carried their zeal so far as to burn their bodies out of love to their souls.
-- This was, especially, the temper of the English court during the unhappy and
odious reigns of the four Kings of the Stuart race -- the two Charles's and the
two James's -- they were, at best, but weak princes -- possessed of arbitrary,
despotic principles of government -- refined by their religious creed which
they received from Rome -- and intoxicated with high notions of prerogative,
and "the right divine of Kings to govern wrong;" they were a disgrace to the
throne and an awful scourge to the kingdom.

The Dissenters, from whom the inhabitants of the New England states in general
derived their pedigree (and they may glory in their descent) were, at that
time, stigmatized, by their enemies, by the name of puritans -- and if ever
there was a people, since the more pure and primitive times of the gospel, who
deserved that appellation, on account of their sincere and conscientious regard
to the purity of christian doctrine, discipline, worship and manners, it was
that generation.

They and their puritanism, however, were to the last degree odious and
offensive to the high church Jacobite party, which then bore the sway in
government, and like the haughty, hard-hearted tyrant of Egypt and his cruel
taskmasters toward their Hebrew vassals, they "evilly entreated and dealt
hardly with our fathers" -- they persecuted them for righteousness sake -- they
enacted laws and with rigor executed them, by which they stripped the
nonconformists of their civil and religious rights and immunities, and
subjected them to every indignity and hardship. Fines and confiscations of
estate were but a common lot among them -- many were confined to loathsome
dungeons, till a lingering death put a period to their sufferings. By an
execrable edict, generally known by the name of the "Test Act." 2000 dissenting
ministers were ejected from their pulpits and their livings in one day. These
were a glorious band of christian soldiers -- a noble army of confessors -- and
among the number we may reckon several great and distinguished names, which,
together with their pious writings, have been handed down to us, and whose
praise is, deservedly, in the American churches.

It was in these dismally dark and perilous times, when to worship God,
according to the dictates of their own consciences was a state crime -- when
their pastors were thrust into corners -- and they despoiled of every thing
most dear and valuable on earth -- when the arm of persecution and tyranny
reigned, and threatened the total subversion of the glorious reformation, so
happily achieved, in the preceding century -- it was at such a time, and under
these peculiar circumstances, that our forefathers first meditated a
dereliction of their dear native land, and the seeking of an asylum in the,
then, unexplored and inhospitable wilds of America. And in these, and other
concurring circumstances, which attended the transplantation of civilization,
liberty and religion into this western hemisphere, we, as christians, must see
and acknowledge an overruling and wonder-working providence. To prepare a
refuge for the oppressed -- a last retreat for persecuted religion and liberty
to flee to, providence had commissioned and conducted Christopher Columbus,
Americus Vespucius, Sebastian Cabot and others, to make discoveries of this new
continent, and has ever since been carrying on some great designs here. The
planting and nurturing a church here, under the auspices of freedom and good
government, has evidently been the peculiar object of providential care and
goodness. It is the case in fact, and said to be agreeable to ancient
prediction, that empire and the arts and sciences, which began in the east,
should travel west; and it is added, that on this continent, under the setting
sun, they should display their last and highest splendour and glory; and as far
as we can judge, from present appearances, the last part of the prediction is
in train of rapid fulfillment.

But, waving this, I would just observe, that it was in the close of the year
1620 that the first ship, freighted with emigrants destined for settlers,
arrived in the harbor of Plymouth, in the now Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
They had a long and hazardous passage, and upon their arrival, were worn down
with fatigue and hardship. See, my friends, the poor houseless families, the
germe and stamina of the New England states, landed on a desert shore -- a
waste, howling wilderness before them, inhabited only by savage beasts or still
more savage men -- their provisions scanty, and a long cold winter before them.
Many died before the return of spring by sickness, brought on by want and
sufferings, and those that survived supported their precarious existence, from
day to day, by shellfish which they found near the shores.

It becomes us, the descendants of these brave and enterprizing sufferers who
are "fed with the finest of the wheat" -- "who eat the fat and drink the
sweet," on this auspicious day to look back to "the day of small things," and
to remember what our fair inheritance cost our fathers.

It was late in the next season before any supplies or new settlers arrived at
the young colony; and for ten years following the settlement languished or
progressed but slowly. But after that period, immigrations more numerous and
respectable were annually received, and the business of plantation was
prosecuted with vigor and success. These exiled apostles of liberty and
religion* animated by the idea that they were now beyond the reach of tyranny's
vengeful arm, and with the prospect of better days before them, were
industrious from principle, and from motives the most interesting and
stimulating to the human heart. The forests, ancient as the deluge, yielded to
the laboring axe -- they subdued the rugged soil -- they planted them fields
and gardens -- they built them houses and towns -- and wherever they pitched
their tents they erected synagogues and altars, for the worship of God, and the
due celebration of the christian mysteries.

Hence we see, brethren, what were the principles and motives, and some of the
concurring providence of Almighty God, which led the way to the settlement of
this country, and laid the foundation of our rising empire. Our fathers, at
every hazard, planted religion -- virtue -- freedom in the land. These they
loved more than their lives -- these they cultivated, cherished and strictly
guarded -- and these they transmitted, pure and unimpaired, to their immediate
descendants: and now we, after a few, and but few, intervening generations,
have risen up in their stead, and entered upon the precious inheritance.

To be thankful for our blessings we must be sensible of their worth and the
price they have cost. For advocating and defending those principles of civil
and religious liberty, which are the established creed of Americans, and
recognized by our civil constitutions, how many statesmen and patriots, like
Hampden and Sidney, have lost their heads on the martyring block! How many
apostles of our liberty and religion, both laity and clergy, have died at the
stake! and how many in the field of battle!

O tyranny! O despotism! are these thy cruel dreadful rites! these thy
miserable, though respectable victims! can thou not be appeased but by such
costly sacrifices!

O sacred liberty! dear as thou art to the human breast, can thou not be
purchased but at such prodigious expense!

If we, my friends and fellow citizens, can depreciate and think lightly of
these our birthright blessings, if we can neglect and abuse them, or trifle
them away, we show that we form an estimate of them widely different from that
of the most illustrious personages the world ever produced, and "of whom the
world was not worthy."

The copiousness and endearment of the subject would detain me longer here, did
not the shortness of my time hurry me down the stream of American history to
more recent transactions and events.

While the colonies remained in their infantile and weak state, and were unable
to render their immense natural resources very productive, the Mother Country,
as we were proud and fond to style Great Britain, treated us with some
appearance of justice, and even of friendship. Though it cannot be wholly
overlooked that the same Jacobite party, which expelled our ancestors from
their inheritance and native homes, still kept up their religious spleen and
persecuting spirit against them and their descendants in America, and at
different periods, several blows were aimed at our religion and liberty. As to
commerce, our British brethren considered us as their factors -- their hunters
-- their fishermen -- their lumberers -- and annually sent over their ships to
receive all our exports -- they monopolized our trade and the balance was
always in their favor -- but they did not violently and directly rob or plunder
us.

The last war in which America bore a part with Great Britain, against France,
their then common enemy, and the seat of which, in its last stages, was on our
continent, bro't the military and commercial importance and internal resources
of this country more fully into view than ever before. From that period we
became an object of ministerial consideration and speculation. We had indeed,
till then, been kept in leading-strings: but these sat light upon us -- such
was our deference and devotion to the parent-state, we were willing to
contribute our full proportion toward the defense of the Empire: nay, to bear
a part of the burden of wars in which ambition and caprice, rather than justice
and sound policy, involved it. But the British ministry, not satisfied with
this, and with realizing all the emoluments of our commerce, apprehending also,
that as we approached to national manhood we might think of going alone without
the help of leading-strings, contrived and fabricated shackles of iron and
fetters of brass, to impose upon us, and at length avowed their intention and
their right so to do. They declared, that "the Parliament of Great Britain had
a right to make laws to bind the colonies in all cases whatsoever;" which was
equivalent to saying, that we had no exclusive rights or property of our own;
but that they were sovereign lords of our soil and masters of our persons and
purses. This doctrine, so degrading and insulting to every citizen of America,
they attempted, both before and after its avowal, to carry into effect. To this
purpose they had instituted stamp duties and commissioned stamp masters to
collect them. The colonies so universally and violently revolted against this
daring and direct infringement upon their liberty and property, that, from
motives of stateprudence, the measure, though not the principle, was dropped -- the
Stamp Act was repealed. The next attempt to raise a revenue from us; without
our consent, was by laying duties on tea, glass, paper and other articles of
necessary importation into America. The same indignant spirit, the same manly
and strenuous opposition appeared against this, as the former measure; to
overcome which, and carry their darling point, the junto of St. James' tried
every art and artifice which machievalian policy, or folly and madness could
invent. They tampered with our Governments and endeavored to intimidate the
governed. They sent their boasted engines of thunder and destruction into our
harbors, and stationed their soldiers in our peaceful towns. The horrid scene
of murder and carnage displayed in the streets of Boston, on the evening of the
5th of March 1770, when the "British bloodhounds," were let loose upon the
unarmed and unoffending inhabitants, must forever impress the minds of
Americans with horror at the idea of standing armies in a time of peace, and
teach them that when civil and municipal law is subject to the control of the
military it must constitute the most odious and fearful despotism.

To divide and disunite the colonies, and by the example of one to overawe and
intimidate the rest, our then province of Massachusetts was singled out as the
peculiar object of ministerial vengeance. The port of Boston was shut up by an
act of Parliament, and blockaded by a naval force; and a few months after, that
devoted town was invested by an armed force by land, and all communication with
the country suspended.

The effect of this cruel, pointed outrage against the obnoxious province,
instead of dividing, was to unite the colonies, "from Dan to Beersheba." From
Georgia to the old province of Maine the Tocsin was sounded -- the alarm was
spread -- one common sentiment, with few exceptions, pervaded the whole mass of
the people -- their interests were deemed one, and the danger common -- the
maxim was adopted, "BY UNITING WE STAND, BY DIVIDING WE FALL."

The expedient of a Congress of deputies, from all the different colonies, to
consult upon the most prudent measures to be taken, at that alarming crisis,
was wisely, and as it were, instinctively fallen upon. It was wonderful, and
beyond expectation, that the people of so many different colonies, whose local
situations and interests, as also their governments, habits and manners, were
so diverse, should be led to form so strict a union and confederation, and this
too without the sanction and coercion of formal, established authority.

The language of the first Congress was the faithful echo of that of the hearts
of all the brave and loyal, tho injured, sons of America, whom they
represented. They would then have deemed it unjustifiable temerity to have
admitted the idea of detaching themselves from the British empire. In the
language of loyalty and wounded affection, they prostrated the colonies at the
foot of a throne to which they had ever been wont to attach the ideas of
wisdom, justice and clemency. To have condescended lower -- to have asked for
less than we did, would have been unworthy and unbecoming the character of
British subjects. Indeed, we asked for no favor -- no royal boon -- but only
for the secure enjoyment of what God and nature, and the blood and sweat of our
ancestors, had made unalienably our own, and which, without a crime, we could
not part with. This was denied us -- our humble, loyal and dutiful
remonstrances were treated with neglect and scorn -- we were spurned from the
throne, and all access thereto barred against us.

Thus abandoned -- friendless and alone -- unknown to the nations of Europe --
we were compelled to make our solemn appeal to the God of justice, and under
him to the arbitrament of the sword. Some of us can remember the opening of the
dreadful scene at Lexington, on the 19th of April, 1775. The Rubicon was then
passed, and there was no receding -- all hope of accommodation vanished with
the smoke of the first gun that was fired on that portentous day -- there was
no alternative left us, but either tamely and dastardly to surrender our
dearest rights, or valorously to defend them in the field. To our everlasting
honor, as a people, we had virtue and spirit enough, in the face of every
discouragement, to choose the latter, and "LIBERTY OR DEATH" became the motto
of the American standard. We had staked our ALL and must stand the hazard of
the die.

Many interesting and tragical scenes ensued -- the mighty issue, big with the
fate of America, hid from the eyes of mortals by the impenetrable curtain of
futurity, hung in long and anxious suspense; and at some gloomy, distressful
periods, the firmest hearts of the firmest American patriots felt some
misgivings, and trembled in anticipation of the awful, dubious event.

The particular conjuncture of time and of affairs at which we first assumed
national existence and sovereignty, demands, on this occasion, our special
notice and consideration. It was in 1776, and, as you well know, on that day
whose propitious anniversary we are now celebrating. No national assembly on
earth, not even the Amphyctiones of Greece, or the Senate of Rome, ever
exhibited a more august, majestic or affecting spectacle than did the
representatives of nascent America, on that memorable day. To be convinced of
this, we need only recur to their personal situation, and the situation of
their country, on that critical, trying occasion. They well knew, that in case
of failure in the mighty contest, then pending, their heads, as well as
fortunes, must have paid the forfeit to enraged despotism. The aspect of our
affairs in the field was by no means flattering. Then no such prodigy as the
surrender of a famed Burgoyne or Cornwallis, with their vaunted, veteran
armies, to an American standard, had been seen; on the contrary, we had met
with some discouraging checks -- we had failed in our Canadian enterprise. The
British fleet and army had evacuated Boston, a few months before, only that
they might take a more advantageous post, and strike a more successful blow in
some other part, and with that design, were then hovering on our coasts, with
an augmented force. Our army was diminishing faster, by the expiration of
enlistments, than it could be recruited by new levies, and our intestine
enemies, the tories, like the ominous raven, were croaking and foreboding swift
perdition to the sons of liberty.

The human character, in the person of individuals, never appears to so good
advantage, as when rising superior to those difficulties and discouragements
under which the generality of mankind sink. It is no uncommon merit for a
sentinel to maintain his post in a secure situation, where there is no
apprehension of assault or opposition: but to do this at the point of the
bayonet, with death in one eye and his duty in the other, argues the good
soldier -- the man of courage. The lukewarm and timid thought and pronounced
this, of all others, the most improper and unsuitable crisis to set up for
independence. But behold the patriotic Senators of America, on this day, 22
years ago, rising superior to all the adverse scenes and gloomy prospects which
surrounded themselves or their country! They came forward with magnanimity and
firmness; and dared, in the face of the world, and in defiance of injurious,
formidable Britain, to assert their country's violated rights -- to declare
"That the American Colonies," which they represented, "were, and of right ought
to be, free, sovereign and independent States," and in a solemn, religious
manner, commended their just and bleeding cause to Heaven's interposition and
care.

The declaratory act, which they then passed and published, is drawn up in the
manly, becoming language of patriotism and piety, and ought to be engraven on
the heart of every American, and the names of its authors, foremost of which
stands our patriotic and amiable Hancock, transmitted to latest posterity, with
honor and applause.

We have not time to mark all the varied scenes and vicissitudes of a long
eight years war to maintain this declaration -- it cost us an immense profusion
of our best blood and treasure. But when we survey the glorious and extensive
objects secured to us, by an honorable peace, in contrast with what must have
been our abject and miserable situation, in a reverse of events, we must still
think it a cheap purchase.

It has been charged upon MAN, as an odious appendage of his character, that
upon realizing a benefit, he is prone to forget the benefactor, together with
the instrument of conveying the benefit. I wish the American people may never
be liable to this imputation, in regard either to "the God of our fathers" or
to those champions of liberty, who, under him, were the chief instruments in
defending our rights, and securing our independence, during the course of the
revolutionary war. Upon recollection, what a long list of able and enlightened
statesmen and patriotic soldiers rises to view, who have severally acted a
noble and conspicuous part, either on the stage of American politics, or the
theater of the American war. At the head of this list stands the illustrious
name of WASHINGTON. When we contemplate or speak of this great man, for he is
but a man, we are to avoid every thing that savours of idolatry or adulation,
and if we do this we cannot well be extravagant in his eulogy. Is it
extravagant to say, that the pen of old Plutarch was never employed upon a
richer subject? -- is it extravagant to place a Washington's merit above that
of the Alexanders and Cesars of antiquity, those butchers of mankind, or the
Henrys and Fredericks -- the Lewises and Georges of modern times? or is it
extravagant to say, that it was reserved for the honor of America to display
the most finished character, as a politician and hero, in the present expiring
century?

How fortunate and happy was it for America that, when she was driven to the
dire necessity of recurring to arms in self dcfence, her eyes were directed to
this accomplished CAPTAIN, to command her armies and direct the operations of
the war! and how kind was providence to us in preserving his important life
through so many hazardous campaigns! had he fallen in battle, or been betrayed
into the hands of the enemy, as was attempted by the infamous Arnold, how would
all America have groaned beneath the stroke! what a damp would it have struck
upon all our hopes! how darkened our prospects! but he lived to see the
important struggle crowned with complete success; and then retired, resigning
his commission, with the same modesty, gracefulness and dignity, with which he
accepted it, since which time, upon the adoption of the Federal Constitution,
invited, and as it were compelled, by the total suffrage of united America, he
presided for eight successive years in our general government, and his obliged
fellow-citizens, and the impartial world, must approve his administration as
wise and prudent. Were it not invidious -- and did I not behold, in his
successor, great talents, displayed with wisdom, firmness and moderation, in a
critical, perplexed state of public affairs, I should say, that if any other
man had had the conducting of the helm of the nation, during the presidency of
Mr. Washington, we had long before this time, been embroiled in the mad
politics, and shameful and desolating wars of Europe.

But in eulogizing this universal darling of his country, we are not to
overlook the merits of others: many sons of America have done worthily, though he
may have excelled them all. The hoary Franklin, the American Newton, here
presents to view -- he was the "sage Mentor" in our councils at home, and the
able negociator abroad. On this auspicious day, we hail the memories of a
Montgomery, who bravely fell before the walls of Quebec -- of a Warren, who
nobly died, repelling the enemy, on Bunker's Hill -- of the amiable Scammel,
who died a martyr to the perfidy and cruelty of a party of British soldiers --
of a Mercer, who in the display of his heroism met his fate in the battle at
Princetown -- and a long list of Warriors who sealed their patriotism with
their blood.

Some, who survived to behold their country in peace and liberty, have since
died, in their peaceful beds, among whom a Green and a Putnam are conspicuous.

A goodly number of patriots and heroes still live, the ornament and blessing
of their country in peace, as they were its protection and defense in war --
even the poor worn out soldier, the private sentinel, ought not to be forgotten
by us, on this occasion -- if the officers in an army are the head to govern
and the eyes to direct, the soldiery are the hands to execute the enterprise.
They doubtless have their merit and claim a share in the glory of atchieving
the independence of their country, and sorry I am, owing to an exhausted
treasury and want of public credit at the close of the war, they have realized
so small a recompense for all their labors and toils and sufferings.

With the blessing of peace, we were established in the exclusive, national
right, and the quiet possession, of a large extensive territory, embracing 1500
miles of sea coast, endued with fertility of soil, salubrity of air,
healthiness of climate, and as great abundance of natural advantages and
sources of national wealth, as any empire the sun ever yet shone upon.

We are a nation peculiarly favored of indulgent and bounteous Heaven. We are
happy in the best of governments -- happy in our rulers -- happy in the
possession of every civil and religious blessing, and want nothing but virtue,
sense and knowledge to make a due appreciation of our priveleges and a heart to
improve them, to make us a great and respectable nation. Our growth and
prosperity, since the adoption of the general government, has been astonishing,
unprecedented and unparallelled in the history of the most thriving nations.
America, not long since, unknown to the nations on the old continent, or known
only as a poor appendage to the British empire, which, by monopolizing her
trade, cramped her growth and kept her out of sight, is now become the mart of
nations, and her canvass is unfurled, in all the known seas on the globe.

It Is true our political horizon, at present suffers a partial eclipse, our
commercial prosperity is interrupted, and our happy national prospects
obscured, by a dark cloud which has, for some time past, been gathering over
our heads, from the coast of France.

When we recollect our past connections with that nation -- that they espoused
our cause and befriended us in the day of our distress -- that they fought by
our sides -- that in their first attempt to throw off the yoke of unlimited
monarchical despotism, and introduce republicanism in its stead, they professed
to take their lessons from us, and to embark in the same cause in which we had
just succeeded -- I say, these things considered, it is painful to animadvert
on the present characters, and late conduct, of the rulers of that distracted,
ill-fated nation. But friendship and even patience and forbearance have their
limits.

On the commencement of the present European war, our government wisely
determined to take and maintain a neutral stand, and has ever since studied
strictly to observe the duties and restrictions peculiar to such a delicate
situation; while at the same time, it kept good faith and fulfilled all
treaty-obligations to France, its Ally. But this national justice and prudence
not exactly coinciding with the selfish, ambitious views and exorbitant
expectations of the rulers of France, and not being able, by finesse and
intrigue, to control our government, and bring us into their measures, they
have licensed, by one decree after another, founded on the most frivolous
pretexts, and their privateers have committed the most wanton and unremitted
depredations on our defenseless commerce, for these 18 months past, and have
plundered our industrious citizens of more, perhaps, than 25 millions of
property.

Repeated attempts at negotiation, on the part of our Executive, with a sincere
view to an amicable composition of existing differences, have proved fruitless;
and we seem now to be just on the eve of a war with that insolent, imperious
nation, which, flushed with their career of successes, on the European
continent, assumes to treat us with the utmost indifference and disdain, as
well as flagrant injustice.

Nothing is more to be dreaded or deprecated, on this side of the dominions of
the grim tyrant of hell, than supreme power lodged in the hands of fools or
madmen, or, which is the same or still worse, of men who are abandoned
reprobates to religion, justice, faith and every principle of political and
moral rectitude -- whose ruling passions are the love of domination and the
love of lucre -- who have the meaness to "sell the mighty meed of their large
honors for so much vile trash as might be grasped thus" with their bloody fists
-- and the unblushing effrontery to insult the ears and feelings of upright and
dignified ministers of other nations, with clamorous demands of douceurs and
bribes, and to extort from unoffending nations, if in their power, immense sums
to furnish their menes plaisirs, or pocket-money -- and who, with the
Horseleach's insatiable daughters, are everlastingly crying give, give,
Pargent, Pargent. This is but part of the portrait of an infamous, despotic,
self assumed oligarchy, who have the lives, liberties and sortunes of 25
millions of their fellow creatures in their hands -- hands, compared with
which, Lady Macbeth's, or King Richard the third's are lily-white.

It is some relief to humanity's feelings, when contemplating such an odious
and horrid tyranny, to reflect that it can be but of short duration; for its
necessary, direct tendency is to self destruction. And while it does last, if
we remain united and firm, and rally round the standard of independence, we
have little to fear, either from its insidious arts, or open injuries: for such
an union and firmness will be a sufficient security against the former, and
joined to vigorous exertion, would, in a great measure, indemnify us against
the latter. A state of war, I know is a serious calamity -- "pregnant" with
infinitely more "mischiefs" than a fair and equal "treaty" to prevent it. But
when an aggressing power capriciously interdicts all diplomatic intercourse and
refuses to treat, and yet persists in its aggressions, what are we to do?

In short, France has already thrown the gauntlet. No formal declaration of
war, by her rulers, could evince their vindictive spirit or hostile intentions
against us, more effectually, than does their late and present treatment of us.
And shall we remain the tame, unresisting victims of their injustice and
rapacity? Shall Americans, who so lately bled in freedom's cause, and gained
their independence at so dear a rate, suffer themselves, so soon, to be
despoiled of these blessings, now almost peculiar to themselves, by French
intrigues or French violence? Forbid it, patriotism -- Forbid it, national
dignity, honor and just resentment -- Forbid it* a reverence for the memory of
our virtuous and patriotic ancestry -- and forbid it, a regard to unborn
posterity.

But I cheerfully quit this unwelcome subject to conclude with some
observations on a more pleasing theme, the importance of literature, which my
brethren of "The Friendly Society" have a right to expect from me on this
occasion. When we contemplate the influence of literature, on the great scale
of national prosperity and political happiness, how forcibly must a conviction
of its importance and utility strike us, from almost every historic page, both
ancient and modern. How gloomy the retrospect on the nations and ages before
the birth of learning and the introduction of the liberal arts! A short life
spent in this age of light and refinement is of more worth than Methuselah's
term of years in such an age and nation. Consult history, and it will
invariably be found that a state of savage, uncultivated nature, instead of
that peaceful, happy state, by some romantic writers represented, is but a
scene of lawless violence, or of abject and wretched slavery. It will be found,
moreover, that learning, liberty and religion go hand in hand. Greece and Rome,
so respectable, so admired, so celebrated in the annals of antiquity, became so
by cultivating learning. By this means they acquired a knowledge of the
essential rights of human nature -- they learned the true dignity of man --
that heaven designed him to be free -- and that life without liberty scarcely
deserved the name of a blessing -- and while they nursed the muses and
preserved their virtue, they preserved their freedom and independence -- their
national honor and importance.

The learning of the ancients was in its zenith in the Augustan age, about the
commencement of the christian era. From that period, it began its decline,
which, though gradual, ceased not till it became total. At the coming in of the
fifth century, when the Goths and Vandals, and other barbarous nations from the
"great northern hive" swarmed and overspread the civilized world, learning
might be said to expire, and with it expired almost every thing valuable in
society and civil life. Liberty took its flight. Tyranny, civil and
ecclesiastical, lifted its hydra head and hissed on every side. In christendom
the prospect was piteous and gloomy. The lovely religion of the benevolent
Jesus lost its native simplicity and luster, and became involved in the darkest
shades of error and superstition. This fair daughter of heaven, disfigured and
stripped of her proper ornaments, appeared with a sour forbidding aspect and in a
foreign, unseemly dress. A fad millenium succeeded -- a thousand years which
make almost a blank in history. A blank, did I say? No, for the few miserable
pages of the annalist are inscribed with the black accounts of the tragical
effects of the reign of ignorance, bigotry and tyranny.

In the 15th century, there began a small revival of learning, in Europe,
which, gradually increasing, paved the way for the happy reformation, in the
next century. Since that memorable epoch the lamp of literature has been
shining brighter and brighter* until this our day, and is, perhaps,
approximating its high meridian. And what have been the effects of this
glorious luminary? The fogs and mists, the illusions and fictions of error have
been dispelled before it -- the Dagon of superstition has fallen before the
sacred ark of genuine religion -- tyranny has been hurled from its throne --
persecution has shut its devouring jaws -- liberality of sentiment and a spirit
of free enquiry have prevailed -- and philanthropy, humanity, candor and
charity have been diffused, and shed their benign and heavenly influence on
society.

Perhaps America, at this day, exhibits the fairest picture of any country or
nation under heaven, of the importance and happy influence of literature and
science. The American people, collectively considered, are, beyond dispute, the
best educated and the most enlightened of any in the world, and our infant
nation already exhibits many noble specimens and monuments of her genius and
intellectual resources. Witness the many valuable literary productions of
American growth, and the many useful and embellishing improvements in the face
of the country, which indicate both genius and a public and enterprizing
spirit, and which have taken place since the revolution. Witness that important
and happy revolution itself. A less enlightened people would never have been so
jealous and tenacious of their liberties -- so eagle-eyed to have spied out
encroachments upon them -- nor been capable of making so vigorous and manly,
and withal so prudent, a stand against encroachments. Witness the happy
republican systems of government which have taken place in the respective
states, and above all, the Federal Constitution which is, undoubtly, the best
palladium of liberty and barrier against its abuse, of any system of human
contrivance, and which, if we have virtue to support it, promises to advance
the respectability, stability and glory of the American Empire, as much beyond
those of every other, as this system exceeds their defective, or less perfect
ones. Here the remark is obvious, that the same knowledge, virtue and
patriotism, which led the way to the freedom and independence of our country,
are essential and indispensable to the preservation of the same. The more
ignorant the subjects of despotism are, the better, on some accounts -- better
for the despot -- for he can rule them with less resistance -- better for the
abject vassals, for their chains and fetters will set the easier upon them. For
my own part, if I must have been doomed a slave to some imperious master, let
me never have known the sweets of liberty; for knowing them, I must have sighed
after them, and repined and sickened in their absence. But not so with respect
to the subjects of a free state and of a republican government. The
continuation of their freedom and happiness depends upon the continuation of
their knowledge and virtue -- these must be cherished and diffused by proper
means and institutions -- by domestic instruction -- by schools and seminaries
for desseminating the rudiments of knowledge -- by colleges and academies for
promoting higher science -- by honorary and pecuniary emoluments as an
encouragement and reward to inventive genius and eminence in science. It is of
the last importance that the people at large, who have, in a sense, the whole
government in their own hands, should be well instructed and virtuously
inclined. The character of those elected to the office of rulers depends upon
the information, character and principles of the electors.

We are happy to observe, that our civil fathers, well weighing this important
principle, have paid very particular attention to the interests of literature
and religion. They have patronized and endowed colleges and academies of
different descriptions, and made provision for schools and public teachers of
morality and religion, in every town.

We, who live in this remote part of the country, labor under some peculiar
disadvantages, in point of education. We are beginning a new country -- taking
farms out of the rough, uncultivated wilderness, where to make any impression
requires exertion and assiduity. A great proportion of our time must
necessarily be devoted to making provision for our families. We can have but
little opportunity for furnishing our minds with knowledge, compared with
people in a reverse of circumstances, and even if we could find leisure for
reading, we in general are unfurnished with books, and hence we see the
expediency and utility of social and circulating libraries. To me it appears
strange that this happy expedient should have been so long neglected, in this
eastern country. "The Friendly Society" was the first institution of the kind
that took place in this country; and I do not know but I might add, in the
District of Maine -- I felicitate you, my brethren, and myself, on the success
it has already obtained and the prospect of its enlargement. I am persuaded
that it is a laudable and good instutition and calculated to promote objects
highly interesting to us, considered either in our individual capacities and
domestic connections, or as members of civil and religious society.

Personal happiness and the endearments of the domestic circle are vastly
heightened by the due culture of the mind, it smooths the unsocial, forbidding
roughnesses of human nature, improves and polishes the human faculties, and
furnishes a capacity both for communicating and receiving intellectual
entertainment.

Learning is religion's favorite handmaid. This applies even to the higher
kinds of science. "Philosophy suggests motives to religion, and religion adds
pleasures to philosophy." The same may be said of all the liberal arts* their
object is the investigation of nature, and "to look through nature up to nature's
God" is the ne plus ultra of all human researches, the rewarding crowning end.

When I consider the place I now stand in, and the common religion of which we
make the profession, it cannot surely be deemed amiss to suggest that, in our
several stations and relative situations, we should discharge the duties
resulting from them, and in particular display all the virtues of patriotism,
from sublimer views, and ultimately to more noble ends than the securing any
political or temporary advantages whatever, and in the perusal of books, which
providence has put into our hands, we ought to have something more important in
view, than the gratifying a transient curiosity, or a taste for literary
amusement.

Our religion teacher us to consider our present existence as a state of
minority, of discipline and probation, designed to prepare us for our adult age
in the next life, which is to be a lasting and unchangeable state, and
therefore that our true happiness, which it is our wisdom and duty to pursue,
lies above and beyond this world.

Let us then my friends, study to reduce the moral science, and all our
religious knowledge, to practice, and seek after and attain that "wisdom whose
ways are ways of pleasantness and all whose paths are peace," -- and whose
blessed influences and effects shall extend beyond the ruin of thrones, the
downfall of empires, and the termination of all political existence in this
world, and support and solace the heart forever.


