AN ORATION PRONOUNCED BEFORE THE CITIZENS OF NEW HAVEN ON THE Anniversary of
the Independence of the United States, JULY 4th. 1798; AND PUBLISHED AT THEIR
REQUEST.

BY NOAH WEBSTER, JUN.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY T. AND S. GREEN.

FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
AMONG all civilized nations, in every age of the world, the foundation of
States, and the establishment of religious systems, have been the subjects of
annual festivity and public demonstrations of joy. This general consent of
nations, in celebrating the distinguished periods of their history, is no
inconsiderable evidence of the propriety of the custom.

These anniversary festivals have a very powerful influence in reviving public
spirit, and in enkindling a flame of national ardor, which, without them, is
liable to be extinguished in the perpetual round of private occupations. They
call to mind the virtues of statesmen, who, by their wisdom, have founded
empires and systems of law; and the sufferings of heroes whose bravery has
defended them. They stimulate posterity to imitate their ancestors, in public
virtues; they infuse into the child the principles which guided, and the
enthusiasm which animated the father; they create and preserve national
attachments, which are the cement of the complex edifice of government.

Such are the general objects of utility to be promoted, by the exercises of
this auspicious anniversary.

Twenty and two years are completed, since the fathers of our empire, appealing
to God and the impartial world, for the purity of their motives, rent asunder
the bands that connected the English colonies with their mother country, and
declared them an INDEPENDENT NATION.

It is known to the members of this auditory, that the general reason assigned
for this bold and decisive measure, was the claim made by the Parliament of
Great Britain, of a right, independent of the consent of the colonies, "to make
laws of sufficient validity to bind them in all cases whatsoever."

This comprehensive claim, so repugnant to the principles of the British
constitution, and of all free governments, which unite inseparably
representation with the right of legislation, was no sooner announced to the
people of this country, than a universal alarm was spread from New Hampshire to
Georgia -- The hopes of a reconciliation to Great Britain yielded to necessity,
and were succeeded by a general determination to resist at all hazards, the
exercise of such an unwarrantable claim. This determination was pursued with
the steadiness of wisdom and the energy of freedom; till it resulted in
severing the colonies from Great Britain, and erecting, in the new world, an
Independent Empire.

This however was not the only reason that called for a separation of the
American colonies from a dependence on Europe. The impropriety of being subject
to a legislation, placed at a distance of three thousand miles, from the people
to be governed, was so obvious to men of discernment, that it was hardly
conceivable, the British government should object to the independence of these
states. It was even the clear interest of the mother country, that her colonies
should become a nation, with the powers of sovereignty; a wise ministry would
have seen this interest, and have proposed by a voluntary act, to acknowledge
them to be independent. It would have appeared to a wise ministry, that in a
state of independence, Great Britain might have received the profits of our
trade, without the expense of governing and defending us. It would have been
foreseen, as events have demonstrated, that under our own protection and
management, the commerce of the country would increase with a much greater
rapidity, than under the jealous regulations of a foreign monopolizing
government.

It is with nations as with individuals -- the less the mind is restrained by
the authority of laws, in regard to its exertions for personal benefit, the
more vigor will be displayed, and in general, with more success. Colonies are
ever in a state of pupillage. Men never exert their full powers and resources,
while they have not the right of self-direction. In a commercial view
therefore, the people of this country would have been less beneficial to Great
Britain, as well to themselves, in the condition of Colonists, than in the
character of an independent nation.

The advantages derived from the commerce of a nation, are not in a simple
ratio to the number of its inhabitants, but in proportion to their industry and
wealth. The productive industry of a country is obviously increased by the
number and variety of its foreign markets. While we were in the condition of
Colonies, Great Britain, from that selfish policy which governs most commercial
nations, abridged our privilege of exporting to the best advantage. The
consequence was, our citizens had less enterprise, less wealth, less
circulating capital, smaller profits, and of course, less ability to purchase
her manufactures.

In this manner, all restrictions on colonial trade, all monopolies, and
probably all restraints on the ingenuity and industry of men, operate to the
prejudice of the nation which imposes them.

In a commercial view therefore, it was the real interest of Great Britain, as
well as of this country, that a separation should take place. Her ministry did
not understand this policy -- for pride is imperious, and passion is blind; we
were therefore compelled to encounter the whole force of her arms in a long and
bloody contest, to obtain that object, which ought to have been received from
her justice and her policy.

If, in a commercial view, the citizens of this country, are gainers by
independence, still more are they gainers in their personal character and in
improvements. If the mind of man is debased by slavery, it is degraded and
vitiated by subjection to a distant government.

Wherever we turn our eyes, we observe this truth, that a colonial
administration is corrupt. Needy rapacious men, the idlers about courts, vile
in their hearts and desperate in their fortunes, often find access to the most
important offices in Colonies. The government of the mother country finds it
convenient to send abroad restless, turbulent, intriguing men; and a Colony is
a kind of honorable exile, for men who really deserve transportation, but whose
crimes will not bring them within the purview of any existing law. -- If many
exceptions can be named of honorable and worthy men employed in administering
colonial government, it detracts not at all from the general observation that
such administration is usually corrupt. -- This corruption at the fountain of
influence; the distance from the mother country, which renders it easy to
commit violence with impunity; the want of a standard of manners, which makes
even vicious men cautious in their vices; all concur to deprave the morals of
colonists. Nor has the colonist the same chance for education, and acquiring an
elevation of mind, as an inhabitant of the mother country -- he is considered
as inferior in rank -- an outlandish being -- humbled in his own estimation and
degraded in the estimation of others.

From this state of degradation, my fellow citizens, was this country rescued
by the glorious act of Independence, which we are now assembled to commemorate.

But let us not limit our views of the benefits to be derived from
Independence, to the advantages of commerce or of character; or of our own
liberties and happiness. Let us extend our views to its connection with the
safety and happiness of mankind in other parts of the world and in future ages.

To a man who believes in the superintendence of Divine Providence over the
affairs of this globe; the settlement of America by a civilized people, and the
establishment of a free government, unfold a most splendid and consoling
prospect. Secluded as America has been from a knowledge of the Europeans, till
a late period of the world, may we not consider it as reserved by Heaven for
the theater of important events; or as the asylum of persecuted freedom and
religion? If we cast our eyes over the other quarters of the earth, where do we
find a spot for the retreat of religion, morals, or arts, for private peace or
public tranquillity? In Asia, man is sunk to a brute, and so firmly established
in the depotism that chains him to the earth, that we have no hopes that his
condition can be ameliorated by ordinary means. Africa gives us no better
prospect. That portion which was once civilized, has been reduced back to
barbarism. Europe is in a state of ferment, and her future destiny may baffle
all our calculations.

So far as history and a knowledge of the human heart will aid our conjectures,
we may consider Europe as declining in improvement, and reverting back to the
darkness and ferocity of the middle ages.

One of two consequences will probably result from the present system of
measures pursuing by France -- Either all Europe will bend to the conquerors,
and submit to be tributary; or all Europe will rise and unite to resist them by
force of arms. -- In the first case, Europe will suffer a universal declension
in the arts, in science, in manners, and in freedom; and in the last, all arts
must be suspended, except the art of war and its auxiliaries.

It is a favorite idea with some enthusiasts that the French, by introducing a
revolutionary spirit in the countries they conquer, and overturning the
despotism that oppresses them, will awaken the people from their torpor and
excite into action those powers which constitute the dignity of man.

But there cannot be a more fallacious opinion, nor one that is more pointedly
contradicted by every page of history. Improvement arises from competition, in
a state of society, where tranquillity fosters taste, and laws secure to every
man the fruits of his industry. But under the dominion of a foreign power, all
emulation is destroyed. Industry is generated and nursed by independence; but
under the control of a foreign government, it must wither and perish.

Let examples decide this question. It has been said that the Romans introduced
their arts and civility of manners, among the barbarians whom they subdued. But
this is not true to any considerable extent. What progress did the the native
Gauls or Britons make in civilization, under the five hundred years dominion of
the Romans? Has history named one man among those nations, who acquired fame in
arts or science? Has one monument of improvement among the millions of the
Gauls, Germans and Britons who lived under the dominion of the Romans, been
preserved? Probably not one.

On the other hand, Greece, after she was conquered by the Romans, the learned,
the polite, the generous Romans, lost her ambition, her arts, and her
character; Egypt also declined under their government; while Judea and
Carthage, actually vanished from among the nations of the earth. Such is the
effect of conquest.

A vanquished nation is a debased, a degraded nation. The brave Romans
themselves, when they were conquered by the Northern Barbarians, gradually lost
their elevation of character, and sunk to a level with their slaves. -- With
their character and their freedom, the Romans lost their arts; Europe, by
conquest, was reduced to slavery, and under the military system which followed
the reduction of the Roman Empire, was, for many centuries, overspread with
darkness and ferocity.

Precisely the same has been the effect of the Saracen and Turkish conquests,
in all parts of the world where their arms have extended. And from the uniform
tesnor of facts, we draw the conclusion, that the nation which aspires to
universal dominion, solicit* the reign of Barbarism. Indeed it is a melancholy
truth, that the progress of civilization and refinement, has ever been defeated
or retarded by a passion for conquest. -- An Alexander, an Omar, or a
Buonaparte, may in a year, destroy the arts, and extinguish the genius of a
nation. Where is the Italian, who will toil for years, with his pencil or his
chisel, if an edict from a distant tyrant can, at any moment, take from him the
fruits of his labor, and from his country, the monuments of his ingenuity?

Such inevitably will be the ultimate effect of the universal dominion of
France -- a total prostration of art* among the vanquished nations, and the
extinguishment of genius.

On the other hand, should the nations of Europe combine to repel the
aggressions of France, whatever may be the final result, the first effect must
be, to arm nations in mass, and all Europe must assume a military character.
This condition of mankind is nearly as unfavorable for improvement in arts and
civilized life, as the lethargy of despotism. --

The present war is also characterized by circumstances that are more than
usually hostile to morality. That species of national piracy, or authorized
plunder, which is indulged on the ocean, is demoralizing mankind with a
rapidity that exceeds all calculation. Should the practice continue a few years
longer, we may expect to see revived the condition of man in the tenth century,
when all commerce was piracy; and when the Norwegians and Danes, like modern
Algiers, laid Europe under tribute. Already are the moral, as well as political
consequences of this practice visible, in every quarter; licentious men abandon
their country, arm privateers, and plunder their fellow-citizens; others, with
more address, but no less treachery, league with the foreign pirates, secretly
supply them with means, and while they walk our streets, in the character of
Gentlemen, are sharing the plunder. Such is the effect of the piratical warfare
now prosecuted on the ocean, and an age will not repair this waste of moral
principles.

In national and social morality, the licentious and unprincipled rulers of a
great empire may speedily break down the barriers of good laws, which wise men
have labored for ages to erect against the savage passions of untutored man;
just as in arts, the knife of a madman, or the hatchet of a barbarian may, in a
moment, despoil the finest productions of a Raphael or a Titian. -- It is the
destiny of human affairs, that the noblest efforts of wisdom and genius, are,
liable continually to be defeated by blockheads.

That state of society which renders bad men masters of the good, is unfriendly
to improvement and to happiness. Such is a state of despotism -- and such, in a
degree, is a state of war.

On the other hand, that condition of man, which secures to him freedom in the
exercise of all his rational faculties, and at the same time, places him beyond
the reach of demagogues, tyrants and mobs, is best adapted to every species of
improvement.

Such a state of society is not to be found in Asia, Africa or Europe. The two
former are overspread with ignorance and despotism; the latter is agitated by
an inveterate contest, between the advocates of the old systems and the
delirious projectors of visionary schemes of reformation. -- The dove of peace,
of virtue and of religion, will, for a long time, find no rest in that quarter
of the globe. America alone seems to be reserved by Heaven as the sequestered
region, where religion, virtue and the arts may find a peaceful retirement from
the tempests which agitate Europe. And it is a circumstance that ought not to
escape our observation, that our revolution happened in good time, to prepare
an empire and a free government, for the reception of the wrecks of the little
freedom which Europe enjoyed. -- The christian and the lover of freedom may
consider this continent as destined by Heaven, to save and to foster the seeds
of a pure church and excellent constitutions of government, which may hereafter
be transplanted to Europe, when the hostile spirit of the present revolution
shall have swept away all the old establishments. After Europe shall have been
scourged with despotism in every shape; the despotism of kings, and of mobs, of
hierarchies, of atheists, of visionary theorists, of armies by land and pirates
by sea; after the half of her people have been sacrificed to the ambition of
men, under the different covers of crowns and liberty ^^ps; the survivors,
weary of eternal discord, of error, of faction, of the persecution of princes
and private clubs* of war, assassination and personal danger, the inevitable
fruits of atheism and chimerical systems of government; will recover from their
delusion and seek a shelter from their miseries, under well tempered forms of
government, analogous to that of the United States, and under the benign
influence of that rational system of religion, which is the only sure basis of
private happiness and public prosperity.

Should this be the destination of the United States, the idea furnishes new
and powerful reasons for guarding the independence and government of our
country, from the arts and the assaults of European nations. -- If, in the old
world, men are doomed to sleep away their existence in the torpor of slavery,
or to live in endless hostility, perpetually shedding each others blood, or
only enjoying short intervals of repose, while resting on their arms; we have
the more reason to cling to the constitution, the laws, to the civil and
religious institutions of our country, and to cherish the pacific policy which
doubles the value of those blessings. -- If there is a nation on earth which
enjoys the same portion of freedom as the people of this country, a knowledge
of that nation has never yet reached us. -- And the condition of Europe herself
demands of us that we should resist with energy and success, all attempts to
introduce among us, the principles and the vices which disturb her repose.

Even admitting what some enthusiasts affirm, that the present political storms
in Europe are necessary to rouse men from their lethargy, awaken their dormant
faculties, and invigorate their minds, yet this consideration furnishes no
reason why we should suffer the same revolutionizing frenzy to penetrate into
this peaceful Republic. We probably enjoy, at this moment, more of the
blessings of freedom, than European nations can acquire; and more than the
people, in their corrupt and debased condition, are capable of enjoying. -- The
extreme pride and jealousy of the rich and the noble, on the one hand; and the
ignorance and ferocity of the peasantry, on the other, absolutely preclude such
a state of property, and of reciprocal confidence and respect, as we enjoy, and
as we hold to be essential to a free government. -- Hence the difficulty and
danger of attempting any great innovation in European governments; difficulties
which have hitherto defeated all schemes for suddenly ameliorating the
condition of its inhabitants.

From these considerations, let us learn to estimate the value of the position
we hold on the globe, and of our civil and religious institutions. Let us
consider them as sacred deposits entrusted to our care by the God of nations,
to be guarded with vigilance, and to be handed down unimpared to posterity.

At no period since we become a nation, have our political affairs been so
critical, as at this moment. Ambition, under the specious cover of
republicanism, and infidelity, under the deceptive title of reason, have
assumed the scepter and the sword, and are stalking over the earth, with
giant-steps, levelling the mounds which wisdom and policy had raised, to
restrain the vicious propensities of men; turning the physical against the
moral force of a nation; dragging, from seats of justice, the wise and the
venerable, and replacing them with bullies and coxcombs; encouraging violence
and robbery, under pretense of introducing a factitious equality; plundering
states, under the name of taking pay for protecting them; dethroning God and
trampling on man.

In the prosecution of this system, and in the confusion that results from it,
the laws of political and moral obligation are forgotten or contemned;
authorities, venerable for truths, sanctioned by age and the consent of
nations, are discarded and left to moulder in the neglected corners of
libraries; while men commit their interests to the guidance of untried
theories. One nation siezes property on the high seas, under pretense of
distressing her enemy; while another thinks it sufficient to justify reprisals,
that she is no worse than her neighbors. Neutral nations are plundered at sea,
threatened with invasion, or civil war, and without a fault, compelled to
purchase peace, with enormous tribute, under the name of diplomatic gratuities
or (...) -- Should this state of things continue for a few (...) longer,
national justice will be erased from our vocabularies; all political
intercourse between governments, will he managed solely by money; justice must
be bought and sold; officers must be hired to perform their duty; the poor man
will lose his rights, because he cannot pay the premium demanded by a rapacious
judge, and the temples of justice will become dens of thieves. Such will be the
civil state of the world, while commerce will be the object of plunder at sea,
and on land, formidable armies will enforce the tyrant's claim, and silence the
clamor of the oppressed.

Such are the inevitable consequences of that false philosophy which has been
preached in the world by Rousseau, Condorcet, Godwin and other visionaries,
who, sit down in their closets to frame systems of government, which are as
unfit for practice, as a vessel of paper for the transportation of men on the
troubled ocean. In all ages of the world, a political projector or
system-monger of popular talents, has been a greater scourge to society than a
pestilence.

While then we rejoice that nature has placed our "goodly heritage" at an
immense distance from the disturbances which harrass Europe; and that our
citizens have had the fortitude to dissolve our political relation to that
quarter of the earth; let us guard our independence, our liberties, our
commerce, and our principles, with the firmness of freemen, and the prudence of
enlightened statesmen. Let us remember that force never makes a convert; that
no amelioration of society can be wrought by violence; and that an attempt to
reform men by compulsion must produce more calamities than benefits. Let us
reject the spirit of making proselytes to particular creeds, by any other means
than persuasion -- that fanaticism in politics, which, like bigotry in
religion, dogmatically arrogates the exclusive privilege of knowing what is
right and denouncing all difference of opinion as damnable heresy. -- A
fanatical republican, who imposes his form of government on his neighbors, by
violence, or silences opposition by the guillotine, is as much a bigot, and a
tyrant, as the Pope who shuts the Bible against investigation, and burns a
heretic at the stake.

Let us never forget that the corner stone of all republican governments, is,
that the will of every citizen is controlled by the laws, or supreme will of
the state. That moment in which the regular authorities cease to govern, that
moment the principles of our constitution are prostrated, and we are slaves.
How little do the advocates of private associations for the purpose of
influencing government, reflect on the effect of their principles. The same
reason which will justify men of one description of principles, in attempting a
private influence upon government, not known to the laws, will justify men of
every other description, in associating for their particular purposes; and in
the monstrous collision of interests, which would certainly arise out of such
cabals, some party must be the victim of the hostile passions of its rival, and
one party has nearly the same chance to be the victim, as another. -- This
remark has been verified in France in its fullest extent. In the rapid
succession of parties, which have arisen, flourished for a few days, and
disappeared under the murderous guillotine, probably no one was traitorous or
hostile to the country: but they had different views to answer; a difference of
views generated hatred, hatred soon produced open hostility, force decided, and
the death or exile of the weakest party closed the completion.

With such melancholy truths before our eyes, let us never suffer an external
influence, unknown to the laws of our country, to interpose and warp its
administration. How glorious was it for America, that her revolution, was
guided by wise and able men, and that scarcely was its progress disgraced by a
popular tumult! If there is a species of despotism, more ferocious, more
merciless, and inexorable, than another, it is the dominion of bullies and
ruffians. May the illustrious example of the conductors of the American
revolution, be sacred to imitation, in every period of our history!

Never, my fellow citizens, let us exchange our civil and religious
institutions for the wild theories of crazy projectors; or the sober,
industrious moral habits of our country, for experiments in atheism and lawless
democracy. Experience is a safe pilot; but experiment is a dangerous ocean,
full of rocks and shoals! --

Since the establishment of our independence, and more especially since the
operation of our national government, our growth and prosperity have verified
the most sanguine predictions. In the general information of the body of
citizens, and in mechanical ingenuity, the American character stands probably
unrivalled -- in every branch of science, it is highly respectable. No nation
can boast of more industrious and enterprizing citizens. Already our commerce
holds probably the second rank, and many of this assembly may live to see the
shipping and commerce of the United States hold the first rank on the ocean.

Such advantages of a political, moral and commercial nature are not to be
bartered away for visionary schemes of government or fraternal embraces.

Why should we suffer our nation to be split into parties about the contests in
Europe? Why degrade ourselves to dispute whether the bastile or the guillotine
is the more dreadful instrument of despotism? Whether the government of England
or France is the more tyrannical? Or whether the English or French privateers
rob us of the most property? -- These questions may occupy private curiosity,
but ought not to affect our attachment to our own government, or divide us into
factions. Our business is to love our country, and to maintain its
independence. Of what consequence is it, which of the European nations requires
us to surrender our independence; or whether the requisition appears in the
candid mode of claiming unconditional submission, or in the more insidious
shape of demands on us for loans, gratuities and fraternity? Where is the man,
who in '75 put on the soldier, to resist the imposition of a three penny duty
on tea; yet will now shrug his shoulders, like a culprit at the whipping post,
and say to the French government, "we will give you a few millions, if you will
only let us alone; we are afraid -- we are very much afraid of war"!!! -- My
friends, had this been the language of '75, we should have had no independence
to commemorate -- and, at this moment, our ports would have been filled with
British tide waiters. -- But our fathers were men -- they were heroes and
patriots -- they fought -- they conquered -- and they bequeathed to us a rich
inheritance of liberty and empire, which we have no right to surrender to the
all-grasping fangs of the French government.

Yes, my fellow freemen; we have a rich and growing empire -- we have a
lucrative commerce to protect -- we have indefeasible rights -- we have an
excellent system of religion and of government -- we have wives and children
and sisters to defend; and God forbid that the soil of America should sustain
the wretch, who wants the will or the spirit to defend them.

Let us then rally round the Independence and Constitution of our country;
resolved, to a man, that we will never lose by folly, disunion or cowardice,
what has been planned by wisdom, and purchased with blood.


