AN ORATION, Delivered at Williamstown, on the 4 th of July, 1799.

Being the ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

By EZEKIEL BACON, Esquire.

Unless corruption first defect the pride,
And guardian vigor of the free born mind,
All crude attempts of violence are vain;
For firm within, and while at heart untouched,
Never yet by force was freedom overcome"
THOMSON. BENNINGTON; PRINTED BY ANTHONY HASWELL.

Williamstown, July 5 th, 1799. SIR,
IN behalf of our fellow citizens of this and the neighboring towns, assembled
at Mr. Reab's on the 4 th of July instant, we have to thank you for the
patriotic Oration delivered by you on that day, and to request a copy thereof
for the press.

Committtee.
WILLIAM TOWNER, EZRA BAKER, SAMUEL KELLOGG, SOLOMON WOLCOTT, jun. ALMOND
HARRISON,


To EZEKIEL BACON, Esquire.
GENTLEMEN;
Courtenanced by your polite request, I submit to publication the following
production; and this I do the more readily from a consideration that the
sentiments which it contains have been misunderstood by many, and the
principles which are advanced in it materially misrepresented.

I am Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, E. BACON.

To the COMMITTEE.
An Oration, etc.
Friends, Brethren and Fellow-Citizens,
To perpetuate in the minds of American freemen, the principles upon which
their republic is founded, was the original object of this anniversary
celebration. To commemorate in joyful but solemn festivity, the day which added
the name of America to the catalogue of nations, is a custom which was not
adopted by a mere thirst for empty parade, and noisy hilarity; but was dictated
by the suggestions of deliberate wisdom, and which has descended to us,
sanctioned by the venerable practice of our political founders. They early saw,
with a foresight alas too prophetic! that the time might ever long arrive, when
the principles which they had so nobly defended, would become unfashionable,
when the privileges which they had so dearly purchased, would be trifled with,
and when the wrongs and oppressions which they had struggled with, would be
buried in the grave of forgetfulness; that a people who had lost the
remembrance of their primeval virtues, and trampled upon the ashes of their
forefathers, must ever long forget themselves, and be forgotten by the
government of their choice.

That by a frequent commemoration of the events of this day, our minds might be
familiarized to contemplate the principles for which it is sacred, has it long
been devoted to the important purpose for which we are now assembled.

To those who have been conversant in the trying scenes which our beloved
country has once experienced, and who by their meritorious exertions
established that glorious declaration of freedom, sovereignty, and
independence, upon which were embarked "the lives, the fortunes and the sacred
honor" of America, it would ill become him who now addresses you to offer the
lessons of admonition or instruction. But to those of us my friends, who have
risen up to enjoy the privileges which have been purchased for us, and to
participate in the blessings which have been bequeathed us, it may be useful to
retrace the ground which has been trodden before us, and to review the
principles which have been established for our instruction.

It is not the object at this time to rehearse the historical progress of the
American revolution, or to recapitulate the steps, by which a nation patient of
injury, though sensible of injustice, desirous of conciliation, yet determined
to be free, was driven from one stage of suffering to another, 'till they
arrived at that point where forbearance would avail them no longer, and their
duty commanded them to resist. The events and the measures which reduced the
good people of America to this solemn and trying situation are now well known
to the world, and familiar to each member of this assembly. It is sufficient to
declare the causes of their conduct in the heartfelt language which they then
adopted. "That the history of the king of Great Britain, was a history of
repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the
establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states, that in every stage of
these oppressions, they petitioned for redress in the most humble terms, their
repeated petitions were answered only by repeated injuries; and that a prince
whose character was thus marked by every act which might define a tyrant, was
unfit to be the rules of a free people." Declaration of Independence.
Such were the injuries they sustained, and such the virtuous cause, for the
support of which, relying only upon heaven and themselves, they closed in the
last and solemn appeal; and what was the result of this seemingly unequal
conflict, between a nation proud of their military resources, and flushed with
their feats of prowess; and a nation just emerging from the cradle of infancy,
and diffident of her means, is a question which every American can answer with
a glow of honest pride, while with a heart of expansive philanthropy he
exclaims.

-- "Ever may the All-just,
"Give to the arms of Freedom such success!"
To the memory of those patriotic worthies, whose lives have for our lakes been
offered up on the altar of Independence; and to those, who after a loss of
every thing but their honor in her service, their country has rewarded with
promises and with scars, we would fain offer that poor tribute of remembrance
which must be at the best but so very inadequate to their merits. But their
names and their deeds, how they fought and how they fell, are they not written
in the book of the chronicles of Columbia, and inscribed on the register of
immortality? Let us their sons imitate the virtues which they practiced, and
attend diligently to the principles which for our instruction they have here
left on long record.

We have heard my friends, and our fathers have told us, in the impressive
words which have just been read. "That all men are created equal. That they
have certain unalienable rights. That all legitimate governments derive their
just powers from the consent of the governed; who have a right when those
governments fall from their original principles, to alter and to abolish them;
that to throw off such governments, and to provide new guards for their future
security, is not only their right but their duty." Declaration of Independence.
Here then are we taught in their fullest extent, those doctrines of "Liberty
and Equality" which have of late become the subject of modern derision and
ridicule; That doctrine of the universal sovereignty of the people, for which
those who have now the hardihood to maintain it, have, from a high authority,
been branded as enemies of the human race: and here is preached in solemn and
explicit terms, that principle, which has been denounced as the harbinger of
confusion, licentiousness and bloodshed; the right, nay the duty of resistance
and insurrection, against governments whose progress to despotism and
oppression can be arrested by no other alternative.

And however harsh, however daring and disorderly, these positions may now
sound in the ears of some, be assured they are drawn from that memorable
instrument, the declaration of American Independence; and I would repeat it,
that these supposed dangerous doctrines, of an original and innate equality of
man, of sovereignty of the people, and of the rights of resistance and
insurrection to usurped powers, are no "weeds of French growth," no invention
of "modern philosophers and system mongers," as some would have us believe:
they are none of the late invented machines, made to pull down all the
religions and governments of Europe on the heads of their inhabitants, and
which have lately been hatched up in the fancies of a disordered brain. No,
fellow citizens, they are the cool unsophisticated conclusions of the honest
sages of America; it is declared by them, not only as a self-evident, but as a
primary article of their creed, that all men are created equal; equal, not in
bodily stature, not in the noble faculties of the mind, or the finer feelings
of the heart; but equal in their claims to those invaluable blessings, which a
beneficent being has bestowed upon his common family with an impartial hand,
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.

I have been thus particular in bringing up to the view of my fellow-citizens,
a remembrance of the principles which have just been recapitulated; because
they appear, by many, to have been either entirely forgotten, or remembered but
as "the tales of yesterday;" and, because, strange to tell! that amongst a
people who were the first to sanction them by their adoption, and to defend
them by their blood, it has become in the short period of twenty three years,
an unpopular, I had almost said a dangerous attempt to proclaim and support
them, yet here they stand; written on the page of American history, and to be
erased only by a destruction of those solemn records on which they are enrolled.

Such then being some of the principles, on the maintenance of which as our
fathers declared, depend the freedom and happiness of our country, let us look
at some of those measures which they deemed infractions thereof; infractions,
not of a trifling and a transient nature, but such as impeled them to that last
alternative, resistance; and to embark themselves on the boisterous sea of a
revolution, a state which has been well described as the "worst of all possible
evils, except that confirmed establishment of tyranny and oppression, for which
there is no other cure."

Amongst other grievances suffered by America from the hand of an usurping
power, and which were deemed too intolerable for freemen to endure, the
following stand conspicuous; impeding by unjust and impolitic measures, the
increasing wealth and population of these states, and for that purpose,
"obstructing the laws for the naturalization of foreigners, and refusing to
pass others to encourage their migration hither; erecting a multitude of new
offices, and sending hither swarms of officers to harrass the people, and eat
out their substance; affecting to render the military independent of and
superior to the civil power. Keeping amongst us in times of peace standing
armies, without the consent of our legislature, and imposing taxes upon us
without our consent." Declaration of Independence.
From these multiplied oppressions (...) making off the tyranny of (...)
government, by whom they (...); and under those of them to (...) exposed,
merely (...) as dependent colonies, we are in no danger of again falling, so
long as we retain that independent station, to which "nature and nature's God"
has entitled us. But amongst the black catalogue of abuses which we then
sustained from a foreign power, are there not some of them, which are sins so
easily besetting all established governments, that against the repetition of
them by our own, there is even now no security, but in the caution, the spirit,
and the unceasing vigilance of the people?

Had we even at this time, a government who were capable of forgetting the hand
that formed them, and neglecting the true interests of their country; might
they not check our rising greatness, and impede the natural increase of our
numbers and resources, by "obstructing the laws for the naturalization of
foreigners," under specious pretexts of national security, and ideal and
exaggerated causes of alarm; passing others subjecting the friendless alien to
hard and unusual punishments, founded upon unjust suspicions, and malicious
accusations; denying him the common rights of hospitality, and the impartial
benefits of justice and humanity? might not such a government, like the
devouring lion from whose fangs we have escaped, "erect a multitude of new
offices, and send out amongst us swarms of officers to barrass the people and
eat out their substance? for that purpose waging foolish and needless wars;
taking occasion thereby to create extensive military and naval establishments;
imposing unnecessary and extravagant taxes; buying up the virtue and
independence of the people, and multiplying the adherents of administration, by
the temptations of office emoluments, places and patronage? might not such a
government in some good measure "render the military independent of, and
superior to the civil power," by frequently calling them forth to suppress
pretended insurrections, purposely created and artfully fomented, by impolitic
measures, irritating denunciations and insolent threats; and if not
encouraging, at least not taking care to correct and discountenance their
indecent outrages, and lawless enormities on the person and property of the
unoffending citizen? might they not virtually suppress the inestimable "freedom
of speech and of the press," under the insidious pretenses, of checking
licentiousness, falsehood and calumny; by laws partially framed, and unfairly
executed, licensing in the partisans of administration the most scandalous
calumnies, and impudent libels* and suppressing under the name of sedition, the
remonstrances which could not be silenced by argument? and thus proceed, in
their works of despotism and injustice, without fear and without shame, by
shutting up the avenues of public opinion, expostulation and complaint? and
hedged in with this system of defense, might they not "in times of peace, keep
up amongst us standing armies," if not without the formal consent of our
legislature, at least without the free and unbiassed consent of the people.

These are the tracks in which all established governments, unchecked by the
vigilance, spirit and intelligence of the people, are prone to run; and from
which my fellow citizens, without those salutary restraints, it were folly to
suppose that our's would be exempt. Whether in its past administration, there
are already discoverable any symptoms of such a declension from first
principles; whether it has sought to establish its measures, by a system of
terror, compulsion and alarm; rather than upon the broad basis of the people's
affections; whether its organization has been laid, in principles of frugality,
moderation, and virtue; or in the principles of profligacy, imprudence and
venality, are questions, on which those who must feel their effects, have a
right freely to judge; and the result of that opinion, they have a right as
freely to declare. For to what purpose do we boast of freedom of opinion, when
the expression of it is curtailed by the terrors of the law; and how shall we
form a just estimation of the characters of public servants, which are
protected from scrutiny, by penalties, imprisonment and disgrace?

But whatever terrors to check the exercise of free enquiry may be held out by
men in power, whatever menaces may be used by their adherents, let us not be
intimidated. The sacred instrument which we have established as the safeguard
of our rights, has declared in terms too explicit to be frittered a way by the
little arts of sophistry, or the paltry shifts of time-serving expediency, that
public measures require no other defense than their own justice and propriety;
and that the only protection to which the characters of your rulers are
entitled, is a conviction of their virtue, wisdom, and integrity amongst the
people.

Strong therefore in the ground, which the wisdom of our excellent constitution
has authorized us to take; and confident that to no laws abridging "the freedom
of speech or of the press," can submission ever be lawfully enforced; it might
be useful and proper in this place, to compare with that standard by which
alone they are to be judged, some of those measures of administration, which
have excited in the minds of our countrymen the most alarming apprehensions,
and inflicted on the feelings of the American people, a wound which it may be
difficult hereafter to heal: and from this enquiry we ought not to be deterred
by any considerations of unmanly fear, false delicacy, or mistaken views of
propriety. For by a man who now holds the highest post of honor which the voice
of his country can bestow, we were but a few years since exhorted, in words
which he cannot recall, nor we forget, "not to be intimidated by any terrors,
from publishing with the utmost freedom, whatever may be warranted by the laws
of our country, nor suffer ourselves to be wheedled out of our liberties by any
pretenses of politeness, delicacy or decency; for these, as they are often
used, are but three different names for hypocrisy, chicanery and cowardice.
Essay on Canon and Fendal Law, by John Adams, Esquire. published about A. D 1765.
Mr. Adams was at that time a private professional man he has since been
advanced to the office of president of the United States.

"Of all characters in history, (says Goldsmith) that of the Emperor Otho,
seems to have been the only one which was mended by advancement."


"

If, fellow citizens, the measures of government be capable of a fair
justification, they have certainly nothing to apprehend from scrutiny and
examination; and it they are not able to stand the test of enquiry, who will
say that we shall not be told of it in language, plain, audible and
undisguised. But upon this investigation, were the talents of the speaker
competent, the time to which we are limited would not allow us to enter: It is
sufficient for the present occasion, if we can be brought to feel that we have
precious privileges at stake, and to know that we have a right to defend them.

It has not been unforeseen, that some of the foregoing sentiments may be
thought too bold, insubordinate and licentious for the present times; that the
matter may be esteemed dangerous, and the manner imprudent, and that thereby
offenses to many may come, yet "to the law and to the testimony" to the
declarations of our public records, to the truth of history, and to the
knowledge of your own hearts may I appeal for the fact, that they were once the
popular topics of American declamation; that they have been proclaimed with
zeal by her patriots, and heard by her citizens with approbation. But "a
generation who knew not Joseph has arisen," in another country, a mighty
revolution has happened; an event in its principles, its operation, and its
consequences, greater probably than the world ever saw.

This revolution, which commenced certainly upon principles congenial with our
own, has, in many of its stages, been pregnant with events highly honorable to
the human character, and consolatory to the cause of freedom; and in others
with catastrophes and excesses, the most discouraging to the views of humanity,
and disgraceful to the character of man.

I am sensible that the respective revolutions of America and of France, though
founded on the same original principles, have, in their progress and their
consummation, been marked with many, very many different features and
characteristics; and it is with pleasure that any feeble attempts of my own are
resigned, when it furnishes an opportunity of giving place to the striking
picture of this subject, which has been drawn by the eloquent pen of an Erskine.

"America and France, says he, be^^^ their revolutions upon the same
principles, but with very different fortunes. America had no ancient internal
aristocracy, France had nothing else. America had to contend with England only,
a contention which gave her France to protect her: France had to contend
against the world. When England had exhausted and disgraced herself, America
was therefore free: but France had to exhaust and disgrace the world, and in
the dreadful effort has been driven to extremities, which frequently have
disgraced herself. But with these accidental differences the objects were the
same; discontent occasioned by abuses produced both revolutions; both
governments might have continued monarchical, if corrupt power would have
submited to correction; they are both now representative republics, and if
corruption will not yet be corrected, let her look to herself. E^sbine's View
of the Causes, etc. of the present war with France.
"

It is not surprising that such a revolution, so mighty in its operations, so
vast in its objects* and so disastrous in many of its events, should have
produeed in the minds of men, all those passions, anxieties and alarms, which
are dictated by the feelings of interest, ambition and avarice. That the kings
and the nobles of the earth; the princes of power, and the lords of their
brethren, should have been roused at the approach of a system which proclaimed
the principles of equal rights, and prostrated at a blow those ideal claims to
honor and sway, which their deluded vassals had been taught to reverence and
adore, was natural and expected. That the extraordinary and terrific scenes
which occured in its accomplishment, should have perplexed the minds of many
honest and feeling men, and have induced them to caution and diffidence, in
proposing and executing apparently salutary innovations in existing
establishments, was perhaps proper and justifiable. But that with any
considerable number of thinking Americans, the mere excesses of a revolution,
which was effected under circumstances of external interference, and internal
difficulties which no nation ever before struggled with, should produce a
horror at the very name of liberty; should induce them to regard every struggle
of an oppressed nation for its rightful freedom, as an effort of lawless and
wicked rebellion; and every attempt at peaceful reformation, as "a conspiracy
against all religion and government," are circumstances unlooked for, and
unaccountable. But that the dreams of disordered imaginations in Europe, should
be imported here by American sanatics, and palmed upon the public as the
councils of truth and soberness; that the impious calumnies which they
propagate, should be successfully enlisted under the banners of a party here,
and played off upon characters whose philanthropy, disinterestedness,
moderation, and virtue, should ever endear them to a grateful people, are
facts, which will leave a deep stain upon the American character, and excite in
posterity a blush for the follies of their fathers. But will not the
considerate citizens of our country, when they hear the very principles for
which they have fought denounced as disorganizing, atheistical and impious,
have the firmness to withstand the barefaced delusion? and when they see the
fairest and the first of her patriots, her Franklin, and her Jefferson, dragged
into the bloody list of pretended conspirators; will they not have the spirit
to step boldly forth, and vindicate to the world, the names of those, who in
times of unexampled trial, profligacy, and corruption, have ever dared to
vindicate the cause of the people?

But it is by these delusive phantoms conjured up to bewilder and to dazzle the
mind; by these systems of artificial plots, conspiracies and alarms, that the
unsupecting mind of the American public has been beguiled, and the honest
virtues of their hearts contaminated and perverted. From this cause has it
happened, that the plain principles of their revolution have become
unfashionable, and the unvarnished language of freedom an unwelcome tale. Yet
it is on that very account more eminently the duty of every faithful citizen,
to remind his brethren of the principles upon which their republic rests, "and
whether they will hear or whether they will forbear" to point to the dangers
which threaten their dissolution.

But there are periods in the affairs of nations, when it is not only their
duty to bring to view the first principles of their rights, and to contemplate
those sound maxims of policy on which their political institutions are founded;
but it likewise behooves them, to consider well of that critical and dangerous
situation into which they may sometimes be driven, by circumstances unfortunate
and unavoidable; or by the reign of a perverse and passionate system of
measures, totally inconsistent with the permanent welfare of the state, or the
existence of private safety and happiness, countenancing the most dangerous and
destructive passions in the minds of the people, and kept up by the re-action
of those passions upon the government.

Such it is to be feared is the situation toward which by a perversion of the
public feeling, singular and unnatural, we are now rapidly verging. For popular
delusion and political infatuation are distempers, of the public mind, with
which most nations have been attacked at some periods of their existence, like
the epidemical maladies of the human body, their operation has varied with the
different constitutions of the patient, and the predisposing causes by which
that constitution was affected. They have at one time led their enchanted
subjects into the troubled gulf of licentiousness, and at others into the
stagnant sea of despotism and oppression. It is not by force alone that liberty
has been destroyed, or the charms of freedom obliterated. The most abominable
systems of tyranny which have disgraced the annals of the world, have neither
been introduced by conquest, nor established by the sword. They have been
accomplished by the gentle arts of popular delusion, and built upon the
infatuated blindness of the multitude; who lulled into security, or driven into
perversity, awake only to a prospect of their wretchedness, and to realize the
consequences of their errors.

The application of these remarks to the temper of the present times, is
perhaps more just than obvious, and will be felt more readily than acknowledged.

A perverse attachment to a party, who had rather risk the dissolution of our
federal union, than be disappointed in the accomplishment of a favorite
measure; is, it is apprehended the infatuation of the present day, and the
delusion by which too many are affected; to the temper, the views and the
consequences of which, it were well to call the attention of considerate men.

That the mutual confederation of these United States, which was at first
dictated by necessity, cemented by common calamity, and continued by the
dictates of wisdom and expedience, had been the guarantee of our national
existence, prosperity and happiness; that its dissolution would open the door
to innumerable evils, and throw us into a state of wretchedness and confusion,
were once esteemed unquestionable truths, of late however, these truths have
either been weakly denied, or wickedly disregarded. The happy continuation of
our union we have reason to fear, has not only been threatened by a series of
untoward measures, but its very expedience has been openly questioned, and its
dissolution wantonly proved; how consistent with an affected attachment to
order, and the exclusive character of federalism, let the public judge! it
becomes then important to enquire, on what principles that union is founded, by
what means it has so long been preserved, and to what dangers it is now exposed.

Let it then be remembered, that the constitution of these states, the present
bond of our union, was necessarily a system of accommodation; that mutual
sacrifices of interest, opinion, and prejudice are it basis; that when these
sacrifices are withheld, the superstructure which has been raised upon them
must tumble into ruins. That these were the pillars upon which it was erected,
we have the evidence of that illustrious body who gave it existence. "Thus" say
they, Letter of the federal convention to congress.
"the constitution which we present, is the result of a spirit of amity, and of
that mutual deference and concession which the peculiarity of our local
situation rendered indispensible."

Whatever therefore tends to sap the foundation of these pillars, and to sweep
from under our feet this "rock of our political salvation," deserves to be
guarded with caution, and repressed with vigilance. And is not this, oh
citizens of America, that baneful spirit of party with which we are infested;
that canker worm which embitters society, foments public discord, and private
animosity, and infuses its poison into the cup of social enjoyment? We are at
present perhaps rather diverted than alarmed at its progress; like heedless
children we may sit smiling at the destructive flame we have kindled, until
like them we may be swallowed up in the conflagration, when it has spread
beyond the power of resistance. But how shall its rage be checked or its fury
appeased; when no station is too exalted for its influence, and no office too
sacred for its exercise? from the grave character who presides upon the bench
of justice, to the young master who harangues at the academy, do we not hear
the same unceasing strain of party politics, and partizan inculcations? and
even that theater, which was once devoted to the mild service of the prince of
peace, is now daily shaken by the jarring notes of political discord.

To crown all, the press, that fruitful tree of good and evil; the "palladium
of our rights, and the scourge of tyrants;" but at the same time the mother of
dissension, and the root of all bitterness, is called in to heighten our mutual
hatreds, and to increase the sum of our irritation. Geographical divisions, and
local prejudices are improved to promote dissensions, and the distant
inhabitants of the union are depicted to each other in all the black features
of savage atrocity. Private reputation assaulted, individual character wantonly
sported with, and public virtue on every hand branded with in amy, is a saint
part of the picture which is daily presented to our observation; and every
public character has frequent occasion to observe with Alexander, "how short is
the distance between a statue and a gibbet!"

We have heard much in the publications of the day, of the dangers of faction,
the mischiefs of party, and the necessity of union and concert; and we
undoubtedly wish to see these factions crushed, and harmony restored; to one or
other of these factions we most of us probably belong; and it is not less a
faction, because perhaps in the general scale of American politics it happens
just at this moment to predominate. There is no security that it will so
continue; and had not those who have now the fortune of war in their hands,
better listen to terms of accommodation? the opposite party must over long
inevitably rise in its turn, in the general circle of vibration; and who shall
answer for their moderation, or that they shall show mercy to those, from whose
hands they have not received it? it may be well for those, who contemning the
voice of opposition, and insulting the language of remonstrance, are determined
to drive every measure which the infatuation of party can accomplish; to
consider, that there is a point beyond which provocation is no longer
tolerable, and moderation itself rises into resistance; but political and
religious bigotry are equally sanguinary and intolerant, and the deluded
fanatic rather wishes to exterminate the opinion of his neighbor, than to make
the smallest sacrifices of his own. Such are those of our modern politicians,
who while they are railing at disaffections and divisions, refuse to make the
most trifling sacrifices to harmony and concord: who with the songs of union,
federalism, and the constitution upon their tongues, are in their hearts bent
upon disunion, consolidation and discord.

To your interest, your feelings, and your experience, citizens of America,
might the appeal be made, for the mutual benefits, and the mutual happiness
resulting from your friendly union. But it is hoped, that they are already too
strongly impressed upon your minds, to be speedily forgotten, or transiently
abandoned. It is an object indispensibly necessary, either to the continuance
of your internal quiet, or your security against external invasions; it has
been cemented by your blood, and confirmed by your mutual toils; you have
encountered common dangers, and common calamities, and are living witnesses of
each other's fortitude, constancy, and courage.

We would appeal to those who were early in the public councils of our country,
and by the cooperation of distant co-patriots conducted us to liberty and
independence, if they have not found the patriotism of their southern brethren
as fervent, and their attachment to the public weal as ardent as their own: If
their courage is not as intrepid, and their fortitude as finished? -- But to
the undegenerate body of real American citizens, this appeal, it is to be
hoped, is needless; they are too well persuaded of the blessings of their
union, speedily to forget them, and too temperate in their decisions suddenly
to renounce them.

No, but it is from the infuriated zeal of an elated and aspiring party, from
those "Porcupines" of disorder, who scatter the quills of dissension through
the land, that the dangers of our situation proceed.

Americans, of these sheep-clad wolves, who under a specious zeal for the
constitution and the laws, are seeking to irritate and divide us, beware! From
the dignified statesman in office to the paltry scribler in a prostituted
gazette, they are all equally detestable. Observe whether public measures are
conducted with temperance, justice dispensed with impartiality, and public
preferments conferred with liberality and fairness. When these questions can be
answered in the affirmative, then may we fondly hope that our union will be
permanent, and our liberty perpetual. But when the mild principles of
toleration are swept away by party zeal, when political attachments are made
the criterion of court favor, and the blessings of office reserved for family
connections and dependents; then must the seeds of our dissolution be sown, and
their fruit fast hastening to maturity.

But we have the consolation of believing, that there is yet in our country a
friend of virtue not easily corrupted, united to a stability not suddenly to be
shaken. That we are blessed with at least some political pilots, who will
outride the temporary storms of opinion, and conduct our vessel into the Haven
of security. If however, rejecting the councils of moderation, and spurning at
the language of forbearance, we can make an oblation of our liberties upon the
consuming altar of party; and rashly surrender that happiness which has been so
dearly purchased; America will but add another page to the long book of human
folly: and while the friend of freedom drops a despairing tear at her fate, the
future historian will record; This people acquired by their valor what they
wanted the virtue to preserve.

FINIS.
P S. IT may be proper just to observe, that some of the observations toward
the close of the preceding production, and which relate particularly to the
subject of the union of these states, had been published by the author in a
distant part of this Commonwealth, under a fictitious signature, some months
previous to the occasion on which they were delivered in this form, and for
which they were not then designed, as they had never however been made public
in this part of the country, it is hoped the introduction of them on this
occasion, will not be thought improper.




