THE ADVENTURES OF Sig. Gaudentio Di Lucca.

Being the substance of his Examination before the Fathers of the Inquisition
at Bologna, in Italy: GIVING AN ACCOUNT OF AN UNKNOWN COUNTRY, IN THE MIDST OF
THE DESERTS OF AFRICA, THE ORIGIN AND ANTIQUITY OF THE PEOPLE, THEIR RELIGION,
CUSTOMS, AND LAWS.

Copied from the original manuscript in St. Mark's Library at Venice; with
critical notes of the learned Signor RHEDI.

To which is prefixed, A letter of the Secretary of the Inquisition, showing
the reasons of Signor GAUDENTIO'S being apprehended, and the manner of it.

TRANSLATED FROM THE ITALIAN.

PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY WILLIAM CONOVER, No. 71, WALNUT STREET.

1799.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
IT is very natural to think the reader would willingly be apprised of two
things relating to these Memoirs: First, how this curious manuscript came to
light, considering the dark and deep secrecy with which all things are
transacted in the inquisition. Secondly, how it came into the translator's
hands. To satisfy such a commendable curiosity, he is to be informed. That the
manuscript was sent by the secretary of the inquisition at Bologna to the
learned Sig. Rhedi, keeper of the library of S. Mark at Venice, his intimate
friend and correspondent, with the whole account how the author was taken up,
and secured in the inquisition, as the letter of the secretary to the same
Signor Rhedi will show: which letter, as it contains a great many curious
particulars in the examination of the criminal, (for he was taken up as such,
though nothing very material was proved against him; for which reason, he
received a more favorable treatment than is generally believed to be customary
in that dreadful tribunal); so it discovers no indirect practices of the
inquisition, but, on the contrary, shows they proceed with a great deal of
circumspection within their walls, though all things are involved in
impenetrable darkness to those without. Beside, the succession of new popes,
and, generally speaking, the change of other officers attending it, might make
them be less upon their guard, as the secretary seems to hint in his letter.
Neither is there any thing that might do him any harm, in case he were
discovered; especially writing to a friend of his own communion, and a priest,
as Signor Rhedi was; which is likewise seen by the letter.

As to the second quaere, the manuscript came into the publisher's hands, by
the means of the same Signor Rhedi, who is an honor to his church, profession,
and country, and one of the most learned and polite men in the world. He is not
so bigoted to his religion or profession, as to shun the company of the
heretical tramon^ani, a title the Indians generally give us; but loves and
esteems a learned man, though of a different persuasion. One reason for this
may be, that he breathes a freer air at Venice, than they do in the other parts
of Italy. The inquisition has nothing to do in the Venetian territories. Though
they are Roman Catholics, the state admits of no tribunal independent of
itself. Besides, as they are a trading people, their commerce obliges them to
be civil to persons of all persuasions, especially strangers. But of all others
they seem to have the greatest respect for the English; whether it be on
account of their power at sea, or their frankness in spending their money, so
many of the English nobility and gentry traveling that way; or from the
candor and sincerity of our nature, so opposite to the Italians, and therefore
the more valued by them: be that as it will, the publisher, who had several
times made the tour of Italy, was not only intimately acquainted, but had
contracted a particular friendship with Signor Rhedi, as well on account of
their mutual inclinations for learning and antiquity, as for several reciprocal
obligations passing between them. The last time he was at Venice, which was in
company of a person of the first rank, who liked the place as well as he did,
he staid there upwards of fifteen months; during which time he had the
opportunity of enjoying the conversation of his learned friend, with as much
liberty, as if he had been of the same persuasion. But the present of a gold
repeating watch, with some other of our English curiosities, so won his heart,
that one day being together in the great library, he unlocks a little grate
where he kept his rarities, and turning to me with a smile, Signor Inglese,
says he, holding a manuscript in his hand, here is such a curiosity, as I am
sure, you never saw, and perhaps never heard of: it is the life of a person who
is now in the inquisition at Bologna, taken from his own confession before the
inquisitors; with the account of a country in the heart of the vast deserts of
Africa, whose inhabitants have lived unknown to all the world upwards of 3000
years, and inaccessible to all the world, but by the way he was carried
thither. The inquisitors are so far persuaded of the truth of it, that they
have promised him his liberty, if he will undertake to conduct some
missionaries the same way, to preach the gospel to a numerous people, who by
his account have the greatest knowledge of natural religion and polity of any
Heathen nation yet known, even beyond the Chinese. For my own part, I could
scarce have believed it, had not the secretary of the same inquisition, who,
you may be sure, by his post, is not a man to be imposed upon, assured me of
the truth of it: nay, that he himself was present at his seizure and
examination, and sent me a copy of his life, which he was ordered to give in by
the inquisitors; with the whole account of the occasion and manner of his
seizure. It seems he had lived some time in Bologna in quality of a physician,
under the name of Signor Gaudentio di Lucca, which he says is his true name,
and confirms it by the place of his birth, the names of his parents, time of
his captivity, etc. He had dropped some words of several strange secrets he was
master of, with mutterings of an unknown nation, religion, and customs, quite
new to the Italian ears, for which reason the inquisition thought sit to seize
him, and, by ways and means made use of in that tribunal, obliged him to give
an account of his whole life, which is the most surprising I ever read. Here is
the secretary's letter, giving a succinct account of the whole affair. I have
added, continued he, some critical remarks in proper places, to show that this
account is not so incredible as it may appear at first sight, and that it
agrees with some hints left us in the remains of ancient history. Besides, the
man stands to the truth of it with a stedfastness that is surprising. He is a
person of a very handsome presence, well read, good sense, and, as it appears
to the inquisitors, (who are nice judges), of seemingly good morals. He
professes himself a zealous Roman Catholic, and that he always was so; for
which reason, the inquisitors are more civil to him than ordinary. He gives
such a rational and circumstantial account of his adventures, that I am of the
secretary's opinion, as to the truth of it. But, added he, I wont forestal the
satisfaction you will find in the perusal: so delivered the manuscript and the
secretary's letter into the publisher's hands, who running his eyes over it for
some time, was so struck with the novelty of the thing, that he asked Sig.
Rhedi, whether he might not take a copy of it. He was answered, he could not
permit the manuscript to be taken out of the library; nor could he, with safety
to himself, allow a stranger, and of a different religion too, the liberty of
staying so long in the library by himself, as the transcribing would take up.
The publisher said, he might put what guards upon him he pleased, provided he
might but transcribe it. No, says he, that is inconvenient too; but I will
order one of my under librarians I can conside in, to write you out an exact
copy, with the secretary's letter, and my own remarks, if you think them worth
your notice; which he did most faithfu^ly; generously commanding the
transcriber, at the same time, not to take any thing of me for his pains. Thus
this curious manuscript came to hand, to the infinite satisfaction of the
publisher, and he hopes it will prove no less to the readers, in the perusal of
it. The character of Signor Gaudentio cannot be called in question; nor is the
publisher a person so little versed in the nature and ways of the Italians, as
to be imposed upon. The translation from the Italian is as exact as possible.
This is the previous account the publisher thought proper to give of this
affair.

N. B. Great part of the matters treated of in these memoirs, being transmitted
in a Roman-Catholic country, and among Roman Catholics, the reader must not
wonder, if they speak of their religion, as if it were the only true one in the
world.

It will not be improper to admonish the reader, not to discredit immediately
some of the relations contained in these Memoirs; but to suspend his judgment,
'till he has read Signor Rhedi's remarks; particularly when he comes to the
origin and antiquity of the people the author speaks of. The learned will find
in them such a vast knowledge in history, and the most intricate remains of
antiquity, as will render them very well worth their notice. The same Signor
Rhedi told the publisher, he had inquired into what happened at Venice;
particularly what the author mentions of Monsieur Godart, one of the most
improbable parts of his adventures, and found the whole to be just as he
relates it.

The publisher is satisfied the reader will be extremely sorry, as well as
himself, for the loss of some sheets belonging to the middle part of this
history. How they came to be lost, he cannot tell; but he supposes, by the
incivility of the customhouse-officers at Marseilles; for they tumbled over his
effects at a very rude rate, and while he had an eye on other matters, they
either took some of the loose sheets, or they dropped out in the tumbling; he
was very much troubled, when he came to miss them in the course of the
translation.

INTRODUCTION.
Giving an account of the causes and manner of the seizure of Signor GAUDENTIO
DI LUCCA, and the first part of his examination.
In a letter from the Secretary of the INQUISITION, to Signor RHEDI.
The Italian titles of Illustrissimo, etc, are left out, as not used in our
language.
SIR,
THE present turn of He either means the death of some pope, or some
extraordinary crisis in the Romish economy.
affairs which fills the heads of other people with intrigues of state, gives
me an opportunity of returning my best thanks, for the rich present you were
pleased to send to a person who was yours before by the strictest ties of
gratitude -- The cabinet, with the other curiosities, came safe to hand, and
shows, that whoever is so happy, as to oblige Signor Rhedi, sows a seed which
returns a hundred fold. -- The poverty of our The secretary was a Dominican
friar; the Dominicans being masters of the inquisition.
profession hinders me from being capable of making a suitable return for your
magnificent present; but nothing ought to take from me the desire of expressing
my acknowledgements. In testimony of it, and to show that poverty itself may be
grateful, I send you, by the bearer, the account of a man whose life has filled
our inquisitors with wonder and astonishment. He has been in the inquisition at
this place about two years: we have employed all our engines to find out the
truth of what he is, and can find nothing material against him, unless it be
the unheard of account he gives of himself. Our first inquisitor has obliged
him to write his own life, with all the particulars, as succinctly as possible,
adding threats withal, that, if we find him in a false story, it shall be worse
with him. He tells us strange stories of one of the most beautiful countries in
the world, in the very heart of the vast deserts of Africa, inaccessible to all
the world but by one way, which seems as extraordinary as the country it leads
to. As you are a person of universal knowledge in antiquity, and an admirer of
curiosities of this nature, I send you a copy of the manuscript to have your
opinion of it; and to give you as clear a notion of the man as I can, you must
know, that about three years before he was taken up by the inquisition, he took
a nea^ house at Bologna in quality of a physician, passing through some slight
examination for form's sake, and paying his fee as is customary with strangers.
His name, as he says, is Gaudentio di Lucca, originally of Lucca A little
republic in Italy,
, but born in Ragusa A republic in Dalmati^, and tributary to the Turks.
; he is a tall, handsome, clean-built man, as you shall see in a thousand, of a
very polite address, and something so very engaging in his aspect* as bespeaks
your favor at first sight* He seems to be near fifty; he is a man of good sense
and fine discourse, though his accent is not pure Italian, from his living, as
he says, so long in foreign countries. He speaks almost all the oriental
languages, and has a very competent share of other parts of learning, as well
as that of his profession. We sent to Ragusa and Lucca to inquire about him,
but could not get the least information of his being known in those places. The
reason of which he has given in his life, as you will see; only at Ragusa, some
people remembered there had been a merchant of that name, about five and twenty
or thirty years ago, who was either lost, or taken by pirates, and never heard
of more.

The inquisition, as you know, sir, has eyes every where, especially on
strangers; we kept an eye upon him from his first settling^ ^t Bologna: but as
we proceed with justice as well as caution, we could not discover any
sufficient reason to take him up. His life was as regular as that of others of
his profession, which he did not follow very closely, but only for form's sake,
being chiefly consulted at his own house, on account of some extraordinary
secrets he pretended to be master of, without making any visits but to ladies,
with whom he grew in prodigious request. They said he had a sweetness and ease
in conversation, that was almost bewitching. This unaccountable fondness of the
ladies gave us the first suspicion, least he should instill some ill notions
into that sex, so credulous where they are fond, and so incredulous where they
dislike. He professed himself a Roman Catholic; seemed to have a competent
knowledge, and even veneration, considering he was a physician, for our holy
mysteries: so we had nothing against him on that account. We could not find
that he wanted for money, though he lived rather genteelly than magnificently:
we found on several occasions, that money, the idol of other people, was the
least of his care; and that he had some secret springs we could not fathom. His
house was but decently, though completely, furnished for one of his rank; he
kept two servants in livery and a valet de chamber; who, being of his town,
knew no more of him than we did. There was an elderly lady we thought had been
his wife, but it proved she was not; a foreigner, for whom he seemed to have a
great respect, and her maid a foreigner also; and an elderly maid servant of
the town. We have them all secured in the inquisition, though he does not know
it. The lady has the remains of a wonderful fine face, and an air of quality;
she speaks a broken Italian, so that we can get very little out of her, but
what agrees with his account. I am confident you will rather be pleased with
these particulars than think them tedious. There is something so extraordinary
in the man, I ought not to omit the least circumstance. We had several
consultations about him in our inquisition, as well as our Leiger
intelligences, but could discover nothing of moment. We examined what
intercourse he had in other parts, by ordering the postmaster to send us all
his letters, which we could easily open, and seal up again with the greatest
nicety. But we found he had only two correspondents, one possessed of a
moderate income of about four thousand crowns in the bank of Genoa; the other a
lady of your city of Venice, whom we discovered to be a celebrated courtezan,
who subscribes herself Favilla. We find by her last letter, that he had given
her very good advice, and persuaded her to become a penitent: you will oblige
us if you will inquire what she is. Amorous intrigues not falling under our
cognizance, we let him alone for some time, having a person under our
examination on suspicion of being a Jew in masquerade, and a spy from the Grand
Signor, who kept us employed for some time. Besides* the good advice he gave
the courtezan, and he being past his prime, made us less suspicious of the
ladies; we supposed they had recourse to him, on account of some female
infirmities. Though the young ladies were most fond of him, his behavior to
them was more an endearing sweetness and courtesy, than love, with very little
signs, at least he had the address to conceal them, of more kindness for one
than another. In fine, persons of the best rank, of both sexes, began to have a
prodigious liking for his company; he stole upon them insensibly. As he
increased in this good opinion, he opened himself with greater freedom; he made
no show at all at first, more than a fine presence and a polite address: but,
after further acquaintance, they discovered he was master of most sciences, and
showed a superior genius in any thing they could discourse of. We employed
proper persons to insinuate themselves into his good liking, and consult him as
a friend on several nice points; but he had such a presence of mind, yet
appeared so unconstrained in his discourse, that they owned themselves novices
in comparison to him. If they talked of politics, he said very judiciously, it
was not for men of his rank, to meddle with affairs of state, or examine what
persons did in the cabinet. If of religion, he seemed to understand it very
well for one of his profession; so that nothing came from him but what was
consonant to the Catholic faith; expressing on all occasions a great deference
for the authority of the church. But still the more sagacious were persuaded,
something more than ordinary lay hid under that specious cover. At length,
talking one day with some of our spies about the customs of foreign countries,
he said, he had met with a nation in one of the remotest parts of the world,
who, though they were Heathens, had more knowledge of the law of nature, and
common morality, than the most civilized Christians. This was immediately
carried to us, and explained as a reflection on the Christian religion. Another
time, as he had a great knowledge in philosophy, he dropped some words as if he
had some skill in judiciary astrology; which you know, sir, is a capital crime
with us. We were as good as resolved to seize him, when we were determined to
it by the following accident. Two of the most beautiful women in all Bologna
had fallen in love with him, either on account of the handsomeness of his
person, or, by a whimsicalness peculiar to some women, because he was a
stranger, or thinking he might keep their secrets better under the cloak of
being a physician; or, in fine, drawn in by some love-potion or other, we
cannot tell; but the matter grew to such a height, that on his showing more
distinguishing favor to one of them, as it is natural for our women to be
violent in their jealousy, as well as love, the other, to be revenged, said he
had bewitched her; which she was sure of for that, since the very first time
she saw him, she thought there was something more in him, than ever she saw in
any man in her life. Besides, she said, she had often found him drawing circles
and figures on paper, which to her looked like conjuration. Her friends
immediately informed our fathers of it; so we resolved to seize him, if it were
but to find out his secrets, and see what the man was. There was another reason
induced us to it, which the world will hardly believe, though it is matter of
fact: that is, we were afraid, the man would be assassinated by some secret
means or other, for being so great with our ladies; so, to save his life, and
not lose the discoveries we expect from him, it was determined he should be
seized immediately. Accordingly, I was deputed, with three underofficers, to
do the business, but with all the caution and secrecy usual in such cases. It
was done about midnight, when we had watched one of the two ladies he favored
most, into his house. We went in a close coach, and myself and one of the
officers stopping at the door, as soon as the servant opened it, stepped in,
telling him what we were, and charging him, at his peril, not to make the least
noise. The servants being Italians, and knowing the consequence of the least
resistance, stood as mute as fishes. We immediately went into the inner
parlour, and; contrary to our expectation, found our gentleman, the young lady
with her governante, and the elderly lady that belonged to him, sitting very
decently at an elegant collation of fruits and sweetmeats, brought, as we
supposed, by the fair lady as a present. At our first appearance, he seemed
more surprised than terrified; as we make no ceremonies in those cases, we told
him our errand, and commanded him to come along with us without the least
resistance, or else it should be worse for him. Then we turned to the young
lady, whose friends and person we knew, and told her we wondered to find her in
such company at such unseasonable hours; but, on account of her friends, would
not meddle with her, but bid her for her own sake, as she tendered her life and
honor, never to take the least notice of the affair. She trembling, and ready
to faint away, after some hesitation, was able to say, that she was come to
consult about her health; that she brought her governante along with her to
take off all suspicion, and as she was mistress of herself and fortune, it was
not unusal for persons of her rank to be out at that time, considering the heat
of the season. She had scarce pronounced these words, when she fell directly
into a swoon. Her governante having things proper for such occasions, revived
and comforted her as well as she could. But when we were going to take the
gentleman along with us, the elderly lady, to whom we suppose he had told his
misfortune, instead of falling into fits, flew at us like a tygress, with a
fury I never saw in any human creature in my life, tearing at us with her nails
and teeth, as if she had been in the most raging madness. We, not accustomed to
resistance, considering our character and cloth, and she a woman, were almost
motionless, when the servants at the noise came up. We commanded them, in the
name of the inquisition, to seize her: the gentleman interposed in our favor,
saying some words to her in an unknown language, which he assured us, were to
beg her to be pacified, as she tendered his life as well as her own; then the
violence of her passion turned another way, and threw her into the strongest
convulsions I ever saw. By this time the other two officers were come up,
wondering at our delay, and to find resistance against the officers of the
inquisition. The gentleman, with a becoming submission, rather than fear,
yielded himself a prisoner, and begged us to pardon the sudden transports' of a
person unacquainted with our customs, whose life in some manner depended on
his. That she was a Persian lady of quality, brought into this country by great
misfortunes, who had once saved his life, as he had been afterward
instrumental in saving hers. That she was disposed to turn Christian, with
intention after some time to end her days in a convent. That for his own part,
relying on his innocence, he readily submitted to our authority, and offered
himself to be carried where ever we pleased* he uttered all this with an air of
constancy that was surprising* We immediately took him into the coach, leaving
two of the officers with the elderly lady, and commanding them and the
gentleman's servants not to stir out of the room till further orders. As soon
as we arrived at the inquisition, we lodged him in a handsome strong room; not
so much like a criminal, as like a person for whom we had some respect. There
we left him to his own thoughts, and returned to his house to seize the elderly
lady and his papers, having dismissed the young lady and her governante before.
I forgot to tell you, that Signor Gaudentio, by our permission, had spoke to
the elderly lady coming out of her fits in Italian, (for we would not let him
speak to her in the unknown language, for fear of a combination), and with much
pains made her understand, that he begged her, by all that was dear, to submit
to whatever we should injoin her; assuring her by that means all would be well
for her safety and his own: which last words seemed to give some calm to her
tempestuous spirits. You may believe, sir, we were much surprised at the
novelty of the thing, and the account he gave of her quality. But as we often
meet with false stories in our employment, that did not hinder us from doing
our duty. So I took her by the hand with a great deal of respect, and put her
into the coach between myself and my companion; not without apprehensions of
some extravagant follies, considering the violence of her temper. But she
continued pretty sedate, only seemed to be overwhelmed with grief; we brought
her to the inquisition, and lodged her in a very handsome apartment separate
from the convent, on account of her sex; with two waiting women to attend her
with all respect, till we were better apprised of the truth of her quality.
This obliged me to take another journey to Signor Gaudentio's house, to secure
his papers, with whatever else might contribute to further our discovery. I
found all things in the same order I left them; but being extremely fatigued, I
sat down to the elegant collation that was left, and, after a small repast,
went to bed in his house, to have the morning before us for securing his
effects. I sealed up all the papers I could find, to examine them at more
leisure, took an inventory of all the movables, that they might be restored to
him in case he were found innocent; and sent for a proper officer to remain in
the house, who was to be responsible for every thing. There were two little
cabinets of curious workmanship; one of them, as it appeared, belonged to him,
the other to the strange lady; but being full of intricate drawers or tills, we
took them both along with us. These and the papers we delivered to the head
inquisitors, not being willing to proceed in either of their examinations, till
we had got all the light we could, to find out the truth, for that was all our
aim; then we could tell what course to take with them. We placed two cunning
lay brothers, in the nature of servants, for Signor Gaudentio, who were to
insinuate themselves into his favor by their kind offices, compassionating his
misfortunes, and advising him to discover the whole truth, in the account of
his life, quality, profession, opinions, and, in fine, whatever articles he was
to be interrogated on, to confess ingeniously what he knew: as that was the
only way to find favor at the hands of the inquisitors; that they pardoned
almost all faults on a sincere confession, and an assurance of amendment. I
visited him myself several times before his examination, and gave him the same
advice and assurance; he promised me faithfully he would, and seemed so steady
and confirmed in his own innocence, with such an agreeable, yet sincere way in
his discourse, as really surprised me, and caused me already to be prejudiced
in his favor; adding with a smile, that the history of his life would
administer more cause of wonder than indignation. Not to be too particular, the
chief of the inquisition, with myself along with them, set to the scrutiny of
his papers. We examined them with all the care imaginable, but could find
nothing to ground any material accusation, except some imperfect memoirs of the
customs of a country and people unheard of to us, and I believe to all the
world beside, with some odd characters, or words, which had no affinity with
any language or characters, we ever saw. We discovered he had a great knowledge
in natural philosophy, with some remarks that were very curious. There was a
rough draught of a map of a country, with towns, rivers, lakes, etc. but no
climate marked down. In short, all his papers contained nothing but some small
sketches of philosophy and physic, with some pieces of poetry of an uncommon
taste. Neither could we find any footsteps of judiciary astrology, or
calculations of nativities, of which we had the greatest suspicion; only a pair
of globes, a set of mathematical instruments, charts of navigation, forms of
unknown trees and plants, and such like things, as all gentlemen who delight in
traveling are curious to have. There were indeed some lines, circles, segments
of circles, which we supposed the informing lady meant; but looked like an
attempt to find out the longitude, rather than any magical schemes. His books
were of the same nature; nothing of heresy that we could see, but such as
belonged to a man of learning. There were several common books of devotion,
such as are approved by our church, and seemed pretty well used; by which we
judged him to be really a Catholic, and a person of no bad morals. But as
nothing looks so like an honest man as a knave, this did not take away all our
suspicion. -- When we came to open the cabinets, in the first of them, which
belonged to him, we found in one of the drawers about four hundred and fifty
Roman crowns, with other small money, and some foreign coin along with it, as
Turkish sequins and some we knew nothing of. The sum not being very
extraordinary, we could conclude nothing from thence. In another drawer we
found several precious stones, some set, some unset, of a very great value, so
far from being counterfeit, that we never saw any so brilliant. Besides,
several pieces of native gold, of such fineness, as nothing with us can come up
to it. In a third, we found a small heap of medals, most of gold, but of an
unknown stamp and antiquity. There were outlandish stones of odd figures
enough, which to others might look like talismans, but we took them for some
out-of-the-way curiosities. In a private drawer in the center of the cabinet,
there was something wrapped up in a piece of green silk of wonderful fineness,
all embroidered with hearts and hands joined together, wrought in gold with
prodigious art, and intermixed with different flowers, unknown in our part of
the world; in the midst of it was an azure stone, as large as the palm of one's
hand, set round with rubies of very great value, on which was most artfully
painted in miniature, a woman at length, holding a little boy in her left hand,
the most beautiful creature that ever eyes beheld; clad likewise in green silk
spangled with golden suns: their complexion was something darker than that of
our Italian ladies; but the features, especially the woman's, so uncommonly
beautiful as if she had been of another species. Underneath was ingraved with a
diamond in a modern hand, Questo solo. You may be sure, sir, this raised our
ideas of the man; at first, we thought he had the secret of the philosopher's
stone: but in all his inventory we could find no implements of that art. Then
we thought he must have been some famous pirate; or one who had robbed the
cabinet of some great prince, and was come to live at Bologna in that private
manner, under the disguise of a physician. But having been three years in town,
if it had been any European prince, the world would have had an account of it
before now: so we concluded that either what he said of that unknown country
was true, or that he had robbed some of the eastern princes, and got off clear
with his prize. But the picture of the woman made us incline to think, he had
married some outlandish queen, and on her death had retired with his effects.
The rest of the drawers were full of natural curiosities of foreign plants,
roots, bones of animals, birds, insects, etc. from whence very likely he took
his physical secrets. The other cabinet, which belonged to the elderly lady,
was very rich, but nothing equal to the first; there were a great many small
jewels, and some very fine pearls, with bracelets, pendants, and other curious
ornaments belonging to women; and a little picture of a very handsome man about
thirty, nothing like our gentleman, in a warlike dress, with a Turkish scymitar
by his side, who by his mien seemed to be a man of note. But we could find
nothing that could give us any knowledge what they were: so that we were at a
loss with all our sagacity what to think of the matter, or to find any just
cause to keep them in the inquisition: for though we don't discover our motives
to other people, we never proceed against any one but on very strong
suspicions. On which account we were resolved to make his confinement as easy
as possible, till we could see further into the affair. We had thoughts of
examining the woman first, to get what we could from her for to interrogate him
upon; but she not understanding Italian enough, we sent to Venice with our
accustomed privacy, for some of your people, that trade to the levant, to be
our interpreters. In the mean time we resolved to try what we could get out of
him by his own confession; so we sent for him before us. He came into the room
with a modest unconcernedness, that rather argued wonder than fear: we had the
cabinet and jewels all before us, showed them to him all together, with the
inventory of his goods, assuring him they should be forthcoming, in case we
were apprised of his innocence; but withal advising him, as well as commanding
him to confess the truth, and then not a hair of his head should be touched.
But if ever we caught him in a false story, all should be confiscated, and he
never see sun or moon more. He assured us with great respect, he would own the
truth to every thing we should interrogate him about, in an accent that would
have persuaded any one of his sincerity, humbly desiring to know what
accusations we had against him. We answered, that was not the method of the
inquisition; but that he should answer directly to our interrogatories. As the
holy office chiefly concerns itself about religion, we asked him first, what
religion he was of. The reason of this was, because, though he professed
himself a Catholic, we were to keep up the forms: neither did we know but that
he might be some Jew or Turkish spy in masquerade: then his name; place of his
birth; where he was educated; how he came by those jewels; what was the
occasion of his settling at Bologna; who that elderly lady was; in sine, every
thing in general and particular we could think of at first, the better to
compare his answers afterward. He told us, he was a Catholic bred and born;
always professed himself such; and in that faith would live and die, let what
would happen to him. He explained himself on the chief heads, to show that he
was well instructed in his religion: he appealed to all the inquiries we could
make, whether he had not behaved as a Catholic on all occasions; naming a
Capuchin in the town, who was his father confessor; to whom, he said, he gave
leave to declare all he knew on that head. As to his name, he said, his true
name was Gaudentio di Lucca, though born at Ragusa. That his father was a
merchant trading to the Levant; which employment he designed to follow himself;
but in his first voyage was taken by an Algerine pirate, who carried him a
slave to Grand Cairo, and sold him to a merchant, of what country nobody knew;
which merchant took him along with him, through the vast deserts of Africa, by
a way he would describe to us if we required it, till he came to a country,
perhaps the most civilized and polite in the whole universe. In that country he
lived near five and twenty years, till on the death of his wife, and his only
surviving son, whose pictures were in that cabinet, the melancholy disaster
made him induce his father-in-law, who was the merchant that had first bought
him, to take another journey to Grand Cairo, from whence he might be able to
return to his native country. This the merchant (for he passed for such, though
he was a great ruler in his own country) complied with: but happening to come
thither when the plague raged in the city, his father-in-law and several of his
attendants died of it; leaving him heir to most of his effects, and part of the
jewels we saw before us. That being now entirely at liberty, he returned in a
French ship trading from Marseilles to the Levant, the master's name Francois
Xavier Godart, who by agreement was to land him at Venice; but touching at
Candy, they accidentally saved the life of that elderly lady, and brought her
off along with them, for which they were persued by two Turkish vessels, and
carried prisoners to Constantinople, but released by the order of the Sultaness
mother. That Monsieur Godart was well known at Venice; particularly by Signor
Corridani, an eminent merchant there, who could assure us of the truth of what
he said. That, in fine, having staid some time at Venice* to see the
curiosities and the carnival, an affair relating to the young lady we saw with
him, when he was seized, and the love he had for learning, Bologna being a
famous university, induced him to settle there, where he presumed we had been
very well informed of his behavior ever since. This, said he, is the most
succinct account I can give to your Reverences, on the interrogatories you have
proposed to me; though my life has been chequered with such a variety of
incidents, as would take a great deal of time to descend to particulars. We
looked at one another with some surprise at this strange account, which he
delivered with such an air of steadiness, as scarce left any room to doubt of
the truth of it. However, our superior turning to him, said, Signor Gaudentio,
we neither believe nor disbelieve what you tell us; as we condemn no man
without a full conviction of his crime, so we are not to be imposed upon by the
accounts people may give of themselves. What is here before us* shows there is
something extraordinary in the case. If we find you to be an impostor, you
shall suffer as such; in the mean time, till we can be better informed, we
injoin you to give in your whole life, with all occurrences, except your
private sins, if you have any, in writing; which you shall read to us, and be
cross-examined, as we think proper. It will concern you therefore to be very
exact, for nothing will pass here but innocence, or a sincere repentance.

This, sir, is the manuscript I send you, given in by himself as ordered; with
the inquisitors interrogatories as we examined it, article by article. Which
interrogatories I have inserted as they were proposed, with a further account
at the end, for the better clearing of the whole. We beg you to inform yourself
of the facts, which his memoirs say happened to him at Venice, particularly
about Monsieur Godart. Besides, sir, you that can trace all the branches of
ancient history to the fountainhead, are able to form a better judgment of the
probability of his relation. He is still in the inquisition, and offers himself
to conduct some of our missionaries, to preach the gospel to those unknown
people. The length of this only gives me leave to assure you, that I am, with
the greatest esteem imaginable.

SIR, etc. F. ALISIO DE ST IVORIO.
Bologna, July 29, 1721.
THE ADVENTURES OF SIG. GAUDENTIO DI LUCCA.
I Should be insensible, Reverend Fathers, if I were not highly concerned to
find myself under any accusation before this holy tribunal, which I revere with
all the powers of my soul: but especially if your Reverences should harbor any
sinister opinion of my religion; for I was born and bred up in the bosom of the
most holy Catholic church, as well as my parents before me; in the defense of
which my ancestors spent part of their blood, against the infidels, and enemies
of our faith; and for which faith I am ready to lay down my life. But I am as
yet a stranger to your Reverences, and on several accounts may be liable to
suspicion. Wherefore I blame not the justice of your proceedings, but rather
extol your goodness in allowing me the liberty to clear myself, by a true and
sincere declaration of my whole life, wherein, I own, have happened several
astonishing and almost incredible occurrences; all which I shall lay before
your Reverences, acording to the commands imposed on me, with the utmost
candor and sincerity.

My name is Gaudentio di Lucca: I was so called, because my ancesters were said
to be originally of that place; though they had been settled for some time at
Ragusa, where I was born: both which places are not so far off, but they may be
very well known to your Reverences. My father's name was Gasparino di Lucca,
heretofore a merchant of some note in those parts; my mother was a Corsican
lady, reported to be descended from those who had been the chief personages in
that island. My grandfather was likewise a merchant: but my great-grandfather,
Bernandino di Lucca, was a soldier, and captain of the great Venerio's own
galley This part of the account is certainly true* there was such a captain in
the list of the officers in that famous battle.
, who was general for the Venetians in the famous battle of (...) against the
Turks. We had a tradition in our family, that he was Venerio's son by a Grecian
lady of great quality, some say descended from the Paleologi, who had been
emperors of Constantinople. But she dying in childbed, and they having been
only privately married, Venerio bred him up as the son of a friend of his who
was killed in the wars. That famous battle, in which the Christians and Venerio
got so great renown against the Turks, instead of raising my
great-grandfather's fortune, was the occasion of his retiring from the wars,
and turning merchant. The reason was this: Venerio the Venetian admiral had
caused a Spanish captain to be hung up at the yard-arm for mutiny It is
likewise true, that there was such a quarrel between Don John of Austria, the
generalissimo, and Venerio admiral of the Venetian galleys; which had like to
have put the whole Christian fleet at variance together, before the battle, and
ruined the hopes of all Christendom. The occasion was as the relates it: Don
John* as generalissimo, viewing the who^e f^eet before the fight, and finding
the Venetian galleys too thinly manned, ordered fou^ thou and Spaniards to be
put on board the said galleys. But one Mutio Tortona, a Spanish captain,
proving mutinous, after a great many injurious words, came to blows with the
captain of the Venetian galley where he was; upon which the whole fleet fell to
it. Venerio, hearing the uproar, sen^ his own captain to ^ee what was the
matter; but the proud Spaniards treated him no better than they did the rest;
so that Venerio himself was forced to come to appease them; but seeing the
Spanish captain persist in his mutinous temper, and the affront he had put upon
his captain, who was reported to be his son* ordered Tortona and his ensign to
be hung at the yard-arm. At this all the Spaniards in the ^eet were up in arms,
and threatened to ^ut the Venetians to pie^e^; but* by the interposition of the
other genera^^, (...) matter was made up till after the fight; when Venerio,
who had behaved with incomparable valor, and, according to Don John's own
conf^ssion, was the chief occasion of the victory, to (...) Spaniard, had his
commission taken from him, and was recalled by the senate.
; which severe discipline so displeased Don John of Austria, generalissimo of
the whole fleet, that, after the battle, the Venetians, to appease Don John,
and not to be deprived of the succors of the Spaniards against the Turks, were
forced to sacrifice Venerio's honor to the resentment of the Spaniards, and
put him out of commission It was Fus^ar^i* who was made general of the
Venetians in Venerio's stead.
. After this ^^sgrace, Venerio retired; and my great-grandfather, whose fortune
depended on his having been bred up to the sea, turned merchant, or rather
privateer against the Moors; and, with the knights of Malta, not only did great
service against them, but made a considerable fortune in the world.

But to return to myself: My father, having a plentiful fortune, took
particular care of the education of his children: he had only two sons, of whom
I was the youngest, and a daughter, who died young. Finding I had a great
inclination to learning, he promoted it, by providing me with the best masters,
till I was fit to go to the university. The knowledge of languages being of
great use as well as ornament to young gentlemen, he himself, by way of
recreation, taught me that mixed language called Lingua Franca, so necessary in
eastern countries. It is made up of Italian, Every one who is the least
acquainted with history, knows that the battle of Lepanto was the greatest
sea fight that ever was fought between the Christians and Turks; and the
victory on the Christians side the most signal. The Spanish galleys were
commanded by Don John of Austria, generalissimo: the Pope's galleys, by the
famous Colonna: the Genoese by old Dorio, who had gained so much renown against
the Turks and French, under Charles Vth. the Venetians by the great Venerio,
one of the bravest soldiers of his time. Haly the Turk, great bassa of the sea,
was slain, and almost all the Turkish commanding officers killed or taken.
Among the prisoners, were Haly's two sons, nephews to the Grand Signor. Of the
common soldiers of the Turks, were slain two and thirty thousand: a hundred and
forty-one of the enemy's galleys were taken, forty sunk or burnt* of galliots
and other small vessels were taken about sixty. Vide the Turkish history, and
other accounts of this famous battle, and the whole affair as is there related.
The battle, was fought on the 7th of October, 1^71.
Turkish, Persian, and Arabian, or rather a jargon of all languages together.
He scarce ever spoke to us but in that language, saying, we might learn Latin
from our masters, and our mother tongue from our playfellows. The same reason
induced him to send me to the famous university of Paris, to learn French at
the same time with my other studies. I lived in the college des Quatre Nations,
and maintained my theses of universal philosophy under the celebrated Monsieur
Du Hamel, who was one of the first in the university, who decried Aristotle's
philosophy, and leaned toward the opinions of Descartes.

[ Secretary. Here the inquisitors muttered a little, fearing he was inclined
to the Copernican system, which has been condemned at Rome. But, since it
regarded philosophical matters only, they passed it over.]


I was entering into my nineteenth year, and had some thoughts of taking to the
church, when my brother wrote me the melancholy account of my father and
mother's death, and the unfortunate occasion of it; which in short was, that
having lost his richest ship, with all his effects, by pirates, and his chief
factor at Smyrna being gone off, his other correspondents came upon him thick;
and not being in a condition to answer their calls* it threw him and my mother
into a deep melancholy, which shortened their days, both dying in three weeks
of one another. My bother told me he was not able to maintain me longer at the
university, as before; but acquainted me, he had made a shift to fit out a
small vessel, wherein he had put his all; and invited me to join the small
portion that fell to my share along with him, with which, he said, we could
make a pretty good bottom; and so retrieve the shattered fortune of our family.
Not to be too prolix, I followed his advice: he sold his house and gardens to
pay his father's creditors, and put what was left, together with my little
stock, into that unfortunate bottom. We set sail from Ragusa the 3d of March,
anno Dom. 1688, very inauspiciously for my dear brother, as will appear by the
sequel. We touched at Smyrna, to see if we could hear any thing of my father's
factor: and were told, that he was turned Turk, and gone off, very
magnificently dressed up in borrowed feathers, to settle at Constantinople;
however we picked up something of some honest Christian merchants, with whom he
had lodged a part of his effects. This encouraged us to proceed to Cyprus and
Alexandria; but, as we were pursuing our voyage one morning, in a prodigious
fog as if the sea was fatal to our family, we spied on a sudden two Algerine
rovers bearing down upon us, one on each side. We had scarce time to clear our
little vessel, when they fired upon us, and called to us to strike, or we were
dead men. My brother and I, considering that our all was at stake, and that we
had better die honorably than be made slaves by those unbelieving miscreants,
called up our men, who were but twenty-three in all, of whom five were young
gentlemen who had engaged to try their fortune along with us. We were armed
only with swords, and pistols under our girdles. After a short consultation, it
was agreed to fight it out to the last man; and we turned back to back to make
head against both sides, my brother in the middle of one rank, and myself in
the other. The enemy boarded us in great numbers, looking on us as madmen to
pretend to make any resistance; but they were soon made to leap back, at least
all that were able; for being close up with them, and they crowded together, we
fired our pistols so luckily, that scarce one missed doing execution. Seeing
them in this confusion we made a push at them on each side, still keeping our
ranks, and drove the remainder headlong off the deck. This we did twice before
any of our men dropped. We were grappled so close, they had no use of their
cannon or muskets, and scarce thought of firing their pistols at us, expecting
we should yield immediately, or to have borne us down with their weight. I am
more particular in describing this petty fight, since there are but few
examples, where a handful of men made such a long resistance. The arch-pirate,
who was a stout, well built young man, raged like a lion, calling his men a
thousand cowards, so loud that his voice was heard above all the cries of the
soldiers. The edge of their fury was a little abated after the dropping of so
many men; and they began to fire at some distance; which did us more harm than
their most furious attacks. My brother, seeing his men begin to drop in their
turn, ordered me to face the one ship, while he with his rank leaped in amongst
the enemies in the other. He did it with such a noble intrepidity, that he made
a gap among the thickest of them immediately. But their numbers closing
together, their very weight drove him back in spite of all he could do, and he
lost several of his men before he could recover his post. The enemy would
neither board us, nor leave us; but firing at us continually, still killed some
of our men. There were now only eleven of us left; and no hopes of victory, or
of quarter after such obstinate resistance. They durst not come to a close
engagement with us for all this; when my brother, to die as honorably as he
could, once more leaped into the pirate's ship, and seeing their captain in the
midst of them, made at him with all his might, calling on the few he had left
to second him. He soon cut his way through; but just as he was coming up to
him, a cowardly Turk clapped a pistol just below his two shoulder-blades, and, I
believe, shot him quite through the heart, for he dropped down dead on the
spot. The Turk that shot him was run through the body by one of our men, and he
himself with the others that were left, being quite overpowered, were all cut
in pieces. I had yet four men left on my side against the less ship, and had
till then kept off the enemy from boarding; but the pirates giving a great
shout at my brother's fall, the captain of the ship I was engaged with, who was
the arch-pirate's brother, cried out to his crew, that it was a shame to stand
all day firing at five men; and leaping on my deck, made at me like a man of
honor, with his pistol steadily poised in his hand: I met him with equal
resolution. He came boldly up within sword's length, and firing his pistol
directly at my face; he aimed his shot so well, that one of the balls went
through my hair, and the other grazed the side of my neck. But before he could
second his shot, I gave him such a stroke with my broad sword, between the
temple and the left ear, that it cut through part of his scull, his cheek-bone,
and going cross his mouth, almost severed the lower part of his face from the
upper. I had just the satisfaction to see him fall, when a musket-ball went
through the brawny part of my right arm, and, at the same time, a Turk hit me
just in the nape of the neck with the butt end of his musket, that I fell down
flat on my face, on the body of my slain enemy. My companions, all but one, who
died of his wounds soon after, fell honorably by my side. The Turks poured in
from both ships like wolves upon their prey. After their barbarous shouts and
yelling for the victory, they fell to stripping the dead bodies, and threw them
into the sea without any further ceremony. All our crew, beside myself, were
slain, or gasping, with threescore and fifteen of the enemy. The reason why we
fought so desperately was, that we knew very well, having killed so many at the
first attacks, we were to expect no quarter; so we were resolved to sell our
lives as dear as we could. When they came to strip me like the rest, I was just
come to myself, being only stunned by the stroke of the musket. They found by
my clothes, that I was one of the most considerable persons of the crew. I was
got upon my knees, endeavoring to rise, and reaching for my sword to defend
myself to the last gasp; I found I could not hold it in my hand, by reason of
the wound in my arm, though if I could, it had been needless; for three of them
fell down upon me; and pressed me to the deck, while others brought cords and
tied my hands, to carry me to the captain. He was dressing a slight wound he
had in his leg with a pistol-shot; and four women in Persian habits were
standing by; three of whom seemed to be attendants to the fourth, who was a
person of the largest size, about five or six and twenty, a most exquisite
beauty, except that she had an Amazonian kind of fierceness in her looks. When
I was brought thus bound to the captain, they assured him I was the man that
had slain his brother, and done the most harm of any. Upon which, starting up
in the greatest fury a barbarian was capable of, and calling for a new scymitar
he had in his cabin, he said, Let me cleave, if I can the head of this
Christian dog, as he did my poor brother's; and then do you chop him into a
thousand pieces. With that he drew the scymitar, and was going to strike, when,
to the astonishment of the very barbarians, the strange lady cried out, O save
the brave young man! and immediately falling on her knees by me, catched me in
her arms, and clasping me close to her bosom, covered my body with hers, and
cried out, Strike, cruel man, but strike through me, for otherwise a hair of
his head shall not be hurt. The barbarians that stood round us were struck dumb
with amazement; and the pirate himself lifting up his eyes toward heaven,
said, with a groan enough to break his heart, How, cruel woman! shall this
stranger in a moment obtain more than I can with all my sighs and tears! Is
this your paramour that robs me of what I have sought for with the danger of
life? No, this Christian dog shall be no longer my cursed rival; and lifting up
his hand, was again going to strike, when, covering me more closely with her
delicate body, she cried out again, Hold, Hamet! this is no rival; I never saw
his face before, nor ever will again, if you will but spare his life: grant me
this, and you shall obtain more from me, than all your services could ever do.
Here he began to pause a little. For my part, I was as much in amaze as he was.
After a little pause, "Cruel woman," said he, what is the meaning of this? Says
she, There is something in this young man (for I was but turned of nineteen)
that he must not die. But if you will engage and swear by the most holy
Alcoran, that you will do him no harm, I not only promise to be your wife, but,
to take off all umbrage of jealousy, I give you leave to sell him to some
honorable person for a slave; and will never see him more. Nor would she part
from me, till he had sworn in that solemn manner, never to do me any hurt
directly or indirectly; and, for greater security, she ordered one of her own
servants to attend me constantly. So I was unbound; and the lady, without so
much as looking at me, or staying to receive my thanks, retired with her woman
into the cabin. The pirate, who had something very noble in his looks for a
Turk, confirmed again to me in the hearing of her officer, that I should
receive no harm; and then ordered me to be carried under deck to the other end
of the ship; commanding his men to steer back for Alexandria, in order, as I
supposed, to dispose of me the first opportunity, that he might be rid as he
thought, of so formidable a rival This is an odd adventure enough; but the
circumstances are pretty well connected together. There happen very strange
accidents among those lawless eastern people, and the wild Arabs, who observe
no rules but what the lions and tigers, could they speak, would make for their
own preservation. I fear there are some who profess themselves Christians would
do the same.
.

[ Secretary. Here the superior of the inquisition receiving a message on some
other business, we told him we would consider further of the account he had
given us, which, we said, might be true, though the adventure was
extraordinary; and that we would hear the remaining narrative of his life
another time. He assured us with the most natural air, that the whole, let it
seem never so extraordinary, was real fact. Whether it were true or false, it
did not much concern the holy office, only so far as we might catch him
tripping in his story: however, some of the inquisitors asked him the following
questions.


1 st inquisitor. Why did you not yield at first, considering the prodigious
inequality of your strength and numbers, when you might have been ransomed
afterward; and not, like madmen, expose yourselves to be cut in pieces, as
they all really were, except yourself?


Gaudentio. I told your Reverences, we had put our all in that bottom; which
once lost, we had nothing to ransom ourselves with, but in all likelihood must
have remained in miserable slavery all our life. We were most of us rash young
men, of more courage than prudence; we did not doubt but we could keep them off
from boarding us, as we did; and thought, by their warm reception, they would
have been forced to sheer off; besides, fighting against Turks and infidels,
though for our lives and fortunes, we judged meritorious at the same time, and
that it might be looked upon as laying down our lives for our holy religion.


2 d inquisitor. You said that the strange lady cried out, There is something
in that young man, that tells me he must not die: I hope you do not pretend to
the science of physiognomy; which is one of the branches of divination; or that
an infidel or Heathen woman could have the spirit of prophecy?


Gaudentio. I cannot tell what was her motive for saying so; I only relate
matter of fact. As for physiognomy, I do not think there can be any certainty
in it. Not but that a person of penetration, who has observed the humors and
passions of men, and considering the little care the generality of the world
take to conceal them; I say, such a person may give a great guess, a
posteriori, how they are inclined; though reason and virtue may indeed overcome
the most violent. But I entirely submit my opinion to your better judgments.


Secretary. I cannot say, we were dissatisfied with these answers: we saw he
has a very noble presence; and must have been extremely handsome in his youth:
therefore no wonder a Barbarian woman should fall in love with him, and make
use o^ that turn to save his life. However, for the present, we remanded him
back to his apartment.

Some days after he was called again to prosecute his story.]


While I was under deck in confinement with the pirates, several of them were
tolerably civil to me; knowing the ascendant the lady had over their captain,
and being witnesses, how she had saved my life. But yet she would not consent
to marry him, till she was assured I was safe out of his hands. The arch-pirate
never came to see me himself, not being willing to trust his passion; or else
to watch all favorable opportunities of waiting on his mistress. One day,
being indisposed for want of air, I begged to be carried upon deck to breathe a
little; when I came up, I saw the lady, with her women, standing at the other
end of the ship on the same account. I made her a very respectful bow at a
distance; but as soon as ever she cast her eye on me, she went down into the
cabin, I suppose, to keep her promise with the captain, and not to administer
any cause of jealousy. I desired to be carried down again, not to hinder my
ben^factress from taking her diversion. I cannot say I found in myself the
least inclination or emotion of love, only a sense of gratitude for so great a
benefit; not without some admiration of the oddness of the adventure. When I
was below, I asked the most sensible and civilized of the pirates, who their
captain was, and who was my fair deliverer. How long, and by what means she
came to be among them; because she seemed to be a person of much higher rank.
He told me his captain's name was Hamet, son to the De^ of Algiers; who had
forsaken his father's house on account of his young mother-in-law's falling in
love with him. For which reason his father had contrived ^o have him
assassinated, believing him to be in the sault. But his younger brother by the
same mother, discovered the design. So gathering together a band of stout young
men like themselves, they seized two of their father's best ships, and resolved
to follow the profession they were now of, till they heard of their father's
death. That as for the lady who had saved his life, she was the late wife of a
petty prince of the Curdi The Curdi, or people of Curdistan, are a warlike
nation, pay^^g a ^mall tribute to the Persians, and sometimes to the Turks;
their very women are martial, and handle the sword and pike. The country runs
from the A^iduli, a mountainous people, made tributary to the Turks by Selim I*
father of Solomon the Magnificent; and reaches as far as Armenia.
, tributary to the king of Persia, whose husband had been lately killed by
treachery, or in an ambuscade of the wild Arabs. That, as far as he had been
informed, the prince her husband had been sent by the king his master to
Alexandria Alexandria is a seaport, at the further end of the Mediterranean,
belonging to the Turks, but much frequented by Arabian merchants, both by land
and sea. One point of Curdistan is not (...) from this port.
; who, apprehending an insurrection among his subjects This insurrection he
speaks of, might be the seeds, or the first plotting of the grand rebellion of
Merowits, which beg^n about the date of this account, and caused such a
terrible revolution in the Persian empire: which no one who understands any
thing can be ingorant of.
, had ordered him to treat for some troops of Arabian horse The Arabian horses
are the best in the world, though not very large. The horsemen are very
dexterous in the eastern way of fighting. O^ which account, one cannot wonder,
if the king of Persia, and his rebellious subjects, made it their interest to
procure as many auxiliaries, (...) they could. It is very likely the little
parties would always be on watch, to ^urprise one another when they could find
an opportunity. And this petty Curdian ^rince being zealous for the service of
his king, might be taken off by the rebels that way,
. That he went there with a very handsome equipage, and took his beautiful wife
along with him. Our captain, continued he, happened to be there at the same
time to sell his prizes, and had not only sold several things of great value to
the Curdish lord and lady, but had contracted a particular friendship with him,
though, as we found since, it was more on account of his fair wife than any
thing else. Nothing in the world could be more obsequious than our captain. He
attended them, and offered his service on all occasions: you see, he is a very
handsome man, and daring by his profession. We could not imagine of a long
while, why he made such a stay at that town, contrary to his custom; living at
a very high rate, as men of our calling generally do. At length the Curdish
lord having executed his commission, was upon the return, when we perceived our
captain to grow extremely pensive and melancholy, but could not tell what was
the cause of it. He called his brother, who lost his life by your hand, and me
to him, and told us in private, he had observed some of the Arabian strangers
muttering together, as if they were hatching some plot or other, whether
against himself, or the Curd, he could not tell; but bid us be sure to attend
him well armed where ever he went. The event proved he had reason for his
suspicions; for one evening, as the Curd and his wife were taking the air, with
our captain, who was always of the party, passing through a little grove about
a league out of town, six Arabian horsemen, exceedingly well mounted, came full
gallop up to us; and without saying a word, two of them fired their pistols
directly at the Curdish lord, who was the foremost, but by good fortune missed
us all. The Curd, as all that nation are naturally brave, drew his scymitar,
and rushing in among them, cut off the foremost man's head, as clean as if it
had been a poppy; but advancing too far unarmed as he was, one of them turned
short, and shot him in the slank, that he dropped down dead immediately. Our
captain seeing him fall, rushed in like lightning, his brother and myself
falling on them at the same time: but the assassins, as if they wanted nothing
but the death of the Curd, or saw by our countenance their staying would cost
them dear, immediately turned their horses, and fled so swiftly on their
jennets, that they were out of sight in an instant. We conducted the poor
disconsolate lady and her dead husband back to the town, where those people
made no more of it (being accustomed to such things) than if it had been a
common accident. When her grief was a little abated, our captain told the lady,
that it was not safe for her to return home the same way she came; that, in all
probability, those who killed her husband were in confederacy with the
disaffected party, and would way lay her, either for his papers, or her goods.
That he had two ships well-manned at her service, and would conduct her safe by
sea to some part of the Persian empire, from whence she might get into her own
country. She consented at last, having seen how gallantly my master had behaved
in her defense. So she came aboard with her attendants and effects, in order to
be transported into her own country. Our captain, you may be sure, was in no
haste to carry her home, being fallen most desperately in love with her: so
that instead of carrying her to any of the Persian dominions, he directed his
course for Algiers, hearing his father was dead; but meeting with you, it has
made him alter his measures for the present. He has tried all ways to gain her
love, but she would not give him the least encouragement, till this late
accident, by which she saved your life. -- When he had ended his relation, I
reflected on it a good while, and considering the natue of those pirates, I
thought I saw a piece of treachery in the affair, much more black than what he
described, and could not forbear compassionating the poor lady, both for her
disaster, and the company she was fallen into. However, I kept my thoughts to
myself. Not long after we arrived at Alexandria, where the pirate sold all our
effects, that is, the merchandise he had taken aboard our ship, except some
particular things that belonged to my brother and myself, as books, papers,
maps and sea-charts, pictures, and the like. He determined to carry me to Grand
Cairo Grand Cairo is the place of residence of the great Bassa of Egypt, higher
up the country, on the river Nile.
, the first opportunity, to sell me, or even give me away to a strange merchant
he had an acquaintance with, where I should never be heard of more.

Nothing remarkable happened during our stay at Alexandaia; they told me the
captain had been in an extraordinary good humor, ever since the lady's promise
to marry him. But she, to be sure he should not deceive her by doing me any
injury when I was out of the ship, ordered her officer to attend me wherever
I was carried, till I was put in safe hands, and entirely out of the pirates
power. When we were arrived at Grand Cairo, I was carried to the place where
the merchants meet to exchange their commodities; there were persons of almost
all the Eastern and Indian nations. The lady's officer, according to his
mistress's order, never stirred an inch from me to witness the performance of
the articles. At length, the pirate and a strange merchant spied one another
almost at the instant, and advancing the same way, saluted each other in the
Turkish language, which I understood tolerably well. After some mutual
compliments, the pirate told him he had met with such a person he had promised
to procure for him two years before, meaning myself; only I was not an eunuch,
but that it was in his power to make me so, if he pleased. Your Reverences
cannot doubt but I was a little startled at such a speech, and was going to
reply, that I would lose my life a thousand times, before I would suffer such
an injury. But the lady's officer turned to the pirate, and said, he had
engaged to his lady I should receive no harm; and that he must never expect to
obtain her for his wife, if she had the least suspicion of such a thing. But
the merchant soon put us out of doubt, by assuring us, that it was against
their laws to do such an injury to any one of their own species; but if it were
done before, they could not help it. Then turning to me, he said in very good
Lingua Franca, "Young man, if I buy you, I shall soon convince you, you need
not apprehend any such usage from me." He eyed me from top to toe, with the
most penetrating look I ever saw in my life; yet seemed pleased at the same
time. He was very richly clad, attended with two young men in the same kind of
dress, though not rich, who seemed rather sons than servants. His age did not
appear to me to be above forty, yet he had the most serene and almost venerable
look imaginable. His complexion was rather browner than that of the Egyptians,
but it seemed to be more the effect of traveling, than natural. In short, he
had an air so uncommon, that I was amazed, and began to have as great an
opinion of him, as he seemed to have of me. He asked the pirate, what he must
give for me; he told him, I had cost him very dear, and with that recounted to
him all the circumstances of the sight wherein I was taken; and, to give him
his due, represented it nowise to my disadvantage. However, these were not the
qualifications the merchant desired; what he wanted was a person who was a
scholar, and could give him an account of the arts and sciences, laws, customs,
etc. of the Christians. This the pirate assured him I could do: that I was an
European Christian, and a scholar, as he guessed by my books and writings; that
I understood navigation, geography, astronomy, and several other sciences. I
was out of countenance to hear him talk so; for though I had as much knowledge
of those sciences, as could be expected from one of my years, yet my age would
not permit me to be master of them, but only to have the first principles, by
which I might improve myself afterward.

[ Secretary. The inquisitors demurred a little at this, fearing he might be
addicted to judicial astrology; but considering he had gone through a course of
philosophy, and was designed for the sea, they knew he was obliged to have some
knowledge in those sciences.]


The pirate told him, I had some skill in music and painting, having seen some
instruments and books of those arts among my effects, and asked me if it were
not so. I told him, all young gentlemen of liberal education in my country
learned these arts, and that I had a competent knowledge and genius that way.
This determined the merchant to purchase me. When they came to the price, the
pirate demanded forty ounces of native gold, and three of those silk carpets he
saw there with him, to make a present to the Grand Signor. The merchant agreed
with him at the first word; only demanded all the books globes, mathematical
instruments, and, in fine, whatever remained of my effects, into the bargain.
The pirate agreed to this, as easily as the other did to the price; so, upon
performance of articles on both sides, I was delivered to him. As soon as I was
put into his power, he embraced me with a great deal of tenderness, saying, I
should not repent my change of life. His attendants came up to me, and embraced
me in the same manner, calling me brother, and expressing a great deal of joy
for having me of their company. The merchant bid them take me down to the
caravansera or inn, that I might refresh myself, and change my habit to the
same as they wore. I was very much surprised at such unexpected civilities from
strangers. But, before I went, I turned to the pirate, and said to him with an
air that made the merchant put on a very thoughtful look, that I thanked him
for keeping his promise in saving my life; but added, that though the fortune
of war had put it in his power to sell me like a beast in the market, it might
be in mine some time or other to render the like kindness. Then turning to the
lady's officer, who had been my guardian so faithfully, and embracing him with
all imaginable tenderness, I begged him to pay my best respects to my fair
deliverer; and assure her, that I should esteem it the greatest happiness to be
one day able to make a return for so unparallelled a favor, though it were at
the expense of that life she had so generously saved. So we parted, the pirate
grumbling a little within himself; and I in an amazing suspense, to know what
was likely to become of me. As they were conducting me to the caravansera where
they lodged, I was full of the sorrowful reflection, that I was still a slave,
though I had changed my master: but my companions, who were some of the
handsomest young men I ever saw in life, comforted me with the most endearing
words, telling me that I need fear nothing; that I should esteem myself one of
the happiest men in the world, when they were arrived safe in their own
country, which they hoped would be before long; that I should then be as free
as they were, and follow what employment of life my inclinations led me to,
without any restraint whatsoever. In fine, their discourse filled me with fresh
amazement, and gave me at the same time an eager longing to see the event. I
perceived they did not keep any strict guard on me; that I verily believed I
could easily have given them the slip; and might have gotten some Armenian
Christian to conceal me, till I should find an opportunity of returning into my
own country. But, having lost all my effects, I thought I could scarce be in a
worse condition, and was resolved to run all hazards. When I came to the house,
I was struck with wonder at the magnificence of it, especially at the richness
of the furniture. It was one of the best in all Grand Cairo, though built low
according to the custom of the country. It seems they always staid a year
before they returned into their own country, and spared no cost to make their
banishment, as they called it, as easy as they could. I was entertained with
all the rarities of Egypt; the most delicious fruits, and the richest Greek and
Asiatic wines that could be tasted; by which I saw they were not Mahometants.
Not knowing what to make of them, I asked them who they were; of what country,
what sect and profession, and the like. They smiled at my questions, and told
me they were children of the Sun, and were called Mezoranians; which was as
unintelligible to me as all the rest. But their country, they told me, I should
see in a few months, and bid me ask no further questions. Presently my master
came in, and embracing me, once more bid me welcome, with such an engaging
affability, as removed almost all my fears. But what followed, filled me with
the utmost surprise. "Young man," said he, "by the laws of this country you are
mine; I have bought you at a very high price, and would give twice as much for
you, if it were to be done again: but (continued he, with a more serious air) I
know no just laws in the universe, that can make a freeborn man become a slave
to one of his own species. If you will voluntarily go along with us, you shall
enjoy as much freedom as I do myself: you shall be exempt from all the
barbarous laws of these inhuman countries, whose brutal customs are a reproach
to the dignity of a rational creature, and with whom we have no commerce, but
to inquire after arts and sciences, which may contribute to the common benefit
of our people. We are blessed with the most opulent country in the world; we
leave it to your choice to go along with us, or not; if the latter, I here give
you your liberty, and restore to you all that remains of your effects, with
what assistance you want to carry you back again into your own country. Only,
this I must tell you, if you go with us, it is likely you will never come back
again, or perhaps desire it." Here he stopped, and observed my countenance with
a great deal of attention. I was struck with such admiration of his generosity,
together with the sentiments of joy for my unexpected liberty, and gratitude to
my benefactor, coming into my mind all at once, that I had as much difficulty
to believe what I heard, as your Reverences may now have at the relation of it,
till the sequel informs you of the reasons for such unheard of proceedings. On
the one hand, the natural desire of liberty prompted me to accept my freedom;
on the other, I considerrd my shattered fortune; that I was left in a strange
country so far from home, among Turks and infidels; the ardour of youth excited
me to push my fortune. The account of so glorious, though unknown country,
stirred up my curiosity; I saw gold was the least part of the riches of these
people, who appeared to me the most civilized I ever saw in my life; but, above
all, the sense of what I owed to so noble a benefactor, who I saw desired it,
and had me as much in his power now, as he could have afterward. These
considerations almost determined me to go along with him. I had continued
longer thus irresolute, and fluctuating between so many different thoughts, if
he had not brought me to myself, by saying, what say you, young man, to my
proposal? I started out of my reveries, as if I had awaked from a real dream;
and making a most profound reverence, My Lord, said I, or rather my father and
deliverer, I am yours by all the ties of gratitude a human heart is capable of;
I resign myself to your conduct: and will follow you to the end of the world.
This I said with such emotion of spirit, that I believe he saw into my very
soul; for embracing me once more with a most inexpressible tenderness, I adopt
you, said he, for my son; and these are your brothers, pointing to his two
young companions; all I require of you is, that you live as such. Here,
Reverend Fathers, I must confess one of the greatest faults I ever did in my
life: I never considered whether these men were Christians or Heathens: I
engaged myself with a people, where I could never have the exercise of my
religion, although I always preserved it in my heart. But what could be
expected from a daring young man, just in the heat of his youth, who had lost
all his fortune, and had such a glorious prospect offered him for retrieving
it? -- Soon after this, he gave orders to his attendants to withdraw, as if he
intended to say something to me in private; they obeyed immediately with a
filial respect, as if they had indeed been his sons, but they were not; I only
mention it to show the nature of the people I was engaged with: then taking me
by the hand he made me sit down by him, and asked me if it were really true, as
the pirate informed him, that I was an European Christian? though, added he, be
what you will, I do not repent my buying of you. I told him I was, and in that
belief would live and die. So you may, said he, (seeming pleased at my answer).
But I have not yet met with any of that part of the world, who seemed to have
the dispositions of mind I think I see in you, looking at the lineaments of my
face with a great deal of earnestness. I have been informed, continued he, that
your laws are not like barbarous Turks, whose government is made up of tyranny
and force, and making slaves of all who fall under their power. Whereas the
European Christians, as I am told, are governed by a divine law, that teaches
them to do good to all, injury to none; particularly not to kill and destroy
their own species: nor to steal, cheat, overreach, or defraud any one of their
just due; but to do in all things just as they would be done by; looking on all
men as common brothers of the same stock, and behaving with justice and equity
in all their actions public and private, as if they were to give an account to
the universal Lord and Father of all. I told him our law did really teach and
command us to do so; but that very few lived up to this law; that we were
obliged to have recourse to coercive laws and penalties, to enforce what we
acknowledged otherwise to be a duty: that if it were not for the fear of such
punishments, the greatest part of them would be worse than the very Turks he
mentioned. He seemed strangely surprised at this. What, says he, can any one do
in private, what his own reason and solemn profession condemns? Then addressing
himself to me in a more particular manner: Do you profess this just and holy
law you mentioned? I told him, I did: then, said he, do but live up to your own
law, and we require no more of you If it appear incredible to any one, that
Heathens, as these people were, should have such strict ideas of morality and
justice, when they see such horrid injustice, frauds, and oppressions among
Christians, let them consider, first, that the law and light of nature will
never be entirely extinguished in any who do not shut their eyes against it;
but that they would esteem the injuries they do to others, without any scruple,
to be very great hardships if done to themsel^es: they have therefore the ideas
of justice and equity imprinted in their minds however obscured by the^r wicked
lives -- 2dly, Let them read the celebrated Bishop of Meau's universal history*
pt. iii. of the morals and equity of the ancient Egyptians under their great
king Sesostris, or about that time. -- 3dly* Not only the lives and maxims of
the first Heathen philosophers, afford us very just rules of morality, but
there are also fragments of ancient history, from the earliest times, of whole
Heathen nations, whose lives would make Christians b^ush at their own
immoralities, if they were not hardened in them. The people of Colchos, whom
the great Bochart* in his Phaleg* proves to have been a colony of ancient
Egyptians, as will be seen in the sequel of these memoirs, or the ancient
inhabitants of Pontus, who come from them, were according to Homer the most
just of men.

Milk-eaters the most just of men^ Hom. II. K.

Chaerilus in Xerxis Diaba^si apud Bochart, speaking of the Scythians on the
Euxine sea, says, they were a colony of the Nomades, a ^ust people.

Strabo says, that Anacharsis and Abaris, both Scythians, esteemed by the
ancient Greeks, for their peculiar and national affability probit^ and justice;
And Nicholaus Damascenus, of the Galactophagi, they are the most just of men.
Vide Bochart, lib. iii. c. 9.


. Here he made a little noise with his staff, at which two of his attendants
came in: he asked them if my effects were come from the pirate. Being answered,
they were; he ordered them to be brought in, and examined them very nicely.
There were among them some pictures of my own drawing, a repeating watch, two
compass boxes, one of them very curiously wrought in ivory and gold, which had
been my great-grandfather's, given him by Venerio; a set of mathematical
instruments, draughts of statuary and architecture by the best masters; with
all which he seemed extremely pleased. After he had examined them with a great
deal of admiration, he ordered one of his attendants to reach him a cabinet
full of gold; he opened it to me, and said, young man, I not only restore all
your effects here present, having no right to any thing that belongs to another
man, but once more offer you your liberty, and as much of this gold, as you
think sufficient to carry you home, and make you live (...) all your life. I
was a little out of count^nance, imagining what I said of the ill mo^als of the
Christians, had made him afraid to take me along with him. I told him, I valued
nothing now so much as his camp^ny, and begged him not only to let me go along
with him, but that he would be pleased to accept whatever he saw of mine there
before him: adding, that I esteemed it the greatest happiness, to be able to
make some small recompense for the obligations I owed him. I do accept of it,
says he; and take you solemnly into my care: go along with these young men, and
enjoy your ^iberty in effect, which I have hitherto only given you in words.
Here some of his elder companions coming in, as if they were to consult about
business; the young men and myself went to walk the town for our diversion.
Your Reverences may be sure, I observed all the actions of these new people,
with the greatest attention my age was capable of. They seemed not only to have
a horror of the barbarous manners and vices of the Turks, but even a contempt
of all the pleasures and diversions of the country. Their whole business was to
inform themselves of what they thought might be an improvement in their own
country, particularly in arts and trades, and whatever curiosities were brought
from foreign parts; setting down their observations of every thing of moment.
They had masters of the country at set hours to teach them the Turkish and
Persian languages, in which I endeavored to perfect myself along with them.
Though they seemed to be the most moral men in the world, I could observe no
signs of religion in them, till a certain occasion that happened to us in our
voyage, of which I shall speak to your Reverences in its proper place. This was
the only point they were shy in; they gave me the reasons for it afterward;
but their behavior was the most candid and sincere in other matters that can
be imagined. We lived thus in the most perfect union all the time we staid at
Grand Cairo; and I enjoyed the same liberty that I could have had in Italy. All
I remarked in them was an uneasiness they expressed to be so long out of their
own country; but they comforted themselves with the thought it would not be
long. I cannot omit one observation I made of these young men's conduct while we
staid in Egypt. They were all about my own age, strong and vigorous, and the
handsomest race of people, perhaps, the world ever produced: we were in the
most voluptuous and lewd town in the whole eastern empire; the young women
seemed ready to devour us as we passed along the streets. Yet I never could
perceive in the young men the least propensity to lewdness. I imputed it at
first to the apprehension of my being in their company, and a stranger; but I
soon found they acted by principle. As young men are apt to encourage, or
rather corrupt one another, I own I could not forbear expressing my wonder at
it. They seemed surprised at the thought; but the reasons they gave were as
much out of our common way of thinking, as their behavior. They told me, for
the first reason, that all the women they saw were either married; or
particular men's daughters; or common. As to married women, they said, it was
such a heinous piece of injustice to violate the marriage bed, that every man
living would look upon it as the greatest injury done to himself: how could
they therefore in reason do it to another? If they were daughters of particular
men, bred up with so much care and solicitude of their parents, what a terrible
affliction must it be to them, or to ourselves, to see our daughters or sisters
violated and corrupted, after all our care to the contrary; and this too,
perhaps, by those we had cherished in our own bosoms? If common strumpets, what
rational man could look on them otherwise than brute beasts, to prostitute
themselves to every stranger for hire? Besides, their abandoned lewdness
generally defeats the great design of nature to propagate the species; or, by
their impure embraces, such disorders may be contracted, as to make us
hereafter, at best, but fathers of a weak and sickly offspring. And if we
should have children by them, what would become of our fathers grandchildren?
But what man who had the least sense of the dignity of his own birth, would
stain his race, and give birth to such a wretched breed, and then leave them
exposed to want and infamy? This they said chiefly with reference to the vast
ideas they had of their own nation, valuing themselves above all other people;
though the consideration holds good with all men. I own, I was mute at these
reasons, and could not say but they were very just, though the warmth of my
youth had hindered me from reflecting on them before. These reflections
appeared so extraordinary in young men, and even Heathens, that I shall never
forget them. -- Sometime after, I found by there diligence in settling their
affairs, and the chearfullness of their countenances, that they expected to
leave Egypt very soon; they seemed to wait for nothing but orders from their
governor. In the mean time there happened an accident to me, scarce fit indeed
for your Reverences to hear; nor should I ever have though it of relating it, had
you not laid your commands on me to give an exact account of my whole life.
Besides, that it is interwoven with some of the chief occurrences of my life in
the latter part of it. Our governor whom they called Pophar, which in their
language signifies Father of his people, and by which name I shall always call
him hereafter, looking at his ephemeris, which he did very frequently, found by
computation, that he had still some time left to stay in the country, and
resolved to go down once more to Alexandria, to see if he could meet with any
more European curiosities, brought by the merchant-ships that are perpetually
coming at that season into the port. He took only two of the young men and me
along with him, to show me, as he said, that I was entirely at my liberty,
since I might easily find some ship or other to carry me into my own country;
and I, on the other hand, to convince him of the sincerity of my intentions,
generally kept in his company. The affair I am going to speak of, soon gave him
full proof of my sincerity.

While we were walking in the public places to view the several goods and
curiosities, that were brought from different parts of the world, it happened
that the Bassa of Grand Cairo, with all his family, was come to Alexandria on
the same account, as well as to buy some young female slaves. His wife and
daughter were then both with him: the wife was one of the Grand Signior's
sisters, seemingly about thirty, and a wonderful fine woman. The daughter was
about sixteen, of such exquisite beauty, and lovely features, as were
sufficient to charm the greatest prince in the world N. B. The Bassa of Grand
Cairo is one of the greatest officers in the Turkish empire, and the most
independent of any subject in Turkey; it is customary for the Sultans to give
their daughters in marriage to such persons; but they are often disliked by
their husbands, on account of their imperious behavior.
. When he perceived them, the Pophar, who naturally abhorred the Turks, kept
off, as if he were treating privately with some merchants. But I, being young
and inconsiderate, stood gazing, though at a respectful distance, at the
Bassa's beautiful daughter, from no other motive but mere curiosity. She had
her eyes fixed on my companions and me at the same time, and, as I supposed, on
the same account. Her dress was so magnificent, and her person so charming,
that I thought her the most beautiful creature I had ever seen in my life. If I
could have foreseen the troubles which that short interview was to cost both
the Pophar and myself, I should have chosen rather to have looked on the most
hideous monster. I observed, that the young lady, with a particular sort of
emotion, wispered something to an elderly woman that attended her, and that
this last did the same to a page, who immediately went to two natives of the
place, whom the Pophar used to hire to carry his things: this was to enquire of
them who we were. They, as appeared by the event, told them, that I was a young
slave lately bought by the Pophar. After a while, the Bassa with his train went
away, and I, for my part, thought no more of the matter. The next day, as the
Pophar and we were walking in one of the public gardens; a little elderly man,
like an ^unuch, with a most beautiful youth along with him, having dogged us to
a private part of the walks, came up to us, and addressing themselves to the
Pophar, asked him what he would take for his young slave, pointing at me,
because the Bassa desired to buy him. The Pophar seemed to be more surprised at
this unexpected question, than I ever observed him at any thing before, which
confirmed me more and more in the opinion of the kindness he had for me. But
soon coming to himself, as he was a man of great presence of mind, he said very
calmly, that I was no slave; nor a person to be sold for any price, since I was
as free as he was. Taking this for a pretext to enhance the price, they
produced some oriental pearls with other jewels of immense value; and bid him
name what he would have, and it should be paid immediately: adding, that I was
to be the companion of the Bassa's son, where I might make my fortune for ever,
if I would go along with them. The Pophar persisted in his first answer, and
said he had no power over me: they alleged, I had been bought as a slave, but
a little before, in the Grand Signior's dominions, and they would have me. Here
I interposed, and answered briskly, that though I had been taken prisoner by
the chance of war, I was no slave, nor would I part with my liberty but at the
price of my life, The Bassa's son, for so he now declared himself to be,
instead of being angery at my resolute answer, replied with a most agreeable
smile, that I should be as free as he was; making at the same time the most
solemn protestations by his holy Alcoran, that our lives and deaths should be
inseparable. Though there was something in his words the most persuasive I ever
felt; yet considering the obligations I owed to the Pophar, I was resolved not
to go; but answered with a most respectful bow, that though I was free by
nature, I had indispensable obligations not to go with him, and hoped he would
take it for a determinate answer. I pronounced this with such a resolute air,
as made him see there was no hopes. Whether his desire was more inflamed by my
denial, or whether they took us for persons of greater note than we appeared to
be I cannot tell; but I observed he put on a very languishing air, with tears
stealing down his cheeks, which moved me to a degree I cannot express. I was
scarce capable of speaking, but cast down my eyes, and stood as immovable as a
statue. This seemed to revive his hopes; and recovering himself a little, with
a trembling voice he replied; Suppose it be the Bassa's daughter, you saw
yesterday, that desires to have you for her attendant, what will you say then?
I started at this, and casting my eyes on him more attentively, I saw him
swimming in tears, with a tenderness enough to pierce the hardest heart. I
looked at the Pophar, who I saw was trembling for me; and feared it was the
daughter herself that asked me the question. I was soon put out of doubt; for
she, finding she had gone too far to go back, discovered herself, and said, I
must go along with her, or one of us must die Love adventures are not the
design of these memoirs, as will appear by the rest of his life: otherwise,
this account of the Bassa's daughter had like to have made me lay down my pen;
without troubling myself to write any further remark. But, when I considered*
the man (...) no fool, let him be what he will, nor could design to embellish
his history by this extraordinary adventure, so like the former, and just upon
the back of it. I am inclined to believe he wrote the matter of fact just as it
happened. More unaccountable accidents than this have happened to some men.

The amorous temper of the Turkish ladies, especially at Grand Cairo where the
women are the most voluptuous in the world, and the surprising beauty of this
young man, who, the secretary says, has the noblest presence he ever saw, even
at that age, might easily charm a wanton giddy girl at the first sight.
Besides, she was informed he was a slave, and might think she could have
purchased him for her private gallant: or might be encouraged in it by the
lustful elderly woman that attended her. Such things have been done before now;
but when she came nearer to the tempting object, and found him to be something
more noble than she expected, her passion might thereby grow to the highest
pitch.

Extraordinary beauty, in either sex, is oftentimes a great misfortune; since
it frequently leads them into very great follies, and even disasters What will
not heedless youth do, when fired with flattery or charms? It is no new thing
for women to fall in love at first fight, as well as men and on as unequal
terms; in spite of all reasons and considerations to the contra^y. I believe
there may be men in the world, as charming in the eyes of women, as ever the
fair Helen appeared to the men. The almost incredible catastrophes caused by
her beauty* are so far from being fabulous, that, besides the account Homer
gives of her, there is extant an oration of the famous I^ocrates De laudibus
Helenae, before Alexander the Great's time, which gives a more amazing account
of the effects of her beauty, than Homer does. He says, she was ravished for
her beauty by the great and wise Theseus, when she was but a girl. She was
afterward courted by all the Grecian princes; and* after her marriage, was
carried from Europe into Asia by the beautiful Paris: which kindled the first
war that is recorded in history to have been made in th^se parts of the world.
Yet, notwithstanding that false and fatal step, her beauty reconciled her to
her husband. The sight of some men may have as violent effects on women.

It is possible the young lady would have been very angry with any one who
should have persuaded Signor Gaudentio to do as he did; yet in effect it was
the greates^ kindness* for this very lady, some time after, became mistress of
the whole Ottoman empire. Whereas if she had run away with him, as the violence
of her passion suggested, they had both of them been inevitably miserable.
Notwithstanding all these reasons, I should not have believed this story* if I
had not examined some other facts* which, he said, happened to him at Venice,
as incredible as this, and found them to be really true.


. -- I hope your Reverences will excuse this account I give of myself, which
nothing should have drawn from me, though it is literally true, but your
express commands to tell the whole history of my life. The perplexity I was in
cannot be imagined. I considered she was a Turk, and I a Christian; that my
death must certainly be the consequence of such a rash affair, were I to engage
in it; that whether she concealed me in her father's court, or attempted to go
off with me, it was ten thousand to one, we should both be sacrificed: neither
could the violence of such a sudden passion ever be concealed from the Bassa's
spies. In a word, I was resolved not to go: but how to get off, was the
difficulty. I saw the most beautiful creature in the world all in tears before
me, after a declaration of love, that exceeded the most romantic tales; youth,
love, and beauty, and even an inclination on my side, pleaded her cause. But at
length the consideration of the endless miseries I was likely to draw on the
young lady, should I comply with what she desired, prevailed above all other. I
was resolved to refuse, for her sake more than my own, and was just going to
tell her so on my knees, with all the arguments my reason could suggest to
appease her; when an attendant came running in haste to the other person, who
was also a woman, and told her the Bassa was coming that way. She was roused
out of her lethargy at this. The other woman immediately snatched her away, as
the Pophar did me; and she had only time to call out with a threat. Think
better on it, or die. I was no sooner out of her sight, but I found a thousand
reasons for what I did, more than I could think of before, while the enchanting
object was before my eyes. I saw the madness of that passion which forced the
most charming person of the Ottoman empire, capable by her beauty to conquer
the Grand Signior himself, to make a declaration of love, so contrary to the
nature and modesty of her sex, as well as her quality and dignity, and ready to
sacrifice her reputation, the duty she owed* her parents, her liberty, perhaps
her life, for an unknown person who had been a slave but some time before. I
saw on the other hand, that had I complied with the fair charmers proposal, I
must have run the risk of loosing my religion or life, or rather both, with a
dreadful chain of hidden misfortunes, likely to accompany such a rash
adventure. While I was taken up with these thoughts, the wise Pophar, after
reflecting a little upon what had happened, told me, this unfortunate affair
would not end so, but that it might cost us both our lives, and something else
that was more dear to him. He feared so violent a passion would draw on other
extremes: especially considering the wickedness of the people, and the brutal
tyranny of their government: however, he was resolved not to give me up but
with his life, if I would but stand to it myself: adding, that we must make off
as fast as we could; and having so many spies upon us, use policy as well as
expedition. Accordingly he went down directly to the port, and hired a ship in
the most public manner to go for Cyprus, paid the whole freight on the spot,
and told them they must necessarily sail that evening. We should actually have
done so, had not our companions and effects obliged us to return to Grand
Cairo; but instead of imbarking for Cyprus, he called aside the master of the
vessel, who was of his acquaintance, and, for a good round sum privately agreed
with him to sail out of the port, as if we were really on board, while the
Pophar hired a boat for us at the other end of the town, in which we went that
night directly for Grand Cairo. As soon as we were arrived there, we inquired
how long it would be before the Bassa returned to that city. They told us it
would be about a fortnight at soonest; this gave the Pophar time to pay off his
house, pack up his effects, and get all things ready for his great voyage; but
he still had greater apprehensions in his looks than ever I remarked in him.
However, he hoped the affair would end well. In five days time all things were
in readiness for our departure. We set out a little before sunset, as is
customary in those countries, and marched but a slow pace whilst we were near
the town, to avoid any suspicion of flight. After we had traveled thus about a
league up by the side of the river Nile, the Pophar leading the van, and the
rest following in a pretty long string after him, we met five or six men coming
down the riverside on horseback, whose fine turbans and habits showed they
were pages, or attendants of some great person. The Pophar turned off from the
river, as if it were to give them way: and they passed on very civilly without
seeming to take any further notice of us. I was the hindmost but one of our
train, having staid to give our dromedaries some water. Soon after these, came
two ladies riding on little Arabian jennets, with prodigious rich furniture, by
which I guessed them to be persons of quality, and the others gone before to be
their attendants. They were not quite over against where I was, when the jennet
of the younger of the two ladies began to snort and start at our dromedaries,
and became so unruly, that I apprehended she could scarce fit him. At that
instant, one of the led dromedaries coming pretty near, that and the rustling
of its loading so frighted the jennet, that he gave a bound all on a sudden,
and being on the inside of us toward the river, he ran full speed toward the
edge of the bank, where not being able to stop his career, he flew directly off
the precipice into the river, with the lady still sitting him; but the violence
of the leap threw her off two or three yards into the water. It happened very
luckily that there was a little island just by where she fell, and her clothes
keeping her up for some minutes, the stream carried her against some stakes
that stood just above the water, which catched hold of her clothes, and held
her there. The shrieks of the other lady bro't the nighest attendants up to us;
but those fearful wretches durst not venture into the river to her assistance.
I jumped off my dromedary with indignation, and throwing off my loose garment
and sandals, swam to her, and with much difficulty getting hold of her hand,
and loosing her garments from the stakes, I made a shift to draw her across the
stream, till I brought her to land. She was quite senseless for some time; I
held down her head, which I had not yet looked at, to make her disgorge the
water she had swallowed; but I was soon struck with a double surprise, when I
looked at her face, to find it was the Bassa's daughter, and to see her in that
place, whom I thought I had left at Alexandria. After some time, she came to
herself, and looking fixed on me a good while, her senses not being entirely
recovered, at last she cried out, "O Mahomet, must I owe my life to this man!"
and fainted away. The other lady, who was her confident, with a great deal of
pains brought her to herself again; we raised her up, and endeavored to
comfort her as well as we could: No, says she, throw me into the river once
more; let me not be obliged to a barbarian for whom I have done too much
already. I told her in the most respectful terms I could think of, that
providence had ordered it so, that I might make some recompense for the
undeserved obligations she had laid on me; that I had two great value for her
merit, ever to make her miserable, by loving a slave, such as I was, a
stranger, a Christian, and one who had indispensable, obligations to act as I
did. She startled a little at what I said; but after a short recollection
answered, whether you are a slave, an infidel, or whatever you please, you are
one of the most generous men in the world. I suppose your obligations are on
account of some more happy woman than myself; but since I owe my life to you, I
am resolved not to make you unhappy, any more than you do me. I not only pardon
you, but am convinced my pretensions are both unjust, and against my own honor.
She said this with an air becoming her quality: she was much more at ease, when
I assured her I was engaged to no woman in the world; but that her memory
should be ever dear to me, and imprinted in my heart till my last breath. Here
ten or a dozen armed Turks came upon us full speed from the town, and seeing
the Pophar and his companions, they cried out, Stop villains, we arrest you in
the name of the Bassa. At this we started up to see what was the matter, when
the lady who knew them, bid me not be afraid: that she had ordered these men ^o
pursue me, when she left Alexandria. That hearing we were fled off by sea, she
pretended sickness, and asked leave of her father to return to Cairo, there to
bemoan her misfortune with her confident: and was in those melancholy
sentiments, when the late accident happened to her. That she supposed these men
had discovered the trick we had played them in not going by sea, and on better
information had pursued us this way. So she dismissed them immediately. I was
all this while in one of the greatest agonies that can be expressed, both for
fear of my own resolutions and hers: so I begged her to retire, lest her wet
clothes should endangar her health. I should not have been able to pronounce
these words, if the Pophar had not cast a look at me, which pierced me through
and made me see the danger I was in by my delay. Her resolutions now seemed to
be stronger than mine. She pulled off this jewel your Reverences see on my
finger, and just said, with tears trickling down her beautiful cheeks, take
this, and adieu! She then pulled her companion away, and never looked at me
more. I stood amazed, almost without life or motion in me; and cannot tell how
long I might have continued so, if the Pophar had not come and congratulated me
for my deliverance. I told him* I did not know what he meant by deliverance,
for I did not know whether I was alive or dead, and that I was afraid he would
repent his buying of me, if I procured him any more of these adventures. If we
meet with no worse than these, says he, we are well enough; no victory can be
gained without some loss. So he awa^^^ed me out of my lethargy, and commanded
us to make the best of our way.

Though the Pophar was uneasy to be out of the reach of the fair lady and her
faithless Turks, yet he was not in any great haste in the main, the proper time
for his great voyage not being yet come. There appeared a gaiety in his
countenance, that seemed to promise us a prosperous journey. For my own part,
though I was glad I had escaped my dangerous inchantress, there was a heaviness
lay on my spirits, which I could give no account of; but the thoughts of such
an unknown voyage, and variety of places, dissipated it by degrees. We were
eleven in number, five elderly men, and five young ones, myself being a
supernumerary person. We were all mounted upon dromedaries, which were very
fine for that sort of creature: they are something like camels, but less, and
much swifter; they live a great while without water, as the camels do, which
was the reason they made use of them, for the barren sands they were to pass
over; though they have the finest horses that can be seen in their own country.
They had five spare ones to carry provisions, or to change, in case any one of
their own should tire by the way. It was upon one of these five that I rode. We
went up the Nile, leaving it on our left hand all the way, steering our course
directly for the Upper Egypt. I presume your Reverences know, that the river
Nile divides Egypt into two parts lengthwise, descending from Abyssinia with
such an immense course, that the Ethiopians said it had no head, and running
through the hither Ethiopa, pours down upon Egypt, as the Rhine does through
the Spanish Netherlands, making it one of the richest countries in the
universe. We visited all the towns on that famous river upwards, under pretense
of merchandising; but the true reason of our delay was, because the Pophar's
critical time for his great voyage was not yet come. He looked at his ephemeris
and notes almost every hour, the rest of them attending his nod in the most
minute circumstances. As we approached the upper parts of Egypt, as nigh as I
could guess, over against the deserts of Barca, they began to buy provisions,
proper for their purpose: but particularly rice, dried fruits, and a sort of
dried paste that served us for bread. They bought their provisions at different
places, to avoid suspicion; and I observed they laid up a considerable
quantity, both for their dromedaries and themselves: by which I found we had a
long journey to make. When we came over against the middle coast of the vast
desert of Barca, we met with a delicate clear rivulet, breaking out of a rising
part of the sands, and making toward the Nile. Here we alighted, drank
ourselves, and gave our dromedaries to drink as much as they would; then we
filled all our vessels, made on purpose for carriage, and took in a much
greater proportion of water than we had done provisions. -- I forgot to tell
your Reverences, that, at several places as we passed, they dismounted, and
kissed the ground with a very superstitious devotion, and scraped some of the
dust, which they put into golden urns* which they had brought with them on
purpose, letting me do what I pleased all the while. This sort of devotion I
then only guessed, but found to be true afterward, was the chief occasion of
their coming into those parts, though carried on under the pretense of
merchandising. They did the same in this place; and when all were ready, the
Pophar looking on his papers and needle, cried Gaulbenim, which, I was
informed, was as much as to say, Now children for our lives; and immediately as
he had steered south all along before, he turned short on his right hand due
west, cross the vast desert of Barca, as fast as his dromedary could well go.
We had nothing but sands and sky before us, and in a few hours were almost out
of danger of any one's attempting to follow us.

Being thus embarked, if I may say so, on this vast ocean of sand, a thousand
perplexing thoughts came into my mind, which I did not reflect on before.
Behold me in the midst of the inhospitable deserts of Africa, where whole
armies Ancient histories give us several instances of a great number of
persons, and even whole armies, who have been lost in the sands of Africa.
Herodotus in Thalia, says that Cambyse^ the son of Cyrus the Great* in his
expedition against the Ethiopians, was brought to such straits in those vast
deserts, that they were fo^ced to eat every tenth m^n before they could get
back again. The other army, which he ^ent to destroy the temple of Jupiter
Aammon, was entirely overwhelmed and lost in the sands. Herodot. Thalia. The
idolaters imputed it as a punishment for his impiety against Jupiter, but it
was for want of knowing the danger. -- I suppose very few are ignorant of the
contrivance of Marius the Roman general, to get over the sands to Capsa* to
seize Jugurtha's treasure, which he thought secure. Sallust. de bello Jugurthin.
had often perished. The further we advanced, the more our danger increased. I
was with men, who were not only strangers to myself, but to all the world
beside: ten against one; but this was not all; I was persuaded now they were
Heathens and idolaters: for, beside their superstitious kissing the earth in
several places, I observed they looked up toward the sun, and seemed to
address their oraisons to that planet, glorious indeed, but a planet and a
creature nevertheless: then I reflected on what the Pophar said when he bought
me, that I was not likely to return. It is possible, thought I, I am destined
for a human sacrifice to some Heathen god in the midst of this vast desert. But
not seeing any arms they had, either offensive or defensive, except their short
go^ds to prick on their dromedaries, I was a little easy: I had privately
provided myself with two pocket-pistols, and was resolved to defend myself till
the last gasp. But when I considered that unparallelled justice and humanity I
had experienced in their treatment of me, I was a little comforted. As for the
difficulty of passing the deserts, I reflected that their own lives were as
much in danger as mine; that they must have some unknown ways of passing them
over, otherwise they would never expose themselves to such evident danger.

I should have told your Reverences, that we set out a little before sunset to
avoid the heats, June the 9th, 1688; the moon was about the first quarter, and
carried on the light till nigh dawn of day; the glittering of the sands, or
rather pebbly gravel, in which there were abundance of shining stones like
jewels or crystal, increased the light, that we could see to steer our course
by the needle very well, We went on at a vast rate, the dromedaries being very
swift creatures; their pace is more running than gallopping, much like that of
a mule; that I verily believe, from six o'clock in the evening till about ten
the next day, we ran almost a hundred and twenty Italian miles: we had neither
stop nor let, but steered our course in a direct line, like a ship under sail.
The heats were not nigh so insufferable as I expected; for though we saw
nothing we could call a mountain in those immense Bares, yet the sands, or at
least the way we steered, was very high ground: that as soon as we were out of
the breath of the habitable countries, we had a perpetual breeze blowing full
in our ^aces; yet so uniform, that it scarce raised any dust; partly because,
where we passed* the sands were not of that small dusty kind, as in some parts
of Africa, which fly in clouds with the wind overwhelming all before them, but
of a more gravelly kind; and partly from an imperceptible dew, which, though
not so thick as a fog, moistened the surface of the ground pretty much. A
little after nine next morning we came to some clumps of shrubby trees, with a
little moss on the ground instead of grass: here the wind fell, and the heats
became very violent. The Pophar ordered us to alight, and pitch our tents, to
shelter both ourselves and dromedaries from the heats. Their tents were made of
the finest sort of oiled cloth I ever saw, prodigious light and portable, yet
capable of keeping out both rain and sun. Here we refreshed ourselves and
beasts till a little after six; when we set out again, steering still directly
west as nigh as I could guess. We went on thus for three days and nights
without any conconsiderable accident; only I observed the ground seemed to rise
insensibly higher, and the breezes not only stronger, but the air itself much
cooler. About ten, the third day, we saw some more clumps of trees on our right
hand, which looked greener and thicker than the former, as if they were the
beginning of some habitable vale, as in effect they were. The Pophar ordered us
to turn that way, which was the only turning out of our way we had yet made. By
the cheerfulness of their countenances, I thought this might be the beginning
of their country; but I was very much mistaken; we had a far longer and more
dangerous way to go, than what we had passed hitherto. However, this was a very
remarkable station of our voyage, as your Reverences will find by the sequel.
As we advanced, we found it to open and descend gradually; till at length we
saw a most beautiful vale, full of palms, dates, oranges, and other
fruit trees, entirely unknown in these parts, with such a refreshing smell from
the odoriferous shrubs, as filled the whole air with perfumes The prodigious
fertility of Africa, in the vales between the deserts and the s^ir^s of it, for
a great breadth toward the two seas, is recorded by the best historians;
though the ridge of it, over which our author was conducted* and other
particular tracts* are all covered with ^ands.
. We rode into the thickest of it as fast as we could to enjoy the inviting*
shade. We eased our dromedaries, and took the first care of them; for on them
all our safeties depended. After we had refreshed ourselves, the Pophar ordered
every one to go to sleep as soon as he could, since we were like to have but
little the three following days. I should have told your Reverences, that as
soon as they alighted, they fell down flat on their faces, and kissed the
earth, with a great deal of seeming joy and ardour, which I took to be a
congratulation for their happy arrival at so hospitable a place, but it was on
a quite different account. I was the first who awoke after our refreshment; my
thoughts and fears, though much calmer than they had been, would not suffer me
to be so sedate as the rest. Finding the hour for departing was not yet come, I
got up, and walked in that delicious grove, which was so much the more
delightful, as the deserts we had passed on, descending toward the center of
the vale, not doubting but, by the greenness and fragrancy of the place, I
should find a spring of water. I had not gone far, before I saw a most delicate
rill* bubbling out from under a rock, forming a little natural basin, from
whence it ran gliding down the center of the vale, increasing as it went, till
in all appearance it might form a considerable rivulet, unless it were swallow
up again in the sands. At that place the vale ran upon a pretty deep descent,
so that I could see over the trees and shrubs below me, almost as far as my
eyes could reach; increasing or decreasing in breadth as the hills of sands,
for now they appeared to be hills, would give it leave. Here I had the most
delightful prospect that the most lively imagination can form to itself; the
sunburned hills of sand on each side, made the greens look still more charming;
but the singing of innumerable unknown bids, with the different fruits and
perfumes exhaling from the aromatic shrubs, rendered the place delicious beyond
expression. After I had drank my fill, and delighted myself with those native
rarieties, I saw a large lion come out of the grove, about two hundred paces
below me, going very quietly to the spring to lap. When he had drank, he wis^ed
his tail two or three times, and began to tumble on the green grass. I took the
opportunity to slip away back to my companions, very glad I had escaped so:
they were all awake when I came up, and had been in great concern for my
absence. The Pophar seemed more displeased that I had left them, than ever I
saw him; he mildly chid me for exposing myself to be devoured by wild beasts:
but when I told them of the ^^ater and the lion, they were in a greater
surprise, looking at one another with a sort of fear in their looks, which I
interpreted to be for the danger I had escaped; but it was on another account.
After some words in their own language, the Pophar spoke aloud in lingu^
Franca, I think, says he, we may let this young man see all our ceremonies,
especially since he will soon be out of danger of discovering them, if he
should have a mind to do it. At this they pulled out of their stores, some of
their choicest fruits, a cruise of rich wine, some bread, a burning glass, a
thurible An instrument to hold incense.
, perfumes, and other instruments commonly used in the Heathen sacrifices. I
looked aghast at this strange sight; which was such as I had never observed in
them before, and began to apprehend that I was now really designed for a human
sacrifice Our author's fears were not v^in, considering the preparatives he
saw* and other circumstances. Besides, it is well known, the ancient Africans,
particularly the Getulians and Libyans, and even the Carthagenians, made use of
human sacrifices to appease their deities. Bochart, in the second part of his
Geographia Sacra, proves beyond question, that the Carthagenians were part of
the people of Canaan driven out by Joshua* who used to sacrifice their children
to Moloch. etc. Even in Hannibal's time, when they were grown more polite, they
sent privately, children to Tire for a sacrifice to Hercules.
to some infernal god or other; but when I compared the Pophar's late words
with what I saw, I scarce doubted of it, and was contriving with myself to sell
my life as dear as I could. The Pophar ordered us to bring the dromedaries, and
every thing along with us, for fear, as he said, they should be devoured by
wild beasts. We descended toward the center of the vale, where I saw the
fountain. They went on a great way lower into the vale, till it began to be
very steep; but we found a narrow way made by art, and not seeming to have been
very long unfrequented, which was more surprising, because I took the place to
be uninhabited, and even inaccessible to all but these people. We were forced
to descend one by one, leading our dromedaries in our hands: I took particular
care to be the hindmost, keeping at a little distance from the rest, for fear
of a surprise. They marched down in a mournful kind of procession, observing a
most profound silence all the while. At length we came into the finest natural
amphitheatre that is possible to describe. There was nothing but odoriferous
greens and sky to be seen; except downwards right before us, where we had a
most delicious prospect over that glorious vale, winding a little to the right,
till it was intercepted by the collateral hills. At the upper part of the
amphitheatre, where the break of the hill made that agreeable esplanade, there
stood an ancient pyramid, just after the manner of those in Egypt, but nothing
near so big as the least of them. In the front of it that faced the vale, the
steps were cut out in the form of an altar, on which was erected a statue of a
venerable old man, done to the life, of the finest polished marble, or rather
some unknown stone of infinite more value. Here I had not the least doubt, but
that I was to be sacrificed to this idol. The Pophar seeing me at a distance
called to me, to come and see their ceremonies. Then I thought it was time to
speak or never. Father, said I, since you give me leave to call you so, I am
willing to perform all your commands, where the honor of the supreme God is not
called in question; but I am ready to die a thousand deaths, rather than give
his honor to another. I am a Christian, and believe one only God, the supreme
being of all beings, and Lord of the universe; for which reason I cannot join
with you in your idolatrous worship. If you are resolved to put me to death on
that account, I here offer my life freely! if I am to be made a part of your
infernal sacrifice, I will defend myself to the last drop of my blood, before I
will submit to it. He answered me with a smile, rather than with any
indignation, and told me, when I came to be better acquainted with them, I
should find they were not so inhuman as to put people to death, because they
were of a different opinion from their own. That this was only a religious
ceremony they performed to their deceased ancestors The earliest accounts of
Egypt, from whence these people came, tell us that they had a great veneration
for their deceased ancestors. See the third part of the Bishop of Meaux's
Universal history, quoted above. Diodor^s Si^^lus, who lived in the beginning
of Augustus's re^gn* says of the Egyptians, they were particularly diligent
about their ^epulchres, or in the worship of their dead. The same superstition
reigns still among the Chinese, whom I shall show afterward to have been a
colony of Egypti^ns, notwithstanding that China and Egypt are so far distant
from each other.
, and if I had not a mind to assist at it, I might sit down at what distance I
pleased.

[ Secretary. The inquisitors were extremely pleased with the first part of his
discourse, wherein he showed such courage in defense of his religion, and
resolution to die rather than join in their idolatrous worship; but all had
liked to have been dashed again by the second part, which made one of the
inquisitors interrupt his narration, and ask him the following question.


Inquisitor. I hope you do not think it unlawful to persecute, or even to put
to death, obstinate heretics, who would destroy the religion of our
forefathers, and lead others into the same damnation with themselves. If
treason against one's prince may be punished with death, why may not treason
against the king of heaven be punished with the like penalty? Have a care you
do not cast reflections on the holy inquisition.


Gaudentio. Reverend Fathers! I only relate bare matter of fact, as it was
spoke by the mouth of a Heathen, ignorant of our holy mysteries. I have all the
reason in the world, to extol the justice of the holy inquisition: nor do I
think, but, in such cases mentioned by your Reverences, it may be lawful to use
the utmost severities to prevent greater evils. But it argued a wonderful
moderation in the Pophar, which I found to be his real sentiments, not
unbecoming a Christian in such circumstances, where it did not tend to the
destruction of the whole. -- But in this, as in all other matters, I submit to
your decisions.


Secretary. I interposed in his favor, and put the inquisitors in mind, that
there was nothing but what was just in his answers: and we ourselves only used
those rigours in the last extremity, to prevent greater mischiefs. So they bid
him read on.


When the Pophar had said this, he and the rest of them fell down on their
faces, and kissed the earth: then with the burning-glass they kindled some
odoriferous woods; put the coals in the thurible with the incense, and incensed
the idol or statue: that done, they poured the wine on the altar; set bread on
the one side, and fruits on the other: and having lighted two little pyramids
of most delicious perfumes at each end of the great pyramid, they sat them down
round the fountain, which I suppose was conveyed by art under the pyramid The
ancient Egyptians had a strange fondness for building pyramids; whether they
were for the same end as the tower of Babel, that is, to make themselves a
name, or for other ends, we cannot ^ell. -- The great pyramid is more ancient
than all the rest* insomuch (...) the best authors do not know when to fix its
dare, some (...) it was built by Moeris their first king, others by Cecrops
Lector. But if the account the Pophar gives of their origin, at the next
station, be true, it was built before there was any king in Egypt. The river
Nile was conveyed by art under the great pyramid.
, and issued out in the middle of the amphitheatre. There they refreshed
themselves, and gathered the fruits which hung round us in the grove, eating of
them very heartily, and inviting me to do the like. I made some difficulty at
first, fearing it might be part of the sacrifice; but they assuring me all was
but a civil ceremony, I joined them, and did as they did. The Pophar turned to
me, and said, My son, we worship one most high God, as you do: what we did just
now, was not that we believe any deity in that statue, or adored (...) a God;
but only respect it as a memorial, and in remembrance of our great ancestor,
who heretofore conducted our forefathers to this place, and was buried in this
pyramid One of the ends of building the pyramids, was certainly for
burying-places for some great men.
. The rest of our forefathers, who died before they were forced to leave this
valley, are buried all around us. That is the reason we kissed the ground, not
thinking it lawful to stir the bones of the dead. We did the same in Egypt,
because we were originally of that land: our particular ancestors lived in that
part, which was afterward called Thebes Thebes once the most famous city of
Egypt, having a hundred ^^tes, etc. was the No-Amon, or Diasposis of the
ancients, Bochart-Ph^leg. lib. 4. Tacitus says, that, in the time of
Germanicus, there was remaining an inscription in the Egyptian language
signifying Habitasse quo^dam (Thebis) septingenta millia hominum aetate
mi^^tari: That there were once seven hundred thousand inhabitants in Thebes fit
to bear arms. Tacit. An^^* lib. 2.
. The time will not permit me to acquaint you at present, how we were driven
out of our native country to this place, and afterward from this place to the
land we are now going to, but you shall know all hereafter. The bread, fruits,
and wine we laid on the alter This is rank ^dolatry, notwithstanding the Pophar
calls it but a civil ceremony. Thus the worship the Chinese pay to their dead*
and allowed by the Jesuits, was said by them to be but a pious civil ceremony,
though ^t was like this, or rather more sup^rstitious. See the condemnation of
it by Pope Clement XI.
, as they are the chief support of our being; so we leave them there as a
testimony, that the venerable old man, whose statue you see, was, under God,
the author and father of our nation. This said, he told us it was time to make
the best of our way; so they all got up, and having kissed the ground once
more, the five elderly men scraped a little of the earth, and put it in fine
golden vessels, with a great deal of care and respect. After refreshing
ourselves again, we made our provision of fruits and water, and leading our
dromedaries up the way we came down, mounted, and set out for the remainder of
our journey.

We were now past the tropic of Cancer When persons are beyond that tropic, at
midday the shadows of things are toward the south, because the sun is then
north of us;

Miranturque umbras transire sinist^as. They might have passed the tropic
before, since it runs over part of the de^ert of Barca, not much southward of
Egypt; but it seems they steered westward for some time.
, as I found by our shadows going southward; and went on thus a little, bending
toward the west again, almost parallel to the tropic, the breezes increasing
rather stronger than before, so that about midnight it was really cold. We gave
our dromedaries water about sunrising, and refreshed ourselves a little: then
set out with new vigor at a prodigious rate: still the breezes fell between
nine and ten; however we made shift to go on, because they came again about
noon: between three and four was the hottest time of all. Besides, going now
parallel to the tropic, we traveled on the hot sands, a very little
descending; whereas, when we pointed southwards toward the line, we found the
ground to be insensibly rising upon us His observations are just, since all the
new philosophers allow the earth to be sph^roidal and g^bbous toward the
equator. Whoever therefore g^es by land, either from the north or south toward
the equator, must ascend. This seems to be a very natural reason, why those
im^e^se Ba^es are not so excessive hot. The highest mountains are cons^derably
^ig^e^ the sun than the low lands, yet excessive cold in the hottest climates;
in the vales the rays of the sun are cooped in, and do^bled and trebled by
r^fraction and reflect on* etc. The same all put in a turbulent motion will be
hot, and in a direct one cold.
; but as we went on these almost flats, if it had not been that we were almost
on the ridge of Africa, which made it cooler than one can well believe, it had
been impossible to bear the heats. When we rested, we not only pitched our
tents for ourselves and dromedaries, but the sands were so hot, that we were
forced to lay things under our feet to preserve them from burning. Thus we
traveled through those dismal deserts for four days, without sight of any
living creature but ourselves. Sands and sky were all that presented itself to
our view. The fatigue was the greatest I ever underwent in my life. The fourth
day about eight in the morning, by good fortune for us, or else by the prudent
forecast of the Pophar, who knew all his stations, we saw another vale toward
the right hand, with some straggling trees here and there, but not seeming nigh
so pleasant as the first, we made to it with all our speed, and had much ado to
bear the heats till we came to it. We alighted immediately, and led our
dromedaries down the gentle descent, till we could find a thicker part of it.
The first trees were thin and old, as if they had just moisture enough to keep
them alive: the ground was but just covered over with a little sun burnt moss,
without any sign of water, but our stock was not yet gone. At length, as we
descended, the grove increased every way, the trees were large, with some dates
here and there, but not so good as in the other. We rested a little, and then
continued to descent for some time, till we came into a very cool and thick
shade. Here, the Pophar told us, we must stay two or three days, perhaps
longer, till he saw his usual signs for proceeding on his journey; and bid us
be sparing of our water, for fear of accidents. We settled our dromedaries as
before: for ourselves, we could scarce take any thing, we were so fatigued,
wanting rest more than meat and drink. The Pophar, ordering us some cordial
wines they had along with them for that purpose, told us, we might sleep as
long as we would* only bid us be sure to cover ourselves well; for the nights
were long, and even cold about midnight. We were all soon asleep, and did not
wake till four the next morning. The Pophar, solicitous for all our safeties as
well as his own, (for this was the critical time of our journey), was a wake
the first of us. When we were up, and had refreshed ourselves, which we did
with a very good appetite, he told us we must go up on the sands again to
observe the signs. We took our dromedaries along with us, for fear of wild
beasts, though we saw none, walking gently up the sands, till we came to a very
high ground. We had but a dreary prospect, as far as our eyes could carry us,
of sunburned plains, without grass, stick, or shrub, except when we turned our
backs to look at the vale below us, which running lower became a rivulet; but
that, either by an earthquake, or some flood of sand, it was quite choked up,
running under ground, without any one's knowing whether it broke out again, or
was entirely swallowed up Geographers agree, that rivers, and (...) great lakes
in Africa sin^ under ground, and are quite l^st without any visible outle^^.
The vast depth of the st^at^ of sand seems more proper to swallow them up
there, than in other parts of the world.
. He said also; that, by the most ancient accounts of his forefathers, the
sands were not in their times so dangerous to pass as they are now, or of such
vast extent There seems to be a natural reason for what he says; for those vast
sands, or hills of gravel, were undoubtedly left by the general deluge, a^
probably all the lesser strata or beds of gravel were. Yet great part of them
must have been covered with ^ime or mud for several years after the deluge,
some thinner, some thicker* and consequently more moist and productive
accordingly. Nevertheless, the violent rays of the sun still render the^ more
dry and barren and, in all probability, these deserts will increase more and
more, where the country is not cultivated.
, but had fruitful vales much nearer one another than at present. He added,
that he wished earnestly to see the signs he wanted for proceeding on our way;
since there was no stirring till they appeared: and that, according to his
ephemeris and notes, they should appear about this time, unless something very
extraordinary happened. This was about eight in the morning, the 9th day after
we set out for the deserts. He was every now and then looking southward, or
southwest, with great solicitude in his looks, as if he wondered he saw
nothing. At length he cried out with great emotions of joy, it is coming! Look
yonder, says he, toward the southwest, as far as your eyes can carry you, and
see what you can discover. We told him, we saw nothing but some clouds of sand,
carried round here and there like whirlwinds. That is the sign I want,
continued he; but mark well which way it drives. We said it drove directly
eastward, as nigh as we could guess. It does, says he; then turning his face
westwards, with a little point of the south. All those vast deserts, says he,
are now in such a commotion of storms and whirlwinds, that man and beast will
soon be overwhelmed in the rolling waves of sands. He had scarce said this, but
we saw, at a vast distance, ten thousand little whirl-spouts of sand, rising
and falling with a prodigious tumult and velocity Though in the vast occean
between the tropics, where promontories do not intervene, the winds are
generally easterly* yet there is a perpetual west wind blows into Guinea --
There are vast ruins at the solstices between the tropics, as the accounts of
those parts declare; though at that time of the year, more beyond the line than
on this side of it. It is not to be questioned* but in such violent changes,
particularly before those rains, there must be furious hurricanes of wind and
sand, enough to overwhelm whole armies and countries. -- The most incredible
part of this narration, is, how they could travel at all under the tropic, in
the summer-solstice, only, as he says the ground being very high and open, it
must draw air.
eastward, with vast thick clouds of sand and dust following them. Come, says
he, let us return to our resting place; for there we must stay, till we see
further how matters go. As this appeared newer to me than any of the rest, and
being possessed with a great idea of the knowledge of the man, I made bold to
ask him, what was the cause of this sudden phenomenon: he told me, that, about
that full moon, there always fell prodigious rains Naturalists agree, that
beyond the line there are great rains at that season. It is possible, they may
begin on this side, being driven by the perpetual west winds into Guinea and
then, by natural causes* turn toward the line and southern tropic.
, coming from the western part of Africa, on this side the equator, and driving
a little south-west for some time at first, but afterward turning almost
south, and crossing the line till they came to the source of the Nile; in which
parts they fell for three weeks or a month together, which was the occasion of
the overflowing of that river The cau^es of the overflowing of the river Nile,
unknown to most of the ancients, are now allowed to be the great pains falling
in (...) and ^uly about the line, and the ^outhern tropic, and the melting of
the show on the mountains of the moon lying in that tract. None can wonder
there should be snow in those hot cl^mates, who have heard of the Andes or
Cordilleras bordering on Peru. Our Italy is very hot, yet the Alps and
Apennines are three parts of the year covered with snow. -- The Nile overflows
in August, which seem to be a proper distance of time for the waters to come
down to Egypt, such a va^t way off from the cause of it. There is a river in
Cochinchina, and elsewhere, that overflows in the same manner.
: but that, on this side the equator, it only rained about fifteen days,
preceded by those whirlwinds and clouds of sand, which rendered all that tract
impassable, till the rains had laid them again. -- By this time we were come
down to our resting place, and though we did not want sleep or refreshment, yet
we took both; to have the cool of the evening to recreate ourselves after so
much fatigue, not being likely to move till the next evening at soonest.

At five in the evening, the pophar called us up to go with him once more to
the highest part of the desert, saying he wanted one sign yet, which he hoped
to have that evening, or else it would go hard with us for want of water, our
provision of it being almost spent; and there were no springs in the deserts
that we were to pass over, till we came within a long days journey of the end
of our voyage. However, he scarce doubted but we should see the certain sign he
wanted this evening; on which account, there did not appear such a solicitude
in his countenance as before: for though he was our governor, or captain, and
had the respectful deference paid to him; yet he governed us in all respects,
as if we were his children, with all the tenderness of a father, as his name
imported; though none of the company were his real children. If there were any
signs of partiality, it was in my favor, always expressing the most endearing
tenderness for me, which the other young men, instead of taking any dislike at,
were really pleased with. No brothers in the world could be more loving to one
another than we were. The elderly men took delight in seeing our youthful
gambols with one another: it is true their nature is, of the two, a little more
inclined to gravity than that of the Italians, who are no light nation; yet
their gravity is accompanied with all the serenity and cheerfulness imaginable,
and I then thought at our first acquaintance, than I had never seen such an air
of a freeborn people in my life; as if they knew no other subjection but what
was merely filial. When we came to the high ground, we could see the hurricanes
play still; but, what was more wonderful, very few effects of that aerial
tumult came our way, but drove on almost parallel to the equator: the air
looked like a brown dirty fog, toward the east and south-east; all the
whirlwinds tending toward those parts; it began after some time to look a
little more lightsome toward the west; but so, as if it were occasioned by a
more strong and settled wind. At length we perceived, at the farthest horrizon,
the edge of a prodigious black cloud, extending itself to the south-west and
western points, rising with a discernable motion, though not very fast. We saw
plain enough, by the blackness and thickness of it, that it prognosticated a
great deal of rain. -- Here they all fell prostrate on the earth: then raising
up their hands and eyes toward the sun, they seemed to pay their adorations to
that great luminary. The Pophar, with an audible voice, pronounced some unknown
words, as if he were returning thanks to that planet for what he saw. At this I
stepped back, and kept myself at a distance; not so much for fear of my life,
as before, as not to join with them in their idolatrous worship. For I could
not be ignorant now, that they had a wrong notion of God, and if they
acknowledged any, it was the sun: which in effect is the least irrational
idolatry people can be guilty of All idolatry being a worship of creatures
instead of the one supreme God, must be irrational. But it is certain, and well
attested by ancient history, that the eastern nations worshipped the sun:
probably it was the first idolatrous worship that was in the world. The great
benefits all nature receives from his influence; the glorious brightness of his
rays; the variety, yet constant tenor of his motions, might induce ignorant
people to believe him to be of a superior nature to other creatures, though it
is evidently certain, he is limited in his perfections, and consequently no
God. It is true, the ancient Egyptians, from whom these people sprung* as will
be seen afterward, worshipped the sun in the most early times. There was a
priest of the sun in the patriarch Joseph's time. And the Egyptians were some
of the first astronomers in the world, contending for antiquity with the
Chaldeans. Though both the Chaldeans and Egyptians had their knowledge from the
descendents of Sem, or his father Noah, who, by the admirable structure of the
ark, appears to have been master of very great sciences. I say, the Egyptians
being so much addicted to astronomy, it is probable that glorious luminary was
the chief object of their worship. They did not worship idols and beasts till
long afterward. See the learned Bo^hart's Phaleg. in Misraim.
. When they had done their oraisons, the Pophar turned to me, and said, I see
you will not join with us in any of our religious ceremonies; but I must tell you,
continued he, that cloud is the saving of all our lives: and as that great sun,
pointing to the luminary, is the instrument that draws it up, as indeed he is
the preserver of all our beings, we think ourselves obliged to return our
thanks to him. Here he stopped, as if he had a mind to hear what I could say
for myself. I was not willing to enter into disputes, well knowing that
religious quarrels are the most provoking of any: yet I thought myself obliged
to make profession of my belief in the supreme God, now I was called upon to
the professed worship of a false deity. I answered with the most modest respect
I was capable of, that that glorious planet was one of the physical causes of
the preservation of our beings, and of the production of all things; but that
he was produced himself by the most high God, the first cause and author of all
things in heaven and earth; the sun only moving by his order, as an inanimate
being, incapable of hearing our prayers, and only operating by his direction.
However, I offered to join with him, in returning my best thanks to the most
high God, for creating the sun, capable by his heat to raise that cloud for the
saving our lives. Thus I adapted my answer as nigh to his discourse as I could,
yet not so as to deny my faith. For I could not entirely tell what to make of
them as yet; since I observed, they were more mysterious in their religious
ceremonies, than in any thing else This agrees with all, ancient accounts of
the first people of Egypt; witness their emblems, hieroglyphics, etc. Most of
the ancient fables* under which so many mysteries were couched, did not first
spring from the Greeks, though improved by them; but from the Egyptians and
Chaldeans, who at first held a communication of sciences with one another, but
grew to emulosity afterward. The wonderful things the Egyptian Magi did, in
imitation of the miracles wrought by Moses, show they were great artists.
; or rather, this was the only thing they were reserved in. He pondered a good
while on what I said, but at length he added, You are not much out of the way:
you and I will talk this matter over another time; so turned off the discourse;
I supposed it to be because of the young men standing by us, whom he had not a
mind should receive any other notions of religion, but what they had been
taught. It was sunset by the time we came down to the grove. We had some small
flights of sand, caused by an odd commotion in the air, attended with little
whirlwinds, which put us in some small apprehensions of a sand-shower; but he
bid us take courage, since he could not find in all his accounts, that the
hurricanes or rains ever came, in any great quantity, as far as we were, the
nature of them being to drive more parellel to the equator: but he was sure we
should have some: and ordered us to pitch our tents as firm as we could, and
draw out all our water-vessels, to catch the rain against all accidents. When
this was done, and we had eat our suppers, we recreated ourselves in the grove,
wandering about here and there, and discoursing of the nature of these
phenomenon. We did not care to go to rest so soon, having reposed ourselves so
well that day, and having all the following night and the next day to stay in
that place. The grove grew much pleasanter as we advanced into it; there were a
great many dates and other fruits, the natural produce of Africa; but not quite
so rich as in the first grove. I made bold to ask the Pophar, how far that
grove extended, or whether there were any inhabitants. He told me, he could not
tell any thing of either. That it was possible the grove might enlarge itself
different ways, among the winding hills: since his accounts told him, there had
been a rivulet of water, though now swallowed up; but he believed there were no
inhabitants, since there was no mention made of them in his papers. Nor did he
believe any other people in the world, beside themselves, knew the way, or
would venture so far into those horrid inhospitable deserts. Having a mind to
learn whether he had any certain knowledge of the longitude, which creates such
difficulties to the Europeans, I asked how he was sure that was the place; or
by what rule he could know how far he was come, or where he was to turn to
right or left. He stopped a little at my questions; then, without any apparent
hesitation, Why, said he, we know by the needle, how far we vary from the north
or south point, at least till we come to the tropic Experimental phylosopy
tells us, that the needle is of litt^e (...) navigation, when under the line;
but lie^ fluctuating without turning to any point of itself; because, as some
suppose, the current of the magnetic effluvia* fly^ng from pole to pole, has
there its longest axis, as the diameter of the (...) is l^nger th^n the axis of
the world. But whether this has the same effect on the ^eed^e by land* which is
the case, as it has by (...)* we must have more certain experiments to know,
though it is probable it may.
; if not, we can take the meridian and height of the sun, and knowing the time
of the year, we can tell how near we approach to, or are off the equator. Yes,
said I: but as there are different meridians every step you take, how can you
tell how far you go east or west, when you run either way in parallel lines
Wherever we stand, we are on the summ^t of the globe with respect to us.
Whoever therefore thinks to go due west, parellel to the equator or east, will
not do so, but will cut the line at longrun, because he makes a greater circle.
These men therefore* when they thought they went due west, were approaching to
the line, more that* they were aware of* and supposing the structure of the
earth to be (...) went up hill all the way, bating some small inequalities.
to the tropics, or the equator? Here he stopped again, and either could not
make any certain discovery, or had not a mind to let me into the secret. The
first was most likely; however, he answered readily enough, and said, You
please me with your curious questions, since I find you are sensible of the
difficulty. Why, continued he, all the method we have, is, to observe exactly
how far our dromedaries go in an hour, or any other space of time: you see we
go much about the same pace: we have no stops in our way, but what we know of,
to refresh ourselves or so, for which we generally allow so much time This must
be understood according to the foregoing remark*
. When we set out from Egypt, we went due west; our beasts gain so many miles
an hour; we know by that, how far we are more west than we were At first sight*
it ^eems to be easier to find out the longitude by land than by sea, because we
may be more certain how f^r we advan^e. At sea there are currents, and tides,
and ^^ttings in of the sea which make the ship to go aslant mo^e or less
insensibly. As ye^ there has been no certain rule found to tell us, ^ow far we
advance du^ east or due west. The elevation of the pole, or the height of the
sun, shows us, how far we decl^ne to the north or south; but we have no certain
rule for the east or west.
. If we decline to the north or the south, we know likewise, how many miles we
have advanced in so many hours, and compute how much the declination takes off
from our going due west. And though we cannot tell to a demonstrative
exactness, we can tell pretty nigh. This was all I could get out of him at that
time, which did not satisfy the difficulty. I afterward asked him, how they
came to find out this way, or to venture to seek out a habitation unknown to
all the world beside. He answered. "For liberty, and the preservation of our
laws." I was afraid of asking any further, seeing he gave such general answers.
By this time it was prodigious dark, though full moon The full moon about the
summer-solst^ce generally brings rain* and the overflowing of the Nile is now
known to be caused by the vast rains (...) the regions near the equator*
. We had some sudden gusts of wind that startled us a little; and it lightened
at such a rate, as I never saw in my life. And although it was toward the
horizon, and drove sidewise of us, yet it was really terrible to see; the
flashes were so thick, that the sky was almost in a light fire. We made up to
our tents as fast as we could; and though we had only the skirts of the clouds
over us, it rained so very hard, that we had our vessels soon supplied with
water, and got safe into our shelter. The thunder was at a vast distance, but
just audible, and, for our comfort, drove still to the eastward. I do not know
in what dispositions the elderly men might be, being accustomed to the nature
of it; but I am sure I was in some apprehension, fully persuaded, if it had
come directly over us, nothing could withstand its impetuosity. I had very
little inclination to rest, whatever my companions had; but pondering with
myself, both the nature of the thing, and the prodigious skill these men must
have in the laws of the universe, I staid* with impatience waiting the event.

I was musing with myself on what I had heard and seen, not being able yet to
guess with any satisfaction what these people were, when an unexpected accident
was the cause of a discovery, which made me see they were not greater strangers
to me, than I was to myself. The weather was stifling hot, so that we had
thrown off our garments to our shirts, and bared our breasts for coolness sake;
when there came a prodigious flash, or rather blaze of lightning, which struck
full against the breast of one of the young men opposite to me, and discovered
a bright gold medal hanging down from his neck, with the figure of the sun
engraved on it, surrounded with unknown characters; the very same in all
appearance I had seen my deceased mother always wear about her neck, and since
her death I carried with me for her sake. I asked the meaning of that medal,
since I had one about me, as it appeared, of the very same make. If the Pophar
had been struck with lightning, he could not have been in a greater surprise,
than he was at these words: You one of these medals! said he; how, in the name
of wonder, did you come by it? I told him my mother wore it about her neck,
from a little child; and with that pulled it out of my pocket. He snatched it
out of my hands with a prodigious eagerness, and held it against the lightning
perpetually ^lashing in upon us. As soon as he saw it was the same with the
other, he cried out, Great sun, what can this mean? Then asked me again, where
I had it? how my mother came by it? who my mother was? what age she was of when
she died? As soon as the vio^ence of his ecstasy would give me leave, I told
him my mother had it ever since she was a little child: that she was the
adopted daughter of a noble merchant in Corsica, who had given her all his
affects when my father married her: tha^ she was married at thirteen; and I
being nineteen, and the second son, I guessed she was toward forty when she
died. It must be Isiphena, cried he, with the utmost ecstasy, it must be she.
Then he caught me in his arms, and said, You are now really one of us, being
the son of my father's daughter, my dear sister Isiphena. The remembrance of
whom made the tears run down the old man's cheeks very plentifully. She was
lost at Grand Cairo about the time you mention, together with a twin-sister who
I fear is never to be heard of. Then I reflected I had heard mother say, she
had been informed, the gentleman who adopted her for his daughter, had bought
her when she was a little girl of a Turkish woman of that place; that being
charmed with the early signs of beauty in her, and having no children, he
adopted her for his own. Yes, said the Pophar, it must be she; but what is
become of the other sister? For, said he, my dear sister brought two at one
unfortunate birth, which cost her her life. I told him I never heard any thing
of the other. Then he acquainted me that his sister's husband was the person
who conducted the rest to visit the tombs of their ancestors, as he did now:
that the last voyage, he took his wife with him, who out of her great fondness
had teased him and importuned him so much to go along with him, that, though it
was contrary to their laws, he contrived to carry her disguised in man's
cloths, like one of the young men he chose to accompany him in the expedition:
that staying at Grand Cairo till the next season for his return, she proved
with child of twins; and, to his unspeakable grief, died in childbed. That when
they carried her up to Thebes to be interred with her ancestors, of which I
should have a more exact information by and by, they were obliged to leave the
children with a nurse of the country, with some Egyptian servants to take care
of the house and effects; but before they came back, the nurse with her
accomplices ran away with the children, and, as was supposed, murdered them,
rifled the house of all the jewels and other valuable things, and were never
heard of afterward. But it seems they thought it more for their advantage to
sell the children, as we find they did, by your mother; but what part of the
world the other sister is in, or whether she be at all, is known only to the
great author of our being. However, continued he, we rejoice in finding these
hopeful remains of your dear mother, whose resemblance you carry along with
you. It was that gave me such a kindness for your person the first time I saw
you, methought, perceiving something I had never observed in any other race of
people, But, said he, I deprive my companions and children here of the
happiness of embracing their own flesh and blood, since we all sprung from one
common father, the author of our nation, with whom you are going to be
incorporated once more. Here we embraced one another with a joy that is
inexpressible. Now all my former fears were entirely vanished: though I had
lost the country where I was born, I had found another, of which I could nowise
be ashamed, where the people were the most humane and civilized I ever saw, and
the soil the finest, as I had reason to hope, in the world. The only check to
my happiness was, that they were infidels. However, I was resolved not to let
any consideration blot out of my mind that I was a Christian. On which account,
when the Pophar would have tied the medal about my neck, as a badge of my race,
I had some difficulty in that point, for fear it should be an emblem of
idolatry, seeing them to be extremely superstitious. So I asked him, what was
the meaning of the figure of the sun, with those unknown characters round about
it? He told me the characters were to be pronounced Omabim, i. e. The sun is
the author of our being, or more literally, The sun is our father. Om or On
signifies the sun [This will be explained in another place]. Ab signifie^
^^^ther, Im or Mim, Us. This made me remember, they had told me in Egypt that
they were children of the sun; and gave me some uneasiness at their idolatrous
notions. I therefore told him, I would keep it as a cognizance of my country;
but could not acknowledge any but God to be the supreme author of my being. As
to the supreme author, said he, your opinion is little different from ours
These people are something like the Chinese* who worship the m^^erial heaven or
sky, which some missionaries could think compatible with Christianity.
. But let us leave these religious matters till another time: we'll close this
happy day with thanksgiving to the supreme being for this discovery: to^morrow
morning, since you are now really one of us, I will acquaint you with your
origin, and how we came to hide ourselves in these inhospitable deserts. --

[ The reader is desired not to censure or dis^elieve the following account of
the origin and transmigration of these people, till he has perused the learned
remarks of Signor Rhedi.]

The next morning the Pophar calling me to him, Son, said he, to fulfill my
promise which I made you last night, and that you may not be like the rest of
the ignorant world, (...) know not who their forefathers and ancestors were It
would certainly be a great satisfaction to most nations to know from what race
of people, country, or family, they sprung originally. This ignorance is owing
chiefly to the Barbari Tramontani Signor Rh^di being an Italian, one cannot
wonder he speaks so contemptibly of the nothern people; the Italians call them
all Bar^ari.
, and other nothern nations, who have from time to time overrun the face of
Europe, leaving a mixture of their spawn in all parts of it; so that no one
knows, whether he came originally from Scythia or Asia, from a civilized
nation, or from the greatest brutes; and though wars and invasions have
destroyed, or interchanged the inhabitants of most countries: Yet this man's
observation is a just censure of the neglect of most people, with respect to
their genealogy and knowledge of their ancestors, where they have been settled
in a country for several ages. But there are matters of greater moment in this
man's relation, true or false, which lead us into some curious remains of
ancient history.
; whether they sprung from brutes or barbarians, is all alike to them, provided
they can but grovel on the earth, as they do: you must know therefore, as I
suppose you remember what I told you at our first station, that we came
originally from Egypt. When you asked me, how we came to venture through these
inhospitable deserts, I told you, it was for liberty, and the preservation of
our laws; but as you are now found to be one of us, I design to give you a more
particular account of your origin. Our ancestors did originally come from
Egypt, once the happiest place in the world; though the name of Egypt, and
Egyptians, has been given to that country, long since we came out of it: the
original name of it was Mezzoraim The original name of Egypt was Misraim; from
Misraim, or Met^oraim, as the learned Bochart explains it, lib* 4. of Geograph.
Sacra in Misraim. M. Du Pin's history of the Old Test. c. 6. and others. All
ancient authors agree* that it was once the richest and happiest country in the
world; flourishing with plenty, and even learning, before the patriarch
Abraham's time. There is a very remarkable fragment of ^upolemus an ancient
Heathen writer, taken from the Babylonian monuments, preserved by Eusebius.
lib. 9, The whole fragment* in our mother tongue, signifies, that, according to
the Babyloni^ns, the first was Belus, the same with R^onos or Saturn: from him
came Him or Cham. the father ^f Canon, brother to Mesraim, father of the
Egyptians.
, from the first man that peopled it, the father of our nation; and we call
ourselves Mezzoranians from him. We have a tradition delivered down to us from
our first ancestors, that when the earth first rose out of the water This is an
ob^cure notion of Noah's flood, known to all nations, at least the c^stern, as
appears by the oldest remains; of which see Bochart on that article, lib. 1.
"The earth rose out of the water*" or the waters sunk from the earth. These
people might mistake something of that undoubted and ancient tradition. But
Misraim could not be ignorant of the ^^ood, his father Him having been in the
ark* whether ignorance or other motives made his posterity vary in the account;
but it is evid^nt the ancients had a notion of the general deluge, as may
easi^y be proved by the remains of Heathen authors bearing testimony to the
scripture-account of it.
, six persons, three men and three women, rose along with it: either sent by
the supreme deity to inhabit it, or produced by the sun The ancient Egyptians
thought men, as well as insects, were produced out of the some of the Nile, by
the heat of the sun, and called themselves Aborigines, as several other nations
did. Though this wise man is inclined to think they were created by God; as it
is evident and certain they were; for since we see one single in^ect cannot be
produced without a cause, it is nonsen^e, as ^ell as impossible, to imagine an
infinite series of men and animals could be produced without ^ separate cause:
on which a^count^ Atheism is one of the most (...) ^otions in the world.
. That Mezzoraim our first founder was one of those six: who increasing in
number, made choice of the country now called Egypt Herodotus tell us* the
Egyptians pretended to be the first inhabitants of the earth; though the
Ethiopians contended with them for antiquity. I must quote the words in Latin,
out of Laurenzo V^^^a's translation, because I have him not in Greek* Omnium
hominum priores s^ ex^itisse arbitrabant^r. They esteemed themselves* says he,
to have been the first of all men. Herodot. l^b. 2. E^terpe*
, for the place of his habitation, where he settled with sixty of his children
and grandchildren, all of whom he brought along with him, governing them as a
real father and instructing them to live with one another, as brothers of one
and the same family It is certain from Bochart, and other learned authors* that
the Egyptian government, as well as that of most nations, was at first
patriarchal: til^ N^mrod founded the first kingdom or empire in the world;
whose example others followed* according to their power. However, the
patriarc^^l government was soon broke in upon in Egypt, since they had kings in
Abraham and Isaac's time, as we learn from the O^d Testament. See Bochart's
Geographia Sacra.
. He was a peaceable man, abhorring the shedding of blood The celebrated Bishop
of Me^^x* in part 3. of his Univ. Hist. gives ^s a wonderful description of the
justice and piety of the first Egyptians* who had such a horror of shedding
men's blood, that they punished their criminals after they were dead; which was
as much in (...)* considering their ^uperst^t^o^s reverence for their deceased
friends and parents, as if they had been punished when alive. The reason why
the ancient moral Heathens abhorred the shedding of blood, might be, that
Noah's sons having lived before the deluge, knew that the wickedness of the
wo^ld was the cause of that dreadf^l judgment; and shedding of b^ood being the
first crime^ punished by God* they might take warning by such terrible examples
though the impiety of some nations soon obscured this (...) of nature*
particularly the descendants of (...) all but this Misraim; who with his
family, by all accounts, first peopled Egypt; and they were noted for j^stice
and knowledge. It will be made (...) sub^equent remarks, that the^e H^ck^oes
were the descen^^nts of wicked (...), or C^^h* who destroyed the peaceabl^
state of the first Egyptians, and introduced idolatry among them* which made
(...) of them fly into other parts of the world to (...) themselves.
, which he said would be punished by the supreme ruler of the world; extremely
given to the search of sciences, and contemplation of the heavens The same
learned Bishop of Meaux, and other historians, assure us, as it is a thing well
known to all the learned* that arts and sciences were brought to ^ery great
perfection in the earliest times in Egypt. Moses was instructed in the sciences
of the Egyptians. Triptolemus, the founder of agriculture, came out of Egypt.
Bacchus, the inventor of wine according to the ancients* came out of Egypt, or
Libya, which borders upon it: though it was first learned from Noah.
Pythagoras* and other learned men, went into Egypt to be instructed by the
priests* etc. Herodotus says the same of himself.
. It was he who was the first inventor of all our arts, and whatever is useful
for the government of life, sprung from him. Though his grandson Thaoth This
Thaoth, the famous ph^losopher of the Egyptians, was before Mercury or
Tr^smegistus; though some take him to be the same. All allow him to be
extremely ancient* but cannot fix the time when he lived. H^storians murder his
name at a strange rate. Bochart calls him Ta^atus, lib. 2. cap. 12. Clemens
Alex. lib. 6. Strom. says* he w^ote forty-two books of astrology, geography,
physic, policy, theology, religion, and government. Jo^eph Ben-Gorion, de
divisione Gentium, calls him Tutis; some call him The^t, others, Tent, Tant,
Thoth, etc. But, according to this man, his name was Tha-oth. It is certain,
however, that he was the great master of the Egyptians; but derived his
learning from Noah, who might have the knowledge of arts and sciences from the
antediluvian world* or from the columns of Seth* which* Josephus says, contain
the principles of astrology, and were erected before the ^^ood by the n^phews
of Seth: one of which columns* as he says, remained in Syria in his time.
Joseph. Ant. lib. 2.
rather excelled him, particularly in the more sublime sciences. Thus our
ancestors lived four hundred years, increasing and spreading over all the land
of Egypt, and abounding with the blessings of peace and knowledge; without
guile or deceit, neither doing or fearing harm from any; till the wicked
descendents of the other men, called Hicksoes The same Josephu^, lib. 2. contra
Appion* says, that Hycksoes, an old Egyptian word, signifies king shepherds, or
kings of beasts, given them by the native Egyptians, as a name of disgrace and
contempt. It (...) of all controversy that there was a great revolution in
Egypt, about four hundred years after the flood, or a little before Abraham's
time. Monsieur Du Piu makes the time from the flood to Abraham's birth three
hundred and fifty years; and about four hundred to his being called by God. It
is certain also, there were kings in Egypt in Abraham's time. It is probable
these kings were the Hycksoes, or king shepherds, who altered the government of
the ancient Egyptians, and continued about five kings reigns. For when the
patriarch Joseph called his father and brethren into Egypt, he bid them ask the
land of ^osh^n to inhabit, because, sa^d he all shepherds are an abomination to
the Egyptians. By which it appears the shepherds were lately dr^ven out. In all
l^kelihood these were the kings who introduced idolatry and the adoration of
brute ^easts among the Egyptians* for which reason they cal^ed them in derision
k^ng-shepherds, or king-beasts. -- The great Bo^hart in his Phaleg* looks upon
this revolution in Egypt to have been before Abraham's time, and so far from
being a fiction* that he says in express words, Castuens et Caphthoraeos (whom
he proves to be the people of Col^hos, for all it is so far from Egypt) ^x
Aegypto migras^e certum est ante Abrahami tempora. "It is certain*" says he.
"that the Ca^luci and the Caphthoraei went out of Egypt before Abraham's time."
Bochart Phaleg. lib. 4. c. 31 Herodotus in Euterpe says, that the people of
Col^hos were originally Egyptians; though some say they went back some ages
after, and settled in Palestine, and were called after th^^ Philistines.
, envying their happiness and the richness of their country, broke in upon them
like a torrent, destroying all before them, and taking possession of that happy
place our ancestors had rendered so flourishing. The poor innocent Mezzoranians
abhorring, as I said, the shedding of blood, and ignorant of all violence, were
slaughtered like sheep all over the country; and their wives and daughters
violated before their eyes. Those whom their merciless enemy spared, were made
slaves to work and till the earth for their new lords.

Secretary. Here the inquisitors interupted him, and asked him, whether he
thought it unlawful in all casas to resist force by force, or whether the law
of nature did not allow the Mezzoranians to resist those cruel invaders even to
the shedding of blood; as also to punish public malefactors with death for the
preservation of the whole. Their intent was, as they are cautious of any new
opinions, to know whether he might not be a dogmatizer, and advance some
erroneous notions, either by holding that to be lawful, which was not so; or
denying things to be lawful, which really may be allowable by the light of
nature.


Gaudentio. Doubtless they might lawfully have resisted even to the shedding of
blood in that case, as public criminals may be put to death. I only acquaint
your Reverences with the notions peculiar to these people; as for the
punishment of their criminals, your Reverences will see, when I come to their
laws and customs, that they have other ways and means of punishing crimes as
effectual as putting to death; though living entirely within themselves, free
from all mixture and commerce with other people, they have preserved their
primitive innocence in that respect to a very great degree. Inquis^^or. Go on.


The Pophar continuing his relation, added: But what was most intolerable was,
that these impious Hicksoes forced them to adore men and beasts, and even
insects, for gods; nay, and some to see their children offered in sacrifice to
those inhuman deities These ^^cksoes being in all appearance the descendents of
wicked Canaan or (...)* were so abominably impious, as to sacrifice human
victims and children to their false gods* and even were the first authors of
all impiety and idolatry.
. This dreadful inundation fell at first only on the lower parts of Egypt,
which was then the most flourishing. As many of the distressed inhabitants as
could escape their cruel hands, fled to the upper parts of the country, in
hopes to find there some little respite from their misfortunes. But alas! what
could they do? they knew no use of arms: neither would their laws suffer them
to destroy their own species; so that they expected every hour to be devoured
by their cruel enemies. The heads of the families in such distress were divided
in their counsels, or rather they had no counsel to follow: some of them fled
into the neighboring deserts, which you have seen are very dismal, on both
sides the upper part of that kingdom; they were dispersed like a flock of sheep
scattered by the ravenous wolves. The consternation was so great, they were
resolved to fly to the farthest parts of the earth, rather than fall into the
hands of those unhuman monsters. The greatest part of them agreed to build
ships, and try their fortune by sea. Our great father Mezzoraim had taught them
the art of making boats It is highly probable the Egyptians had the knowledge
of shipping long before the Greeks, whose finest ship was Argo* built by Jason
to fetch the golden fleece from Colchos. The first notion of shipping was
undoubtedly taken from the ark; the Egyptians were necessitated to make ^se of
boats, by reason of the annual overflowing of the river Nile, and to pass the
different branches into which that famous river divides itself in the Lower
Egypt. The S^doni^ns, whom Bo^hart proves to be the descendents of Canaan, had
the use of shipping* as he also prove^* before the children of Israe^ departed
out of Egypt.
, to cross the branches of the great river [Nile]; which some, said he, had
learned by being preserved in such a thing from a terrible flood that
overflowed all the land In all appearance this must have been Noah's flood*
which it is much S^gnor Rhedi passes over in his remarks.
. Which instrument of their preservation they so improved afterward, that they
could cross the lesser sea Egypt i^ bounded on the one side by the end of the
Mediterranean; on the other side by the Red sea, dividing i^ from Arabia: this
he casts the lesser sea, as being much narrower than the Mediterranean.
without any difficulty. This being resolved on, they could not agree where to
go: some being resolved to go by one sea, some by the other. However they set
all hands to work; so that in a year's time they had built a vast number of
vessels; trying them backwards and forwards along the coasts, mending what was
deficient, and improving what they imagined might be for their greater
security. They thought now, or at least their eagerness to avoid their enemies
made them think, they could go with safety all over the main sea. As our
ancestors had chiefly given themselves to the study of arts and sciences, and
the knowledge of nature, they were the most capable of such enterprises of any
people in the world. But the apprehension of all that was miserable being just
fresh before their eyes, quickened their industry to such a degree, as none but
men in the like circumstances can have a just idea of. Most of these men were
those who had fled in clouds from lower Egypt. The natural inhabitants of the
upper parts, though they were in very great consternation, and built ships as
fast as they could, yet their fears were not so immediate, especially seeing
the Hicksoes remained yet quiet in their new possessions. But news being
brought them, that the Hicksoes began to stir again, more swarms of their cruel
brood still flocking into that rich country, they resolved now to delay the
time no longer, but to commit themselves, wives, and children, with all that
was most dear and precious, to the mercy of that inconstant element, rather
than trust to the barbarity of their own species. They who came out of the
Lower Egypt, were resolved to cross the great sea This great sea, as
distinguished from the le^s, must be the Mediterranean. Those who fled by that
sea, must be those who went to Colchos: they could not go by land ove^ the
isthmus, because the Hick^oes poured in upon them that way: (...) must not
suppose they went all the way by sea to Co^chos, quite round by the stre^g^^s
of the Hellespont. They must cross the end of the Mediterranean, and go by land
the shortest way they could till they came to the borders of the Euxine sea. It
is almost in^redible men should go ^o far to ^e^k an habitat^on. But Bochart
says, it is cert^in the people of Colchos came out of Egypt; they must
therefore have been driven out by some terrible enem^es. You will say* Why may
not this first revolution in Egypt, which Bochart speaks of, have been made by
the great Semiramis, wife to Ninus, the son of N^mrod? It is answered in the
first place, because Josephus calls the first invaders of Egypt,
king-shepherds* which cannot agree with the great heroine Semiramis, 2dly.
Because it is not credible, notwithstanding the contrary opinion of most
historians, that Ninus, the husband of Semiramis, could be ^o early as they
make him to be, i. e. the son of Nimrod, but some other Ninus long after him:
for though Semiramis conquered Egypt, and afterward lost her army against the
Ethiopians, this could not be so soon after the flood; because historians
describe that army to consist of three hundred thousand men instructed in
discipline after a military manner* armed with warlike chariots, etc. as were
the Ethiopians against her* and even superior to her. I say, it is not credible
such great armies could be rai^ed so soon after the flood, if she was
daughter-in-law to Nimrod the great hunter, who was the son of Cu^^, and
great-grandson (...) No^^h.
, and with immense labor were forced to carry their materials partly by land,
till they came to the outermost branch of the Nile, since their enemies coming
over the isthmus, though they hindered them from going out of their country by
land, unless by the deserts, yet had not taken possession of that part of the
country. It is needless to recount their cries and lamentations at their
leaving their dear country. I shall only tell you, that they ventured into the
great sea, which they crossed, and never stopped till they came to another sea
i. e. the Euxine sea.
, on the sides of which they fixed their habitation, that they might go off
again in case they were pursued. This we learned from the account of our
ancestors who met with some of them that came to visit the tombs of their
deceased parents, as we do; but it is an immense time since, and we never heard
any more of them. -- The other part, who were much the greater number, went
down the lesser sea i. e. the Red sea. There were several other revolutions in
Egypt as by the Ethiopians, after Semiramis was conquered; who were expelled
again, either by the great Se^ost^is, of whom Herodotus relates such famous
explo^ts; or a little before by his predecessor. The Canaanites also, who were
driven out of Palestine by Joshua, conquered part of it, as we shall see
afterward. Long after that, it was subdued by Nabuchodonosor, who destroyed
the renowned city of Thebes, with her hundred gates. Bochart in Nineve. Then
the Persians under Cambyses the son of Cyrus the Great. In fine, the Romans
made a province of it in Augustus's time. Strabo says, that famous city of
Thebes, at present is but a poor village.

Atque vetus Thebe centum jacet ob^uta portis.

Juven. ^at. 1.


, having built their ships on the sea; they never stopped or touched on either
side, till they came to a narrow part of it This must be the streights of
Babelmandel* which let them into the vast eastern ocean.
, which led them into the vast ocean; there they turned of to the left into the
eastern sea. But whether they were swallowed up in the merciless abyss, or
carried into some unknown regions, we cannot tell, for they were never heard of
more. Only of late years, we have heard talk at Grand Cairo, of a very numerous
and civilized nation in the eastern parts of the world, whose laws and customs
have some resemblance to ours; but who, and what they are, we cannot tell,
since we have never met with any of them.

The father of our nation, since we separated ourselves from the rest of the
world* who was priest of the sun at No-om No-om or No-on, signifies, in the old
Mezzoranian, o^ old Egyptian language, the house of the sun. Their words are
made up of monosyllables put together like the Chinese, which is another reason
why the Chine^e ought to be looked upon as a colony of the Egyptians. Vide the
remarks of the foregoing part of this relation. The patriarch Joseph married
the daughter of the priest of On* which, several learned men say, is the ^ame
with Hel^o^o^is, or city of the sun. From No com^s the Egyptian nomes, or
divisions of the country, which the great Bochart in his Phaleg. ^ays is an
Egyptian, not a Greek word, though dynasty is Greek. Bochart lib. 4. c. 24.
Hence very likely came the Nomades and Numidae, from their wandering and
frequently changing their habitation, or names; the first and most ancient of
all nations lived thus.
, called afterward by those miscreants No-Ammon That is, the house or temple
of Him, or Hammon* or Charnoon* or Ch^m, as Bochart varies it. Th^s Ham was the
Tyrian Jupiter, and in this place was afterward situated the great city of
Thebes, as ha^ been observed before, called by the Greeks Diospolis, or the
city of Jupiter. Cadmus, who was of Thebes in Palestine, being driven out from
thence by Joshua, built it; but was driven out from it, and forced to retire to
Tire, from whence he conducted a colony of Tyrians, or banished Canaanites*
into B^^^tia, where he built Thebes al^o, or rather the c^tadel of Thebes,
called Cadmeia. Vide Bochart, in Cadmus and Hermion^. Which last the same
author says, came originally from mount Hermon in Palestine; and as that word
in the Canaan^a^ languages signifies a serpent, from hence arose the fable o^
the serpent's teeth turning into men. The temple of Jupiter Ammon, or Hammon,
in Africa, was built by the Chinani, who spread themselves from Egypt into
Libya.
, because of the temple of Hammon), was not asleep in this general
consternation; but did not as yet think they would come up so high into the
land. However, he thought proper to look out for a place to secure himself and
family in case of need. He was the descendent, in a direct line from the great
Tha-oth; and was perfectly versed in all the learned sciences of his ancestors.
He guessed there must certainly be some habitable country, beyond those
dreadful sands that surrounded him, if he could but find a way to it, where he
might secure himself and family; at least, till those troubles were over: for
he did not at that time think of leaving his native country for good and all.
But, like a true father of his people, which the name of Pophar implies, he was
resolved to venture his own life, rather than expose his whole family to be
lost in those dismal deserts. He had five sons, and five daughters married to
as many sons and daughters of his deceased brother. His two eldest sons had
even grandchildren, but his two youngest sons as then had no children. He left
the government and care of all to his eldest son, in case he himself should
miscarry; and took his two youngest sons, who might best be spared along with
him. Having provided themselves with water for ten days, with bread and dried
fruits, just enough to subsist on, he was resolved to try five days journey
endwise through these sands; and if he saw no hopes of making a discovery that
time, to return again before his provisions were spent, and then try the same
method toward another quarter. In short, he set out with all secrecy, and
pointing his course directly westward, the better to guide himself, he came to
the first grove that we arrived at, in a little more time than we took up in
coming thither. Having now time enough before him, and seeing there was water
and fruits in abundance, he examined the extent of that delicious vale: he
found it was large enough to subsist a great many thousands, in case they
should increase, and be forced to stay there some generations, as in effect
they did. After this they laid in provisions as before, with dates and fruits
of the natural produce of the earth, finer than ever were seen in Egypt, to
encourage them in their transmigration, and so set out again for his native
country. The time prefixed for his return was elapsed by his stay in viewing
the country; so that his people had entirely given him up for lost. But the joy
for his unexpected return, with the promising hopes of such a safe and happy
retreat, made them unanimously resolve to follow him. Wherefore, on the first
news of the Hicksoes being in motion again, they packed up all their effects
and provisions as privately as they could; but particularly all the monuments
of arts and sciences left by their ancestors, with notes and observations of
every part of their dear country, which they were going to leave, but hoped to
see again when the storm was over. They arrived without any considerable
disaster, and resolved only to live in tents till they could return to their
native homes. As they increased in number, they descended further into the
vale, which there began to spread itself different ways, and supplied them with
all the necessaries of life; so that they lived in the happiest banishment they
could wish; never stirring out of the vale for several years, for fear of being
discovered. The Pophar finding himself grow old, (having attained almost two
hundred years of age The regular lives of the first Egyptians, and of these
people descended from them, together with the climate, their diet of fruits and
liquors, their exemption from violent passions* without being corrupted by the
spurious spawn of other nations* and the like, might contribute very much to
the length of their lives, and strength proportionably. The Macrobii, or
long-livers, a people of Ethiopia, and a colony of the ancient Egyptians, lived
to a vast age, and were called Macrobii from their long lives. See Herodotus of
the Ethiopians; and what he says of their strength in the bow, which they sent
to Cambyse^, when he ^ad denounced war against them; saying, that when he could
bend that bow, he might make war against them; which bow only Sm^rdis,
Cambyses's brother, could bend, and for that reason was afterward p^t (...)
death by his brother out of envy.
), though he was hale and strong for his years, resolved to visit his
native^country once more before he died, and get what intelligence he could
for* the common interest. Accordingly, he and two more disguised themselves,
and repassed the deserts again. They just ventured at first into the borders of
the country: but, alas! when he came there, he found it all over run by the
barbarous Hicksoes. All the poor remains of the Mezzoranians were made slaves;
and those barbarians had begun to build habitations, and establish themselves,
as if they designed never more to depart the country* They had made No-om one
of the^r chief towns It seems Thebes* though afterward such a prodigious city,
was then but the head of the name of that man's family.
, where they erected a temple to their ram-god Jupiter Hammon, whom Bochart
proves to have been Ham or Cham, the son of Noah, was represented with a ram's
head, which was held in such abomination by the first Egyptians* from whence
they called those first invaders Hicksoes.
, calling it No-Hammon No-Hammon, the house of the ram-god.
, with such inhuman laws and cruelties, as drew a flood of tears from his aged
eyes It is likely he means Busiridis aras, so infamous in an^iquity: or the
cruel Busiris, who sacrificed his guests. Though historians do not agree about
the time when Busiris lived, which shows he was very ancient; yet all agree, he
was a monster of cruelty, and became a proverb on that account. This was a very
natural reason for the Egyptians to disperse themselves into so many coloni^s
as they did, to avoid such cruelties.
. However, being a man of great prudence and foresight, he easily imagined, by
their tyrannical way of living, they could not continue long in that state
without some new revolution. After making what observations he could, and
visiting the tombs of his forefathers, he returned to the vale, and died in
that place where you saw the pyramid built to his memory. Not many generations
after, according as he had foreseen, the natives, made desperate by the
tyrannical oppressions of the Hicksoes, were forced to break in upon their
primitive laws, which forbade them to shed blood; made a general insurrection,
and, calling in their neighbors around them. fell upon the Hicksoes when they
least expected it, and drove them out of the country. They were headed by a
brave man of a mixed race, his mother being a beautiful Mezzoranian, and his
father a Sabaean These Sabaeans were the descendents of some of the sons of
Chu^^ or Chuss, a very tall race of men* great negotiators* and more polite
than the other Arabians.

The bodies of the inhabitants [the Sab^^ans] are more majestic than other men.


. After this young conqueror had driven out the Hicksoes, he established a new
form of government, making himself king over his brethren, but not after the
tyrannical manner of the Hicksoes^, and grew very powerful. Our ancestors sent
persons from time to time to inform themselves how matters went. They found the
kingdom in a flourishing condition, indeed, under the conquering So^s This must
be the great Sesostris or Se^osis* of whom the learned Bishop of Meaux, as a^^o
Herodotus, says such glorious things. Thoug^ authors do not say preci^e^y when
he lived* all acknowledge him to have flourished in the earliest times. He
extended his conquests over the greatest part of the east* and almost over the
known world, as ^ome say. Where his enemies were cowards* and made no
resistance, he set up statues of them resembling women. Herodot. lib. 2.
Eu^^rp^. Mons. de Meaux* par. 3. Hist. Univ. This great conq^eror's name i^
very much varied by authors.
, for so he was called. He and his successors made it one of the most powerful
kingdoms of the earth; but the laws were different from what they had been in
the time of our ancestors, or even from those the great Sos^ had established.
Some of his successors began to be very tyrannical; they made slaves of their
brothers, and invented a new religion; some adoring the sun, some the gods of
the Hicksoes; so that our ancestors, as they could not think of altering their
laws, though they might have returned again, chose rather to continue still
unknown in that vale, under their patriarchal government. Nevertheless, in
process of time, they increased so much, that the country was not capable of
maintaining them; so that they had been obliged to return, had not another
revolution in Egypt forced them to seek out a new habitation. This change was
made by a race of people called C^anim The^e in all appearance were the wicked
Canaaneans, who being to be destroyed, and being driven out of Canaan by
Joshua, dispersed themselves, and invaded the greatest part of the countries
round about them. Bochart in Canaan proves almost demonstrably, that they
dispersed themselves over all the islands and seaports of Europe, Asi^, and
Africa In his preface he quotes a most curious p^ss^ge out of Procop^us de
be^^o Vande^^co, of a pillar that was found in Africa, with a Phoenician or
Canaanean inscription, which signifies in Greek*

We are those who fled from the face of J^s^s, or Joshua the robber* the son of
Nave. Eusebius* in Chronico, has much the same; and S^* Austin* in his City of
God* says* that the ancient country people abo^t Hippo in Africa, who were the
remains of the ancient Carthaginian^* if you asked them who they were* would
answer, We are originally Canaan^, or Canaaneans.


, as wicked and barbarous in effect, but more politic, than the Hicksoes;
though some said they were originally the same people, who being driven out of
their own country by others more powerful than themselves, came pouring in, not
only over all the land of Mezzoraim, but all along the coasts of both seas,
destroying all before them, with greater abominations than the Hicksoes had
ever been guilty of: in short, a faithless and most perfidious race of men,
that corrupted the innocent manners The celebrated Bochart so often quoted,
proves that the Phoenicians or Carthaginians, whom he also pro^es to have been
Canaaneans* were the persons who spread idolatry, with all the tribe of the
Heathen gods, and their abominable rites, over the whole world. Bochart in
Canaan. The same author says the Phoenicians or Canaani, invaded Egypt about
that very time. This he proves directly: and that they had their castra about
Memphis: as also that Cadmus and Phoenix whom he makes contemporaries with
Joshua, having fled before him came out of Egypt afterward, and built Thebes
in Boeotia. See also Herodotus in Euterpe.
of the whole earth. Our forefathers were in the most dreadful consternation
imaginable. There was now no prospect of ever returning into their ancient
country. They were surrounded with deserts on all sides. The place they were in
began to be too narrow for so many thousands as they were increased to: nay,
they did not know but the wicked Cnanim, who were at the same time the boldest
and most enterprising nation under the sun Herodotus says, that they sailed
(even in those early days) from the Red sea, round Africa, and came back to
Egypt through the streights* and up the Mediterranean. Herodot. Melp^me^^. and
Bochart. That Hanno the elder, by order of the senate of Carthage* sailed round
the greatest part of the world* and after his return delivered to them an
account of his voyage, which is called the Periplus of Hanno. He affected to be
honored as a god for it, and lived before Solomon'^ time, Bochart in Canaan,
lib. 1. c. ^7.
, might find them out some time or other. Being in this distress, they resolved
to seek out a new habitation; and, to that end, compared all the notes and
observations on the heavens, the course of the sun, the seasons, and nature of
the climate, and whatever else might direct them what course to steer. They did
not doubt but that there might be some habitable countries in the midst of
those vast deserts, perhaps as delicious as the vale they lived in, if they
could but come at them. Several persons were sent out to make discoveries, but
without success. The sands were too vast to travel over without water, and they
could find no springs nor rivers. At length the most sagacious of them began to
reflect, that the annual overflowing of the great river Nile, whose head could
never be found out, must proceed from some prodigious rains which fell
somewhere southward of them about that time of the year; which rains, if they
could but luckily time and meet with, might not only supply them with water,
but also render the country fertile where they fell. Accordingly the chief
Pophar, assisted by some of the wisest men, generously resolved to run all
risks to save his people. They computed the precise time when the Nile
overflowed, and allowed for the time the waters must take in descending so far
as Egypt. They thought therefore, if they could but carry water enough to
supply them till they met with these rains, they would help them to go on
further. At length, five of them set out, with ten dromedaries, carrying as
much water and provisions as might serve them for fifteen days, to bring them
back again in case there was no hopes. They steered their course as we did,
though not quite so exact the first time, till they came to the place, where we
are now. Finding here, as their notes tell us Those w^se ancients kept records
of every thing that was memo^rable and useful for their people. If this had
been the practice of the European^ we should not have lost so many secrets of
nature as we have.
, a little rivulet, which is since swallowed up by the sands, they filled their
vessels, and went up to take an observation; as we did: but seeing the signs of
the great hurricanes, which was our greatest encouragement, it had like to have
driven them into despair; for the Pophar knowing the danger of being
overwhelmed in the sands, thought of nothing but flying back as fast as he
could, fearing to be swallowed up in those stifling whirlpools. This
apprehension made him lay aside all thoughts of succeeding toward that
climate; and now his chief care was how to get back again with safety for
himself and his people. But finding all continue tolerably serene where they
were, they made a halt in order to make some farther observations. In the mean
time, they reflected that those hurricanes must be forerunners of tempests and
rain. Then they recollected, that no rain, or what was very inconsiderable,
ever fell in Egypt This is well known by all the descriptions of that country*
the inundation of the Nile supplying the want of it, and making it one of the
most fertile kingdoms in the world; every one knows it was once the granary of
the Roman empire. However, some small rain fall^ sometimes: nor is there any
more higher up in the country. The overflowing of the Nile is known to be
caused by vast rains falling under the line, or about that climate; and since
those don't take Egypt and the adjoining part of Africa in their way* they must
by consequence (...) parallel with the line; which was a very natural and
philosophicaly observation of these wise men.
, or for a great way south of it, till they came within the tropics, and thence
concluded, that the rains must run parallel with the equator, both under it,
and for some breadth on both sides, till they met the rise of the river Nile,
and there caused those vast inundations so hard to be accounted for by other
people. That, in fine, those rains must last a considerable while, and
probably, though beginning with tempests, might continue in settled rain,
capable of being passed through. Then he at first resolved to venture back
again to the first vale: but being a man of great prudence, he presently
considered, that as he could not proceed on his way without rains, so he could
not come back again but by the same help, which coming only at one season, must
take up a whole year before he could return. However, he was resolved to
venture on, not doubting but if he could find a habitable country, he should
also find fruits enough to subsist on, till the next season. Therefore he
ordered two of his companions to return the same way they came, to tell his
people not to expect him till the next year, if Providence should bring him
back at all; but if he did not return by the time of the overflowing of the
Nile, or thereabouts, they might give him over for lost, and must never attempt
that way any more. They took their leaves of one another as if it were the last
adieu, and set out at the same time; two of them, for their homes in the first
vale, and the other three for those unknown regions; being destitute of all
other helps but those of a courageous mind. The three came back to this place,
where it thundered and lightened as it does now; but the Pophar observed it
still tended sidewise, and guessed, when the first violence was over, the rains
might be more settled. The next day it fell out as he foresaw; whereupon,
recommending himself to the great author of our being, he launched boldly out
into that vast ocean of sands and rain, steering his course south-west, rather
inclining toward the south. They went as far as the heavy sands and rains
would let them, till their dromedaries could hardly go any further. Then they
pitched their tents and refreshed themselves just enough to undergo new labor,
well knowing all their lives depended on their expedition. They observed the
sands to be of a different kind from what they had seen hitherto, so fine, that
any gust of wind must overwhelm man and beast, only the rains had clogged and
laid them.

Not to prolong your expectation too much: they went on thus for ten days, till
the rains began to abate; then they saw their lives or deaths would soon be
determined. The 11th day the ground began to grow harder in patches, with here
and there a little moss on the surface, and now and then a small withered
shrub. This revived their hopes, that they should find good land in a short
time, and in effect, the soil changed for the better every step they took; and
now they began to see little hills covered with grass, and the valleys sink
down as if there might be brooks and rivers. The twelfth and thirteenth day
cleared all their doubts, and brought them into a country, which, though not
very fertile, had both water and fruits, with a hopeful prospect further on, of
hills and dales, all habitable and flourishing. Here they fell prostrate on the
earth, adoring the creator of all things, who had conducted them safe through
so many dangers, and kissing the ground, which was to be the common nurse for
them, and, as they hoped, for all their posterity: when they had reposed
themselves for some days, they proceeded further into the country, which they
found to mend upon them the more they advanced into it. Not intending to return
till next year, they sought the most proper place for their habitation; and
setting up marks at every moderate distance not to lose their way back again,
they made for the highest hills they could see, from whence they perceived an
immense and delicious country every way; but to their greater satisfaction, no
inhabitants. They wandered thus at pleasure through those natural gardens,
where there was a perpetual spring i^ some kinds of the produce of the earth,
and the ripeness of autumn with the most exquisite fruits in others. They kept
the most exact observations possible. Whichever way they went, there were not
only springs and fountains in abundance, but, as they guessed, (for they kept
the higher ground, the heads of great rivers and lakes, some of which they
could perceive; so that they were satisfied there was room enough for whole
nations, without any danger, as they could find, of being disturbed.. By their
observation of the sun, they were nigher the equator than they had imagined
Though we may imagine a lesser circle parallel to the tropics and the equator,
which is called maximus parallelorum; yet whoever travels either by land or
sea, parallel, as he thinks, to the equator, does not so, but will approach to
it; nay and cross it at last* (unless he goes spi^^lly), and makes indentures
as he goes along: the reason is, because wherever we are, we are on the
summit of the globe with respect to us, and our feet make a perpendicular to
the center; so that if we go round the globe, we shall make a great circle* and
by consequence cu^ the equator.
, so that they there passed the middle space between the tropic and the line.
Being come back to their first station, they there waited the proper season for
their return. The rains came something sooner than the year before, because
they were further westward. The hurricanes were nothing like what they were in
the vast sands. As soon as they began to fix in settled rains, they set out
again as before, and in twenty days time from their last setting out* happily
arrived at the place where they left their dear friends and relations, whose
joy for their safe and happy arrival was greater than I can pretend to
describe. Thus this immortal hero accomplished his great undertaking, so much
more glorious than all the victories of the greatest conquerors, as it was
projected, formed, and executed by his own wisdom and courage; not by exposing
and sacrificing the lives of thousands of his subjects, perhaps greater men
than himself, but by exposing his own life for the safety of those that
depended on him.

It were too tedious to recount to you all the difficulties and troubles they
had, both in resolving to undertake such a hazardous transmigration, as well as
those of transporting such a multitude, with their wives and children, and all
their most precious effects, over those merciless sands, which they could only
pass at one season of the year. But the voyage being at length resolved on, and
the good Pophar wisely considering the difficulties, and necessity, the mother
of invention, urging him, at the same time, to gain as much time as he could,
since the vale where they were at present was sufficient to maintain them till
the rains came; got all his people hither in the mean time, to be ready for the
season. The newborn children were left with their mothers, and people to take
care of them, till they were able to bear the fatigue. Thus, in seven years
time going backwards and forwards every season, they all arrived safe, where we
ourselves hope to be in ten or twelve days time. This great hero we deservedly
honor, as another Misraim, the second founder of our nation, from whose loins
you yourself sprung by the surer side, and are going to be incorporated again
with the offspring of your first ancestors.

Here he ended his relation, and your Reverences may easily believe, I was in
the greatest admiration at this unheard of account. As it raised the ideas I
had of the people, so I could not be sorry to find myself, young and forlorn as
I was before, incorporated with, and allied to such a flourishing and civilized
nation. My expectation was not disproportionable to my ideas: I was persuaded I
was going into a very fine country; but the thoughts of their being Pagans left
some little damp on my spirits, and was a drawback to my expected happiness.
However, I was resolved to preserve my religion, at the expense of all that was
dear to me, and even of life itself.

By this time, the Pophar ordered us to refresh ourselves, and prepare all
things for our departure, though the storm of thunder and lightning did not
cease till toward morning. At len^th, all things being ready for our moving,
we marched on slowly till we came into the course of the rains. It was the most
settled and downright rain (as the saying is) that ever I saw; every thing
seemed to (...) as calm, as the tempest was violent before (...) Being
accustomed to it, they had provided open vessels on each side of the
dromedaries, to catch enough for their use as it fell, and they covered
themselves and their beasts with that fine oiled cloth I mentioned before. All
the sands were laid, and even beaten hard by the rains, though heavy and cloggy
at the same time. We made as much way as possible, for five days, just resting
and refreshing ourselves when absolutely necessary. I must own, nothing could
be more dismal than those dreary solitary deserts, where we could neither see
sun nor moon, but had only a gloomy, malignant light, just sufficient to look
at the needle, and take our observations. On the sixth day we thought we saw
something move sidewise of us, on our right hand, but seemingly passing by us;
when one of the young men cried, There they are, and immediately crossed down
to them. Then we perceived them to be persons traveling like ourselves,
crossing in the same manner up toward us. I was extremely surprised to find,
that those deserts were known to any but ourselves. But the Pophar soon put me
out of pain, by telling me, they were some of their own people* taking the same
season to go for Egypt, and on the same account. By this time we were come up
to one another* The leader of the other caravan, with all his company,
immediately got off their dromedaries, and fell prostrate on the earth before
our Pophar; at which he stepped back; and cried, Alas! is our father dead? They
told him, Yes; and that he being the first of the second line, was to be regent
of the kingdom, till the young Pophar, who was born when his father was an old
man, should come to the age of fifty. Then our people got off, and prostrated
themselves before him The ^astern manner of showing respect.
, all but myself. They took no notice of my neglect, seeing me a supernumerary
person, and by consequence a stranger; but as soon as the ceremonies were over,
came and embraced me, and welcomed me into their brotherhood with the most
sincere cordiality, as if I had been one of their nation. The Pophar soon told
them what I was, which made them repeat their caresses with new ecstasies of
joy peculiar to these people. After reiterated inquiries concerning their
friends, and assurances that all was well, except what they had just told him,
the Pophar ^sked them, how they came to direct their course so much on the left
hand, expecting to have met them the day before; and they seeming to point as
if they were going out of their way. They told us, they were now sensible of
it, and were making up for the true road as fast as they could: but that the
day before, they had like to have lost themselves by the darkness of the
weather, and their too great security; for beating too much on the left hand,
one of their dromedaries foundered, as if he were got into a quicksand Persons
may wonder to hear of quicksands in the midst of the sunburnt deserts of
Africa. But the thing will not seem so improbable, when we come to examine the
reasons of it. Without doubt, our author does not mean such quicksands as are
caused by the coming in of the tide under the sands; a man of sense would be
incapable of such a blunder. But that ther^ should be some stagnating waters in
the low swamps of the sands, is so far from being incr^dible* that it can be
hardly thought to be otherwise. It is very well known, there are vast lakes in
some parts of Africa, which have no visible outlets. There are rivers also that
lose themselves in the sands, where sinking under for some time, they may form
sandy marshes, or quicksands, as the author ^a^ls them.
. The rider thinking it had been nothing but some looser part of the sand,
thought to go on, but ^ell ^e^per the further he went, till the comman^er
ordered him to get off immediately, which he did with so much haste, that not
(...) his dromedary, the poor beast going on further into the quicksands, was
lost. Then the Pophar told them, there was such a place marked down in their
ancient charts, which, being so well acquainted with the roads, they had never
minded of late years: that he supposed those quicksands to be either the rains,
which had sunk through the sands, and meeting with some strata of clay,
stagnated, and were forming a lake; or more probably, it was the course of some
distant river, rising perhaps out of a habitable country, at an unknown
distance, but had lost itself in those immense sands. However, he congratulated
them on their escape, and, like a tender father, gently chid them for their too
great security in that boundless ocean. Our time not permitting us to stay
long, each caravan set out again for their destined course, having but five or
six days journey to make, that is, as far as we could travel in so many days
and so many nights; for we never stopped but to refresh ourselves. The rains
had so tempered the air, that it was rather cold than hot, especially the
nights, which grew longer, as we appro^ched the line. Here we steered our
course more to the west again, but not so as to leave the ridge of the world. I
observed the more we kept to the west, the more moderate the rains were, as
indeed they slackened in proportion as we came nigher our journey's end;
because coming from the west, or at least with a little point of the south,
they began sooner than where we set out. The tenth day of our journey, I mean
from the last grove or resting place, one of our dromedaries failed. We had
changed them several times before, to make their labor more equal. They would
not let it die, for the good it had done; but too of the company having water
enough, and knowing where they were, staid behind, to bring it along with them.
We now found the nature of the sands and soil to begin to change, as the Pophar
had informed me: the ground began to be covered with a little moss, tending
toward a green sward, more like barren downs than sands; and I unexpectedly
perceived in some places, instead of those barren gravelly sands, large spaces
of tolerable good soil It was observed in some of the former remarks, that not
only the ^^serts of Africa, but all the strata, or great beds of gravel, which
are found in all parts of the world, probably were caused by the universal
deluge. Nor can they be well accounted for otherwise. The deeper the beds of
gravel are, the more they show, by the heterogeneous stuff lodged with them,
that they were brought thither, not produced there ab origin. The vast falls
and gullets which are seen on the skirts of all the mountains in the world,
evidently show they were caused by some violent agitation, which carried the
looser earth and small stones along with it: for which nothing can be more
natural, than the supposition of a flood, or agitated fl^^d, which* by its
violence and shakings, carried all that was moveable before it for some time.
This gravel was incorporated with the loose earth before the flood, and was
carried to and fro, while the waters were in their greatest agitation, washing
and melting the loose earth from the gravel and stones. But when the waters
came to their highest pitch, and began to subside, the stones and gravel would
sink sooer than lighter things, and so be left almost in a body in those strata
they appear in. This might be illustrated much further, if there were occasion.
The vast numbers of petrified shells and scallops, which are found in all parts
of the world, on the higher grounds, could never be a mere lusus naturae, as
some too curious philosophers imagine* but must be accounted for by such a
flood; and these appearing in all parts of the universe, the flood must have
been universal. The sudden change of soils in every region, with the exceeding
richness of some more than others, and that too sometimes all at once, is to be
accounted for from the same cause: for the same violence of waters washing the
earth from the stones, must naturally make an unequal accumulation of both. As
for Africa, all the ancients speak of the incredible fertili^y of it in some
places, and the extreme barrenness of the deserts in others.
. At length, to our expressible joy and comfort, at least for myself, who could
not but be in some suspense in such an unknown world, we came to patches of
trees, and grass, with slanting falls and heads of vales, which seemed to
enlarge themselves beyond our view The prodigious height of the sands in
Africa, in those parts which lie between the tropics, may not only be the cause
of the sands or gravel sinking in greater quantities at the decrease of the
flood; but the most extensive vales may have their rise from very small gullets
at first.
. The rains were come to their period; only it looked a little foggy at a great
distance before us, which was partly from the exhalations of the country after
the rains It is very natural to think, that those barren sunburned deserts send
(...) but few exhalations.
; partly from the trees and hills stopping the clouds, by which we found that
the weather did not clear up in the habitable countries so soon as in the
barren deserts. The Pophar told me, that, if it were not for the haziness of
the air, he would show me the most beautiful prospect that ever my eyes beheld.
I was sensibly convinced of it by the perfumes of the spicy shrubs and flowers,
which struck our senses with such a reviving fragrancy, as made us almost
forget our past fatigue, especially me, who had not felt the like even in the
first vale: neither do I believe all the odours of the Happy Arabia could ever
come up to it. I was just as if I had risen out of the most delicious repose.
Here the Pophar ordered us to stop for refreshment, and added, that we must
stay there till next day. We pitched our tents on the last descent of those
immense Bares, by the side of a little rill that issued out of the small break
of the downs, expecting further orders.

The cause of our stay here, where we were out of danger, was not only for our
companions we had left behind us, but on a ceremonious account, as your
Reverences will see by and by: they were also to change their habits, that they
might appear in the colors of their respective tribe or name, which were five,
according to the number of the sons of the first Pophar, who brought them out
of Egypt, whose statue we saw at the pyramid. By their laws all the tribes are
to be distinguished by their colors; that wherever they go, they may be
known what name they belong to; with particular marks of their posts and
dignities; as I shall describe to your Reverences afterward. The grand
Pophar's color, who was descended from the eldest son of the ancient Pophar,
was a flame color, or approaching nigh the rays of the sun, because he was
chief priest of the sun. Our new regent's color was green, spangled with suns
of gold, as your Reverences saw in the picture; the green representing the
spring, which is the chief season with them. The third color is a fiery red,
for the summer. The fourth is yellow, for autumn; and the fifth purple,
representing the gloominess of winter; for these people, acknowledging the sun
for the immediate governor of the universe, mimic the nature of his influence
as nigh as they can. The women observe the colors of their respective tribes,
but have moons of silver intermixed with the suns, to show that they are
influenced in a great measure by that variable planet. The young virgins have
the new moon; in the strength of their age the full moon; as they grow old, the
moon is in the decrease proportionably. The widows have the moon expressed just
as it is in the change; the descendents of the daughters of the first Pophar
were incorporated with the rest. Those of the eldest daughter took the eldest
son's color, with a mark of distinction, to show they were never to succeed to
the popharship, or regency, till there should be no male issue of the others at
age to govern. This right of eldership, as these people understand it, is a
little intricate; but I shall explain it to your Reverences more at large, when
I come to speak more particularly of their government. When they are sent out
into foreign countries, they take what habit or color they please, and
generally go all alike, to be known to each other; but they must not appear in
their own country but in their proper colors, it being criminal to do
otherwise. They carry marks also of their families, that in case any
misdemeanor should be committed, they may know where to trace it out; for which
reason, now they drew near their own country, they were to appear in the
colors of their respective n^mes; all but myself, who had the same garment I
wore at Grand Cairo, to show I was a stranger, though I wore the Pophar's
color afterward, as being his relation, and incorporated in his family. When
they were all arrayed in their silken colors, spangled with suns of gold, with
white fillets round their temples, studded with precious stones, they made a
very delightful show, being the handsomest race of people this day in the
universe, and all resembling each other, as having no mixture of other nations
in their blood.

The sun had now broke through the clouds, and discovered to us the prospect of
the country, but such a one as I am not able to describe; it looked rather like
an immense garden than a country: at that distance I could see nothing but
trees and groves; whether I looked toward the hills or vales, all seemed to be
one continued wood, though with some seemingly regular intervals of squares and
plains, with the glittering of golden globes or suns through the tops of the
trees, that it looked like a green mantle spangled with gold. I asked the
Pophar, if they lived all in woods, or whether the country was only one
continued immense forest. He smiled and said, when we come thither, you shall
see something else besides woods; and then bid me look back, and compare the
dreary sands we had lately passed with that glorious prospect we saw before us:
I did so, and found the dismal barrenness of the one enhanced the beautiful
delight of the other. The reason, says he, why it looks like a wood, is, that,
besides innumerable kinds of fruits, all our towns, squares, and streets, as
well as fields and gardens, are planted with trees, both for delight and
convenience, though you will find spare ground enough for the produce of all
things sufficient to make the life of man easy and happy. The glittering of
gold through the tops of the trees, are golden suns on the tops of the temples
and buildings: we build our houses flat and low on account of hurricanes, with
gardens of perfumed ever-greens on the top of them; which is the reason you see
nothing but groves.

We descended gradually from off the deserts through the scattered shrubs, and
were saluted every now and then with a gale of perfumes quite different from
what are brought to the Europeans from foreign parts. The fresh air of the
morning, together with their being exaled from the living stocks, gave them
such a fragrancy as cannot be expressed. At length we came to a spacious plain
a little shelving, and covered with a greenish coat, between moss and grass,
which was the utmost borde^ of the desert; and beyond it a small river,
collected from the hills, as it were weeping out of the sands in different
places; which river was the boundary of the kingdom that way. Halting here, we
discovered a small company of ten persons, the same number, excluding me, with
ours, advancing gravely toward us: they were in the proper colors of the
Nomes, with spangled suns of gold, as my companions wore, only the tops of
their heads were sprinkled with dust, in token of mourning. As soon as they
came at a due distance, they fell flat on their faces before the Pophar,
without saying a word, and received the golden urns with the earth which we
bro't along with us. Then they turned, and m^rched directly before us, holding
the urns in their hands as high as they could, but all in a deep and mournful
silence. These were deputies of the five Nomes sent to meet the urns. We
advanced in this silent manner without saying one word, till we came to the
river, over which was a stately bridge with a triumphal arch on the top of it,
beautified with suns of gold, most magnificent to behold. Beyond the bridge, we
immediately passed through a kind of circular grove, which led us into a most
delightful plain, like an amphitheatre, our silence was broke with shouts of
joy that rended the very skies; then the whole multitude falling flat on their
faces, adoring the urns, and thrice repeating their shouts and adorations,
there advanced ten triumphant chariots, according to the colors of the Nomes
with suns as before; nine of the chariots were drawn with six horses each, and
the tenth with eight for the Pophar regent, The five deputies, who were the
chief of each Nome, with the urns and companions, mounted five of the chariots,
the other five were for us, two in a chariot; only being a supernumerary, I was
placed backwards in the Pophars chariot, which he told me was the only mark of
humiliation and inequality I would receive. We were conducted with five
squadrons of horse, of fifty men each, in their proper colors, with streamers
of the same, having the sun in the center, though the opposite avenue, till we
came into another amphitheatre of a vast extent, where we saw an infinite
number of tents of silk of the color of the Nomes, all of them spangled with
golden suns: here we were to rest and refresh ourselves. The Pophar's tent was
in the center of his own color, which was green, the second Nome in dignity,
in whose dominions and government we now were.

I have been longer in this description, because it was more a religious
ceremony than any thing else, these people being extremely mysterious in all
they do The ancient Egyptians were so misterious, particularly in their
religious ceremonies* and arcana of government* that, in all probability, the
ancient fables, which very few yet understand rightly, had their rise from
them; though the learned Bochart, in his Ph^l^g* derives them chiefly from the
Canaanites, who dispersing themselves all over the world, when they fled from
Joshua, imposed upon the credulous Greeks by the different significations of
the same words in their language. It is observable by the by, that the most
ancient languages, as the Hebrew* with its different dialects, of which the
Canaanean or Phoenician language was one, the Chinese language, etc. had a
great many significations for the same word, either from the plain simplicity
or poverty of the ancient languages, or more probably from an affected
mysteriousness in all they did.
. I shall explain the meaning to your Reverences as briefly as I can. The
stopping before we came to the bridge on the borders of those in hospitable
deserts, and walking in that mournful silent manner, not only expressed their
mourning for their deceased ancestors, but also signified the various
calamities and labors incident to man in this life, where he is not only
looked upon to be, but really is, in a state of banishment and mourning;
wandering in sunburned deserts, and tossed with storms of innumerable lawless
desires, still sighing after a better country. The passage over the bridge,
they would have to betoken man's entrance into rest by death. Their shouts of
joy, when the sacred urns arrived in that glorious country, not only signified
the happiness of the next life, (for these people universally believe the
immortality of the soul, and think none but brutes can be ignorant of it), but
also that their ancestors, whose burial-dust they brought along with them, were
now in a place of everlasting rest.

[ Inquisitor. I hope you don't believe so of Heathens, let them be ever so
moral men, since we have no assurance of happiness in the next life mentioned
in the Holy Scripture, without faith in Christ.


Gaudentio. No, Reverend Fathers, I only mention the sense in which these men
understand the mysteries of their religion. As I believe in Christ, I know
there is no other name under heaven by which men can be saved.


Inquisitor. Go. on.]


Every ceremony of these people has some mystery or other included in it; but
there appeared no harm in any of them, except their falling prostrate before
the dust, which looked like rank idolatry: but they said still, they meant no
more than what was merely civil, to signify their respect for their deceased
parents See the remarks before on that head, and the accounts of the worship of
the Chinese, who were originally Egyptians, in the disputes between the
Dominicans and Jesuits, where the latter maintained the idolatrous ceremonies
and offerings made to their deceased ancestors, to imply nothing but a natural
and civil respect. The Dominicans, on the contrary, very justly held them to be
idolatry, as they were judged to be, and condemned as such by Clement XI.
.

I shall not as yet detain your Reverences with the description of the beauties
of the country through which we passed, having so much to say of the more
substantial part; that is, of their form of government, laws, and customs, both
religious and civil; nor describe their prodigious magnificence, though joined
with a great deal of natural simplicity, in their towns, temples, schools,
colleges, etc. Because, being built mostly alike, except for particular uses,
manufactures, and the like; I shall describe them all in one, when I come to
the great city of Phor, otherwise called, in their sacred language, No-om
Jo^ephus against Appion distinguishes two languages of the ancient Egyptians
the one sacred, the other common. Their ^acred language (...) full of
mysteries, perhaps like the Cabala of the Jews.
: for if I should stay to describe the immense riches, fertility, and beauties
of the country, this relation, which is designed as a real account of a place
wherein I lived so many years, would rather look like a romance than a true
relation. I shall only tell your Reverences at present, that after having taken
a most magnificent repast, consisting of all the heart of man can conceive
delicious, both of fruits and wines, while we staid in those refreshing
tabernacles, we passed on by an easy evening's journey to one of their towns,
always conducted and lodged in the same triumphant manner, till we came to the
head of that Nome, which I told your Reverences was the green Nome, belonging
to the Pophar regent, second in dignity of the whole empire. Here the urn of
dust belonging to that Nome was reposited in a kind of golden tabernacle, set
with precious stones of immense value, in the center of a spacious temple,
which I shall describe afterward. After a week's feasting and rejoicing, both
for the reception of the dust, and the safe return of the Pophar and his
companions, together with his exaltation to the regency, we set out in the same
manner for the other Nomes, to reposit all the urns in their respective
temples. These are five, as I informed your Reverences before. The country is
something mountainous, particularly under the line, and not very uniform,
though every thing else is; containing valleys, or rather whole regions running
out between the deserts; besides vast ridges of mountains in the heart of the
country, which enclose immense riches in their bowels. The chief town is
situated as nigh ^s possible in the middle of the Nomes, and about the center
of the country, bating those irregularities I mentioned. The four inferior
Nomes were like the four corners, with the flame-coloured Nome, where the grand
Pophar, or regent pro tempore resided, in the center of the square. Their
method was to go to the four inferior. Nomes first, and reposit the urns, and
then to complete all at the chief town of the first Nome. These Nomes were each
about eight days very easy journey over. Thus we went the round of all, which I
think, as I then remarked, was a kind of political visitation at the same time.
At length we came to the great city of Phor, or No-om, there to reposit the
last urn, and for all the people to pay their respects to the grand Pophar, if
in being, or else to the regent. By that time, what with those who accompanied
the procession of the urns, and the inhabitants of that immense town, more
people were gathered together, than one would have almost thought had been in
the whole world; but in such order and decency, distinguished in their ranks,
tribes, and colors, as is not easy to be comprehended. The glittering tents
spread themselves over the face of the earth.

I shall here give your Reverences a description of the town, because all other
great towns or heads of the Nomes are built after that model, as indeed the
lesser towns come as nigh it as they can, except, as I said, places for arts or
trades, which are generally built on rivers or brooks, for convenience; such is
the nature of the people, that they affect an exact uniformity and equality in
all they do, as being brothers of the same stock.

The town of Phor, that is, the Glory or No-om, which signifies the house of
the sun, is built circular, in imitation of the sun and its rays, It is
situated in the largest plain of all the kingdom, and upon the largest river,
which is about as big as our Po, rising from a ridge of mountains under the
line, and running toward the north, where it forms a great lake, almost like a
sea, whose waters are exhaled by the heat of the sun, having no outlet, or sink
under ground in the sands of the vast deserts encompassing it. This river is
cut into a most magnificent canal, running directly through the middle of the
town. Before it enters the town, to prevent inundations, and for other
conveniences, there are prodigious basins, and locks, and sluices, with
collateral canals, to divert and let out the water, if need be. The middle
stream forms the grand canal, which runs through the town, till it comes to the
grand place; then there is another lock and sluice which dividing it into two
semicircles or wings, and carrying it round the grand place, forms an island
with the temple of the sun in the center, and meeting again opposite to where
it divided, so goes on in a canal again. There are twelve bridges with one
great arch over each, ten over the circular canals, and two where they divide
and meet again. There are also bridges over the strait canals, at proper
distances. Before the river enters the town, it is divided by the first great
lock into two prodigious semicircles encompassing the whole town. All the
canals are planted with double rows of cedars, and walks the most delightful
that can be imagined. The grand place is in the center of the town, a
prodigious round, or immense theater, encompassed with the branches of the
canal, and, in the center of that, the temple of the sun. This temple consists
of three hundred and sixty-five double marble pillars. according to the number
of the days of the year Our author seems to be a little out in this place; for
it is certain the ancient Egyptians did not make their ^ear to consist of so
many* days, unle^s you will say, that these people, being very great
astronomers, were more exact in their observations.
, repeated with the stories one above another, and on the top a cupola open to
the sky for the sun to be seen through. The pillars are all of the Corinthian
order It is generally supposed, that the different orders of pillars, as the
(...)* the Ionic, Corinthian* etc. cam^ first from the Greeks, as their
appellations, being Greek, would make us believe; but the famous and ancient
palace of Persepo^is, notwithstanding its Greek name, where there were
hieroglyphics and inscriptions ^n characters none could unders^and* besides
other reasons, s^ew that the invention came from Egypt or from the ancient
Chaldeans* or rather from Se^^, Noah, and the ancient Hebrews. It is likewise
very observable, that the invention of arts and sciences came from the east,
and can be traced no higher than Noha's flood; unless you will allow the Fables
of Seth, alleged by the learned Jo^ephus in his antiquities, quoted above. All
which is a very natural confirmation of the account given by Mo^es, against our
modern skeptics.
, of a marble as white as snow, and fluted. The edges of the flutes, with the
capitals cornished, are all gilt. The inner roofs of the vast galleries on
these pillars, are painted with the sun, moon* and stars, expressing their
different motions; with hierogliphics known only to some few of the chief
elders or rulers. The outsides of all are doubly gilt, as is the dome or grand
concave on the top, open in the middle to the sky. In the middle of this
concave is a golden sun, hanging in the void, and supported by golden lines or
rods from the edges of the dome. The artificial sun looks down, as if it were
shining on a globe of earth, erected on a pedestal altar-wise, opposite to the
sun, according to the situation of their climate to that glorious planet; in
which globe or earth are enclosed the urns of their deceased ancestors, On the
inside of the pillars, are the seats of the grandees or elders, to hold their
councils, which are all public. Opposite to the twelve great streets, are so
many entrances into the temple, with as many magnificent stair-cases between
the entrances, to go into the galleries or places where they keep the registers
of their laws, etc. with gilt balustrades looking down into the temple. On the
pedestals of all the pillars were engraven hieroglyphics and characters known
to none but the five chief Pophars, and communicated under the greatest secrecy
to the successor of any one of them, in case of death, loss of senses, and the
like. I presume, the grand secrets, and arcana of state, and, it may be, of
their religion, arts, and sciences, are contained therein. The most improper
decorations of the temple, in my opinion, are the flutings of the pillars,
which rather look too sinical for the august and majestic simplicity affected
by these people in other respects.

The fronts of the houses round the grand place are all concave, or segments of
circles, except where the great streets meet, which are twelve in number,
according to the twelve signs of the zodiac, pointing to the temple in strait
lines like rays to the center, This vast round is set with double rows and
circles of stately cedars before the houses, at an exact distance; as are all
the streets on each side, like so many beautiful avenues, which produce a most
delightful effect to the eye, as well as convenience of shade. The cross
streets are so many parallel circles round the grand place and temple, as the
center, making greater circles as the town enlarges itself. They build always
circular-wise till the circle is complete; then another, and so on. All the
streets, as I said, both straight and circular, are planted with double rows of
cedars. The middle of the areas between the cuttings of the streets are left
for gardens and other conveniences, enlarging themselves as they proceed from
the center or grand place. At every cutting of the streets, is a lesser
circular space set round with trees, adorned with fountains, or statues of
famous men; that, in effect, the whole town is like a prodigious garden,
distinguished with temples, pavilions, avenues, and circles of greens; so that
it is difficult to give your Reverences a just idea of the beauty of it. I
forgot to tell your Reverences, that the twelve great streets open themselves
as they lengthen, like the radii of a wheel, so that at the first coming into
the town, you have the prospect of the temple and grand place directly before
you; and from the temple a direct view of one of the finest avenues and
countries in the world. Their principal towns are built after this form. After
they have taken a plan of the place, they first build a temple; then leave the
great area, or circular marketplace, round which they build a circle of
houses, and add others as they increase, according to the foregoing
description; ridiculing and contemning other countries, whose towns are
generally built in a confused number of houses and streets, without any regular
figure. In all the spaces or cuttings of the streets, there are either public
fountains brought by pipes from a mountain at a considerable distance from the
town; or, as I said before, statues of great men holding something in their
hands to declare their merit; which, having no wars, is taken, either from the
invention of arts and sciences, or some memorable action done by them for the
improvement and good of their country. These they look upon as more laudable
motives, and greater spurs to glory, than all the trophies erected by other
nations, to the destroyers of their own species. Their houses are built all
alike, and low, as I observed before, on account of storms and hurricanes, to
which the country is subject; they are all exactly of a height, flat-roofed*
with artificial gardens on the top of each The ancient Babylonians had
artificial gardens, or ^ort^ pens^^^s, (...) the tops of their houses, as early
as the great Semi^^^nis; though Herodotus (...) their invention from a later
Babylonian queen, who being a m^de by na^ion, and loving woods, and not being
permitted to go out of the palace* had those artificial gardens made to d^vert
her.
, full of flowers and aromatic shrubs; so that when you look from any eminence
down into the streets, you see all the circles and avenues like another world
under you; and if on the level, along the tops of the houses, you are charmed
with the prospect of ten thousand different gardens meeting your sight
wherever you turn; insomuch, that I believe the whole world besides cannot
afford such a prospect. There are a great many other beauties and conveniences
according to the genius of the people; which, were I to mention, would make up
a whole volume. I only say, that the riches of the country are immense, which
in some measure are all in common, as I shall show when I come to the nature of
their government; the people are the most ingenious and industrious in the
world; the governors aiming at nothing but the grandeur and good of the public,
having all the affluence the heart of man can desire, in a place where there
has been no war for near three thousand years; there being indeed no enemies
but the inhospitable sands around them, and they all consider themselves as
brothers of the same stock, living under one common father; so that it is not
so much to be wondered at, if they are arrived to such grandeur and
magnificence, as persons in our world can scarce believe or conceive.

When the ceremonies for the reception of the urns were over, religious
ceremonies with these people always taking place of the civil, The most polite
nations of antiquity even among the Heathens, gave the preference to religion,
before all other considerations. As for the Christian religion, though of late
persons of some wit* little judgment, and no morals, call it in question, it is
well known, men become more men as they become Christians. The light of faith
brought in learning* politeness, humanity, justice, and equity, instead of that
ignorance, and a brutal barbarity, that overspread the face of the earth; and
the want o^ it will lead us in time into the same enormities which religion has
ta^ght us to forsake; on which account it is the part of all (...) government
(...) countenance and preserve religion.
, they proceeded to the inauguration of the Pophar regent; which was performed
with no other ceremony, for reasons I shall tell your Reverences afterward,
^ut placing him in a chair of state with his face toward the east, on the top
of the highest hill in the Nome, to show that he was to inspect, or overlook
all, looking toward the temple of the sun, which stood directly eastward of
him, to put him in mind that he was to take care of the religion of his
ancestors in the first place. When he was thus placed, three hundred six^y-five
of the chief of the Nome, as representatives of all the rest, came up to him,
and making a respectful bow, said, Eli Pophar, which is as much as to say, Hail
father of our nation; and he embracing them as a father does his children*
answered them with Ca^i B^nim, that is, My dear children. As many of the women
did the same. This was all the homage they paid him, which was esteemed so
sacred as never to be violated. All the distinction of his habit was one great
sun on his breast, much bigger than that of any of the rest. The precious
stones also, which were set in the white fillet binding his forehead, were
larger than ordinary, as were those of the cross circles over his head,
terminated on the summit with a large tuft of gold, and a thin plate of gold in
the shape of the sun, fastened to the top of it horizontally; all of them, both
men and women, wore those fillet-crowns with a tuft of gold, but no sun on the
top, except the Pophar.

As soon as the ceremonies and rejoicings were over, which were performed in
tents at the public expense, he was conducted, with the cheerful acclamations
of the people, and the sound of musical instruments, to a magnificent tent in
the front of the whole camp, facing the east, which is looked upon as the most
honorable, as first seeing the rising sun; and so on, by easy journeys, till
he came to the chief town of that Nome. The reason why these ceremonies were
performed in the different Nomes, was to show that they all depended on him,
and because the empire was so very populous, it was impossible they could meet
at one place. I cannot express the caresses I received from them, especially
when they found I was descended from the same race by the mother's side, and so
nearly related to the Pophar. When I came first into their company, they all
embraced me, men and women, with the most endearing tenderness; the young
beautiful women did the same, calling me brother, and catching me in their arms
with such an innocent assurance, as if I had been their real brother lost and
found again. I cannot say but some of them expressed a fondness for me that
seemed to be of another sort, and which afterward gave me a great deal of
trouble; but I imputed it to the nature of the sex who are unaccountably more
fond of strangers, whom they know nothing of, than of persons of much greater
merit, who converse with them every day. Whether it proceeds from the want of a
sufficient solidity in their judgment, or from a l^vity and fickleness in their
nature, or from the spirit of contradiction, which makes them fond of what they
mostly should avoid; or thinking that strangers are not acquainted with their
defects, or, in the fine, are more likely to keep their counsel; be that as it
will, their mutual jealousies gave me much uneasiness afterward* But to say a
word or two more of the nature of the people* before I proceed in my relation;
as I told your Reverences, they are the handsomest race of people I believe
nature ever produced, with this only difference, which some may think a defect,
that they all are too much like one another: but if it be a defect, it proceeds
from a very laudable cause; that is, from their springing from one family,
without any mixture of different nations in their blood Tacitus ^ays much the
same of the Germans* I^s^ ^orum op^nioni^^^ a^cedo, qui G^rm^niae populos
nullis al^^r (...) infect^s, propriam et ^^ceram et tanquam (...) gentem
e^stiti (...). I agree* says he, with their opinion who think the people of
Germany ^o pe^uliarly ^ike one another* ec^use they have not been cor^upted by
marriages with other nation (...) ^hey were noted ^n Augustus's t^me to have
(...) as most of the ^^tive Germans have to this day. I remember I ^aw a review
of a G^rman regiment in the city of Mil^n* where ^ most every one of the (...)
soldiers had blue eyes. No wonder therefore, if t^ese Africans, o^r author
speaks of, should be so ^ike o^e another.
; they have neither wars, nor traffic with other people, to adulterate their
race, for which reason they know nothing of the vices such a commerce often
brings along with it. Their eyes are something too small, but not so little as
those of the Chinese; their hair is generally black, and inclined to be a
little cropped or frizzled The ancient Egyptians, according to Herod (...) and
Bo^hart were ^o.
, and their complexion brown, but their features are the most exact and regular
imaginable; and in the mountainous parts toward the line, where the air is
cooler, they are rather fairer than our Italians Though our Italians are
something more (...) than the northern (...)* yet our ^^dies keeping much (...)
from their c^^^dhood* have very fine skins, and exce^ all other^ for de^icacy
of feature^ (...).
; the men are universally well shaped, tall and slender, except through some
accidental deformity, Tacitus de m^ribus Germ^^^rum.
I fancy (...) Rhedi never saw our American beauties.
which is very rare; but the women, who keep themselves much within doors, are
the most beautiful creatures, and the finest shaped in the world, except, as I
said, being too much alike. There is such an innocent sweetness in their
beauty, and such a native modesty in their countenance, as cannot be described.
A bold forwardness in a woman is what they dislike; and to give them their due,
even the women are the most chaste I ever knew, which is partly owing to the
early and provident care of their governors. But as I design to make a separate
article of the education of their young people, I shall say no more at present
on that head.

The visitations which we made to carry the urns, gave me an opportunity of
seeing the greatest part of their country as soon as I came there; though the
Pophar, with a less retinue, and with whom I always was, visited them more
particularly afterward. The country is generally more hilly than plain, and in
some parts even mountainous; there are, as I said, vast ridges of mountains,
which run several hundred miles, either under, or parallel to the equator.
These are very cold, and contribute very much to render the climate more
temperate than might otherwise be expected, both by refrigerating the air with
cooling breezes, which are wafted from thence over the rest of the country, and
by supplying the plains with innumerable rivers running both north and south,
but chiefly toward the north It is ermarkable that most ^prings rise from the
north side of the hills, and more rivers run northward than southward, at least
on this side of the line, though the observat^on does not always hold; the
reason may be, for that there a^e more mists and dews hang^ng on the north
side, because the ^un dries up the moisture on the o^th side of the mountains*
more than on the north; though perhaps all springs don't rise from rain and
mists* etc. yet most do
. These hills, and the great woods they are generally covered with, are the
occasion of the country's being subject to rain^ It is well known to the
n^turalists, that great woods and hills coll^ct clouds and vapors, and
consequently ca^se it to rain more there than in other places.
; there are vast forests and places, which they cut down and destroy as they
want room, leaving less groves for beauty and variety, as well as use and
convenience. The rains and hilliness of the country make traveling a little
incommodious, but then they afford numberless springs and rivulets, with such
delicious vales, that, adding this to the honesty and innocence of the
inhabitants, one would think it a perpetual paradise. The soil is so prodigious
fertile, not only in different sorts of grain and rice, with a sort of wheat
much larger and richer in flower than any Indian wheat I ever saw; but
particularly in an inexaustible variety of fruits, legumes, and eatable herbs
of such nourishing juice, and delicious taste, that to provide fruit for such
numbers of people is the least of their care. One would think the curse of Adam
had scarce reached that part of the world or that Providence had proportioned
the fertility of the country to the innocence of the inhabitants; not but the
industry and ingenuity of the people, joined with their perpetual peace and
rest from external and almost internal broils, contribute very much to their
riches and fertility. Their villages being most of them built on the rivulets
for manufactures and trades, are not to be numbered. Their hills are full of
metallic mines of all sorts, with materials sufficient to work them; silver is
the scarcest, and none more plentiful than gold; it comes out oftentimes in
great lumps from the mineral rocks, as if it wept out from between the joints,
and was thrown off by the natural heat of the earth, or other unknown causes:
this gold is more ductile, easier to work, and better for all uses, than that
which is drawn from the ore. Their inventions not only for common conveniences,
but even the magnificence of life, are astonishing. When I spoke of their
fruits, I should have mentioned a small sort of grape that grows there
naturally, of which they make a wine, sharp at first, but which will keep a
great many years, mellowing and improving as it is kept; but the choicest
grapes, which are chiefly for drying, are cultivated among them, and a very
little pains does it. Their wines are more co^dial than inebriating; but a
smaller sort, diluted with water, makes their constant drink. I don't remember
I ever saw any horned beasts in the country, except goats of a very large size,
which serve them for milk, though it is rather too rich: deer there are
innumerable, of more different kinds than are in Europe. There is a little
beast seemingly of a species between a roe and a sheep, whose flesh is the most
nourishing and delicious that can be tasted; these make a dish in all their
feasts, and are chiefly reserved for that end. Their fowl, wild and tame, make
the greatest part of their food, as to flesh-meat, of which they don't eat
much, it being, as they think, too gross a food. The rivers and lakes are
stored with vast quantities of most exquisite fish, particularly a golden
trout, whose belly is of a bright scarlet color, as delectable to the palate
as to the eye. They suppose fish to be more nourishing and easier of digestion
than flesh, for which reason they eat much more of it* but having no rivers
that run into the sea, they want all of that kind.

Their horses, as I observed before, are but small, but full of mettle and
life, and extremely swift; they have a wild ass longer than the horse, of all
the colors of the rainbow, very strong and profitable for burden and drudgery;
but their great carriages are drawn by elks; the dromedaries are for traveling
over the sands. The rivers, at least in the plain and low countries, are ^ut
into canals, by which they carry most of their provision and effects all over
the country. This is only a small sketch of the nature of the country, because
I know these matters don't fall under the cognizance of your Reverences, so
much as the account of their religion, morals, customs, laws, and government.
Yet I must say that for riches, plenty of all delicacies of life,
manufactories, inventions of arts, and every thing that conduces to make this
mortal state as happy as is possible, no country in the known world can
parallel it; though there are some inconveniences, as your Reverences will
observe as I go on with my relation.

Before I come to the remaining occurrences of my own life, in which nothing
very extraordinary happened till I came away, unless I reckon the extraordinary
happiness I was placed in, as to all things of this life, in one of the most
delicious regions of the universe, married to the regent's daughter, whose
picture is there before you, and the deplorable loss of her with my only
remaining son. [Here he could not refrain from weeping for some time], as well
as the present state to which I am reduced; though I must own I have received
more favorable treatment than could well be expected: I shall give your
Reverences a succinct account of their religion, laws, and customs, which are
almost as far out of the common way of thinking of the rest of the world, as
their country.

Of their Religion.
The religion of these people is really idolatry in the main; though as simple
and natural as possible for Heathens. They indeed will not acknowledge
themselves to be Heathens, in the sense we take the word; that is, worshippers
of false gods T^i^ opinion was very ancient* and came o^iginally from Egypt*
where Pythagoras learned it: though perhaps (...) way of employing it, he
altered it qu^te from what these (...), which (...) the le^^ irrational of the
two. Th^^gh, (...) I can never be^^eve, the^e wise men (...) held (...)
opinion, but (...) unders^ood it a^^egorical^y* I must own, at the same time,
some of the ancient* did ho^d the other (...).
, for they have an abhorrence of idolatry in words as well as the Chinese, but
are idolaters in effect, worshipping the material ^un, and paying those
superstitious rites to their deceased ancestors; of which part of their
religion your Reverences have had a f^ll account already. These people however
acknowledge one supreme God, maker of all things, whom they call ^l The old
Arabians (...) A^, or perhaps El, mean something very gra^^ or high Alchymy,
for Grand Ca^^, (...) for the highest (...), (...) I wonder Signor Rhedi took
to notice of this (...).
, or the most high of all. This they say natural reason teaches them from an
argument, though good in itself, yet formed after a different way of arguing
from other people: they say all their own wisdom, or that of all the wisest men
in the world put together, could never for^^ (...) glorious world in all its
causes and effects, so justly adapted to its respective ends, as it is with
respect to every individual species. Therefore the author of it must be a being
infinitely wiser than all intellectual beings. As for the notion of any thing
producing itself without a prior cause, they laugh at it, and ask why we don't
see such ^ffects produced without a cause? hence they hold one only independent
cause, and that there (...) one, or nothing could ever be produced. Though they
make a god of the sun, they don't say he is independent as to his own being:
but that he received it from this El. Some of the wiser sort, when I argued
with them, seemed to acknowledge the sun to be a material being created by God;
but others think him to be a sort of vicegerent, by whom the El performs every
thing, as the chief instrumental cause of all productions. This is the reason
that they address all their prayers to the sun, though they allow all power is
to be referred originally to the El. The men look upon the moon to be a
material being, dependent on the sun; but the women seem to make a goddess of
her, by reason of the influence she has over that sex; and foolishly think she
brings forth every month when she is at the full, and that the stars are hers
and the sun's children. They all of them, both men and women, rest satisfied in
their belief, without any disputes or studied notions about a being so
infinitely above them, thinking it much better to adore him in the
inscrutability of his essence, in an humble silence, than to be disputing about
what they cannot comprehend; all their search is employed in second causes, and
the knowledge ^^^ature as far as it may be useful to men.

[ Inquisitor. I hope you ^on't (...) that some men may have (...) ^otions of
the Deity, in which they ought to be set right by wiser and more learned men
than themselves; by consequence all searches and disputes about the being and
nature of God are not to be condemned.


Gaudentio. No, may it please your Reverences, for I presume you only
understand me now as representing other people's opinions, not my own, which is
entirely conformable to what the Catholic church teaches. I often told the
Pophar, to whom I could speak my mind with all the freedom in the world, that
as no mortal man could pretend to tell what belonged to the incomprehensibility
of God's essence, yet our reason obliging us to believe his being; it was
necessary, by the same reason, that we should be instructed by himself, or some
lawgiver immediately commissioned by him; lest we should err in so material a
point. This lawgiver we Christians believe he did send, by giving us his only
Son, who was capable of instructing us in what belonged to the eternal ^^^^ead:
that he did (...) only give us the justest notion^ (...) could ^wor^ have, but
confirmed (...) truth (...) what he said, by such signs and ^onders as none but
one sent from God could perform.


Inquisitor. Go on.]


When I said, they address all their prayer^, and most of the external actions
of their worship to the sun, it is on account of their believing him to be the
physical cause of the production of all things by his natural influence; which,
though the wiser sort of them, when you came to reason more closely, will grant
to be derived from the El, and some of them will own him to be a mere material
being, moved by a prior cause, yet the generality of them don't reflect on
this; but are really guilty of idolatry in worshipping a mere creature.
Nevertheless, as to the moral effects of the universe, or the free actions of
men with respect to equity, justice, goodness, uprightness, and the like, which
they allow to be proper^^ (...) duty of rational creatures, and of much greater
consequence th^n the physical part of the world: this, I say, they all refer to
the supreme being, whose will it is they should be merciful, good, just, and
equitable to all, agreeable to the just notions of the all wise author of their
existence, whose supreme reason being incapable of any irreg^^^r bias, ought to
(...) rule of his creatures that depend on (...) and are in some measure
partakers of his perfections. They (...) notion by a very proper comparion
(...) for example, to act contrary to the (...) of nature in physical
productions, is to produce monstrous births, etc. so to act contrary to the
ideas of the supreme reason in moral cases, must be a great deformity in his
sight.

I own I was charmed with this natural way of reasoning, and asked them
further, whether they believed the supreme being troubled himself about the
moral part of the world, or the free actions of men* They seemed surprised at
the question, and asked me, whether I thought it was possible he should leave
the noblest part out of his care, when he took the pains (that was their
expression) to create the least insect according to the most exact rules of art
and knowledge, beyond all that the art of man can come up to? I asked them
again; what were the rules, which it was his will that free agents, such as
man* for instance, should follow in the direction of their lives? They told me,
(...), justice, and equity, in imitation of the supreme reason in him; for,
said they, can you think the supreme being can approve of the enormous actions
committed by men; or that any vile practices can be according to the just ideas
of his reason; if not, they must be contrary to the best light of reason, not
only in God, but man, and therefore liable to be punished by the just governor
of all.

I submit these notions to your Reverences better judgment, but I thought them
very extraordinary for persons who had nothing but the light of nature to
direct them; it is pity but they had been a^ right in their more remote
inferences as they were in these principles. The sum therefore of the
theoretical part of their religion, is,

First, that the El is the supreme intellectual, rational, and most noble of
all beings; that it is the duty of all intellectual beings to imitate the just
laws of reason in him, otherwise they depart from the supreme rule of all their
actions, since what is contrary to the most perfect reason in God, must be
contrary to our own, and by c^^sequence of a deformity highly blameable in his
sight; all their prayers, and whatever they ask of this supreme being, is, that
they may be just and good as he is.

Secondly, that the sun is the chief, at least instrumental cause of their
bodies, and all other physical effects. Your Reverences know better than I can
inform you, that this is wrong: to him they address their prayers for the
preservation of their lives, the fruits of the earth, etc.

Thirdly, that their parents are the more immediate instrumental cause of their
natural being, which they derive partly from the El, and partly from the sun,
and they reverence them the more on this account, as being the vicegerents of
both, and believe them to be immortal, as to the spiritual or intellectual
part, and consequently able and ready to assist them according to the respect
they show them by reverencing their tombs and honoring their memories. Though,
upon a nicer examination, I found that the superstitious worship they pay to
their deceased ancestors, was as much a politic as a religious institution,
because their government being patriarchal, this inviolable respect they show
to their parents makes them obey their elders or governors, not only with the
most dutiful observance, but even with a filial love and alacrity.

There are some other points of less consequence, and reducible to these three
heads, which your Reverences will observe in the course of my relation* (...)
for the immortality of the soul, rewards and punishments in another life* they
believe both, though they have an odd way of explaining them. They suppose,
without any hesitation, that the soul is a being independent of matter, as to
its essence, having faculties of thinking, willing, and choosing, which mere
matter, let it be spun ever so fine, and actuated by the quickest and the most
subtle motion, can ever be capable of; but their notion of their pre-existence
with the El, before they were sent into bodies, is very confused. The rewards
and punishments in the next life they believe will chiefly consist in this;
that in proportion as their actions have been conformable to the just ideas of
the supreme being in this life, partak^ng still more and more of his infinite
wisdom, so their souls will approach still nearer to the beautiful intelligence
of their divine model in the next. But if their actions in this life have been
inconsistent with the supreme reason in God, they shall be permitted to go on
for ever in that inconsistency and disagreement, till they become so
monstrously wicked and enormous, as to become abominable even to themselves.



Of their opinion concerning the transmigration of souls, and the science of
physiognomy.
I found the wisest of them held the metempsychosis, or the transmigration of
souls This notion of the transmigration of the souls of brutes into men and
women in this life, particularly into the latter, was not unknown to the
ancients, though explained something after a different way: witness a remaining
fragment of Simonides, a very ancient Greek poet, to that (...).
, not as a punishment in the next life, as some of the ancient Heathen
philosophers did, but as a punishment in this; the chief punishment in the next
was explained above. This transmigration of souls is quite different from the
received notion of the word. Instead of believing, as the (...) did, that the
souls of wicked and voluptuous, men, after their deaths, transmigrated into
beasts according to the similitude of their vicious inclinations, till, passing
through one animal into another, they were permitted to commence men again; I
say, these people, instead of believing this, hold a metempsychosis of quite a
different nature; not that the souls of men enter into brutes, but that the
souls of brutes enter into the bodies of men, even in this life. They say, for
example, that the bodies of men and women are such delicate habitations, that
the souls of brutes are perpetually envying them, and contriving to get into
them; that, unless the divine light of reason be perpetually attended to, these
brutal souls steal in upon them, and cha^^ up the rational soul, so that it
shall not be able to govern the body, unless it be to carry on the designs of
the brutal soul, or at best only make some faint efforts to get out of its
slavery. I took it at first, that this system was merely allegorical, to show
the similit^^^ between the passions of men when no^ directed by reason, and
those of brutes. But, upon examination, I found it was their opinion, that this
(...) did really happen; insomuch (...) last journey with the Pophar into (...)
when he saw the Turks, or other strange nations, nay several Armenian and
European Christians, he would say to me in his own language, there goes a hog,
there goes a lion, a wolf, a fox, a dog, and the like; that is, they believe
the body ^f a voluptuous man is possessed by the soul of a hog, of a lustful
man by that of a goat, a treacherous man by that of a fox, a tyrannical man by
that of a wolf, and so of the rest. This belief is instilled into them so
early, and with so much care, that it is of very great benefit to keep them
within the bounds of reason. If a young man finds himself inclined to any of
these passions, he addresses himself immediately to some person whom he thinks
of superior wisdom, who assures him that the soul of some certain brute is
endeavoring to surprise and captivate his rational soul, and take possession
of its place. This makes them always wa^chful, and upon their guard against
their own passions, not to be surprised by such ^ merciless enemy. Their
immediate remedy is, to look steadfastly at the divine light that shines within
them, and compare it with its original, till by the force of its rays they
drive ^ay those brutal souls, which, as soon as (...) discovered in their
treacherous (...) (for they come on, say they, by (...) daring to attack that
divine light (...)), are easily repulsed, before they have obtained possession,
though it costs a great deal of pains to dislodge them, when once they are got
in. The fear of being abandoned to the slavery of these brutal souls is so
deeply imprinted in them from their infancy, that they look upon the temperance
and regularity of their lives to be in a great measure owing to this doctrine.
The same notions hold with their women; into whom their mothers and governesses
instill them, as the wise men do to the men; only they believe the brutal souls
that enter into women, are of a different species from those that enter into
men. They say, for instance, that of a cameleon makes them false and
inconstant; that of a peacock, coquettish and vain; that of a tygress, cruel
and ill-natured; and so of the rest. They add another difference between men
and women, that when these brutal souls are entered into them, they are much
harder to be driven out from them, than from the men; besides that these brutal
souls will lurk undiscovered in women a great while, and are often scarce
discernible, till the age of five and twenty or thirty; whereas in most men
they discover themselves presently after their entrance.

It was on account of this (...), as I found by repeated observat^^^ (...) they
were so addicted to the study (...) ^ognomy, laying down rules to know by the
countenance, the lines of the face, and unguarded looks of men, whether the
brutal soul has got possession or not, in order to apply proper remedies. This
science, however uncertain and doubtful among Christians, (who have greater
assistance of grace and virtue to resist their passions, those treacherous
invaders), is brought to greater perfection and certitude than one would
imagine, among such of these people, who, having no such assistance, take
little care to cultivate and moderate their vicious inclinations, unless they
are apprised and forewarned of the danger. Therefore their wise men, whenever
they come in company of the younger sort, consider attentively with themselves
all the lineaments of the countenance, complexions, motions, habit of body,
constitution, tone of the voice, make and turn of the face, nose, ears, etc.
but particularly they observe the structure and glances of the eye, with
innumerable signs proceeding from it, by which they pretend to discover those
passions. I say, they pretend to know by these what brutal soul lays siege to
the rational soul, or whether it has already taken possession of its post. If
they are strangers, they pru^^^^ly take care to avoid their (...) least are on
their guard not to have (...) dealings with them in matters obnox^^^s to the
brutal soul they think them possessed by. But if the person attacked by these
brutal souls be of their own nation, they immediately forewarn such to be on
his guard, by which, and the dread they have entertained from their youth of
these brutal enemies, they are kept in such order, that, as I said, I never saw
such moral people in my life. The worst is, they are extremely inclined to be
proud, and have too great a value for themselves, despising in their hearts all
other nations as if they were nothing but brutes in human shape The Chinese,
whom I have proved to be descended from the first Egyptians, are subject to the
like pride and contempt of other people; saying that all other nations have but
one eye, whereas nature has given them two: signifying thereby, how much wiser
they think themselves (...) other men.
. However, their wisemen take as much care as possible to correct this fault,
as far as the ignorance of the law of grace will allow; by putting them often
in mind of the miseries and infirmities of human life, which being real evils,
must be in punishment of some fault; that the most perfect are liable to death,
which makes no distinction between them and the rest of the world. Besides,
humility, and a commiseration for the defects of others, is one of the rays of
the divine light that is to guide them. From such documents and instructions of
the wiser sort, though they do not care to have any correspondence with other
people, seeing them so possessed with (...) brutal souls, yet they are a most
(...) and compassionate people in all the^^ ^^^^viour.



Of their laws and customs.
Over and above what has been said already of the nature and customs of these
people, I shall here observe that their laws are very few in number; but then
they are prodigious exact in the observance of them. I have often heard the
Pophar, contrary to his custom, make very severe reflections on* the lawyers of
other countries, who make laws upon laws, and add precepts upon precepts, till
the endless number of them makes the fundamental part to be forgotten; leaving
nothing but a confused heap of explanations; which may cause ignorant people to
doubt, whether there is really any thing meant by the laws, or not. If I forbid
my son, says he, to do any wrong to any one, what need is there of reckoning up
all the particulars by which a person may be wronged? Show but the fact on both
sides, any man of sense and equity can tell, if there be any wrong done. For if
you multiply an infinity of circumstances, it will be much more difficult to
decide what is right, or what is wrong, than if you precisely and absolutely
forbid all injury whatsoever. It is almost incredible, with what nicety and
equity, and how soon, their judges determine the few disputes they have among
them. To weigh the merits of the cause by the weight of the purse, would be
counted by them one of the greatest enormities. There are no courts for
disputes of this nature; all is done by laying the case before their public
assemblies, or before any one or two prudent and just men; and the affair is
finally decided at once. All the law for meum and tuum among them is, Thou
shall do no wrong to any one, without entering into any further niceties. Such
explanatory suppositions, say they, oftener show people how they may
ingeniously contrive to do an injury, than how to avoid it.

Their laws therefore are nothing but the first principles of natural justice,
explained and applied by the elders, in the public hearing of all who have a
mind to come in when the fasts are brought into dispute.

The worship of the Deity, and that excessive and even superstitious reverence
they pay to their parents, both alive and dead, is so carefully inculcated to
them from their infancy, that there is no need of any written law to enforce
it. They look on a man to be possessed with some brutal soul, who should
pretend to call in question or neglect this duty.

There is a positive law among them, not to shed human blood voluntarily These
people descending from Misraim, who might know the patriarch Noah, and might
have learned by tradition the punishment of Cain for the murder of his brother
Abel, carried that opinion to an excess. Be these people who they will, or not
be at all, I cannot but observe, how inexcusable the wickedness of men was from
the beginning* without blaming God, as some libertines do, for leaving them in
ignorance.

The wicked Ham, or Cham, was in the ark with Noah, and lived many years before
the deluge, (the truth of which is attested by ancient history as well as by
sacred scripture,) and saw the dreadful punishment inflicted on the world for
sin; could not he have learned godliness, and the reward for it, of his father
Noah? Could not Ham have taught his own children, they theirs; and so on? But
they corrupted their own ways, and thereby showed the necessity of a revelation.


. They carry this fundamental law of nature to such a height, that they never
put any one to death, even for murder, which very rarely happens; that is, once
in several ages. If it appears that a person has really murdered another, a
thing they think almost impossible, the person convicted is shut up from all
commerce of men, with provisions to keep him alive as long as nature allows.
After his death the fact is proclaimed, as it was when they shut him up, over
all the Nomes. His name is blotted out of their genealogies; then his dead body
is mangled just in the same manner as he killed the innocent, and afterward
burnt to ashes, which are carried up to the highest part of the deserts, and
then tossed up into the air, to be carried away by the winds blowing from their
own country: nor is he ever more to be reckoned as one of their race, and there
is a general mourning observed throughout the kingdom for nine days.

There is also an express law against adultery and whoredom, which are likewise
punished after death. If persons are caught in adultery, they are shut up apart
till death; then they are exposed naked as they were surprised, and the body of
the women treated after the most ignominious manner for three days. After
which, they are burnt, and their ashes dispersed as before See the learned
Bishop of Menux's universal history, concerning the Egyptians, par. 3. and of
their punishments after death.
. Whoredom is only punished, in the man, by chaining him to a he goat, and the
women to a salt bitch, and leading thus round the Nome. All in the respective
Nome, men and women, are to be present at the more signal punishments; and
parents are obliged to explain to their children the wickedness and horror of
the crime, for a warning for the future. I forgot to tell your Reverences, that
if the woman brings forth by adultery, the child is preserved, till able to be
carried with them when they go into Egypt, and there given to some stranger,
with ample provision for its maintenance, but never to be heard of more With
our author's ^ave, this is not such a ^ust and compassionate part* to turn
innocent children out among people whose customs they had such a horror of,
only for their parents faults. For though the maxim be good. Beware a breed yet
the care they took of their youth, and the moral instruction they gave them,
might make them abhor the crimes of their parents.
.

There is also one particular I should have mentioned, relating to injustice.
If, for example, the elders find there has been any considerable injustice
done, the criminal is obliged to restore nine times the value. If any one be
convicted to have imposed upon the judges, he is to be sent out to the skirts
of the country, to live by himself for a time proportionable to his guilt, with
a mark on his forehead, for all persons to avoid him, lest he should instill his
principles into others. All other matters are regulated rather by custom, than
by laws, which will be seen; when I come to the form of their government, and
other particular institutions.



Of their form of Government.
Their form of government, as I had the honor to acquaint your Reverences
before, is patriarchal, which they preserve inviolably, being the most
tenacious people in the world of their primitive institutions. But the order of
the succession is extremely particular, in order to keep up the equality of
brotherhood and dignity as exact as they can. Your Reverences, I presume,
remember that they all sprung from one family, (and lived as such when they
were driven out of Egypt), the head of which was priest of the sun. This
government they had observed ever since misraim took possession of that land
for his habitation. But when they were secured from all the world in the first
vale, as was mentioned before, they established that form of government after a
particular manner. The first Pophar settling in that vale with his five sons,
and as many daughters with their husbands, governed them during life, as father
or patriarch of them all. Their prodigious veneration for their parents, and
separation from all other people, render this form infinitely more practicable
than can well be imagined. As they were children of one man, the interest of
the whole was the interest of every particular. All the nation of the first
transmigration were children, grandchildren, or great-grandchildren of the good
old man who conducted them thither. Having no wars, or voyages at sea, nor
commerce with the distempers as well as vices of other nations, who generally
differ in their way of living as well as their climate; having nothing of this,
I say, to destroy their people, they not only increased prodigiously, without
plurality of wives, but by that and their almost primitive way of living, they
preserved their lives to a great old age, most of them living above hundred and
fifty years. The first Pophar (say their memoirs lived till an hundred and
fifty-five, and his eldest son his successor, more robust still, to a hundred
and sixty. Presently after his establishment in the first vale, he divided his
small dominions into five Nomes, or governments, under his five sons, as was
observed before. All were to be subordinate to the eldest; but it was only a
patriarchal subordination, relating to the whole. The other governors, and
indeed all fathers of families, were entire ministers of the laws in their
respective families; but these last were liable to the inspection of the more
immediate superiors, and all to that of the Grand Pophar, assisted with such a
number of counselors as were established afterward. To give your Reverences a
more distinct idea of this wonderful government, it will come much to the same,
whether we descend from the chief Pophar to every respective family, or from
these upwards. The particularities of the succession I shall consider
afterward. However, it will be easier seen if we take them when their numbers
were not so great, at the first beginning of their establishment.

The Pophar, then, having distinguished the bounds of every Nome, I mean in
their first transmigration, each son took possession of it for himself and
posterity. While each son's children were unmarried, they continued under the
government of their father, who made use of as much land as was sufficient for
the conveniences and pleasures, as well as the necessaries of life. But as
soon as any son was married, or at least when he could be called a father of a
family, the father, with consent of the Pophar, alloted him likewise a
sufficient quantity for the same end: so they spread and enlarged themselves as
it were from the center to a father extent, much in the same manner as they
build their towns, till they had occupied the whole Nome. Here you will say,
these people must in process of time increase ad infinitum, without lands
sufficient to maintain them. This was really the case in the first plantation,
which was so entirely occupied by them, that if the famous Pophar, who brought
them into the vast continent they now enjoy, had not made that glorious
discovery with the danger of his life, they must have returned into Egypt, or
ate up one another; but where they are at present, they have room enough,
notwithstanding their numbers, for several ages. However, I often represented
to the Pophar, that it must come to that at last: the thought made him uneasy
at first, and at length put him on a further discovery, as your Reverences will
see in the sequel. But such vast numbers of them betaking themselves to arts
and manufactures, and the country being so prodigiously fertile, there does not
appear any great difficulty in that respect. Of all arts they look upon
agriculture as the first in dignity next to the liberal sciences, since that
nourishes all the rest; but it comes so easily, and the fruits and legumes are
so rich and delicious, that they have little more trouble than to gather them:
besides, having two summers, and two springs, each different season produces
its peculiar fruits. But to return to the idea of their government, each father
of a family governs all his descendents, married or unmarried, as long as he
lives. If his sons are fathers, they have a subordinate power under him; if he
dies before he comes to such an age, the eldest son, or the eldest uncle, takes
care of them, till they are sufficient to set up a family of themselves. The
father, on extraordinary occasions, is liable to be inspected by five of the
most prudent heads of that district; these by five of the five adjacent
districts chosen by common consent; these last, by the heads of the five Nomes,
and all the Nomes by the Grand Pophar, assisted with three hundred sixty-five
elders, or senators, chosen out of every Nome. What is most particular in this
government is, that they are all absolute in some manner, and independent, as
looking on themselves as all equal in birth; yet in an entire dependency of
natural subordination or eldership, which runs through the whole economy, as
your Reverences will see when I come to the succession. They are in the same
manner lords and proprietors of their own possessions, yet the Pophar and
governors can allot and dispose of all for the public emolument, because they
look on him to be as much the father of all, as the immediate natural father is
of his proper children, and even in some sense their natural father by right of
eldership, because they sprung originally from one man, whom the Grand Pophar
represents. To this, that natural, or politic, or even superstitious respect
they show to their parents, contributes so much, that they never dispute, but,
on the contrary, revere, the regulations made by their superiors; being
satisfied that they are not only just and good, but that it is their own act,
since it is done by virtue of a subordination to which they all belong.

The succession of, eldership has something very particular, and even intricate
in it. To express at the same time the superiority of the elder son and the
equality of independence, I shall endeavor to explain to your Reverences, as
well as I can, the right thereof. The eldest son of the first Pophar is always
Grand Pophar, when he is of age to govern, which, as I said, is at fifty at
soonest; but if the direct line fails, not the uncle's son, nor any one in that
Nome, but the right heir of the next Nome; and so of all the five Nomes. If
they should fail in all the Nomes, the right heir of the second son of the
first Nome, and so of all the rest. This, they say, has happened several times
since their first establishment, which is not much to be wondered at, if they
are so ancient as they pretend. Thus, though the grand popharship be confined
to the eldest in some sense, in effect it belongs to them all; but if the next
heir be a minor, as he is always judged to be till he is fifty years of age,
the eldest of that age of the second son of the next Nome, is regent till the
heir be out of his minority, and so on: insomuch that, in order to divide the
superiority among them as equally as possible, he who has the next right to be
Grand Pophar, is never to be regent. All other public officers, teachers of
arts and sciences, overseers of all the public employments, etc. are
constituted by the Grand Pophar, and sanhedrim, with associates of every Nome.



More particulars of their public economy.
Though, as I said, the Pophar is in some sense the proprietor of the whole
country, as head of the government and chief patriarch; yet the paradox of this
government consists in this, that they are joint lords, acknowledging no
inequality, but merely eldership, and the respect due to dignitaries, which
they esteem as their own, or redounding to themselves, because they all give
their consent to their election for the public good: In a word, the whole
country is only one great family governed by the laws of nature, with proper
officers, constituted by the whole, for order and common pr^servation^. Every
individual looks on himself as a part of that great family. The Grand Pophar is
the common father, esteeming all the rest as children and brothers, calling
them universally by that name, as they all call one another brothers, bartering
and exchanging their commodities as one brother would do with another; and not
only so, but they all join in building their towns, public places, schools,
etc. laying up all the stores and provisions, over and above the present
consumption, in public places, for the use of the whole, with overseers and
inspectors, constituted by the common consent, who are to take care chiefly,
that no disorder be committed. Thus every one contributes to all public
expenses, feasts, and the like, which on some occasions are extremely
magnificent; affecting external grandeur in all respects. Thus also every man,
wherever he goes, enters into what house he pleases, as if it were his own
home; this they are doing perpetually throughout the whole country, rather
visiting than merchandising: exchanging the rarities of each respective place
with those of other parts, just like friends making presents to one another; so
that all the roads are like streets of great towns, with people going backward
and forward perpetually. They do this the more frequently to keep up a
correspondence between the Nomes, lest distance of place should cause any
forgetfulness of their being of one family. The plenty of the country affords
them every thing that nature can call delightful, and that with such ease, that
infinite numbers are employed in trades and arts, according to their genius, or
inclinations; which, by their continual peace and plenty, their long
establishment in one country, and under one form of government, the natural
ingenuity of the people, the early knowledge of arts, which they brought with
them out of Egypt; by the improvements their wise men make in them from time to
time; and from what they learn when they pay their visits to their deceased
ancestors, they have brought to prodigious perfection. One may say of them,
that they are all masters, and all servants; every one has his employment;
generally speaking, the younger sort wait on the elders* changing their offices
as is thought proper by their superiors, as in a well-regulated community. All
their children universally are taught at the public expense, as children of the
government, without any distinction but that of personal merit. As the persons
deputed for that end, judge of their genius, or any particular inclination,
they are disposed afterward to those arts and callings for which they seem
most proper; the most sublime sciences are the most in respect with them, and
are chiefly the employment of their great men and governors, contrary to the
custom of other countries; the reason of which is, because these being never
chosen till they are fifty years of age, they have had more time to improve
themselves, and generally are persons of more extensive capacities. They
rightly suppose, that persons who excel others in the most rational sciences,
are not only fittest to govern a rational people, but also most capable of
making themselves masters of what they undertake; not but such men, knowing the
governors are chosen out of that rank, have an eye in their studies to the
rules and arts of governing, which are communicated at a distance by them,
according to the talents they remark in the subjects. They do not do this out
of any spirit of ambition, employments being rather an honorary trouble than an
advantage, but for the real good of the whole. Agriculture, as I said, has the
next place in honor after the liberal arts; and next to that, those arts are
most esteemed which are most necessary; the last of all are those which are of
least use, though perhaps the most delightful.

Since every one is employed for the common good more than for themselves,
perhaps persons may apprehend that this gives a check to industry, not having
that spur of private interest, hoarding up riches, or aggrandizing their
families, as is to be found in other nations. I was apprehensive of this
myself, when I came to understand their government; but so far from it, that
possibly there is not such an industrious race of people in the universe. They
place their great ambition in the grandeur of the country, looking on those as
narrow and mercenary spirits, who can prefer a part to the whole: they pride
themselves over other nations on that account; each man having a proportionable
share in the public grandeur, the love of glory and praise seems to be their
greatest passion. Besides, their wise governors have such ways of stirring up
their emulation by public honors, harangues, and panegyrics in their
assemblies, with a thousand other ways of show and peagantry, and this for the
most minute arts, that were it not for that fraternal love ingrafted in them
from their infancy, they would be in danger of raising their emulation to too
great a height. Those who give indications of greater wisdom and prudence in
their conduct than others, are marked out for governors, and gradually raised
according to their merit. Whoever invents a new art has a statue erected
according to the usefulness of it, with his name and family inserted in public
records. Whoever distinguishes himself by any particular excellency; has
suitable marks of distinction paid him on public occasions, as garlands,
crowns, acclamations, songs, or hymns in his praise, etc. It is incredible how
such rewards as these encourage industry and arts in minds so affected with
glory as these people are: on the other hand, their greatest punishments,
except for capital crimes, which are punished as above, are by public disgraces.

But now I am speaking of their youth; as they look upon them as seeds of the
commonwealth, which if corrupted in the bud will never bring forth fruit, so
their particular care is laid out in their education, in which I believe they
excel all nations. One cannot say there is one in the whole nation who may be
called an idle person, though they indulge their youth very much in proper
recreations, endeavoring to keep them as gay as they can, because they are
naturally inclined to gravity. Besides daily recreations, they have set times
and seasons for public exercises, as riding, vaulting, running, but
particularly hunting wild beasts, and fishing for crocodiles and alligators, in
their great lakes, which I shall describe to your Reverences on another
occasion; yet they are never suffered to go alone, that is, a company of young
men together without grave men and persons in authority along with them, who
are a guard to them in all their actions: nay, they are never suffered to sleep
togegether, each lying in a single bed, though in a public room, with some
grave person in the same room with them. Their women are kept much in the same
manner, to prevent inconveniences which I shall touch upon when I come to the
education of their women: and this so universally, that as there are no idle
companions to lead them into extravagancies, so there are no idle and loose
women to be found to corrupt their minds. Their whole time, both for men and
women, is taken up in employments, or public recreations, which, with the early
care to instruct them in the fundamental principles of the morality of the
country, prevents all those disorders of youth we see elsewhere. Hence too
comes that strength of body and mind in their men, and modest blooming beauty
in their women; so that among this people nature seems to have kept up to its
primitive and original perfection. Besides, that universal likeness in them,
proceeding from their conjugal fidelity and exclusion of all foreign mixture in
their breed, (where all the lineaments of their ancestors, direct and
collateral, meet at last in their offspring), gives the parents the comfort of
seeing their own bloom and youth renewed in their children; though in my
opinion this universal likeness is rather a defect; not but the treasures of
nature are so inexhaustible, that there are some distinguishing beauties in
every face. Their young men and women meet frequently, but then it is in their
public assemblies, with grave people mixed along with them. At all public
exercises the women are placed in view to see and be seen, in order to inspire
the young men with emulation in their performances. They are permitted to be
decently familier on those public occasions, and can choose their lovers
respectively, according to their liking, there being no such thing as doweries,
or interest, but mere personal merit in the case; but more of this afterward
when I shall speak more particularly of the education of their women and
marriages. This is a short sketch of the government and economy of a people,
who are as much distinguished from the customs of others, as they are separated
by their habitation and country.

Inquisitor. You seem, Sir, to have a very high idea of this patriarchal
government, and look upon it according to the law of nature; I hope you don't
deny but persons may be obliged by the law of nature to obey their forms of
government, as well as a patriarchal one?


Gaudentio. No, Reverend Fathers, by no means, I don't enter into comparisons,
but relate matter of fact. It is not to be doubted, but different forms of
government may be proper for different nations; and where once a form of
government is lawfully established, persons are obliged to obey, to avoid
anarchy and confusion; as for example, whoever should endeavor to subvert a
monarchical government once lawfully established, must break in upon the laws
of right and justice, which are obligations of the law of nature.


Inquisitor. Read on.


Second Inquisitor. Under favor, I must ask him a question or two first. I
think Signor Gaudentio, you make the Grand Pophar to be both prince and priest;
that is, to be vested both with temporal and spiritual power. Is it your
opinion that the spiritual power is subject to the temporal?


Gaudentio. I speak of Heathens, Reverend Fathers, and a Heathenish worship,
where the Grand Pophar was both prince of the people, and chief priest of the
sun by his place. I acknowledge no head of the church but his Holiness, as most
agreeable to the primitive institution of our religion.


Here he went on in his exalted notions of the sovereign Pontiff, partly being
a Roman Catholic, but chiefly, in all appearance, because he was before the
Inquisition; for which reason the publisher thought fit to leave it out.
Gaudentio. Is it your Reverences pleasure that I go on with my history?


Inquisitor. Ay, ay, read on.]




The education of their women, and marriages.
As for their women, the Pophar told me it was what gave them the most trouble
of any thing in their whole government; that by their records their ancestors
had held frequent consultations after what manner they were to be managed,
there being great difficulties to be feared either from allowing them liberty,
or keeping them under restraint. If you allow them liberty, you must depend on
their honor, or rather caprice, for your own; if you keep them under
confinement, they will be sure to revenge themselves the first opportunity;
which they will find in spite of all you can do. The rules, said he, by which
men are governed, will not hold with women; solid reason, if you can make them
sensible of it, will some time or other have an influence on most men; whereas
humor is what predominates in women. Hit that, you have them; miss it, you do
nothing: and yet they are so far from being an indifferent thing in the
commonwealth, that much more depends on the right management of them than
people imagine. Licentiousness of youth draws innumerable misfoutunes on any
government, and what greater incentives for licentiousness than lewd women,
whether common prostitutes, wanton ladies, or adulteresses? For all loose women
belong to one of these classes. Our women, continued he, are extremely
beautiful, as you see; our men strong and vigorous; conjugal fidelity therefore
and chastity must be the strongest bonds to keep them in their duty. As for our
young men, we steep them in perpetual employment, and animate them to glory by
every thing that can move generous minds; with our women, we endeavor the same
by ways adapted to their genius. But our greatest care of all is, to make
marriage esteemed by both parties the happiest state that can be wished for in
this life. This we believe to depend on making the woman, rather than the man,
happy and fixed in her choice; because, if the person be imposed upon her,
contrary to her own inward inclination, dislike, or revenge, or perhaps a more
shameful passion, will make her seek for relief elsewhere; and where women are
not virtuous, men will be lewd. We therefore permit the woman to choose entirely
for herself, and the men to make their addresses where they please: but the
woman is to distinguish her choice by some signal occasion or other, and that
too not without great difficulties on both sides, which being surmounted, they
esteem themselves arrived at the happy part of all their wishes. The most
ardent and tried love determines the choice: this endears the man to her on the
one hand, and the difficulty of finding any woman who has not the same
inducements to love her husband, leaves him no encouragement for his lawless
desires among married women; and the single women are either so early engaged
with their lovers, or so possessed with the notion that a married man cannot
belong to her, that his suit would be entirely vain. In a word, we do not allow
the least temporal interest to interfere in the choice, but rather wish our
young people should be mutually attracted by esteem and affection. The whole
business of courtship is to prove their constancy, and to make them so: when we
are well assured of this, all obstacles are removed. We found this method to
have the least inconveniences of any, and the best* means to preserve conjugal
fidelity, on which the good of families so much depends.

When our nation, continued he, began to grow very populous, and the country
full of riches and plenty; the promiscuous conversation of our young men and
women, with some neglect on the part of the governors, was the occasion that
the bounds of our innocent ancestors were not sufficient to keep them in their
duty; strange disorders were crept in among our youth of both sexes; our men
grew enervated and effeminate, our women wanton and inflamed; unnatural abuses
wasted their constitution; so that we lost thousands of our young men and
women, without knowing what was the cause; even in the married state, the women
began not to be contented with one man: on which account our ancestors had
almost resolved to keep all our women from the sight of men till they were
married, and then to deliver them up to their husbands, who should have a
despotic right over them, as I am informed they have in other nations. They
imagined this to be a certain means to ascertain the legitimacy of their
child^en, and to prevent jealousy, the first cause, however dissembled, of the
man's dislike to his wi^e. Others objected against this severe disciple, and
said it was making the most beautiful part of the creation mere slaves, or at
least mere properties; that it was to give a fatal check to the glory of a free
people, to deprive the husband of the voluntary love of his moiety, and take
away the most endearing part of conjugal happiness. To this the severer side
answered, that their abuses of liberty showed they were scarce capable of
making a proper use of it. However a medium betwixt both carried it for that
time. The injuries of the married state, and the corruption of youth, which was
the occasion of it, were judged to be of such consequence to the commonwealth,
that, resolved to put a stop to it at any rate, all the wise men and governors
consulted together, and resolved unanimously to put the laws I mentioned
against adultery and whoredom in execution, causing proclamations to be made
for that intent throughout the whole empire. All corruptors of youth of both
sexes were shut up immediately, with the regulations I related above, of having
grave persons always in the company of young people, whether men or women. They
married off all that were of age for it, as fast as they could; but quickly
found the number of inhabitants did not increase as usual, their native vigor
being exhausted or debelitated by their unnatural
abuses...............................

[ Some paragraphs seem wanting in this part of Gaudentio's narrative which
doubtless were very curious.]

There is one peculiar method allowed by them, in which they differ from all
other nations; for whereas this last endeavor to preserve their young people
from love, lest they should throw themselves away, or make disadvantageous
matches; the former, having no interested views in that respect, encourage a
generous and honorable love, and make it their care to fix them in the
strictest bonds they can, as soon as they judge, by their age and constitution,
of their inclinations: this they do sometimes by applauding their choice, but
mostly by raising vast difficulties, contrived on purpose, both to try and
inhance their constancy. They have histories and stories of heroic examples of
fidelity and constancy in both sexes; but particularly for the young women, by
which they are taught rather to suffer ten thousand deaths, than violate their
plighted faith. One may say they are a nation of faithful lovers; the longer
they live together, the more their friendship increases, and infidelity in
either sex is looked upon as a capital crime. Add to this, that being all of
the same rank and quality, except the regard paid to eldership, and public
employments; nothing but personal merit, and a liking of each other, determines
the choice; there must be signal proofs produced, that the woman prefers the
man before all others, as the service must be distinguished in the same manner.
Where this is approved of by the governors or elders, if the woman insists on
her demands, it is an inviolable law that that man must be her husband. Their
hands are first joined together in public, then they claspe each other in the
closest embrace, in which posture the elder of the place, to show that this
union is never to be dissolved, takes a circle of the finest tempered steel,
woven with flowers, and first lays it over their necks, as they are thus
clasping each other, then round their breasts, or hearts, to signify that the
ardency of their love must terminate in an indissoluble friendship; which is
followed by infinite acclamations and congratulations of the whole assembly. I
believe the world cannot furnish such examples of conjugal chastity as are
preserved between them by these means. Widowers and widows never marry single
persons, and but rarely at all, except left young; when they are to gain each
other as before. By such prudent precautions infinite disorders and misfortunes
to the commonwealth are prevented, proceeding not only from disproportionate
and forced marriages, but from the licentiousness of idle persons, who either
marry for money, or live on the spoil of other people, till they can get an
advantageous match. This is a short sketch of their government and customs,
which I thought would not be unacceptable to your Reverences, though a great
many other customs of less moment will occur in the sequel of my life, to which
I now return.



The Pophar regent made choice of me for one of his attending companions, with
the other young men who came home with us; he had a great many other attendants
and officers, deputed by common consent to wait his orders as regent; these
were changed every five years, as were those attending the governors of the
other Nomes, on account of improvement; for, being all of equal quality, they
endeavor to give them as equal an education as is possible, changing their
employments, and waiting on one another in their turns, by the appointment of
their respective governors, except those whose genius or choice determines them
to arts and sciences, according to their economy described before. I must only
add, that having such a high value for their race, no one thinks it a disgrace
to perform the meanest offices, being all to be attended in like manner
themselves when it comes to their turns, each looking on the honors done to
every branch of their government, as their own. Hence all their public ranks
and ceremonies are the most magnificent that can be imagined; there is scarce
any thing done even in entertainments between the private tribes, but there are
proper officers deputed for it, and all expenses paid out of the common stock,
with deputies and overseers for every thing. Their houses are all open to one
another with a long gallery, which runs from the end of one range of building
to the other. The women's apartments join together; with the men of each family
joining to their own women, that is, their wives, sisters, and daughters. The
women have their subaltern officers like the men. The first apartment of every
break of a street belongs to the men, then the women's belonging to them, then
the women of the next family joining to them, and their men beyond them, and so
on, with large public halls at proper distances for public assemblies; so that
every thing they do is a sort of paradox to us, for they are the freest and yet
strictest people in the world; the whole nation, as I observed before being
more like one universal regular college, or community, than any thing else. The
women are perpetually employed as well as the men; it is their business to work
all the fine garments for themselves and the men, which being much the same
except devices and flowers for their friends and lovers, are made with less
difficulty; the chief difference is in the wearing them. But the chief
distinction of sexes is in the ornaments of their necks, and hair. Crowns and
fillets are worn by all, just after the model of the little picture your
Reverences saw in the cabinet; all their tapestry, embroidery, and the like,
with infinite other curiosities, are the works of their women, so that the
chief qualification of their women or ladies, for they are all such, is to
excel at the loom, needle, or distaff. Since I came there, by the Pophar's
desire, they have added that of painting, in which I believe, the vivacity of
their genius will make them excel all the rest of the world. Not teaching for
hire, I thought it no disgrace in me to instruct such amiable scholars in an
art no man ought to be ashamed of. It is a thing unknown with these people for
young ladies of any degree, or even young men, to have nothing else to mind or
think of but visits and dress* When I gave them an account of the lives of our
quality and gentry, they cried out, What barbarians! Can any thing become
beauty more than knowledge and ingenuity? They seemed to have such a contempt,
and even a horror for a life of that nature, that the young ladies asked me
with great concern, if our ladies had any lovers? as if it were impossible to
love a woman who had nothing to recommend her, but what nature gave her. In
fine, by the description I gave of the idle life of our ladies, they judged
them to be no more than beautiful brutes. They asked me also, if I did not
think myself fortunate by my captivity, where I met with ladies, who thought
the ornaments of the mind more desirable than those of the body, and told me
they imputed what they saw in me, to my good fortune of being borne of their
race by the mother's side; nay, could scarce believe but my father had a
mixture of their blood some way or other. I assured them, I esteemed myself
very happy to be in the midst of so many charms of body and mind; and added,
that though they had the inestimable happiness of being born all of one race,
without any mixture of fo^eign vices, yet, in effect, all the world were
originally brothers and sisters, as springing from one pair, since men and
women did not rise out of the ground like mushrooms. This I said, to give them
a little hint of natural and revealed religion, which are inseparably linked
together. But to return to myself: The Pophar being my nearest relation, took
me into his own fafamily, as his constant companion and attendant, when he was
not on the public concerns: where I likewise accompanied sometimes, and
received most distinguishing marks of his favor. He would often con^er with
me, and instruct me in their ways and customs, and the polity of their
government, inquiring frequently into the particularities of our governments,
both civil and religious. He never endeavored to persuade me to conform to
their religious ceremonies, and my own good sense told me it was prudence not
to meddle with them. I rather thought he seemed inclined to have more
favorable sentiments of our religion, as such, than his own, though he was
prodigiously bigoted to their civil customs; saying, it was impossible ever to
preserve a commonwealth, when they did not live up to their laws; which would
be as few, and as simple as possible. For when once people come to break in
upon fundamentals, all subsequent laws would not have half the strength as
primary ones. To these he added many other reflections, that showed him a man
of consummate wisdom, and worthy the high post he bore. He had had two sons,
both dead, and two daughters living; the one was about ten years old, when I
arrived there, (it is we your Reverences saw in that picture), the other born
the year before the Pophar set out for Grand Cairo. His lady, much younger than
himself, showed such fresh remains of beauty, as demonstrated that nothing but
what sprung from herself, could equal her; both the Pophar and his consort
looked on me as their own son, nor could I expect greater favor had I really
been so. I took all the care imaginable not to render myself unworthy of it,
and both revered and loved them beyond what I am able to express; though
indeed, as I observed, the whole race of them was nothing but a kingdom of
brothers and friends; no man having the least suspicion or fear of one another.
They were so habituated to the observance of their laws, by their natural
dispositions and the never-ceasing vigilance of their governors, that they
seemed to have a greater horror for the breach of their laws, than the
punishments attending it; saying, that infinite disorders might be committed by
the malicious inventions of men, if there was nothing but fear to keep them in
their duty. Such force has education and the light of nature rightly
cultivated; for myself I was left to follow what liberal employment I had a
mind to. Philosophy, music, and painting had been the chief part of my study
and diversion, till my unhappy captivity and the loss of my brother; but as I
was fallen among a nation of philosophers, that noble science, the mistress of
all others, made up the more serious part of my employment; though at
sometimes, by the Pophar regent's earnest desire, I applied myself to the other
two, particularly painting. They had a great many old. fashioned musical
instruments, and an infinite number of performers in their way, who attended
their feasts and public rejoicings; but their music, both vocal and
instrumental, was not near so perfect as one might have expected of so polite a
people, and did not come up to the elevated genius of our Italians. Their
philosophy chiefly turned on the more useful part of it, that is, the
mathematics and direction of nature: in the moral part of it they have a
system, or rather notion, of which I forgot to acqaint your Reverences before;
it is a too high and exalted notion of providence, if that expression may be
allowed, by which they imagine all things to be so governed in this world, that
whatever injury a man does to another, it will be returned upon him or his
posterity, even in this world, in the same manner, or even in a greater degree,
than what he did to others.

[ Iquisitor. You will be pleased to explain your own sentiments in this
particular, since we hope you don't deny that fundamental law of nature and
religion, viz. That the divine providence presides over all things; and as for
sublunary things, we presume you believe that providence does not only show
itself in the wonderful production and harmony conspicuous in all natural
causes and effects, beyond all the wit and art of men; but also over the moral
part, that is, the free actions of men, by suitable rewards and punishments in
this world or the next, to make an equal and just compensation for all the good
and evil of this life, as God is the just and equal father of all. So pray
explain yourself, that we may know your real sentiments on that head.


Gaudentio. I hope, Reverend Fathers, I shall convince you, my sentiments are
really orthodox in this point* no man has more reason to magnify Providence
than myself; but Heathenish people may carry a just belief to superstition.
That there is a providence over the physical part of the world, no man who has
any just knowledge in nature can be ignorant, since he may be convinced by the
least insect, every thing being adapted to its peculiar ends, with such art and
knowledge in the author of it, that all art and knowledge of men cannot do the
like; and by consequence not being able to make itself, it must be produced by
a cause infinitely knowing and foreseeing. Then, as to the moral part of the
world, the same reason shows, that since the great creator descends so low as
to take care of the least insect, it is incredible to think that the noblest
part of the world, that is, the free actions of men should be without his care.
But as he has given them the glorious endowments of free will, the same
providence knows how to adapt the direction of them by ways and means suitable
to their beings; that is, by leting them know his will, and proposing suitable
rewards and punishments for their good and bad actions; which rewards and
punishments, it is evident, are not always seen in this life, since the wicked
often prosper, and the good suffer, but by consequence must be reserved for
another state.

But these people not having a just notion of the next life, though they
believe a future state, carry matters so far, that they think every injury done
to another, will be some way or other retaliated upon the aggressor, or his
posterity, in this life; only they say, the punishment always falls the heavier
the longer it is deferred. In this manner do they account for all the
revolutions of the earth, that one wicked action is punished by another; that
the descendents of the greatest monarchs have been lost in beggary for almost
endless generations, and the persons that dispossessed them treate^ after the
same manner by some of the descendents of the former; and so on^ which notion,
in my opinion, is no^ just, since a sincere repentance man wipe off the most
grievous offenses* But as persons, generally speaking are more sensibly touched
with the punishments of this life, it is not t^ be doubted but there are often
mo^^ signal marks of avenging providenc^ in this life, in order to deter the
wicked.


Inquisitor. Go on.]


Finding the Pophar had a prodigiou^ fancy for painting, by some indifferen^
pieces he had picked up, I applied myself with extraordinary diligence, to that
art particularly since he would have me teac^ his daughter, whose unparalleled
charms though but in the bud, made me insensibl^ to all others. By frequent
drawing, I no^ only pleased him and others, but almos^ myself; every one there
men and women were to follow some art or science; the Pophar desired me to
impart my art t^ some of the young people of both sexes saying there were very
great encourage^ments for the inventors of any new arts which I might justly
claim a title to. I did so, and before I left the place, I had the pleasure to
see some of them equal, or even excelling their master.

These were the chief employments of me leisure-hours; though I was forced to
leav^ them for considerable intervals, to attend the Regent in the private
visitations of his charge, which he did frequently from time to time, sometimes
to one Nome, sometimes to another, having an eye over all, both officers and
people. These visitations were rather preservatives against, than remedies for,
any disorders. He used to say, that the commonwealth was like a great machine
with different movements, which if frequently visited by the artist, the least
flaw being taken notice of in time, was not only soon remedied, but was a means
of preserving all the rest in a constant and regular motion; but if neglected,
would soon disorder the motions of the other parts, and either cost a great
deal to repair or bring the whole machine to destruction. Unless on public
solemnities, which were always very magnificent, the Pophar (not to burden his
people) went about without any great train, accompanied by only an assisting
elder or two, the young Pophar, and myself. He had frequent conversations with
the subalterns, and even with the meanest artisans, calling them his children;
and they having recourse to him as their common father. For the first five
years of his regency, the only difficulty we had of any moment to determine was
an affair of the most delicate nature I ever heard: though it does not concern
myself, I shall relate it to your Reverences for the peculiar circumstances of
it, being a case entirely new, as well as unprovided for by the laws of their
constitution.

The case was this: Two twin-brothers had fallen in love with the same woman,
and she with them. The men and the woman lived in different parts of the same
Nome, and met accidentally at one of their great solemnities; it was at the
feast of the sun, which is kept twice a year, because, as I informed your
Reverences, their kingdom lies betwean the tropics, but more on this side the
line than the other. This situation is the occasion that they have two springs
and two summers. At the beginning of each spring there are great feasts in
every Nome, in honor of the sun; they are held in the open fields, in
testimony of his being the immediate cause (in their opinion) of the production
of all things. All the sacrifice they offer to him are five little pyramids of
incense, according to the number of their Nomes, placed on the altar in plates
of gold till they take sire of themselves. Five young men and as many women are
deputed by the governors to perform the office of placing the pyramids of
incense on the altar: they are clad in their spangled robes of the color of
the Nome, with crowns on their heads, marching up two by two, a man and a
woman, between two rows of young men and women, placed theatre-wise one above
another; and make the most beautiful show that eyes can behold. It happened
that one of the twin. brothers was deputed, with the young lady I am speaking
of, to make the first couple for the placing the incense on the altar* They
marched up on different sides till they came to the altar: when they have
placed the incense, they salute each other, and cross down, the men by the
ranks of the women, and the women by the men, which they do with a wonderful
grace becoming such an august assembly. The design of this is to encourage a
decorum in the carriage of the young people, and to give them a sight of each
other in their greatest luster. When the five couple have performed their
ceremony, the other ranks come two by two to the altar, saluting each other,
and crossing as before: by which means the young people have an opportunity of
seeing every man and woman of the whole company, though the placing of them is
done by lot. If they have not any engagement before, they generally take the
first liking to one another at such interviews, and the woman's leen and choice
being what determines the marriage, without any view of interest, being, as I
said, all equal in quality, the young gallants make it their bu^iness to gain
the affection of the person they like by their future services. To prevent
inconveniences of rivalship at the beginning, if the man be the person the
woman likes, he presents her with a flower just in the bud, which she takes and
puts in her breast. If she is engaged before, she shows him one, to signify her
engagement; which if in the bud only, shows the courtship is gone no further
than the first proposal and liking; if half blown, or the like, it is an emblem
of further progress; if full blown, it signifies that her choice is determined,
from whence they can never recede; that is, she can change the man that
presents it, but he cannot challenge her ti^l she has worn it publicly. If any
dislike should happen after that, they are to be shut up, never to have any
husband. If she has no engage^ent, but does not approve of the person, (...)
makes him a low courtesy, with her (...) till he is gone away. The (...) (...)
it is true, for all this, have some (...) arts, dissembling their (...) is now
and then, but not often. If (...) be engaged, he wears some favor (...) other
to show it; if he likes not the (...), he presents her with nothing; if the
woman should make some extraordinary advances, without any of his side, she has
liberty to live a maid, or to be disposed of among the widows, being looked
upon as such, who, by the by, marry none but widowers. But to return to the
twins. It happened that the brother who went with the lady to the altar, seeing
she had no bud upon her breast, fell in love with her, and she with him; the
awe of the ceremony hindered them from taking any further notice of one another
at that time. As she went down the ranks, the other brother saw her, and fell
in love with her likewise, and contrives to meet her with a bud in his hand,
just as the ceremony ended; which she accepts of taking him to be the person
who had marched up with her to the altar; but being obliged to go off with the
other young ladies, whether the concern she had been in, in performing the
ceremony before such an illustrious assembly, or the heat of the weather, or
the joy she conceived in finding her affection reciprocal, or all together, had
such an effect, that she fell into a fainting-fit among her companions; who
opening her bosom in haste, not minding the flower, it fell down, and was trod
under foot. Just as she was recovered, the brother who performed the ceremony,
came up and presented his bud; she thinking it had been that she had lost,
received it with a look that showed he had made a greater progress in her
affections than what that flower expressed. The laws not permitting any further
conversation at the juncture, they retired to their respective habitations.
Some time after, the brother who had the luck to present the first flower, whom
for distinction I shall call the younger brother, as he really was, found a way
to make her a visit by stealth, at a grated window which, as I observed, was
publicly prohibited by the wise governors, but privately connived at to enhance
their love. He came to her, and, after some amorous conversation, makes bold to
present her the more advanced mark of his affection; which she accepted of, and
gave him in return a scarf worked with hearts separated by little brambles, to
show there were some difficulties for him to overcome yet: however, they gave
one another mutual assurances of love, and he was permitted to profess himself
her lover, without declaring her name, for some private reasons she had. Not
long after, the elder brother came, and procured an opportunity of meeting her
at the same window. The night was very dark, so that he could not see the
second flower which she had in her bosom: only she received him with greater
signs of joy and freedom than he expected; but reflecting on the signs he had
remarked in her countenance, and after her illness by a sort of natural vanity
for his own merits, flattered himself that her passion was rather greater than
his, excused himself for being so long without seeing her, and added, that if
he were to be guided by the height of his flame, he would see her every night.
She reflecting how lately she had seen him, thought his diligence was very
extraordinary, but imputed it to the ardour of his passion; in fine, she gave
him such assured signs of love, that he thought in himself he might pass the
middle ceremony, and present her with the full-blown flower, to make sure of
her. She took it; but told him she would not wear it for some time, till she
had passed some forms, and had further proof of his constancy; but, for his
confirmation of her affection, she put out her hand as far as the grate would
permit, which he kissed with all the ardour of an inflamed lover, giving her a
thousand assurances of his fidelity, and she in return gave him a riband with
two hearts interwoven with her own hair, separated only with a little hedge of
pomegranates almost ripe, to show that the time of gathering the fruit was nigh
at hand. Thus were the three lovers in the greatest degree of happiness
imaginable; the brothers wore her favors on all public occasions,
congratulating each other for the success in their amors; but, as lovers
affect a secrecy in all they do, never telling one another who were the objects
of their affection. The next great feast drew on, when the younger brother
thought it was time to present the last mark of his affection in order to
demand her in marriage, which was usually performed in those public
solemnities. He told her he hoped it was now time to reward his flame, by
wearing the open flower, as a full sign of her consent, and gave her a
full-blown artificial carnation, with gold flames and little hearts on the
leaves, interwoven with wonderful art and ingenuity. She thinking it had been a
repitition of the ardour of his affection, took it, and put it in her bosom
with all the marks of tenderness, by which the fair sex in all countries know
how to reward all the pains of their lovers in a moment. Upon this he resolved
to ask her of her parents; which was the only thing necessary on his side, the
woman having right to demand any man's son in the kingdom, if he had but
presented her with the last mark of his affection. The elder brother having
given in his some time before, thought the parents approbation was the only
thing wanting on his side, and resolves the same day on the same thing. They
were strangely surprised to meet one another; but seeing the different favors,
they did not know what to make of it. When the father came, they declared the
cause of their coming, in terms which fully expressed the agony of their minds:
the father was in as great concern as they were, assuring them he had but one
daughter, who, he was confident, would never give such encouragement to two
lovers at the same time, contrary to their laws; but seeing their extreme
likeness, he guessed there must be some mistake. Upon this the daughter was
sent for; who, being informed it was to declare her consent in the choice of
her lover, came down with four flowers in her bosom, not thinking but the two
full blown had belonged to the same person, since she had received two before
she had worn the first. The description the poets give of the goddess Venus
rising out of the sea, could not be more beautiful than the bloom that appeared
in her cheeks when she came into the room. I happened to be there present,
being sent before by the Pophar, to let the father know of the regent's
intended visit; that being a considerable officer, he might order his concerns
accordingly. As soon as the young lady heard the cause of their coming, and saw
them indistinguishably like each other, with the public signs of her favors
wrought with her own hand, which they brought along with them, she creamed out,
"I am betrayed!" and immediately fell in a swoon, flat on the floor, almost
between her two lovers. The father, in a condition very little better, fell
down by his daughter, and bathing her with his tears, called to her to open her
eyes, or he must die along with her. The young men stood like statues, with
rage and despair in their looks at the same time. I being the only indifferent
person in the room, though extremely surprised at the event, called her mother
and women to come to her assistance; who carried her into another room,
undressed her, and, by proper remedies, brought her at last to herself The
first word she said was, "Oh! Berilla, what have you done? All the rest was
nothiing but sobs and sighs, enough to melt the hardest heart. When she was in
a condition to explain herself, she declared, she liked the person of the man
who went up with her to the altar; that some time after the same person, as she
thought, had presented her with the first marks of his affection, which she
accepted of, and in sine had given her consent by wearing the full-blown
flower; but which of the two brothers it belonged to, she could not tell;
adding, that she was willing to submit to the decision of the elders, or to
undergo what punishment they thought fit for her heedless indiscretion; but
protested, that she never designed to entertain two persons at the same time,
but took them to be the same person. The care of their marriages being one of
the fundamentals of their government, and there being no provision in the law
for this extraordinary case, the matter was referred to the Pophar regent, who
was to be there in a few days; guards in the mean time were set over the
brothers, for fear of mischief, till a full hearing. The affair was discussed
before the Pophar regent, and the rest of the elders of the place. The three
lovers appeared before them, each in such agony as cannot be expressed. The
brothers were so alike, it was hard to distinguish one from the other. The
regent asked them, which of the two went up to the altar with the young lady;
the elder said it was he; which the younger did not deny. The lady being
interrogated, owned she designed to entertain the person that went up with her
to the altar, but went no further than the first liking. Then they asked which
of the two brothers gave the first flower; the younger said, he presumed he
did, since he fell in love with her as she went down the ranks, and contrived
to give her the flower as soon as the ceremony was over, not knowing of his
brother's affection, neither did she bear any mark of engagement, but accepted
of his service; the lady likewise owning the receipt of such flower, but that
she lost it, fainting away in the crowd; but when, as she thought, he restored
it to her, she did not like him quite so well, as when she received it the
first time, supposing them to be the same person. Being asked who gave her the
second, third, and last mark of engagement, it appeared to be the younger
brother, whose flower she wore publicly in her bosom; but then she received the
full-blown flower from the elder brother also. The judges looked at one another
for some time, not knowing well what to say to the matter. Then the regent
asked her, when she gave her consent, if she did not understand the person to
be him that went up with her to the altar? She owned she did; which was the
elder: but in fact had placed her affections on the person who gave her the
first flower, which was the younger. Then the two brothers were placed before
her, and she was asked, that, supposing she were now at liberty, without any
engagement, which of the two brothers she would choose for her husband? she
stopped, and blushed at the question, but at length said, the younger had been
more assiduous in his courtship; and with that burst into tears, casting a look
at the younger brother, which easily showed the sentiments of her heart. Every
one was in the last suspense how the regent would determine the case; and the
young men expressed such a concern in their looks, as if the final sentence of
life and death, happiness or misery, was to be pronounced to them. When the
regent, with a countenance partly severe as well as grave, turning toward the
young lady, Daughter, said he, your ill fortune, or indiscretion, has deprived
you from having either of them: both you cannot have, and you have given both
an equal right; if either of them will give up their right, you may marry the
other, not else. What do you say, sons? says he, will you contribute to make
one of you happy? They both persisted they would not give up their right till
the last gasp. Then, says the regent, turning to the lady, who was almost dead
with fear and confusion, since neither of them will give up their right, I
pronounce sentence on you to be shut up from the commerce of men, till the
death of one of your lovers; then it shall be left to your choice to marry the
survivor. So giving orders to have her taken away, the court was going to break
up, when the younger brother falling on his knees, cries out, I yield my right,
rather than the adorable Berilla should be miserable on my account; let me be
shut up from the commerce of men, for being the occasion of so divine a
creature's misfortune. Brother, take her and be happy; and you divine Berilla,
only pardon the confusion my innocent love has brought upon you; and then I
shall leave the world in peace. Here the whole court rose up, and the young man
was going out, when the regent stopped him; Hold, son, says he, there is a
greater happiness preparing for you than you expect; Berilla is yours, you
alone deserve her, you prefer her good to your own; and as I find her real love
is for you, here join your hands, as I find your hearts are already. They were
married immediately; the regent leaving behind him a vast idea, not only of his
justice, but wisdom, in so intricate a case. I drew an historical piece of
painting of this remarkable trial, expressing as nigh as I could the postures
and agonies of the three lovers, and presented it* to the divine Isyphena, the
regent's daughter, telling her, that if she were to accept of flowers, as that
young lady did, she would ruin all the youths of Mezorania. She received it
blushing, and said she should never receive any but from one hand, nor even
that, if she thought she should do him any harm; adding, that she thought her
father had given a just judgment; then waved the discourse with such
innocence, yet knowledge of what she said, that I was surprised to the last
degree; not being able to guess whether I had offended her or not.

These visitations in the company of the Pophar, gave me an opportunity of
seeing all the different parts and chief curiosities of the whole empire. Their
great towns, especially the heads of every Nome, were built, as I said, much
after the same form, differing chiefly in the situation, and are principally
designed for the winter-residence, for their courts and colleges, but
particularly for instructing and polishing their youth of both sexes; and such
admirable care and economy, to avoid all dissoluteness and idleness, that, as
I observed before, there is no such thing known, as for persons to have no
other business on their hands but visits and dress; esteeming those no better
than brutes and barbarians, who are not constantly employed in improving their
natural talents in some art or science. Their villas, or places of pleasure,
are scattered all over the country, with most beautiful variety: the villages
and towns built for manufactures, trades, convenience, of agriculture, etc. are
innumerable; their canals, and great lakes, some of them like little seas, are
very frequent, according as the nature of the country will allow; with
pleasure-houses and pavilions, built at due distances round the borders,
interspersed with islands and groves, some natural, some artificial, where at
proper seasons you might see thousands of boats skimming backwards and
forwards, both for pleasure and the profit of catching fish, of which there is
an inexhaustible store. There are also vast forests of infinite variety and
delight, distinguished here and there with theatrical spaces or lawns, either
natural, or cut out by art, for the convenience of pitching their tents in the
hot seasons, with such romantic scenes of deep vales, hanging woods, and
precipices, natural falls, and cascades, or rather cataracts of water over the
rocks, that all the decorations of art are nothing but foils and shadows to
those majestic beauties of nature; besides glorious prospects of different
kinds over the edges of the mountains where we passed in our visitations,
sometimes presenting us with a boundless view over the most delicious plains in
the world; in other places, having our view terminated with other winding
hills, exhaling their reviving perfumes from innumerable species of natural
fruits and odoriferous shrubs. -- Traveling thus by easiy journeys, staying or
advancing in our progress as we thought fit, I had an opportunity of admiring
with infinite delight the effects of industry and liberty, in a country where
nature and art seemed to vie with each other in their different productions.
There was another extraordinary satisfaction I received in these visitations,
which was the opportunity of seeing, and partaking of their grand matches, or
rather companies, if I may use the expression, of hunting and fishing. All the
young people with their governors, or all who are able or willing to go, at
particular seasons disperse themselves for these hunts all over the kingdom:
the country being so prodigious fertile, that it furnishes them, almost
spontaneously, with whatever is necessary, or even delectable for life, the
people living in some measure in common, and having no other interest but that
of a well-regulated cummunity. They leave the towns at certain seasons, and go
and live in tents for the convenience of hunting and fishing, according as the
country and seasons are proper for each recreation; the flat part of the
country (though it is generally more hilly than champaign) is stocked with
prodigious quantities of fowl and game, as pheasants, partridges of different
kinds, much larger than our wild hens; turkeys, and peacocks, with other
species of game, which we have not in Italy; hares almost innumerable, but no
coneys that ever I saw; unless we call coneys a lesser sort of hare, which feed
and run along the cliffs and rocks, but don't burrow as ours do. There is also
a small sort of wild goat, much less than ours, not very fleet, of a very high
taste, and prodigious fat. They take vast quantities of all sorts but still
leave sufficient stock to supply next season, except hurtful beasts, which they
kill whenever they can. But their great hunts are in the mountains and woodland
parts of the country, where the forests are full of infinite quantities of mast
and fruits, and other food for wild beasts of all kinds; but particularly stags
of four or five different species; some of which, almost as big as a horse,
keep in the wildest parts, whose flesh when dry and seasoned with spices, is
the richest food I ever tasted. Their wild swine a^e of two kinds, some vastly
large, others very little, not much bigger than a lamb, but prodigious fierce.
This last is most delicate meat, feeding on the masts and wild fruits in the
thickest part of the groves; and multiplying exceedingly, where they are not
di^turbed, one sow bringing sixteen or eighteen pi^s; so that I have seen
thousands of them caught at one hunting match, and sent in presents to the
other parts of the kingdom, where they have none; which is their w^y in all
their recreations, having persons appointed to carry the rarities of the
country to one another, and to the governors, parents, and friends left behind.
When they go out to their grand hunt, they choose some open vale, or vast lawn,
as far in the wild forests as they can; where they pitch their tents, and make
their rendezvous: then they send out their most courageous young men, in small
bodies, of ten in a company, well-armed, each with his spear and his fusil
slung on his back, which last of late years they find more serviceable against
the wild beasts than spears, having got samples of them from Persia. These go
quietly through the wildest parts of the forest at proper distances, so as to
meet at such place, which is to view the ground, and find a place proper to
make their stand, and pitch their toils. They are often several days out about
this; but are to make no noise, nor kill any wild beast, unless attcacked, or
they come upon him in his couch, at unawares, that they may not disturb* the
rest. When they have made their report, several thousands of them surround a
considerable part of the forest, standing close together for their mutual
assistance, making ^s great a noise as they can, with dogs, drums, and rattles,
and other noisy instruments, to frighten the game toward the center, that none
may escape the circle. When this is done, all advance in a breast, encourage
their dogs, sounding their horns, beating their drums and rattles, that the
most courageous beasts are all roused, and run before them toward the center,
till by this means they have driven together several hundreds of wild beasts,
lions, tigers, elks, wild boars, stags, foxes, hares, and in fine all sorts of
beasts that were within that circle. It is most terrible to see such a heap of
cruel ^easts gathered together* grinning and roaring at one another, in a most
f^^ghtful manner: but the wild boar is the master of all. Whoever comes nearest
him in that rage, even the largest lion, he strikes at him with his tusks, and
makes him keep his distance. When they are brought within a proper compass,
they pitch their toils round them, and enclose them in, every man joining close
to his neighbor, holding out their spears to keep them off. If any beast
should endeavor to make his escape, which some will do now and then
(particularly the wild boars), they run against the points of the spears, and
make very martial sport. I was told, that a prodigious wild sow once broke
through three files of spears, overturned the men, and made a gap, that set all
the rest a running almost in a body that way, so that the people were forced to
let them take their career, and lost all their labor. But now they have men
ready with their fusils to drop any beast that should offer to turn ahead. When
they are enclosed, there is most terrible work, the greatest beasts fighting
and goring one another, for rage and spite, and the more fearful running into
the toils for shelter. Then our men with their fusils drop the largest as fast
as they can. When they intend to shoot the wild boars* three or four aim at him
at a time, to be sure to drop him or disable him, otherwise he runs full at the
last that wounded him, with such fury, that sometimes he will break through the
strongest toils; but hi^ companions all join their spears to keep him off. When
they have dropped all that are dangerous, and as many as they have a mind, they
open their toils, and dispatch all that are gasping. I have known above five
hundred head of beasts of all sorts killed in one day. When all is over, they
carry off their spoil to the rendezvous, feasting and rejoicing, and sending
presents as before.

There is oftentimes very great danger, when they go through the woods to make
discovery of their hunts; because, if, in small companies, some stubborn beast
or other will attack them directly; every man, therefore, as I said, has a
fusil slung at his back, and his spear in his hand for his defense. Being once
in one of their parties, we came upon a prodigious wild boar, as he was lying
in his haunt; some of us were for passing by him, but I thought such a noble
prey was not ^o be let go; so we surrounded him, and drew up to him, with more
courage and curiosity, than prudence; one of my companions, who was my intimate
friend, being one of those who conducted me over the deserts, went up nigher to
him than the rest, with his spear in his hands, stretched out ready to receive
him, in case he should come at him; at which the beast started up of a sudden,
with a noise that would have terrified the stoutest hero, and made at him with
such fury, that we gave him for lost. He stood his ground with so much courage,
and held his spear so firm and exact, that he run it exactly up the mouth of
the beast, quite into the inner part of his throat; the boar roared, and shook
his head in a terrible manner, endeavoring to get the spear out, which if he
had done, all the world could not have saved the young man. I, seeing the
danger, ran in with the same preeipitancy, and clapping the muzzle of my gun
almost close to his side, a little behind his fore-shoulder, shot him quite
through the body; so he dropped down dead before us. Just as we thought the
danger was over, the sow, hearing his cry, came rushing on us, and that so
suddenly, that before I could turn myself with my spear, she struck at me
behind with her snout, and pushing on, knocked me down with her impetuosity;
and the place being a little shelving, she came quite tumbling over me, which
was the occasion of saving my life. Ashamed of the foil, but being well
apprised of the danger, I was scarce got up on my feet and on my guard, when,
making at me alone, though my companions came in to my assistance, she pushed
at me a second time with equal fury. I held my spear with all my might,
thinking to take her in the mouth; but missing my aim, I took her just in the
throat, where the head and neck join, and thrust my spear with such force, her
own career meeting me, that I struck quite through her windpipe, the spear
sticking so fast in her neck-bone, that when she dropped, we could scarce get it
out again. She tossed and reeled her head a good while before she fell; but her
windpipe being cut, and bleeding inwardly, she was choked. My companions had
hit her with their spears on the side and back; but her hide and bristles were
so thick and hard, they did her very little damage. -- They all applauded my
courage and victory, as if I had killed both the swine. But I, as justice
required, gave the greatest part of the glory, for the death of the boar, to
the courageous dexterity of the young man, who had exposed himself so
generously, and hit him so exact in the throat. We left the carcases there, not
being able to take them with us; but marking the place, we came afterward with
some others to carry them off. I had the honor to carry the boar's head on the
point of my spear; which I would have given to the young man, but he refused
it, saying, that I had not only killed it, but saved his life into the bargain.
The honor being judged to be me by every one, I sent it as a present to the
divine Isyphena; a thing allowed by their customs, though as yet I never durst
make any declarations of love: she accepted of it, but added, she hoped I would
make no more such presents; and explained herself no further.

These people having no wars, nor single combats with one another, which last
are not allowed for fear of destroying their own species, have no other way of
showing their courage, but against wild beasts; where, without waiting for any
express order of their superiors, they will expose themselves to a great
degree, and sometimes perform exploits worthy the greatest heroes.

Their fishing is of two kinds; one for recreation and profit; the other to
destroy the crocodiles and allagators, which are only found in the great lakes,
and the rivers that run into them, and that in the hotter and champaign parts
of the country. In some of the lakes, even the largest, they cannot live: in
others they breed prodigiously. As they fish for them only to destroy them,
they choose the properest time for that purpose, that is, when the eggs are
hatching; which is done in the hot sands, by the sides of the rivers and lakes.
The old ones are not only very ravenous at that time, but lie lurking in the
water near their eggs, and are so prodigious fierce, that there is no taking
their eggs, unless you first contrive to kill the old ones. Their way to fish
for them is this: They beat at a distance, by the sides of the rivers and
lakes, where they breed, which makes the old ones hide themselves in the water.
Then twenty or thirty of the young men row quietly backward and forward on the
water where they suppose the creatures are; having a great many strong lines
with hooks, made after the manner of fish-hooks, well armed as far as the
throat of the animal reaches. These hooks they fasten under the wings of ducks
and water-fowls, kept for the purpose, which they let drop out of the boat, and
swim about the lake. Whenever the ducks come over the places where the
creatures are, these last strike at them, and swallow the poor ducks
immediately, and so hook themselves, with the violence and check of the boat.
As soon as one is hooked, they tow him, floundering and beating the water, at a
strange rate, till they have him into the middle of the water at a distance
from the rest of his companions, who all lie nigh the banks; then the other
boats surround him, and dart their harping-spears at him, till they hill him.
These harping-spears are pointed with the finest tempered steel, extremely
sharp, with beards to hinder them from coming out of his body; there is a line
fastened to the spear, to draw it back, and the creature along with it; as also
to hinder the spear from flying too far, if they miss their aim. Some of them
are prodigious dexterous at this; but there is no piercing the creature but in
his belly, which they must hit as he flounces and rolls himself in the water.
If a spear hits the scales of his back, it will fly off as from a rock, not
without some danger to those who are very nigh, though they generally know the
length of the string. I was really apprehensive of those strange fierce
creatures at first, and it was a considerable time before I could dart with any
dexterity; but the desire of glory, and the applauses given to those that
excel, who have the skins carried like trophies before their mistresses, these,
and the charms of the regent's daughter, so inspired me, that I frequently
carried the prize.

It is one of the finest recreations in the world; you might see several
hundred boats at a time, either employed, or as spectators, with shouts and
cries, when the creature is hit in the right place, that make the very banks
tremble. When they have killed all the old ones, they send their people on the
shore, to rake for the eggs, which they burn and destroy on the spot; not but
some will be hatched before the rest, and creep into the water, to serve for
sport the next year. They destroy these animals, not only for their own
security in the use of the lakes, but also to preserve the wild fowl and fish,
which are devoured and destroyed by the crocodiles.

But the fishing on the great lake Gilgol, or lake of lakes, is without any
danger; there being no allagators in that water; and is only for recreation,
and the profit of the fish. The lake is above a hundred Italian miles in
circumference. At proper seasons, the whole lake is covered with boats; great
n^mbers of them full of ladies to see the sport, beside what are on the islands
and shores, with trumpets, hautboys, and other musical instruments, playing all
the while. It is impossible to describe the different kinds of fish the lake
abounds with; many of them we know nothing of in Europe; though they have some
like ours, but much larger, as pikes, or a fish like a pike, two or three yards
long: a fish like a bream, a yard and a half over; carps forty or fifty pound
weight; they catch incredible numbers of them: some kinds in one part of the
lake, some in another. They fish in this manner, and afterward feast on what
they catch, for a fortnight or three weeks, if the season proves kind, retiring
at night to their tents, either on the islands or shore, where there are
persons employed in drying and curing what are proper for use; sending presents
of them into other parts of the country, in exchange for venison, fowl, and the
like. Though there are noble lakes and ponds, even in the forests, made by the
enclosures of the hills and woods, that are stored with excellent fish; yet
they are entirely destitute of the best sort; that is, sea fish, which we have
in such quantities in Europe. When this fishing is over, they retire to the
towns, because of the rainy seasons, which begin presently after.

I am now going to enter on a part of my life, which I am in some doubt,
whether it is proper to lay before your Reverences, or not: I mean the hopes
and fears, the joys and anxieties of a young man in love; but in an honorable
way, with no less a person than the daughter of the regent of this vast empire.
I shall not however, enter into the detail of the many various circumstances
attending such a passion; but shall just tuch on some particular passages,
which were very extraordinary, even in a passion which generally of itself runs
into extremes. Your Reverences will remember, that there is no real distinction
of quality in these people, nor any regard either to interest or dignity, but
merely to personal merit; their chief view being to render that state happy
which makes up the better part of human life. I had nothing therefore to do in
this affair, but to fix my choice, and endeavor to please and be pleased. My
choice was soon determined; the first time I saw the incomparable Isyphena, the
regent's daughter, though she was then but ten years old, ten thousand budding
beauties appeared in her, with such unutterable charms, that though I as good
as despaired of arriving at my wished for happiness, I was resolved to fix
there, or no where.

I observed when I was first introduced into her company by the regent her
father, that she had her eye fixed on me, as a stranger, as I supposed, but yet
with more than a girlish curiosity. I was informed afterward, that she told
her playfellows, that that stranger should be her husband, or no one. The wise
Pophar her father had observed it, and whether it was from his knowledge of the
sex, and their unaccountable fondness for strangers, or whether he disapproved
of the thought, I cannot tell, but he was resolved to try both our constances
to the utmost. I was obliged by the Pophar to teach her and some other young
ladies, as well as some young men, to paint; but it was always in the father or
mother's company. Not to detain your reverences with matters quite foreign to,
and perhaps unworthy your c^gnisance, it was five years before I durst let her
see the least glimmering of my affection. She was now fifteen, which was the
height of her bloom. Her father seeing she carried no mark of any engagement,
asked her in a familiar way, if her eyes had made no conquests; she blushed,
and said, she hoped not. He told me also as a friend, that I was older than
their customs cared to allow young men to live single; and with a smile asked
me, if the charms of the Bassa's daughter of Grand Cairo had extinguished in me
all thoughts of love. I told him there were objects enough in Mezorania, to
make one forget any thing one had seen before, but that being a stranger I was
willing to be thoroughly acquainted with the genius of the people, lest I
should make any one unhappy. I was just come back from one of our visitations,
when I was struck with the most lively sense of grief I ever felt in my life. I
had always observed before, that Isyphena never wore any sign of engagement,
but then I found she carried a bud in her bosom. I fell immediately upon it;
which she perceiving, came to see me without any bud, as she used to go before,
keeping her eyes upon me to see what effect it would have. Seeing her continue
without any marks of engagement, I recovered, and made bold to tell her one
day, that I could not but pity the miserable person, whoever he was, who had
lost the place in her bosom he had before; she said unconcernedly, that both
the wearing and taking away the flower from her bosom, was done out of kindness
to the person. I was then so taken up with contrary thoughts, that I did not
perceive she meant to try whether she was the object of my thoughts or not.
However, finding she carried no more marks of engagement, I was resolved to try
my fortune for life or death; when an opportunity offered beyond my wish. Her
mother brought her to perfect a piece of painting she was drawing: I observed a
melancholy and trouble in her countenance I had never seen before; that moment
the mother was sent for to the regent, and I made use of it to ask her, what it
was that affected her in so sensible a manner? I pronounced these words with
such emotion and concern on my own part, that she might easily see I was in
some very great agony. She expressed a great deal of confusion at the question,
insomuch, that without answering a word, she got up, and went out of the room,
leaving me leaning against the wall almost without life or motion. Other
company coming, I was roused out of my lethargy, and slunk away to my own
apartment, but agitated with such numberless fears, as left me almost destitute
of reason. However, I was resolved to make a most just discovery, and to be
fully determined in my happiness or misery. There was a greated window on the
backside of the palace, where I had seen Isyphena walk sometimes, but never
dared to approach; I went thither in the evening, and seeing her by herself, I
ventured to it, and falling on my knees, asked her for heaven's sake what was
the matter, or if I had offended her? She immediately burst into tears, and
just said, "Ask no more," and withdrew; though I cannot say with any signs of
indignation. Some time after, I was sent for to instruct her in the finishing
of her piece. I must tell your Reverences, that I had privately drawn that
picture of her which you saw, and put the little boy in afterward. In a hurry
I had left it behind me in my closet, and the Pophar finding it by accident,
had taken it away without my knowledge: and shown it to the mother; and making
as if he did not mind Isyphena, who stood by, and saw it (as she thought,
undiscerned), seemed to talk in a threatening tone to the mother about it. When
I came in, I had just courage enough to cast one glance at Isyphena, when,
methought, I saw her eyes meet mine, and show a mixture of comfort and trouble
at the same time. As this subject cannot be very proper for your Reverences
ears, I shall comprise in half an hour what cost me whole years of sighs and
solicitude, though happily crowned at last with unspeakable joys. This trouble
in Isyphena was, that having made herself mistress of the pencil, she had
privately drawn my picture in miniature, which she kept secretly in her bosom,
and it having been discovered by the mother, as that which I had drawn was by
the father, to try her constancy he had expressed the utmost indignation at it:
but Isyphena's greatest trouble was, lest I should know and take it for a
discovery of her love, before I had made any overtures of mine. In progress of
time we came to an eclaircissement: she received my two first flowers: but
because I was half a stranger to their race, we were to give some more signal
proof of our love and constancy than ordinary; we had frequently common
occasions offered us, such as might be looked upon as the greatest trials. She
was the paragon not only of the kingdom, but possibly of the universe, for all
perfection, that could be found in the sex. He stature was about the middle
size, the just proportion of her shape made her really taller than she seemed
to be; her hair was black The author being an Italian, did not think black hair
so beautiful.
indeed, but of a much finer gloss than the rest of the sex, nor quite so much
curled, hanging down in easiy tresses over her shoulders, and shading some part
of her beautiful cheeks. Her eyes, though not so large as our Europeans, darted
such luster, with a mixture of sweetness and vivacity, that it was impossible
not to be charmed with their rays: her features were not only the most exact,
but inimitable and peculiar to herself. In fine, her nose, mouth, teeth, turn
of the ^ace, all concurring together to form the most exquisite symmetry and
adorned with a bloom beyond all the blushes of the newborn aurora, rendered
her the most charming, and the most dangerous object in nature. The noblest and
gaest youths of all the land, paid their homages to her adorable perfections,
but all in vain: she avoided doing hurt where she could do no good; she did not
so much scorn, as shut her eyes to all her offers, though such a treasure gave
me ten thousand anxieties before I knew what share I had in it: but when once
she received my addresses, the security her constant virtue gave me was
proportionable to the immense value of her person. For my part* I had some
trials on my side. I was surrounded with beauties, who found a great many ways
to show me they had no dislike to me. Whether being a stranger, of different
features and make from their youth, gave them a more pleasing curiosity, or the
tallness of my stature, something exceeding any of theirs, or the gaiety of my
temper, which gave me a freer air than is usual with them, being, as I
observed, naturally too grave, (be that as it will), Isyphena's bright sense
easily saw I made some sacrifices to her. But we had greater trials than these
to undergo, which I shall briefly relate to your Reverences, for the
particularity of them. When I thought I was almost arrived at the height of my
happiness, being assured of the heart of the divine Isyphena, the Pophar came
to me one day with the most seeming concern in his countenance I ever marked in
him, even beyond that of the affair with the great Bassa's daughter: after a
little pause, he told me, he had observed the love between his daughter and
myself; that, out of kindness to my person, he had consulted their wisemen
about it, who all concluded; that, on account of my being a stranger, and not
of their race by the father's side, I could never marry his daughter; so that I
must either solemnly renounce all pretensions to her; or be shut up for ever
without any commerce with his people, till death. But, says he, to show that we
do justice to your merit, you are to have a public statue erected in your
honor, because you have taught us the art of painting; which is to be crowned
with a garland of flowers by the most beautiful young woman in the kingdom;
thus you will live to glory, though you are dead to the world. But if you will
renounce all pretensions to my daughter, we will furnish you with riches,
sufficient, with the handsomeness of your person, to gain the greatest princess
in the world, provided you will give a solemn oath never to discover the way to
this place. I fell down on my knees before him, and cried out, Here take me,
shut me up, kill me, cut me in a thousand pieces, I will never renounce
Isyphena. -- He said no more, but that their laws must be obeyed. I observed
tears in his eyes, as he went out, which made me see he was in earnest. I had
scarce time to reflect on my miserable state, or rather was incapable of any
reflection at all, when four persons came in with a dismal heaviness in their
looks, and bade me come along with them; they were to conduct me to the place
of my confinement. In the mean time, the Pophar goes to his daughter, and tells
her the same thing; only adding that I was to be sent back to my own country,
loaded with such immense riches as might procure me the love of any woman in
the world: for, says he, those barbarians (meaning the Europeans) will marry
their daughters to any one who has but riches enough to buy them; the men will
do the same with respect to the women; let the woman be whose daughter she
will, if she had but money enough to purchase a kingdom, a king would marry
her. Before he had pronounced all this, Isyphena had not strength to hear it
out, but fell down in a swoon at his feet: when she was come to herself, he
endeavored to comfort her, and added, that she was to have the young Pophar's
son, a youth about her age; for though he was not old enough to govern he was
old enough to get children. He went on and told her, I was to have a statue
erected in honor of me, to be crowned by the fairest woman in all Mezorania,
which, says he, is judged to be yourself, and, if you refuse it, Amnophilla is
to be the person. This was the most beautiful woman next Isyphena, and by some
thought equal to her, whose sighs of approbation and liking to my person I had
taken no notice of, for the sake of Isyphena. She answered with a resolution
that was surprising, even to her father, That she would die before she would be
wanting to her duty, but that their laws allowed her to choose whom she pleased
for her husband, without being undutiful; that as to the crowning of the
statue, she accepted of it, not for the reason he gave, but to pay her last
respects to my memory, who, she was sure, would never marry one else. As for
the young Pophar* she would give her answer when this ceremony was over. When
all things were ready for it, there was public proclamation made in all parts
of the Nome, that whereas I had brought into the kingdom, and freely
communicated to them the noble art of painting, to have a public statue erected
in my honor, to be crowned with a crown of flowers by the fairest woman in all
Mezorania. Accordingly, a statue of full proportion, of the finest polished
marble, was erected in one of their spacious squares with my name engraven on
the pedestal in gold characters, setting forth the service I had done to the
commonwealth, etc. The statue had the picture of Isyphena in one hand, and the
emblems of the art in the other. The last kindness I was to receive, was to be
permitted to see the ceremony with a perspective glass, from the top of a high
tower belonging to the place of my confinement, from whence I could discern
every minute circumstance that passed. Immediately the crowd opened ta make way
for Isyphena, who came in the regent's triumphant chariot, drawn by eight white
horses, all caparisoned with gold and precious stones, herself more resplendent
than the sun they adorned. There was a scaffold with a throne upon it just
close to the statue, with gilt steps for her to go up to put the crown on the
head of it. As soon as she appeared, a shout of joy ran through the whole
crowd, applauding the choice of her beauty, and the work she was going to
perform; then proclamation was made again for the same intent, setting forth
the reasons of the ceremony. When all was silent, she steps from the throne by
degrees with the crown in her hand, holding it up to be seen by all, supported
by Amnophilla and Menisa, two of the most beautiful virgins after herself.
There appeared a serenity in the looks of Isyphena beyond what could be
expected, expressing a fixed resosolution at the same time. As soon as she had
put the crown on the head of the statue, which was applauded with repeated
shouts and acclamations, she stood still for some time, with an air that showed
she was determined for some great action; then turning to the officers, ordered
them to make proclamation, that every one should remark what she was going to
do. A profound silence ensuing through the whole assembly, she went up the
steps again, and taking out the most conspicuous flower in the whole crown,
first put it in the right hand of the statue, and then clapped it into her
bosom, with the other two she had received from me before, as a sign of her
consent for marriage, which could not be violated. This accasioned a shout ten
times louder than any before, applauding such an heroic act of constancy, as
had never been seen in Mezorania. The regent ran up to her, and embracing her
with tears of joy trickling down his cheeks, said, she should have her choice,
since she had fulfilled the law, and supplied all defects by that extraordinary
act of fidelity: and immediately gave orders to have that heroic action
registered in the public records, for an example and encouragement of constancy
to posterity. But the people cried out, Where is the man! where is the man! let
their constancy be rewarded immediately...

Here the reader, as well as the publisher, will lament the irreparable loss of
the sheets, which were mislaid at his coming over. He does not pretend to
charge his memory with what they contained; just having time to run them over
in the Italian, when Signor Rhedi got them copied out for him. As far as the
publisher remembers, the lost sheets contained several discourses between the
Pophar and Gaudentio, concerning religion, philosophy, politics, and the like;
with the account of the loss of his wife and children, and some other accidents
that befell him during his stay in the country, which, as we shall see, induced
him to leave the place, with several curious remarks of Signor Rhedi; all which
would doubtless have given a great deal of satisfaction to the reader. But no
one can be so much concerned for the loss as the publisher, since they cannot
now be repaired, by reason of the death of the same Signor Rhedi, never to be
sufficiently regreted by the learned world.]

These discourses Probably about the Christian religion.
made very great impressions on the mind of a person of so much penetration as
the regent was, insomuch that he seemed resolved, when his regency was out,
which wanted now but a year, to go a long with me into Europe, during the ^^ay
he was to make at Grand Cairo, that he might have an opportunity of examining
matters at the fountainhead; wisely judging a consideration of such
consequence, as that of religion, to be no indifferent thing. For my own part,
notwithstanding the beauty and riches of the country, I could find no
satisfaction in a place where I had lost all that was dear to me, though I had
the comfort to have my dear Isyphena, and her three children, all baptized by
my own hand before they died: neither could length of time allay my grief; but,
on the contrary, every thing I saw revived the memory of my irreparable loss. I
considered the instability of the fleeting joys of this world, where I thought
I had built my happiness, for a man of fortune, on the most solid foundation.
But alas! all was gone as if it had been but a dream, and the adorable Isyphena
was no more. The good old Pophar was in a very little better condition, having
lost his dearest daughter, and his little grandchildren, particularly the
eldest boy, who is that picture with his mother. This reflection on the vanity
of human felicity, made him more disposed to hear the truths of our divine
religion, so that he was resolved to go and search further into the reasons for
it. There was another yet more forcible reason induced me to solicit the Pophar
for my return to my native country, which was the care of my future state. I
had lived so many years without the exercise of those duties our church obliges
us to perform, and, though I had not been guilty of any great crimes, I was not
willing to die out of her bosom: however, to do all the good I could to a
country where I had once enjoyed so much happiness, this being the last year we
were to stay, I at length persuaded the regent, that there might be some danger
of an invasion of his country, from the apposite side toward the southern
tropics; at least, I did not know, but there might be some habitable climate
not so far over the sands, as toward Libya and Egypt. I had often signified my
thoughts to him in that respect. I told him, that though his kingdom was safe,
and inaccessible to all but ourselves on that side, it was impossible, it might
be nigher the great ocean on the opposite one, or that the sands might not be
of such extent; or, in fine, there might be ridges of mountains, and from them
rivers running into the ocean, by which, in process of time, some barbarous
people might ascend, and disturb their long uninterrupted rest, without any
fence to guard against such an emergency. This last thought alarmed him; so we
were resolved to make a new trial, without communicating the design to any but
the chief council of five, where we were sure of inviolable secrecy. What
confirmed me in my notion was, that, when we were on the utmost point of our
mountains southward, looking over the deserts, I could perceive something like
clouds, or fogs, hanging always toward one part. I imagined them to be fogs
covering the tops of some great mountains, which must neve habitable vales.
Being resolved to make a trial, we provided all things accordingly, and set out
from the furthest part of the kingdom southwards, taking only five persons in
our company, steering our course directly toward that point of the horizon,
where I observed the thick air always hanging toward one place. We took
provisions and water but for ten days, leaving word that they should not
trouble themselves about us, unless we made a considerable stay, because in
case we found mountains, we should always find springs and fruits to subsist
on, by making a further search into the country: otherwise, if we saw no hopes
at the five days end, we would return the other five, and take fresh measures.
The third day of our vo^age, we found the deserts not so barren as we expected,
the ground grew pretty hard; and the fourth day we discovered some tufts of
moss and shrubs, by which we conjectured we should soon come to firm land; the
evening of that day we discovered the tops of hills, but further off than we
thought; so that though we traveled at a great rate all that night and most of
the next day, we could only arrive at the foot of them the fifth day at night.
After some little search we came to a fine spring, and, to our comfort, no
signs of inhabitants; if there had, we should have returned immediately to take
further advice. The next morning we got up to the top of the highest hill to
discover the country; but found it to be only the point of a vast mountainous
country, like the worst part of our Alps, though there were some fertile vales
and woods, but no footsteps of its ever having been inhabited, as we believed,
since the creation. Finding we could make good provision for our return, we
were in no great pain about time; but wandering from place to place, viewing
and observing every way. After proceeding along those craggy hills and
precipices in this manner for five days, they began to lessen toward our
right, but seemed rather to increase the other way: at length, in the most
dismal and horrid part of the hill-brow, one of our young men thought he spied
something like the figure of a man, sitting by a little spring under a craggy
rock just below us; we sent three of our people round another way to keep him
from running into the wood, while the Pophar and myself stole quietly over the
rock where he was. As soon as he saw us, he whips up a broaken chink in the
rock, and disappeared immediately: we were sure he could not get from us; so we
closed and searched, till we found a little cave in the windings of the rock,
where was his retiring place. His bed was made of moss and leaves, with little
heaps of dried fruits, of different sorts, for his sustenance. When he saw us,
he was surprised, and rushed at us like a lion, thinking to make his way
through us, but being all five at the mouth of the cave, he stood ready to
defend himself against our attempts. Viewing him a little nigher, we saw he had
some remains of an old tattered coat, and part of a pair of breeches, with a
ragged sash, or girdle, round his waist, by which, to our great surprise, we
found he was an European. The Pophar spoke to him in Lingua Franca, and asked
him who, or what he was; he shook his head as if he did not understand us. I
spoke to him in French, Italian, and Latin, but he was a stranger to those
languages; at length he cried^out Inglis, Inglis. I had learned something of
that language, when I was student at Paris: for knowing my father had a mind I
should learn as many languages as I could, I had made an acquaintance with
several English and Scotch students in that university, particularly with one
F. Johnson, an English Benedictine; and could speak it pretty well for a
foreigner, but had almost forgot it for want of use. I bid him take courage,
and fear nothing, for we would do him no harm. As soon as ever he heard me
speak English, he fell down on his knees, and begged us to take pity on him,
and carry him to some habitable country, where he might possibly get an
opportunity of returning home again, or at least, of living like a human
creature. Upon this he came out to us, but looked more like a wild beast, than
a man; his hair, beard, and nails were grown to a great length, and his mien
was as haggard, as if he had been a great while in that wild place; though he
was a stout well built man, and showed something above the common rank. We went
down to the fountain together, where he made me to understand, that his father
was an East India merchant, and his mother a Duch woman of Batavia, that he had
great part of his education in London; but being very extravigant, his father,
whose natural son he was, had turned him off, and sent him to Batavia, to his
mother's friends; that, by his courage and industry, he was in a fair way of
making his fortune, being advanced to a lieutenant in the Dutch guards at
Batavia; but was unhappily cast away on the coast of Africa, where they had
been on a particular adventure: That he and his companions, four in number,
wardering up in the country to seek provisions, were taken by some strange
barbarians, who carried them a vast unknown way into the continent, designing
to eat them, or sacrifice them to their inhuman gods, as they had done his
companions. But being hale and fat at the time of his taking, they reserved him
for some particular feast: That, as they were carrying him through the woods,
another party of barbarians, enemies to the former, met them, and fell a
fighting for their booty: which he perceiving, knowing he was to be eaten if he
staid, slunk away in the scuffle into the thickest woods, hiding himself by
day, and marching all night he did not know where, but, as he conjectured,
still higher in the country. Thus he wandered from hill to hill, and wood to
wood, till he came to a desert of sands, which he was resolved to try to pass
over, not daring to return back, for fear of falling into the hands of those
merciless devourers. He passed two days and two nights without water, living on
the fruits he carried with him, as many as he could, till he came to this
mountanious part of the country, which he found uninhabited; taking up his
abode in that rock, where he never had any hopes of seeing a human creature
again: neither did he know himself where he was, or which way to go back. In
fine, he told us he had lived in that miserable place, now upwards of five
years. After we had comforted him, as well as we could, I asked him, which way
the main sea lay, as near as he could guess, and how far he thought it was to
it? He pointed with his hand toward the south, a little turning toward the
east, and said, he believed it might be thirty or forty days journey; but
advised us never to go that way, for we should certainly be devoured by the
barbarians. I asked him whether the country was habitable from that place down
to the sea; he told me yes, except that desert he had passed; but whether it
was broader in other places, he could not ^ell.

All the time he was speaking, the Pophar eyed him from top to toe; and calling
me aside, What monster, says he, have we got here? There is a whole legion of
wild beasts in that man. I see the lion, the goat, the wolf, and the fox, in
that one person. I could not forbear smiling at the Pophar's skill in
physiognomy, and told him we should take care he should do no harm. Then I
turned to the man, and asked him, whether he would conform himself to the laws
and rites of the country, if we carried him among men again, where he should
want for nothing. He embraced my knees, and said, he would conform to any laws
or any religion, if I would but let him see a habitable country again. I
started at the man, and began to think there was some truth in the Pophar's
science. However, I told him, if he would but behave like a rational creature,
he should go along with us: but he must suffer himself to be blindfolded, till
he came to the place. He startled a little, and seemed to be prodigious
suspicious, lest we should deceive him. But on my assuring him on the faith of
a man, that he should come to no harm, he consented.

After we had refreshed ourselves, being both glad and concerned for the
information we had received of the nature of the country, which was the intent
of our journey, in order to guard against all inconveniences, we covered his
eyes very close, and carried him back with us, sometimes on foot, sometimes on
one of the spare dromedaries, till we arrived safe from where we set out. Then
we let him see where he was, and what a glorious country he was come into. We
clothed him like ourselves, that is, in our travelling-dress, to show he was
not an entire stranger to our race. He seemed lost in admiration of what he
saw, and embraced me with all the signs of gratitude imaginable. He readily
conformed to all our customs, and made no scruple of assisting at all their
idolatrous ceremonies, as if he had been as good a Heathen as the best of them.
Which I seeing without declaring myself to be a Christian, told him I had been
informed, the people of the country where he was educated, were Christians; and
wondered to see him join in adoring the sun. Pugh! says he, some bigoted
people make a scruple, but most of our men of sense think one religion is as
good as another. By this I perceived our savage was of a new set of people,
which I had heard of before I left Italy, called Politici These Politici were
forerunners of modern free-thinkers, who^e princip^es tend to the destruction
of all ^uman society, as our author sh^ws incomparably well by and by.
, who are a sort of Atheists in masquerade. The Pophar, out of his great skill
in physiognomy, would have no conversation with him, and commanded me to have a
strict eye over him. However, the information he had given us of the
possibility of invading the kingdom the way he came, answered the intent of our
voyage, and my former conjectures; about which there was a grand council held,
and orders given to secure the foot of our outermost mountain southwards, which
ran a great way into the desert; so that it was sufficient to guard against any
of those barbarous invaders of the continent. But to return to our European
savage; for he may be justly called so, being more dangerous in a commonwealth,
than the very Hicksoes themselves; though he was a person who had a tolerably
civilized education, bating the want of all sense of religion, which was owing
to his perpetual conversation with libertines: He had a smattering of most
kinds of polite learning, but without a bottom in any respect. After he had
been with us some time, his principles began to show themselves in his
practice. First, he began to be rude with our women; married or single, it was
all alike to him; and, by an unaccountable spirit of novelty or contradiction,
our women seemed to be inclined to be very fond of him; so that we were at our
wits ends about him. Then he began to find fault with our government, despising
and condemning all our ceremonies and regulations: but his great aim was, to
pervert our youth, enticing them into all manner of liberties* and endeavoring
to make them believe, that there was no such thing as moral evil in nature;
that there was no harm in the greatest crimes, if they could but evade the laws
and punishments attending them. As I had endeavored to create a confidence in
him, he came to me one day, and said, that, since I was an European as well as
himself, we might make ourselves men for ever, if I would join with him: You
see, says he, these men cannot fight; nay, will rathe, be killed themselves,
than kill any one else: cannot you show me the way out of this country, where we
will get a troop of stout fellows well armed, and come and plunder all the
country? we shall get immense riches, and make ourselves lords and masters of
all. I heard him with a great deal of attention, and answered him, that I
thought the project might easily take, only for the horrid wickedness of the
fact; especially for us two, who had received such favors from the Pophar and
his people; he, in his being delivered from the greatest misery; and myself, in
having been freed from slavery, and made one of the chief men of the kingdom:
that the action would deserve to be branded with eternal infamy, and the
blackest ingratitude: beside the infinite vi^lanies, injustices, crimes, and
deaths of innocent persons, who must perish in the attempt; which would always
stare us in the face, and torment us with never-ceasing stings of conscience
till our death. Conscience! says he, that is a jest; a mere engine of
priestcraft: all right is founded in power: let us once get that, and who will
dispute our right? As for the injustice of it, that is a mere notion;
distinction of crimes, mere bigotry, and the effect of education, ushered in
under the cloak of religion. Let us be but successful, and I will answer for
all your scruples. I told him, it was a matter not to be resolved on suddenly;
and that I would consider on it. But I bid him be sure to keep his matters to
himself. I went immediately to the Pophar, and gave an account of what had
passed. He was struck with horror at the recital; not so much for the
consequences, as that human nature could be brought to such a monstrous
deformity. If, says he, your Europeans are men of such principles, who would
not fly to the furthest corner of the earth, to avoid their society? Or rather,
who can be sure of his life among such people? Whoever thinks it no greater
crime in itself, to kill me, than to kill a fly, will certainly do it, if I
stand in his way. If it were lawful, continued he, by our constitutions to kill
this man, he deserves a thousand deaths, who makes it lawful to destroy all the
world besides. I answered, that all the Europeans were not men of his
principles, nor even those of his nation, who were generally the most
compassionate and best natured men in the world. But that he was of a new set
of wretched people, who called themselves Deists, and interorly laughed at all
religion and morality, looking upon them as mere engines of policy and
priestcraft. Interiorly! says he; yes, and would cut any man's throat
ex^eriorly and actually, if it were not for fear of the gallows. Shut him up,
cried he, from all commerce of men, lest his breath should infect the whole
world; or rather, let us send him back to his cave, to live like a wild beast;
where if he is devoured by the savages, they do him no injury, on his own
principles. I represented to him, that we were just on our journey back to
Grand Cairo, where we might carry him blindfold, that he should not know our
way over the sands, and there give him his liberty; but that we would shut him
up till then. This being agreed on, I took a sufficent number of men, to seize
him; and to do it without any mischief, for he was as stout as a lion, we
contrived to come upon him in his bed, where we caught him with one of our
young women. Three of our men fell upon him at once, and kept him down, while
the rest tied his hands and legs, and carried him into a strong-hold, whence it
was impossible for him to escape* The woman was shut up apart, according to our
laws. When he found himself taken, he called me by the most cruel names he
could think on, as the most wicked and treacherous villain that ever was, thus
to betray him, and the trust he had put in me. Yes, says I, it is a crime to
discover your secrets, and no crime in you to subvert the government, and set
all mankind a-cutting one another's throats, by your monstrous principles: so I
left him for the present. Some time after, I went to him, and told him, our
council had decreed he should be carried back from whence he came, and be
delivered over to the savages, either to be devoured by them, or to defend
himself by his principles, as well as he could. He cried out, Sure we would not
be guilty of such horrid barbarity! Barbrrity! said I; that is a mere jest:
they will do you no injury; if your flesh is a rarity to them, when they have
you in their power, they have full right to make use of it. He begged by all
that was dear, we would not send him to the savages; but rather kill him on the
spot. Why, says I, you are worse than the greatest canibals; because they spare
their friends, and only eat their enemies; whereas your principles spare no
body, and acknowledge no tie in nature. At length he owned himself in a
mistake, and seemed to renounce his errors; when I told him, if he would engage
his most solemn promise, to suffer himself to be blindfolded, and behave
peaceably, we would carry him to a place where he might find an opportunity to
return to his own country. But, says I, what signify promises and engagements
in a man who laughs at all obligations, and thinks it as just and lawful to
break them, as to make them? No, he cursed himself with the most dreadful
imprecations, if he were not tractable in all things we should command him.
But, says he again, will not you deliver me back to the savages? I answered in the
same tone, should we do you any wrong, if we did? At length, to appease him, I
promised him faithfully we would put him in a way to return into his own
country: but bid him consider, if there were no such thing as right and wrong,
what would, or what security could there be in human life?

In a few weeks, the time drew on for our great journey to Grand Cairo, where I
was in hopes of seeing my native country once more. All things were now as good
as ready; the Pophar and myself had other designs than usual, and were in some
pain to think of leaving that once so happy country. Though, as I said, all
things that could make me happy, were buried with my dear Isyphena. The Pophar
had some serious thoughts of turning Christian; the evidences of our religion
were soon perceived by a person of his deep penetration; though persons of
little learning, and great vices pretend they don't see them. But, like a wise
man, he was resolved to examine into it, in the places where it was exercised
in the greatest splendor. We provided a good quantity of jewels, and as much
gold as we could well carry, for our present expenses at Grand Cairo, and
elsewhere, in future exigencies. I went to my Deist in his grotto, and threw
him in as much gold and jewels as were sufficient to glut his avarice, and make
him happy in his brutal way of thinking. But I would not trust myself with him
alone, for all his promises, as he, on his side, expressed still a diffidence
of trusting any body; I suppose from the consciousness of his own vile
principles. Then I threw him a blinding-cap, which we had made for him, that he
should not see our way over the deserts. This cap was made like a headpiece,
with breathing places for his mouth and nose, as well as to take in
nourishment, opening at the back part, and clasping with a spring behind, that
being once locked, he could not open it himself. He put it on his head two or
three times, before he durst venture to close it. At last he closed it, and he
was as blind as a beetle. We went to him and tied his hands, which he let us do
quietly enough; but still begged us that we would not betray him to the
savages. I bid him think once more, that now his own interior sense told him,
that to betary him would be a crime; by consequence there was such a thing as
evil.

All things being in readiness, we mounted our dromedaries. The Pophar and all
the rest kissed the ground as usual; I did the same, out of respect to the
place which contained the remains of my never too much lamented Isyphena, the
ashes of whose heart are in the hollow of the stone, whereon is her picture.
Not to mention the ceremonies of our taking leave, we were conducted in a
mournful manner over the bridge, and lanched once more into the ocean of sands
and deserts, which were before us. Our savage was on a dromedary which followed
the rest, but led by a cord fastened to one of them, for security. It stumbled
with him twice or thrice, and threw him off once, but without any great hurt.
But the fear of breaking his neck put him into a great agony; and though he was
as bold as a lion on other occasions, he was prodigiously startled at the
thoughts of death. We arrived at Grand Cairo at the usual period of time,
without any particular disaster. As soon as we were settled, the Pophar ordered
me to send the Deist packing as soon as we could. This brutal race, says he,
next the cannibals, are fittest company for him. I unlocked the
blinding-helmet, and told him, we had now fulfilled our promise; that he was at
Gaand Cairo, where he might find some way or other to return into Europe; and,
to convince him, carried him to some European merchants who assured him of the
same. Delivering to him his gold and jewels, I begged him to reflect on his
obligations to us, and the greatful acknowledgments due to our memory on that
account: we had taken him from a miserable solitude, where he lived more like a
wild beast than a man; and where he was in danger of being found and devoured
by the cannibals: we had brought him into one of the happiest countries in the
world, if he would but have conformed to its laws; and now had given him his
liberty to go where he pleased, with riches sufficient to make him easy, and
benefits to make him grateful all his life. I then took my leave of him. But to
our sorrow we had not done with him yet. As soon as the Pophar and the rest had
performed the ceremony of visiting the tombs of their ancestors, or rather the
places where the tombs had been, the good old man and myself began to think of
measurs for our journey into Italy. He ordered his people to stay at Grand
Cairo till the next annual caravan; and in case he did not return by that time,
they were to go home, and he would take the opportunity of the next following
caravan, because he was upon business that nearly concerned him. We had agreed
with a master of a ship to carry us to Venice, which, as I had the honor to
acquaint your Reverences before, was a French ship, commanded by Monsieur
Godart. We had fixed the day to go aboard, when behold? our savage, at the head
of a band of Turks, came and siezed every one of us, in the name of the great
Bassa. By great good fortune, while we staid at Grand Cairo, I had the grateful
curiosity to inform myself what was become of the former Bassa's daughter, we
left there five and twenty years ago. The people told me, the daughter was
married to the Grand Sultan, and was now Sultaness, mother to the present
Sultan, and regent of the empire; adding that her brother was their present
great Bassa. This lucky information saved all our lives and liberties. We were
carried prisoners before the Great Bassa, the faithless savage accusing us of
crimes against the state; that we were immensely rich, (a crime of itself
sufficient to condemn us), and could make a discovery of a country of vast
advantage to the Grand Signior. To be short, we had all been put to torture,
had not I begged leave to speak a word or two in private to the Great Bassa.
There I told him who I was; that I was the person who had saved his sister's
life, the now Empress; and, to convince him, told him all the circumstances
except that of her love, though he had heard something of that too: I showed
him the ring she had given me for a remembrance, (which he also remembered),
adding, that we were innocent men, who lived honestly according to our own
laws, coming there to traffic, like other merchants, and had been traduced by
one of the greatest villains upon earth. In a word, this not only got us off,
and produced us an ample passport from the Grand Bassa for our further voyage;
but he also ordered the informing wretch to be seized, and sent to the galleys
for life. He offered to turn turk if they would spare him. But being apprised
of his principles, they said he would be a disgrace to their religion; and
ordered him away immediately. Upon which, seeing there was no mercy, being
grown mad with rage and despair, before they could seize his hands, he drew out
a pistol, and shot himself through the head; not being able to find a worse
hand than his own. The Pophar, good man! bore these misfortunes with wonderful
patience, though he assured me his greatest grief was to see human nature so
far corrupted, as it was in that impious wretch, who could think the most
horrid crimes were not worth the notice of the supreme governor of the
universe. But see, says he, that providence can make the wicked themselves the
instruments of its just vengeance: for can any thing be so great a blot upon
human nature as to be its own destroyer, when the very brutes will struggle for
life till the last gasp? However, he was uneasy till he had left that hateful
place. Besides, there were some signs of the plague breaking out; so we went
down to Alexandria as fast we could. And to encourage Monsieur Godart, he made
him a present beforehand of a diamond of a considerable value. We set sail for
Candy, where Monsieur Godart was to touch, the 1^^h day of August, anno 1712.
But, alas! whether these troubles, or not being used to the sea, or some
infection of the plague he had caught at Grand Cairo, or all together, is
uncertain; but that great good man fell so dangerously ill, that we thought we
should scarce get him to Candy. He assured me, by the knowledge he had of
himself and nature, that his time was come. We put in at the first creek, where
the land-air a little refreshed him; but it was a fallacious crisis; for in a
few days, all of us perceived his end drew near. Then he told me he was
resolved to be baptized, and die in the Christian faith. I got him instructed
by a Reverend priest belonging to Monsieur Godart; his name was M^nsieur Le
Grelle, whom I had formerly known when he was a student in the college for
foreign missions; and* what was the only comfort I had now lest, I saw him
baptized, and yield up the ghost with a courage becoming the greatest hero, and
the best of men. This was the greatest affliction I ever had in my whole life,
after the death of his daughter. He left me all his effects, which were
sufficient to make me happy in this life, if riches could procure happiness.

We had some days to stay, before Monsieur Godart could make an end of his
business. I was walking in a melancholy posture along the seashore, and
reflecting on the adventures of my past life, occasioned by those very waters
whereon I was looking, when I came, or rather my feet carried me, to a hanging
rock, on the side of the island, just on the edge of the sea, and where there
was scarce room enough for two or three persons to stand privately undercovert,
very difficult to be discerned; where going to sit down, and indulge my
melancholy thoughts, I espied a Turk and two women, as if concealed under the
rock. My own troubles not allowing me the curiosity to pry into other people's
concerns, made me turn short back again: but the elder of the two women, who
was mistress of the other, seeing by my distress, that I was a stranger and a
Christian, (being now in that habit), came running to me, and falling on her
knees, laid hold of mine, and begged me to take pity on a distressed woman,
who expect^d every moment to be butchered by one of the most inhuman villains
living, from whose violence they had fled and hid themselves in that place, in
expectation of finding a boat to convey him off. I lifted her up, and thought I
saw something in her face I seen before, though much altered by years and
troubles. She did the same by me, and at length cried out, O heavens! it cannot
be the man I hope! I remembered confusedly something of the voice, as well as
the face; and, after a deal of astonishment, found it was the Curdish lady, who
had saved my life from the pirate Hamet. Oh! says she, I have just time enough
to tell you, that we expected to be pursued by that inhuman wretch, unless you
can find a boat to carry us off before he finds us, otherwise we must fall a
sacrifice to his cruelty. I never staid to consider consequences, but answered
precipitately, that I would do my best; so ran back to the ship as fast as I
could, and with the help of the first man brought the boat to the rock. I was
just getting out to take hold of her hand, when we heard some men coming
rushing in behind us, and one of them cried, Hold villain, that wicked woman
shall not escape so; and fires a pistol, which missing the lady, shot the man
attending her, into the belly, so that he fell down presently, though not quite
dead. I had provided myself with a Turkish scymitar, and a case of pistols,
under my sash, for my defense on shipboard; I saw there was no time to
deliberate, so I fired directly at them, for there were three, and had the good
luck to drop one of them. But Hamet, as I found afterward, minding nothing but
his revenge on the woman, fired again, and missing the lady a second time, shot
her maid through the arm, and was drawing his scymitar to cleave her down, when
I stepped in before the lady; but shooting with too much precipitancy, the
bullets passed under his arm, and lodged in the body of his second; he started
back at the fire so near him, which gave me time to draw my scymitar. Being now
upon equal terms, he retired two or three paces, and cried, Who art thou that
venturest thy life so boldly for this wicked woman? I knew his voice perfectly
well, neither was he so much altered as the lady. I am the man said I, whose
life thou would have taken, but this lady saved it, whose cause I shall now
revenge as well as my own, and my dear brother's. We made no more words, but
fe^l to it with our scymitars, with all our might; he was a brave stout man,
and let me see I should have work enough to hew him down. After several
attacks, he gave me a considerable wound on my arm, and I cut him across the
cheek a pretty large gash, but not to endanger his life; at length the justice
of my cause would have it, that striking of his turban at one stroke, and with
another falling on his bare head, I cut him quite into the brains, that some of
them spurted on my scymitar. He fell down, as I thought, quite dead, but after
some time he gave a groan, and muttered these words, Mahomet thou art just, I
killed this woman's husband, and she has been the occasion of my death; with
these words he gave up the ghost. By this time the lady's attendant was dead;
so I took the lady and her woman without staying, for fear of further
difficulties, and putting them in the boat, conducted them to the ship.
Monsieur Godart was extremely troubled at the accident, saying we should have
all the island upon us, and made great difficulty to receive the lady; but upon
a just representation of the case, and an abundant recompense for his effects
left behind, we got him to take her in, and hoist sail for Venice as fast as we
could. The lady had now time to thank me for her delivery, and I to
congratulate my happy fortune in being able to make a return for her saving my
life. During our passage, I begged her to give us the history of her fortunes
since I left her, which I prognosticated then could not be very happy,
considering the hands she was fallen into. Says she, You remember I made a
promise to Hamet, that I would marry him on condition he would save your life.
Yes, Madam, said I, and am ready to venture my own once more in return for so
great a benefit. You have done enough, says she; and with that acquainted us,
that when I was sold off to the strange merchants, Hamet carried her to
Algiers, and claimed her promise. I was entirely ignorant, says she, of his
having a hand in the death of my dear lord; but, on the contrary, the villain
had contrived his wickedness so cunningly, that I thought he had generously
ventured his own life to save his, and being, as you know, a very handsome man,
of no very inferior rank, and expressing the most ardent love for my person,
and I having no hopes of returning into my own country, fulfilled my promise
made on your account, and married him. We lived contentedly enough together for
some years, bating that we had no children, till his constant companion, who
was the man attending me at the rock, and was killed by that villain, fell out
about a fair slave, which Omar, so he was called, had bought, or taken prisoner
in some of their piracies. Hamet, as well as he, fell in love with her, and
would have taken her for his concubine, but the other concealed her from him:
they had like to have fought about it; Hamet vowed revenge. The other, who was
the honester man of the two, was advised to be upon his guard, and to deliver
the woman to him; which he never would consent to, but was resolved to run all
risks, rather than the young lady should suffer any dishonor. In the mean time,
her friends, who were rich people of Circassia, hearing where she was, made
interest to have her ransomed, and taken from both of them, by the authority of
the Dey of Algiers, who was otherwise no friend to Hamet. This last had been
informed, that Omar, because he could not enjoy her himself, contrived to have
her ransomed from his rival, and I myself had a hand in the affair, for which
he threatened revenge on both of us; and being also disgusted with the Dey, he
gave orders to have his ships ready to move, and follow his trade of piracy.
Then Omar informed me how Hamet had murdered my first husband, by hiring the
Arabians to do it, while he pretended to defend him to avoid my suspicions,
with such circumstances of the fact, that I saw the truth was too clear. The
horror and detestation I was in, is not to be expressed, both against myself,
for marrying such a monster. Omar added, that* he was certainly informed, that
as soon as he had us out at sea, he would make away with us both; and told me,
if I would trust myself with him, he would undertake to carry me off in a boat,
and conduct me into my own country. I was resolved to fly to the farthest end
of the earth to avoid his loathed fight; so resolved to pack up our most
precious things, and go along with him. He procured a boat to meet us, at a
little creek of the island, by a person he thought he could confide in, but who
betrayed the whole affair to Hamet. Of which also we had timely notice, and
removing from the station where we expected the boat, and fled along the coast
as privately as we could, and hid ourselves under the rock where you found us,
expecting either to find some favorable occasion to be carried off, or to die
by the hand of Hamet, which we certainly had done, had not he met with his just
death by yours. The lady had scarce given us this short account of her
misfortunes, and we were not only congratulating her for her deliverance, but
admiring the justice of providence, which reached this villain, both to bring
him to condign punishment for the murder of the innocent Curd, and make him die
by my hand, five and twenty years after he had robbed and killed my brother
with all his crew, sold me for a slave, and attempted to kill me also, had not
the strange lady saved my life: I say, we were making such like reflections on
this strange accident, when they told us from above, two vessels seemed to come
full sail upon us, as if they were pursuing us with all their might. We made
all the sail we could, but our ship being pretty heavy loaded, we saw we must
be overtaken. Some of us were resolved to fight it out to the last, in case
they were enemies. But Monsieur Godart would not consent to it, saying the
Bassa's passport would secure us, or by yielding peaceably, we might be
ransomed. They came up to us in a short time, and saluted us with a volley of
shot, to show what we were to trust to. We struck our sails and let them board
us without any resistance. Monsieur Godart, with too mean a spirit, as I
thought, told them with cap in hand, that he would give them any satisfaction,
and assured them he would not willingly fall out with the subjects of the Grand
Signior. They seized every man of us, and spying the lady and me, There they
are, said they; the adulteress and her lover, with the spoils of her murdered
husband. Which words, showing they were Turks in pursuit of us from Candy,
quite confounded Monsieur Godart at once, and made me imagine, I should have
much ado to find any quarter. They hauled us upon deck, making show as if they
were going to cut off my head. I never thought myself so nigh death before; but
had the presence of mind to cry out in the hearing of the whole crew* that we
were servants of the Grand Sultaness; and produced the passport of the Great
Bassa her brother, charging them on their peril not to touch us. This stopped
their fury a little; some cried out. Hold, have a care what you do; others
cried, Kill them all for robbers and murderers, the Sultaness will never
protect such villains as these. When the hurly burly was something appeased,
Monsieur Godart reasoned the case with them, and told them, if they murdered
us, they could never conceal it; since all the crew of the three ships heard
our appeal to the Sultaness mother, the passport setting forth among other
things, that I had saved the life of the Garnd Sultaness. This brought them to
a demur. The chief of them began to consult among themselves what was best to
be done. When I, begging leave to speak, told them, if they would carry us to
Constantinople, we would willingly submit our lives, and all that belonged to
us, in case the Sultaness did not own the fact, and take us into her
protection: that, in case they put us to death, some one or other, in such a
number, would certainly inform against them, the consequences of which they
knew very well. I touched also but tenderly on the death of Hamet, and our
innocence. The first part of my speech made them pass over the other. They
demurred again, and at length resolved to carry us to Constantinople, and
proceed against us by way of justice, not doubting to make good prize of us, on
account of our being Christians. Thus was our journey to Venice interrupted by
this accident. When we came to the port, Monsieur Godart got leave to send our
case to Monsieur Savigni, the French resident; who found means to represent to
the Sultaness mother, that there was a stranger in chains, who pretended to be
the person who had saved her life, when she was at Grand Cairo, and would give
her proofs of it, if he could be admitted to her Highness's presence. I would
not send the ring she gave me, for fear of accidents. The Sultaness gave orders
immediately, I should be brought to her presence; saying, she could easily know
the person, for all it was so long before. I put on the same kind of dress I
was in when she first saw me, which, if your Reverences remember, was the
traveling dress of the Mezoranians. When I was brought into her presence, I
scarce knew her, being advanced to a middle age, and in the attire of the Grand
Sultaness. She looked at me with a great deal of emotion, and bid me approach
nigher. I immediately fell on my knees, and holding the ring in my hand which
she gave me at parting, as if I were making a present of it, Madam, said I,
behold a slave, who had the honor to save your Highness's life, and now begs
his own, and that of his companions; and most humbly request your Highness to
accept of this jewel, as a token of our last distress. Instead of answering me,
which put me in great pain, as doubting whether I was right or not, she turned
to her nighest attendants, and said in a pretty soft voice, It is he, I know
him by his voice, as well as his dress: and rising off her seat, came and took
the ring. Then looking attentively at it, Yes, Sir, said she, I own the ring
and bearer; and acknowledge you to be the one who saved my life. For which
reason, I give you yours, and all that belongs to you, forbidding all under
pain of death, to give you the least trouble; and withal ordered a very rich
Turkish robe to be thrown over my shoulders, as a sign of her favor. Immediate
orders were sent to the port to set Monsieur Godart and all his crew at
liberty, and to feast us as particular friends of the Grand Sultaness. The
company being dismissed, she made a sign for me to stay, having further
business with me. When all were gone, but two of her chief favorite women, she
came to me without any ceremony, and taking me in her arms, as if I had been
her brother, embraced me with a great deal of tenderness; her joy to see me,
making her lay aside her grandeur, and yield to the transports of undisguised
nature. She led me by the hand into a most magnificent apartment; saying, Come,
Signior Gaudentio, for so I think you are called; after you have refreshed
yourself, you shall tell me your adventures. She made no scruple to sit down
with me, being now not only mistress of herself, but of the whole Ottoman
empire, as well as sure (...) her attendants. We had a refreshment of all the
rarities of the East, with the richest wines for me, though she drank none
herself. I long to hear your adventures, continued she, of so many years
absence. So I told her in short, how I was carried by that strange merchant
into an unknown country; without telling her the way we went thither; where I
had married the regent's daughter. She blushed a little at that part, and
showed the remains of all her former beauty. But it put me in mind of my own
indiscretion, to touch on such a nice point. She passed it off with a great
deal of goodness; and, recovering myself, I acquainted her of the reasons of my
return, as well as how I was taken by Hamet the first time, which she had not
been acquainted with before; and lastly, how I met with the same Hamet again,
killed him, and by that means came into that misfortune. I called it then a
misfortune, said I, but look upon it now to be one of my greatest happinesses;
since, by that occasion, I have the honor of seeing your Highness in that
dignity of which you are the most worthy of any one in all the Ottoman empire.
She seemed to be in admiration at the course of my life; and added, I think,
Signor, you said you were married; is your spouse dead? No, Madam, said I:
alas! she is dead, and all my children, and I am going to retire, and lead a
private life in my native country. With these and other discourses we passed
the greatest part of the day, when she bid me go back to the ship in public,
attended with all the marks of her high favors; but she said she would send
for me privately in the evening; for, added she, I have a thousand other things
to ask you. Accordingly I was introduced privately into the seraglio; which
she, being Sultaness-regent, could easily do. There she entirely laid aside her
grandeur. We talked all former passages over again, with the freedom of friends
and old acquaintances. In our conversation, I found she was a woman of
prodigious depth of judgment, as indeed her wading through so many
difficulties, attending the inconstancy of the Ottoman court, particularly the
regency, evidently showed. I made bold to ask her how she arrived at that
dignity, though she was the only person in the world that deserved it; and took
the liberty to say in a familiar way, that I believed her Highness was now
sensible of the service I did her, in refusing to comply with her former
demands, since the fates had reserved her to be the greatest empress of the
world, not the consort of a wandering slave. Had I not been entirely assured of
her goodness, I should not have dared to have touched on that head. She blushed
with a little confusion at first, but putting it off with a grave air,
Grandeur, says she, does not always make people happy. Ten thousand cares
attend a crown; but the indifference I have for all things, make mine sit
easier than it might have done otherwise. It is true, continued she, that young
people very seldom see their own good, and oftentimes run into such errors, by
the violence of their passions, as not only to deprive them of greater
blessings, but render their misfortunes irretrievable. Some time after you were
gone, my father the Grand Bassa was accused by some underhand enemies, of
mal-administration, a thing too frequent in our court, and privately condemned
to be strangled. But having some trusty friends at the Port, he had notice of
it, before the orders came: he immediately departed from Grand Cairo, and took
a round-about way toward Constantinople, to prevent, as the way is, the
execution of them. He sent me before to prepare matters, and to intercede with
the young Sultan, my late deceased Lord, for his life, leaving word where I
might let him know of the success of my intercession. I presented myself before
the Sultan with that modest assurance, which my innocence, my youth, and grief
for my father's danger, gave me. I fell down on my knees, and, with a flood of
tears, begged my father's life. The Sultan looked at me with some amazement;
and, whatever it was he saw in my face, not only granted my request, and
confirmed my father in his former post; but made a profession of love to my
person; and even continued it with more con^stancy, than I thought a Grand
Sultan capable of, having so many exquisite beauties to divert him, as they
generally have. I consented, to save my father's life; and whether the
indifferency I had for all men, made him more eager, I cannot tell; but I found
I was the chief in his favor. He had some other mistresses now and then, of
whom he was very fond. But never teasing him, nor fretting myself about it, I
easily found I continued to have the solid part of his friendship; and bringing
him the first male child, the present emperor, I became the chief Sultaness;
and by his death, and the minority of my son, am now regent; by which I am
capable of rendering you all the service the Ottoman empire can perform: which
I esteem one of the happiest events of my life. I returned her the most
profound bow, and humble thanks a heart full of the most lively sense of
gratitude could profess. She offered me the first post of the Ottoman empire,
if I would but become a mussulman, or only so in appearance. Or if, said she,
you had rather be nigh me, you shall be the chief officer of my household. I
have had assurance enough, added she, that neither your inclinations nor
principles can be forced; neither will I endeavor to do it, but leave you as
much at your liberty, as your generous master did, when he bought you of Hamet.
I expressed all the grateful acknowledgments possible, for so generous an
offer; but assured her with an air that even expressed sorrow for the refusal,
that I lay under religious obligations, which bound me indispensably to return
into my own country. She was become now as much mistress of her inclinations,
as she had acquired prudence and experience by the long command she had over
her husband's heart, and the whole Ottoman empire. So after a month's stay she
let me go, with all the marks of honor her dignity would suffer her to
express. She would have punis^ed the persons that took us, but I interceded for
them. Monsieur Godart, who was well rewarded for the loss of his time and
confinement, can testify the truth of this history. The last words she said to
me, were, to bid me remember, that a Turk and a woman were capable of generous
gratitude and honor, as well as Christians. So we set sail for Venice.

[ Secretary. Here one of the inquisitors came in with a gold medal in his
hand, and turning to the examinant, said, Signor Gaudentio, I believe you have
found a relation in Italy, as well as in Africa, and one of the same nation
with your mother. It is the Persian lady you brought along with you, whom we
secured the same time we did you; but would not let you know it, till we could
procure intelligence from Venice, and a person who could speak the Persian
language. We own we find her in the same story with you, and nothing material
against you from Venice. Upon the examining her effects, we found this medal of
the same make with yours by which you knew who your mother was. She says it was
about her neck, when she was sold to the Persian merchant. But since we shall
give you both your liberties in a short time, she shall be brought unto you,
and we give you leave to say what you will to her, with the interpreter by.
Upon this the lady was introduced, with her maid and the interpreter. As soon
as she saw our examinant in good health, seemingly at liberty, a joyful
serenity spread itself over her countenance, such as we had not seen before.
Our examinant asked her, to be pleased to give an account of her life, as far
as she thought proper, and how she came by that medal.


Lady. All I know of myself, said she, is, that the noble Curd, who bought me
of a Persian merchant for a companion for his only daughter, about my own age,
whom he thought I resembled very much, often declared to me, that the merchant
bought me of a Turkish woman, who left that medal about my neck, supposing it
to be some charm or preservative against distempers, or because a sister of
mine had the same fastened about her neck, with a gold chain, which could not
be taken off without breaking; but who, or where the sister was, I never knew.
The noble Curdish Lord, who bought me, grew prodigious fond of me, and bred me
up as another daughter; and not only so, but having an only son, something
older than myself, he connived at a growing love he perceived between his son
and myself; which, after some difficulties on both sides, at length came to a
marriage; though it cost my generous benefactor and father-in-law his life. For
anothor young Lord of Curdistan, falling in love with me, often challenged
Prince Cali (that was my dear husband's name) to decide their pretensions by
the sword, which I had always forbid him to do; saying, that man should never
be my hasband who exposed my reputation by a duel; since the world would never
believe, that any man would expose his life for a woman, unless there had been
some encouragement given on both sides: whereas I never gave the least to any
but Prince Cali. However, the other met him one day, and attacked him so
furiously, that Prince Cali was forced to kill him in his own defense, making a
thousand protestations, that he had almost suffered himself to be killed,
rather than to disobey my orders. But the father of the prince who was slain,
with a company of assassins, (...) an ambuscade for prince Cali and his father,
in which this latter was killed, and most of his train. But by the valor of
his son, and two of his companions, the chief assassins were laid dead on the
spot, and the rest put to flight. But Prince Cali, after the death of his
father, fearing further treachery of that nature, presently after we were
married, removed to another part of the kingdom; from whence being sent on a
commission by his king, he was inhumanly murdered by the barbarous Hamet. This
is the sum of my unfortunate life, till I had the good fortune to save yours.


Secretary. We permitted the nephew and the aunt (for so they were found to be
by the medal) to embrace one another; Signor Gaudentio assuring her, that by
all appearance he was the son of her sister and the mother's sister that was
lost, and both of them preserved to save each other's life. The lady then
declared, she would turn Christian, since her misfortunes were come to a
period; and that she was resolved to leave the world, and retire into some of
our monasteries. We put her among the nuns of our order, where she promises to
be a signal example of virtue and piety. The inquisitors ordered the examinant
to give them the remaining part of his life, which, in all appearance, if they
found his story to agree with their informations, might purchase him his
liberty. Upon which Gaudentio proceeded as follows.]


I was telling your Reverences, that at length we set sail from the Port, and
steered our course directly for Venice, where we happily arrived without any
considerable accident, the 10th of December 1712. I do not question but your
Reverences are already informed, that such persons did arrive at Venice about
that time. Monsieur Godart is well known to several merchants, and some of the
senators of that famous city, whom he informed of what he saw with his own
eyes. But there were some particular passages, unknown to your Reverences,
wherein I had like to have made shipwreck of my life, after so many dangers; as
I did here of my liberty; though I do not complain, but only represent my hard
fortune to your Reverences consideration, as well as a great many strangers of
the first rank, to see the nature of it. I put on my Mezoranian habit, spangled
with suns of gold, and the fillet-crown on my head, adorned with suns of gold,
with several jewels of very great value, which I believe was the most
remarkable and magnificent dress of any ^here. I went unmasked being assured my
face and person were unknown to all the world. Every one's eyes were upon me.
Several of the masqueraders came to me, and talked to me, particularly the
ladies. They spoke to me in several languages, as Latin, French, Italian,
Spanish, High Dutch, etc. I answered them all in the Mezoranian language, which
seemed as strange to them, as my dress. Some of them spoke to me in the Turkish
and Persian language, in Lingua Franca, and some in an Indian language I did
not understand. I answered them still in the Mezoranian, of which no body knew
one word. Two ladies particularly, very richly dressed, followed me where ever
I went. The one, as it proved afterward, was Favilla, the celebrated
courtesan, in the richest dress of all the company; the other was the lady who
was with me when I was taken up, and who was the occasion of my settling at
Bologna; I mean the true occasion, for I will conceal nothing from your
Reverences. Notwithstanding their diligence, I got away unknown at that time.
The next time I came, I appeared in the same dress, but with richer jewels; I
had more eyes upon me now than before. The courtesan pursued me again in a
different, but richer dress than the former. At length she got me by myself,
and pulling off her mask, showed me a wonderful pretty face, only there was too
fierce an assurance in it. She cried in Italian, O Signor, you are not so
ignorant of our language, as you would seem to be! you can speak Italian and
French too: though we don't know who you are, we have learned you are a man of
honor. If you would not understand our words, you may understand a face, which
very great personages have been glad to look at: and with that put on one of
the most ensnaring airs I ever saw. I don't doubt but your Reverences have
heard of that famous courtesan, and how the greatest man in Venice was once her
slave. I was just going to answer her, when the other lady came up, and pulling
off her mask also, said almost the same things, but with a modesty more
graceful than her beauty, which was most exquisite, and the most like the
incomparable Isyphena I ever saw. I made them both a most respectful bow, and
told them, that it had been much safer for me, if I had kept myself still
unknown, and never seen such dangerous charms. I pronounced these words with an
air, that showed, that I was more pleased with the modesty of the last lady,
than the commanding assurance of the first. The courtesan, though a little
nettled at the preference she thought I gave the other, put on a more serious
air, and said, she had been informed, there was something very extraordinary in
my character, and said she would be glad to hear more of it by herself; that
her name was Favilla, and that she lived in such a street, where I should find
her house remarkable enough. The Bolognian lady, whom your Reverences knew very
well, and who was then at Venice, on account of the death of her uncle, one of
the senators, who had left her all his effects, said modestly, if I were to
favor her with a visit, as she had been informed that I was a learned man and
a virtuoso, being inclined that way herself, she should be glad of an hour's
conversation with me on that subject, telling me her name, and where she lived;
adding, if I would inform myself of her character, I need not be ashamed of her
acquaintance; nor, I hope of mine, Madam, says the other, thinking she had been
reflected on by that word. It was Monsieur Godart, who, with a levity peculiar
to his nation, had made the discovery who I was, though he knew nothing of me
but what passed since I came from Grand Cairo. I was going to reply to the
ladies, when company came up, and broke off the discourse. I was resolved to
see neither of them, and would go no more to the assembly, though almost
unavoidably I saw both afterward. I inquired into Favilla's character, though
I scarce doubted of it by what I saw and heard, and was informed that she was
an imperious courtesan, who had enslaved several persons of the first rank, of
different nations, and enriched herself by their spoils: this determined me not
to see her* But, as Monsieur Godart and myself were walking to see the town, he
brought me either industriously, or accidentally, by her door; she was sitting
at the window of one of the most magnificent palaces in Venice, (such spoils
had she reaped from her bewitched lovers.) As soon as she espied me, she sent a
servant to tell me, that lady Favila would wish to speak with me: I made some
difficulty, but Monsieur Godart told me, a man of honor could not refuse such
a favor as that; so I went in, and Monsieur Godart with me. The lady received
me with a most charming agreeable air, much different from her former
assurance, and conducted me into a most magnificent apartment, leaving Monsieur
Godart entertaining a very pretty lady, her companion. Not to detain your
reverences too long, when I would not understand what she meant, she offered me
marriage, with the inheritance of all her effects; I was put to the last
nonplus. I assured her with a most profound bow, that though I was not worthy
of such a happiness, I had an obligation never to marry. All the blood
immediately came into her face: I did not know what she was going to do, but
finding her in that disorder, I made another bow, saying, I would consider
further on her proposal; and walked directly out of the house, designing to
leave Venice as soon as my affairs would give me leave. Some time after
Monsieur Godart came to me, and told me, he was forced to do as I did; that the
lady was in such an outrageous fury he did not know what might be the
consequence. Three nights after, as Monsieur Godart and a young kinsman of his,
and myself, were going toward the Rialto, in the dusk of the evening, four
ruffians attacked us unawares; two of them set upon me, the other two attacked
Monsieur Godart and his kinsman; the poor young gentleman was run through the
body the first push; I made shift to disable one of my adversaries, but in
doing it, the other run me through the ribs, but the sword took only part of my
body, and missing my entrail,, the point went out on the side of my back.
Monsieur Godart, who, to give him his due, behaved with a great deal of courage
and bravery, had killed one of his men, and wounded the other; and the
ruffians, being disappointed in their nefarious designs, fled with the greatest
precipetancy, and in a place so dissipated and corrupt as Venice, it is very
easiy to elude discovery, or the hand of justice; after this unexpected
rencounter, we retired to our lodgings, where we had our wounds dressed, and as
soon as they would admit of traveling, we set out for Bologna, for probably
any longer stay might have involved us in greater difficulties.

This is a true and full account of my life hitherto; whatever is blameable in
it I hope your Reverences will pardon, as I submit it entirely to your
judgments.

[ Secretary. As I had the honor to inform you before, we inquired into all
those facts which he said happened to him in the company of Monsieur Godart;
which finding to be true, we judged the rest might be so. We asked him, if he
would conduct some of our missionaries to that strange country he mentioned; he
told us he would: but not willing to trust him entirely, as not knowing what he
might do with them, when he had them in unknown countries, we thought fit to
give him his liberty first to go where he would, even out of Italy, with
assurances, if he came back of his own accord, we would send missionaries along
with him. He went to Venice and Genoa abought his concerns, and is now come
back, with us; so that we believe the man to be really what he professes
himself to be.]


FINIS.

