THE MILLENIAL DOOR THROWN OPEN OR, THE MYSTERIES OF THE LATTER DAY GLOR^
UNFOLDED, IN A DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT EAST-WINDSOR, STATE OF CONNECTICUT, JULY
FOURTH, 1799.

The twenty-third year of the declaration of INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES:
In which event was laid the CORNER STONE (...) the NATIONAL TEMPLE, under whose
auspices all worshippers of GOD are allowed full indulgence: and from which
springs the TEMPLE of the LIVING GOD, into whose bosom the Nations of the Earth
are to bring their glory and their honor.

BY DAVID AUSTIN, Junr. Citizen of the World.

EAST-WINDSOR: PRINTED BY LUTHER PRATT.

July, 1799.

(...) the Young Gentlemen, Members of the Concilio ^^ciety, of East-Windsor,
at whose request the ^ensuing Discourse is committed to paper.
SIRS,
A COMPLIANCE with your request, that a Discourse might be delivered to you on
the 4th July, being followed by the pressing solicitation of ^our committee,
that the same might be given them for publication, I cheerfully enter upon the
ta^k of preparing for you a copy of that discourse which (...) might have died
as it fell from the lip. If any thing now presented you, shall tend to brighten
the prospects of your Society, by giving keenness to the edge of your rational
enquiries after truth, by lighting the lamp of hope, that the field of enquiry
now opening to your view, shall well repay the labor of the pursuit; and if it
may please GOD to give you an heart to improve the harvests of instruction, you
may gather to his own glory, to the benefit of society, and to the salvation of
your own souls; the reward will be equal to the expectation which the warmth of
your address seems to promise, and which our united prayers may be w^ll
employed to secure.

THE MILLENIAL DOOR, etc.
Daniel VII. ^6th ^7th. But the judgment shall sit, and they shall (...) his
dominion, to consume and to destroy it (...) the end. And the kingdom, and the
greatness (...) the kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the
people of the saints of the (...) High, whose kingdom is an everlasting
king^^^, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.


THE sublimity of this language, clothing an unalterable decree, at once, awful
in its aspect toward the nations in rebellion against GOD, and most animat^g
to those who bow to the scepter of his magestic sway, is well calculated to
excite in us humble and adoring thoughts of GOD, proportionate to the solemn
and awful subject on which, in this place, he condescends to speak.

THE language falls from the lips of an angel, whilst he unfolds to the prophet
the mystery of the four kingly powers which, in succession were ^o arise upon
the earth, and of the other kingdom ^^ich should arise after them, that should
be (...) from the first and who should subdue three (...). And he shall speak
great words against the ^ost High, and shall wear out the saints of the Most
^igh and think to change times and laws: and they shall be given into his hand,
until a time, and times, (...) the dividing of time. But the judgment shall
sit, (...) they shall take away his dominion, to consume and destroy it unto
the end.

UNTIL of late, there has been but one opinion amongst protestant divines, as
to the application of this descriptive branch of this very interesting
prophecy. They have all united in applying it to the papal power. They have
said it pointed, with precision, at the Bishop of Rome: That his standing is to
be seen in several prophetic features in the field to which this passage
belongs, and that the same is firmly supported by other correspondent
predictions, and prophetic aspects to be found ^n other parts of this book of
Daniel, and in the writings of St. Paul and of St. John.

O^ late, however, Divines seem less united in the application of these
prophecies to the Bishop of Rome than they, heretofore, had been accustomed to
be. Several reasons can be given for the change of sentiment. First, sympathy
in the sufferings of humanity, in the excision of the papal clergy by the
national rod: Secondly fear, lest the same fate may approach the border of the
protestant household, so far as we may have exposed ourselves to the jealousy
and fury of the lawful husband, by commiting fornication with the "kings of the
earth:" and lastly, the mistake may have arisen from the very sudden,
unexpected and violent means by which it is pleasing GOD to execute the
exterminating decree upon the papal household. These things considered, there
is little ground of surprise, that many protestant divines should have warped
from the ancient, acknowledged and just interpretations of this prophecy, and
have labored to accommodate the prophecies more to the circumstances of their
own safety, than what the ancient interpretation, in the light of Heaven's,
present awful exposition, seemed to warrant them to do. But of what avail will
the windings and twistings of mutilated and imperfect parts of prophetic
testimony be to those, whom the indignation of Heaven, by its all penetrating
eye, is searching out! -- Why has not the falsity of papal interpretation
screened the papal power? Why has she not been able to parry the application
of prophetic character from herself, by placing them to the account of Rome
heathen, which has gone down before her (...) Why has she not been able to
keep steadfast h^s dominion, and to preserve steadfast the section of the iron
and of the clay, by declaring that (...) section of the image against which the
stone (...) to inpinge was the section of the Roman ^mpire, already carried
away? -- The answer is, the last section is formed of iron and of clay; of
kingly and of priestly power combined: styled, by themselves the holy Roman
Empire, deriving its sanctity from the impious infusion of the wa^^rs of the
mystical whore into the cup of kingly administration. The iron being gone; the
iron and the clay combine, and form the ten toes of the Babylonish structure.
Against this last section, the stone is now striking. By its power the image is
shook, and seems likely, soon, to fall to the ground: As the downfall of
mystical Babylon is reputed to be the counterpart to the introduction and
prosperity of the kingdom of GOD, according to the spirit and hope of the
l^tter day glory, it is of very interesting moment, to settle our minds on this
important question; that our faith, and hope, and practice, may follow those
leadings of mind, which truth, and not error shall dictate to the honest (...).

LET it then be the business of the present discourse, to show, I. WHOSE
dominion it is, that is to be (...) away, to be consumed, and to be destroy^^
unto the end. II. By what means, this power shall be ^^^moved: and III. WHAT
are the happy consequences, i^^mediately to follow.


And the kingdom and dominion and the grea^^ness of the kingdom under the whole
Heaven shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High, whose
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.

I. THE subject enquires, whose dominion it is that is to be taken away, to be
consumed, and to be destroyed until the end.

LET a fair interpretation of the vision of Daniel, contained in this chapter
and expounded upon by the Angel, afford to us an answer to this enquiry.

IN the visions of GOD, Daniel saw, and behold from the sea, a tempestuous
estate, four great beasts came up, diverse one from another. The first was like
a lion and had eagles wings. This ^ndoubtedly presents an image of the
Babylonish empire extending its scepter, like the wings of an eagle, over one
hundred and twenty seven provinces. The wings were plucked. The reins of
government were taken from the hands of Nebuchadnezer. He was driven from men
until seven times passed over him* -- He was lifted up from the earth* and made
to stand upon his feet as a man, and a man's heart was given unto him. Like a
man, changed from the character he once wore whilst in a state of estrangment
from GOD, he exemplifies his conversion in the public confession he m^kes. And
at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzer lifted up mine eyes unto Heaven and
mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the Most High, and praised
and honored him that lives forever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion*
and his kingdom is from generation to generation. And all the inhabitants of
the earth are reputed as nothing: And he does according to his will in the army
of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand
or say unto him what do thou?

The head of gold, the crown of the Babylonish empire, was removed in the
excision of Belsheszer according to the interpretations of the writing by
Daniel. -- GOD has ^^^bered thy kingdom and finished it: thou art weighed in
the balances and art found wanting: thy kingdom is divided and given to the
Medes and Persians. In that night was Belsha^er, the king of the Chaldeans
slain. And Darius the Median took the kingdom.

THE Medes and Persians* the kings of the east, forming the two arms and the
breast of Nebuchadnezar's Image succeeded to the order and kingdom of the head
of gold. And behold another beast, a second, like to a bear, and it raised up
itself on one side; and it had three ribs in the mouth of it between the teeth
of it, and they said thus unto it arise, devour much flesh!

THIS kingdom is likened unto a bear because of the voraciousness of the
animal; its embracing its prey as the Medes and Persians encompassed Babylon --
it rose on one side of the Assyrian Empire, or from a state of connection with
it: -- it had three ribs between its teeth, denoting three eminent warriors in
the Mede and Persian armies; three presidents to whom the government was
committed; or to three kingdoms which including itself, it held in its
succession, as it were between its teeth: and the command to devour, presents
the rapacity of its dominion and succession.

After this I looked, and (...) and, which had upon the back of i^ four wings
of a (...), the beast had also four heads, and ^ominion (...) given to it.

THIS language paints to us the person, rapid strides and support of the
Grecian warrior, Alexander the Great. Like a leopard, spotted, sleek, and rapid
in its movements, so was Alexander. The four wings upon the back doubly express
the rapidity of his movements: the four pillars of his armies, on which he
rested, are also represented by the four heads which this beast is said to
carry: and to whom the dominion was eventually left.

After this I saw in the night visions and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and
terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth, it devoured and
break in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it and it was diverse
from all the beasts that were before it and it had ten horns.

THIS power is undoubtedly the power of Heathen Rome. It had the dominion in
the days of the crucifixion of our LORD. At the hands of this power the LORD of
life was put to death; moved thereto by the implacable enmity of the Jewish
Rulers. Over the whole world this dreadful and terrible beast maintained its
(...) something of the Christian doctrine and administrations in its Imperial
(...); it was over turned by the Go^^ and (...), between the fifth and sixth
cen^^^ry of the Christian era. It had ten horns, d^noting (...) kings, who i^
succession sat upon the imperial throne; or ten kingdoms over whom its s^eptre
primarily (...). Th^se horns were broken; th^se kingdoms were overturned; and
the (...) hea^ings of the political (...) gave birth to an Empire; known in
this prophecy under the style and title of a little horn which had eyes like a
man, and before, whom three of the first horns were plucked up by the roots;
and a mouth speaking great things.

(...) properties of the little horn are, by all, imputable to the papal power.
His empire, at first, was very small. He brought the ^rovinc^ and city of Rome
under his pontifical jurisdiction. He next was helped to tear up the empire of
Lombardy and of Raven^^ by the roots, and thus subdued three ^onns of the ten
from among which he sprang up. In the possession of the total jurisdiction of
these three kingdoms or provinces: in connection with an assumed, acknowledged,
yet disputed ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the other seven; this papal power
has, in an higher or less degree, been en^bled to maintain its jurisdiction
^ntil the day in which we have (...) its body given, thus for, to the burning
flame^ (...) all the pontifical air^ assumed; nor the uni^^^sal jurisdiction
claimed; nor the thunders of (...) power sent abroad; nor the great words it
spoke have availed to hinder that its foundation should not be shaken -- its
authority had in contempt, and its thunders trampled under foot. I behold then
because of the voice of the great words which the horn spoke, I beheld even
till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning
flame.

THIS exploit we now live to see performed. The convulsive scenes of European
conflict are loosening the stones of this papal fabric; and more and more
sapping the foundation of this antichristian structure.

THE ten kings are loosing their dominion. The subjects of these papal branches
are uniting in the common enmity, and with common consent, seem willing that
this antichristian power should be consumed by the breath of that irresistible
flame in which GOD is breathing forth his indignation upon it; waiting for the
fatal and deadly blow this power is to receive at the brightness of his coming.

THE place will not admit of so much as a glance at the many and variegated,
and repeated prophetic characters in which this papal power, that is now
falling, is spoken of, and represented as to fall in these days. Few can ^e
ignorant that the Old Testament and the New, are full of declarations to this
point. The sins of this mystical Babylon are recounted. Her persecutions and
bloodshed, her wearying of the saints of the Most High, and the universal
merchandise of her ungodly traffic; and the circulation of the filthiness of
her Babylonish cup, throughout all the regions of the mystical family, are
represented as abominations which call aloud for the perdition to be poured
forth, to which she is appointed in GOD'S great decree. Rejoice over h^^ thou
Heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets, for GOD has avenged you of her. And
a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great mill stone, and cast it into the
sea, saying, thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down,
and shall be found no more at all. And the voice of harpers and musicians, and
of pipers and trumpeters shall be heard no more at all in thee, and no
craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be shall be found any more in thee, and the
sound of a mill stone shall be heard no more at all in thee. And the light of a
candle shall shine no more at all in thee, and the voice of the bride groom and
of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the
great men of the earth* for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.
Perfectly, in concord with these declarations the text decl^^es: But the
judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion to consume and to
destroy it unto the end.

THE subject leads our thoughts

II. TO enquire by what means this apostate* papal, antichristian power is to
be removed?

FOR information on the subject we must make our appeal to the word of GOD; and
to the events of providence which are now passing before us. In doing this we
not only justify ourselves as following the best sources of instruction we can
be favored with, but avoid the weight of the curse which lies at the door of
those who consider not the work of the LORD, nor regard the operations of his
hands.

THE information to be obtained from the oracles of GOD is general; reserving
the fuller manifestation to the day in which the mighty seat of antichristion
desolation shall be wrought. In fact, some part of every prediction is kept in
the dark! It was never the design of Heaven that its predictions should be
fully understood until they were accomplished. -- Men might combine to defeat
them, and thus wage an unnecessary war with GOD. Men are left to the freedom of
their own will, and unconstrained, seem left to fulfill the will of GOD by the
thoughts they entertain, by the words they speak, and by the actions they
perform. When the event predicted is performed then we behold with admiration
the perfect coincidence of the event with the prediction it was ordained to
fulfill.

IN the interpretation of Daniel respecting the Babylonish image, pointing to
the section representing the papal power, in the feet and toes which were part
of iron and part of clay; thou saw said he till that a stone was cut out
without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and of
clay and break them to pieces: then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the
silver and the gold broken to pieces together and became like the chaff of the
summer threshing floor: and the wind carried them away, that no place was found
for them, and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain and filled
the whole earth.

And, whereas, thou saw iron mixed with (...) clay, they shall mingle
themselves with the seed of men! a union being formed between the sons of GOD
and the sons of men: but they shall not cleave one to another, no particular
attachments, more than ministers to private accommodation between the things of
GOD and of men; even as iron is not mixed with clay.

Forasmuch as thou saw that the stone was g^t out of the mountain without
hands and that it break in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver and
the gold, the great GOD has made known to the king what shall come to pass
hereafter, and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof is sure.

AND in the text, the declaration is: But the judgment shall sit, and they
shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end. -- In
These. II. 2nd -- it is written respecting the man of sin, the son of perdition;
who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called GOD, or that is
worshipped; so that he as GOD sits in the temple of GOD, showing himself
that he is GOD; and then, shall that wicked be revealed; whom the LORD shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming.

THE antichristian power, falling in the character of mystical Babylon, affords
constant ground of exultation, on the part of those who have ^^en made to feel
the weight of her rod. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double ^^to her
double, according to her works, in the (...) which she has filled, fill to her
double.

MANY exultations, are recorded, as springing out of the event of the downfall
of mystical Babylon of which there is not now time fully to speak.

SUFFER me, in this place, to read in your hearing a brief sketch of the
sentiments of the learned of the day, on this subject It is taken from the body
of a discourse preached by Doct. Livingston, before the members of the New York
missionary society, convened on the 23d. of April in that City. The pamphlet I
hold in my hand* page 45.

THE dispensations of providence, in connecion with the sure word of prophecy,
justly raise our expectations, and may be considered as unequivocal tokens of
signal success. -- What ever may be the period from which the rise of
antichrist is to be dated, it is evident his usurpations and tyranny are
drawing to a close. That wicked power which has so long resisted the progress
of the gospel, but which for some time has been gradually consuming* will soon
be destroyed by the brightness of the Redeemer's coming. The last struggles of
the monster may be violent, and his expiring agonies protracted, but he is
certainly dying. The western and eastern antichrist, which with their combined
influence, are perhaps considered in scripture as one, arose nearly at the same
time and will fall together.

THE vials of wrath, now pouring upon those nations which gave their aid and
support to the man of sin: the desolations of war, the revolutions, terrors,
and convulsions, unrecorded before in history, announce the approach of some
period new and interesting. The REDEEMER is shaking the nations, and his people
hope, it is to prepare the way for his coming. We presume not, with confidence,
to ascertain "the times or the seasons which the father has put in his own
power" but as we know that when the fig tree puts forth leaves the summer is
nigh: so when we see all these things, we know that the coming of the son of
man is near, even at the door.

TAKE, my brethren, a deliberate view of all these events. Collect them in a
point, and feel the encouragement which they are ^^l^^lated to inspire.
Whatever may be the immediate consequence of your efforts, it will be accepted
of the LORD, that it was in your hearts to build him an house. Whatever may be
the issue of the individual or joint exertions in this good work; it will not
be long before the morning will break, and with its rising luster dispel the
shades of night. Another season of refreshing is at hand. Another Pentecost
will awaken the churches and amaze the world. The cruel conflict which must
terminate in killing the witnesses, can afford the adversary but a short
triumph. The spirit of life from GOD will again enter into them: order will
speedily arise out of confusion: light succeed to darkness, and the REDEEMER
take to himself his great power and reign. His breath will shake the slain
multitudes, and nations be born in a day. The Jews are ready to hail their own
Messiah, and all the ends of the earth, will see the salvation of GOD.

HEAR the decree which ensures the final success of the Gospel, and the glory
of the REDEEMER: He must reign until he has put all enemies under his feet;
then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to GOD, even
the father: that GOD man be all in all.

SUFFICE it, that the predictions of GOD are sure and certain, and so
powerfully opperative as to ascertain the event announced. The event we now
behold, of consequence are better capable to designate the means by which this
overthrow seems likely to be accomplished than to be totally dependant on the
prophetic description.

ON the subject of our own experience, on the evidence arising from matters of
fact, something may be, with safety said.

IS it not evident, that the political stone which is now giving the deadly
shock to the last section of the Babylonish Image, took its origin in these
western climes? was it not cut out without hands from the Mountain of GOD'S
universal providence in these United States? was it not the weighty stone which
we all helped to lift, during the introduction and progress of that political
re^olution through which we have just now passed? did it not get its birth, at
the moment wh^lst the alarm of British usurpation, and threatened devastation
was sounded in our ears? How like electric fire did the animating principle of
liberty, and determined opposition pervade the abodes of our collonial realms?
how, in rapture, did Columbia's sons start from their fires, seize their arms,
and march to the tune of Victory or Death! Boston harbor received the tea,
rendered poisonous, through the potion infused, by North's insidious hand. The
Gaspee schooner was in flames; the king's authority was defied; and with arms
in hand an appeal was made to Heaven for the justice of our cause. Twenty years
expired, and these United States found themselves independent. Their standards
were planted, where just now the proud insignia of the enemy braved the winds;
threating never to leave our coasts until the keys of our graineries and of our
commerce were laid at their feet! Delusive hope! -- impotent wish! despotic
thirst, for gold and for power, which the arm of proud despotism itself could
not secure!

AT this moment the stone cut out without hands, may be said to have ripened
into form. But previous to the twenty years of American growth, like the winds
of Eolus, impatient to be gone, it stretches its way across the Atlantic. As a
cloud of political glory it accompanies Washington's son^ Against the throne of
Papal despotism it lets off its fire. At the door of the first born of
Babylon's sons it gently knocks; but that the decree of Heaven may be
fulfilled, an iron rod demolishes the incrustation, strikes down the door
posts, and lays this branch of the mystical family level with the dust.
Provoked at this event, like Bala^ and Balaam of old, the despots of Europe,
the civil and ecclesiastical luminaries of the Papal firmament seek to find
enchantments against GOD'S irresistible decree. None can be found. The stone
braves all opposition and advances and strikes with redoubled strength the feet
of the mighty image: It trembles, it reels to and fro, and threatens to fall.

IN this appeal to facts, an answer is found, as to the means by which this
Papal power is to be removed. GOD has carved out an irresistible stone; He
has brought a strong westerly wind from these western climes which threatens
totally to dismantle the tabernacles of the mystical wowoman; who in her
doctrine, communion and government sits upon the shoulders of the kings of the
earth.

THIS same event and operation may be seen in the dispensation of the white
horse, seen by St. John in the Revelations. In a political preparatory and
pioniering sense, George Washington mounted this prophetic horse in the opening
of the American revolution. The Marquis La Fayette was borne through the
tempest of the French Revolution by the same figure, as far as he succeeded;
being dismounted, to take a walk in the dreary regions of Austrian Castles*
prisons and dungeons, to illustrate the fate of Sons of Liberty i^ the hands of
earthly despots: B^^naparte l^^ped upon the horse left by the M^^quis; and, on
his back, proudly pr^^^^d through the states of Italy, put his hand into the
pockets of his holiness, dried up the waters of the mystical Euphrates, and
left the navigation of St. Peter's suc^^ssor, at high water mark. To enforce
this prophetic idea, already accomplished by many it is known, that in a
literal and absol^te sense Washington, La Fayette and Bounaparte performed
their exploits, mounted upon a white horse, a figure, with all leaders of
victory, and of triumph.

CONTINUING to illustrate this prophetic doctrine: Buonaparte is now smiting
the River of Egypt in its seven streams. This was necessary to fulfill the
scriptures -- to give liberty to the Jews -- to open the door of communication
through all Countries where they reside, and to enter the wedge, which eventually
may produce a fracture upon the Mohammedan empire. Should the ^ims of France
penetrate to Syria weaken the Mohammedan power on the east, and the same power
bear upon this empire in the north the scriptures will be fulfilled also in the
event. But tidings out of the east and out of the north s^all trouble him*
therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy and utterly to make away
many* and he shall plant the tabernacle of his palaces i^ the glorious holy
mountain^, yet he shall come to his (...) none sh^l^ h^l^ him.

HOW far the dispensation of the political stone shall be permitted to advance,
casting down the buildings of the ol^ wo^ld; before the advent of the Kingdom
of GOD shall speak peace to the troubled nations is a question of no small
moment. The sorrows of present scenes -- the expectation of many, and the
testimony of Holy Writ all unite in teaching that the Great Day is at hand: the
long expected jubilee trump is about to sound. -- The illustration of this
point fall* under the last head of our discourse; which was to show,

III. What were the happy consequences, immediately to follow at the overthrow
of the empire of mystical Babylon.

THE text declares; And the kingdom and dominion and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the ^^ints of
the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall
serve and obey him."

OTHER passages of scripture confirm this doctrine: the nature of the two
contending powers establishes it. As error recedes, truth advances. As the
night withdraws, the day dawns and the day star arises. As old Babylon fell,
the city, temple and service of the Jewish nation was restored. In these days,
on the same principles of action, and of re^action, a^ the kingdoms of this
world fall, the kingdom of GOD must arise.

THIS kingdom is so near, in fact and in reality, that its counterfeit is
already manifest. The empire of darkness has exerted itself to forge, in the
inferior realms, the plan of the millennial day, and is now attempting to play
off this game; and to palm this counterfeit millennium upon the sons of men, as
though it was formed in the counsels of eternal truth, and had the sanction of
eternal power. But where sir! can this magic scene be discovered, you may be
ready to say? we have heard of Jannes and Jambres who withstood Moses, and of
Satan who labored, by fair promises, counterfeit application of scripture, and
by vain and pompous shows to gain the homage of the Savior of mankind to
himself, in the gospel section; but we have never heard that any one had
attempted to counterfeit the millennial section: the work must be too great!
none could attempt to seize the reins of the millenial administration but such
as GOD should appoint.

LAVATER, a celebrated Phisyognomist of Switzerland, after the reduction of
that country by the French arms, writes to the Directory of France of the
greivances which the people suffer: and in a masterly manner demands redress.
-- "You have" says he "sent us Liberty, but it is the LIBERTY OF HELL!" --
Never did words fall, with more truth and precision, from the lips of man. The
Liberty which the government of France, now gives to conquered countries is
indeed the Liberty of Hell. It is a plan of liberty, specious in words and
appearance, like the charmings of the serpent, whose writhings and twistings
and whole field of enchantments labor but for the moment, when with the utmost
certainty, the prey may be swallowed alive. How many families, villages, towns,
cities and kingdoms have gone down to satisfy the insatiable man of these
destroyers! The thousand lives, the numberless possessions, the immensity of
wealth which this vortex has swallowed up, are scarcely sufficient to form an
observeable trait in the back ground of this Terrible Republic. -- Their style
is ONE and INDIVISIBLE; that is UNITY and UNIVERSALITY. They design to form one
universal Republic, at the head of which the voracious Directory is seated: and
whilst on the principles of the sun-fish, extending and contracting, these men
devour the riches of the earth, they would fain teach the poor sufferers, that
it is Liberty they are giving* and that the Millenial estate i^ fast advancing!
well might Lavater reply, it is the millennium of Hell! so it (...) it is the
attempt of Satan to mount the millennial saddle through the instrumentality of
the Directory. This seat secured, and the Directory supported; it would not be
within the reach of Michael and of his host, to introduce the peaceful and
prosperous reign of the Prince of Peace. This is the object and such the hope
entertained, within the walls of perdition's palace!

BUT such object shall never be fulfilled; such hope never realized! all may
wish this; many pray for it; and to some it appertains to know it. The
inspiration of GOD presents, in five different places, the five headed monster
of France. They always hold the dark side of the picture. They stand an
off-set, and counterpart to the administration of the Deity himself, in the
latter day. This doctrine can be illustrated and proved to a degree of
exactness and precision of which the world, with all its improvements, at
present has no idea. Time will not admit even if it were proper, to enter on
this interesting and solemn scene on the present occasion. Suffice it, for the
purpose of proving the approach of the administration of the latter day glory;
that it be understood that its counterfeit is now upon the earth: that urged by
the fury of the bottomless pit, this fallacious picture labors with a
fierceness and perseverance unequalled, to secure its object; to execute its
plan, and to seize upon its prey. And it will cost no high degree of ^^ith to
believe, if things are so, that nothing will be able fully to restrain the
impetuosity of these agents of in^ernal enterprise; but the appearance and
advance of that power to which all other powers shall yield obeisance, as unto
GOD. To Him the dominion appertains. He is capable to resume it, and to give it
unto his son. In the character of the Lion of the tribe of Judah, shall our
Immanuel presently roar for his prey. He shall strike the scepter from the hand
of his enemies, and cause that the prey be delivered from the hand of the
mighty. From design to bring this country into submission to their all
conquering power it is, that no reasonable terms of pacification have been
accepted by them. Our commerce has opened the door for maritime depredation* at
the reins of our government they have wishfully locked* and in more ways than
one, have thrown the harpoon at our national bag. -- Yet we live! -- Though the
tempests threaten our federal ship* -- and* at times, the pumps can scarce keep
her clear* yet* under auspicious Heaven, we may hope to ride ou^ the storm,
until the all spreading hand of the coming dominion shall touch our helm.

THIS day commemorates the event, the joyful event, in which our federal ship
was h^ve ^^om the stocks, and launched upon the ocean of Independence. During
her progress, for the first twenty years, she performed wonders; she ^^iled
under the special eye of prophetic aspects; she brought our tribes from
Babylon; she braved the tempests of complaint, excited by the Tobiases and the
S^nb^lle^ts of the day; she showed her flag, and ever carried a good side in
moments of expectation. The whole scene accomplished, her prime navigator
stepped on shore, and left the concern to them that should follow. The tempests
have of late beat high; but dangers passed, shall but sweeten the felicities
which are to follow. If Heaven first visit our land, in the spirit of the
second revolution, as it has in the order of the first, if it adopt the
mountain of our administration, as the first mountain on which the kingdom of
glory shall be established, it will be easy to see that the Constellation shall
always set her compass for the Insurgents.

ON this subject, to the mind of the writer, there appears little doubt. Much
may depend on the faith of our political ark, acknowledging GOD, as the chief
pilot, in all her concerns. Nothing is lost to our government, that it has
left the concerns of religion and of another world to the teachings of every
man's own conscience, as unto GOD. It is a slander against the Heavens, to
pretend to say that the things of GOD are indebted to the things of men for
their support. Let GOD be true and every man a liar in this concern!

NO sooner had she twenty years of our political operation built for us this
political temple; than wisdom fell from GOD in respect to the millennial
temple; from the bosom of this federal edifice it was to break forth. Under its
canopy it shall be nursed* and whilst European nations behold on these western
shores of the Atlantic, the temple of freedom, over which our confederation
spreads its wings; they shall see how delightful a picture of the approaching
millenial confederation it presents. For three years has the wisdom of GOD
been occupied in training to knowledge the instrument, appointed as the organ
of divine communication. Such is the course of that divine teaching, and so
multiplied and universal its forms of instruction, that no event can happen, no
piece can be named where instruction cannot be found.

THE mountain of the LORD'S house, now forming, will ultimately establish
itself in the tops of the mountains, and exalt itself above the hills, and all
nations shall flow unto it. Unto the mountain of the LORD, soon to be
established in these United States, all nations, by their deligates, shall
flow. They shall come to worship before GOD in Zion. It shall set, through this
mode, GOD'S compass upon the ^arth, and stretch his line under the whole
Heavens. Ethiopia and Seba shall come and bow down: and upon the distant
mountains to the ends of the earth, the mount of the LORD shall be
acknowledged. Through the instrumentality of this organ, the Prince of Peace
shall speak peace to the nations, and they shall beat their swords into plow
shears, and their spears into pruning hooks and they shall learn war no more. I
have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways, and he
shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives; not for price nor reward
says the LORD of Hosts; for lo! the labor of Egypt, and the merchandise of
Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature shall come over unto thee: and they
shall be thine: in chains shall they come over and bow down, and make
supplication; saying, surely GOD is in thee and beside, there is none else;
there is no GOD. Surely thou art a GOD that hides thyself O GOD of Israel the
Savior*

LEAVING prophetic illustrations, and waiting farther demonstration in support
of what has been said, either in view of illucidating the character of
mystical Babylon, or the means by which she is overthrown, or the happy
consequences which shall follow, it may now be proper to revert to the
consideration of a few things analogus to the events of the day; of the present
fourth of July 1799, which we are assembled to celebrate. This day commemorates
the event of the declaration of our National Independence. That was an
important day, both in relation to the benefits which it brought in its train,
in a national point of view and in reference to the foundation of that national
edifice from which is yet to beam forth, the light and glory of the world. Let,
then, the day be celebrated as the hour which gave birth to the mighty events
which of necessity, were needful to prepare the way for the peaceful empire of
the Prince of Peace. Be astonished at the event which in the kingdom of
providence, the hand of our GOD carved out through the instrumentality of such
unpromising means! what could equal the enterprise of the sons of July fourth,
1776, but the unequalled enterprise, perseverence and toil of those who first
braved the tempest that they might plant the empire of civilization and of
religion in these western climes! had they foreseen what was to sp^^ing from
their loins, with what additional fervor of spirit might they have followed up
the noble enterprise their thoughts had achieved! But the fire of soul which
was in them to possess, and to hand down to us, this fertile and extensive
habitation, seems, by inheritance to have descended to us their sons! Hail ye
departed souls! Hail* ye slumbering fathers! Arise from the dead and behold the
wonders GOD has wrought!

IF the benevolence of the Deity has marked out for us such a possession, how
loud the argument that the same sentiment of benevolence should meet a joyful
welcome to our own breasts! that we may be the children of our father which is
in Heaven, who makes his son to shine on the evil and on the good, and sends
his rain on the just, and on the unjust! How can we so well improve the
blessings of civil, of social, of rational, and of religious life, as to employ
them in the purposes of a diffusive good will to all around ^ Does independence
of character -- enterprise abroad, lit^rature and religion at home, grace the
history of our nation, thus far, let us see it, that none of these characters
are forfeited by a cold, an inanimate attention to the duties now before (...)
or to the enchanting prospects which now ravish the intellectual eye!

To the young Gentlemen, the members of the Concilio Society of this town, at
whose request this Discourse is delivered, some attention may justly be paid.
Young Gentlemen,
IF there were nothing else by which your private or public virtues might be
known, it seems a sufficient exemplification of your character, that you have
formed yourselves into a society for the promotion of the interests of
literature, of the social virtues, and of religion. -- What objects can be more
worthy the attention of American genius, than objects such as these? They
enlarge the mind, increase the empire of thought, and dignify the soul. May
your numbers increase, the very worthy objects of pursuit still inflame your
minds with that noble ardour, which has urged you to enter upon this happy
course, and given you success thus far! -- Let others, from your example dare
to step forth, and with you, pursue the same path to dignity and to honor.

TO encourage the emulous spirit of your rising society, let a very few brief
inferences, from what has been said, strike afresh, the spark of intellectual
zeal into your animated minds.

1. ARE we Americans, by birth, let us learn to appreciate our origin, our
present possessions and our advancing duties. Let us love our country -- love
our laws and our religion -- love literature, love GOD, and love one^another.

2. HAS the political needle seemed to shake in the compass, and to puzzle the
wisest to determine, when it should find its star; or whither the path of duty
should lead, let the exemplification of the birth of civil and religious
liberty in the United States, the building of the temple of freedom, here, as
the base of the approaching building of GOD, determine our minds that primary
respect is due to our own country, to our own constitution, and to own our laws.

3. HAVE any, in our country, seemed, by the shakings of the needle, to have
been led into a spirit of dissension from the spirit of our federal
administration; let all such receive a gentle hint to be ware of the waters of
Talleyrand! If a vortex is in motion, its waters very extensive, and its end,
political perdition; with what tenderness of thought may such be cautioned not
to take the counterfeit millenial aspect, for the more substantial good yet ^an
be revealed! -- A few mouth^ were and our brethren shall find that Americans
need not look across the Atlantic for the blessings they, from the signs of the
times, are led to expect and to pursue.

4. In the protection of these United States from the desires and designs both
of Great Britain and of France, behold how truly the GOD of our fathers has
continued to be our GOD, in moments when the wisdom of our wisest men, has
been closely p^essed to discern what was the path of political duty, best
promising permanent peace, and social felicity to the inhabitants of these
United States. The LORD JEHOVAH has brought the political ark to the door of
safe^y, and from her present convulsions, she shall soon reach the port of her
permanent destiny.

5. LET us learn to excuse all false expositions of the prophecies, or of the
signs of the times, seeing the door of just exposition has not, before now,
been truly thrown open. Let mystical Babylon fall Let Talleyrand and his
associates pursue her to extermination: never forgetting, that when the wrath
of men has fulfilled the will of GOD, the remainder he is able to restrain --
Amen.


