LETTERS FROM THE HEALTH-OFFICE, SUBMITTED TO THE Common Council, OF THE CITY
OF NEW YORK.

By RICHARD BAYLEY.

PRINTED BY JOHN FURMAN, No. 102, Pearl-street, third door below the corner of
Old-slip.

Advertisement.
THE following letters, selected from the records of the HEALTH-OFFICE, for the
years 1796, 1797, and 1798, are respectfully submitted to the COMMON COUNCIL of
the city of New York; to which is annexed, a letter, wherein an attempt is made
to explain why the PESTILENTIAL DISEASE of 1798, was more generally prevalent
than in 1795, 1796, or 1797.

BY RICHARD BAYLEY.

Extracts from the Correspondence of 1796.
New York, July 1, 1796. SIR,
IN the latter part of April last, I called on the Mayor of this city, and
communicated to him a circumstance which I believed to be a very interesting
one to the future health of the inhabitants of White Hall and its environs,
viz. That in filling up the wharf at the east side of the slip, they had
already buried two dead horses, and at that period they were covering a third.
Besides this, there were several hundred loads of street-dung, spread on the
unfinished wharf: and that the place was in such a state of nuisance, that it
eminently threatened the safety of the inhabitants. The Mayor replied, That he
would have the necessary enquiries made. On the same day, I made a similar
communication to Alderman Furman, and expressed a wish, that the Act for
preventing nuisances should be attended to.

THE fact is, Sir, that part of White Hall to the east of the slip, is in a
most offensive condition.

THE crew of the ship Antoniette, from Copenhagen, which lies adjoining the
nuisance above alluded to, and who cannot come on shore, or return on board,
without crossing over the above ground, has sickened successively almost to a
man. They have been sent to Bellevue, recovered, and on their return, have
sickened again. The day before yesterday a man was sent to the Hospital --
yesterday another -- and this day two more have sickened; and I have no doubt
but their complaints are in consequence of exhalations, arising from the wharf.

THERE are a number of people sickening in the neighborhood of White Hall, and
the alarm it has created, is too well founded. Nothing short of the removal of
a quantity of street manure, and other offensive matter, which now lies on the
wharf, and the wharf being covered over with clean graver, earth or sand,
intermixed with a quantity of lime, can possibly prevent the calamity which has
already taken place, from extending its influence.

I have the honor to be, With perfect respect, Sir, Your most obedient servant,
RICHARD BAYLEY, Health-Officer.

His Excellency, Governor JAY.
Staten Island. July 30, 1796. DEAR SIR,
A REPORT prevails in the country, that the same Fever which proved fatal to so
many of the inhabitants of New York the last fall, has again made its
appearance, and that the city, in consequence of it, has become very sickly.
The disagreeable impression excited in the minds of the people by such a
rumor, is, perhaps, increased by several paragraphs to the same purpose, which
I am informed have appeared in the Philadelphia papers. In order, therefore,
that I may be, in some measure, enabled to silence the fears of my friends, and
to afford them the most satisfactory information upon a subject so important, I
shall esteem it a favor if you will communicate to me a candid statement of the
business; for I have no doubt, that unless the most conclusive means are soon
adopted by some medical character of influence among you, the alarm, however
unfounded, will obtain such credit, as to prevent the people in the Country
from resorting in their usual numbers to the City.

With respect and affection, I remain, Your sincere friend, RICHARD CHANNING
MOORE.

R. BAYLEY.
New York, July 31st, 1796. DEAR SIR,
IT is true that a Fever resembling the one which proved so great a scourge to
our city last year, made its appearance again about White Hall, and in the
vicinity of the Exchange, about the middle of July; but I have solid reasons
for believing that this complaint will not be extended beyond certain limits.
You may recollect, that in the frequent conversations we have had together, on
the subject of the last year's Fever, I have been uniform in my opinion as to
the cause of its production, namely This sentiment (...) the notice of the
ingenious Dr. (...) of (...) who put the (...) construct^^^ (...) it, (...) in
New York, was attributed, by (...) Physician(...)
, the accumulation of every species of filth and perishable matter, on the low
^ade grounds, on the south side of the city, and the abominable custom of
filling up slips and docks with similar materials. I have said that these;e
causes, (...) by a moist atmosphere and hot sun, could not (...) of producing
the most baneful exhalations, and that their effects must necessarily be felt
by those who were more immediately exposed to their influence.

THE proprietors of the lots on the East side of White Hall slip, carried out a
bulk head the last spring, with a view to extend the dock further into the
river. The dimensions of the dock are very considerable, and a maxim invariably
adopted by the proprietors of docks, is, that the cheapest mode of filling is
the best. Accordingly, carts were employed to collect such dirt and filth as
all large, populous cities furnish in abundance, and with those materials was
the dock filled up; and to add to the salubrity of the mass, there was
occasionally added, dead horses, dogs, cats, hogs, etc.

THE exposure of White Hall, and indeed the whole of the West end of the city
of New York, must be considered as extremely healthy. The winds during the warm
season, are generally from the Sea, and arrive to this part of the town
uncontaminated, by passing over unwholesome grounds. Yet such is the fact, that
the poisonous exhalations which have abounded in that quarter during the warm
weather, have so changed the air, that the inhabitants on the South side of
Pearl-street, between Old-slip and White Hall, almost all concur in their
testimony, that the disagreeable effluvia has frequently compelled them to
close their windows, especially in the evening, on the South side of their
houses; and, in several instances, have assured me, that the offensive smells
have been such, as to occasion vomiting.

THE dock on which Mr. Delafield's stores are erected, is in a state truly
execrable, and the slip on the right and on the left is little better. These,
and such places, are visited by the Dock-Fever -- the Yellow-Fever, if you
please, that murderer of our own creating.

WERE the proprietors of these and such like docks, compelled to live on them,
the evil would soon be remedied; but people of this description are generally
secure from the ravages of disease, enjoying the benefit of their rents in the
cooler retirements of the country.

BUT, fortunately for us, from a concurrence of happy events, the dock-fever
has entirely disappeared. It has continued for a short time only, when a
gracious Providence sent us hard winds, repeated thunder and lightning,
inundations of rain, and cool weather. To causes of this kind are we to ascribe
the suspension of a formidable disease, which had begun to show itself among us.

THE present exertions of our Common Council, in giving a new surface of
wholesome earth to the dock of White Hall, will, without doubt, contribute to
the same salutary effects; and, if the same measures were extended to other
parts of the town, there would be much less reason to apprehend a return of the
Dock-Fever.

THUS, Sir, your questions are answered. You might have come to town with
safety. -- You may come to town with safety; but I would advise you and all
your country brethren, not to reside or sleep in the neighborhood of filthy
docks. New York, as I have said before, may be rendered as healthy a city as
any under the sun; and when its baneful police is changed, and the nuisances
with which the city abounds are corrected, you will hear no more of the ravages
of particular diseases.

I am, etc. R. BAYLEY.

Reverend Richard C. Moore.
New York, November 16th, 1796. SIR,
THE Commissioners of Health have requested me to desire, that you would make
your observations on the disorder that has prevailed in some parts of this city
in the latter part of last summer, called a Billious or Yellow Fever; and to
point out to them your opinion of the cause of the disorder; and, in
particular, to show why the report that has prevailed, of its being imported,
is not well founded.

THE Commissioners would also be much obliged to you, to point out, in what
respect the present law "for preventing the bringing in and spreading of
Infectious Diseases into this state, is deficient, and what amendments may be
made to it.

YOUR early attention to the foregoing, will much oblige the Commissioners, as
well as

Your humble servant, JOHN MURRAY, Chairman of the Commissioners of Health.

Dr. R. Bayley.
December 10th, 1796. SIR,
I RECEIVED a letter from you, dated November 26, expressing a wish that I
would furnish the Commissioners of health, with such observations as had
occurred to me during the last summer and autumn, relative to the causes or
origin of the disease, which occasioned so much alarm in this city, and which
proved fatal to so many of its inhabitants; and that these observations might
be accompanied with such reflections as I might deem proper relative to
nuisances, for the removal of which a law was passed by the legislature of the
state, on the first of April, 1796.

As it regards the first request, I had fortunately made some progress in
stating the principal facts, at the period of receiving your letter, which I
have since completed, and which marked No. 1, is submitted to the perusal of
the Commissioners.

I SHALL endeavor to perform the task assigned me, by making such reflections
on the subject of nuisances, as circumstances may have given rise to.

IN the summer and autumn of 1795, a disease prevailed in this city,
denominated from its nature and violence, the Yellow-Fever. The terror and
dismay which it produced in all classes of Citizens, may be easily remembered;
and the influence it had on the commerce of the city, and the number of lives
it destroyed, are circumstances of too recent a date to be forgotten.

IN this distressing situation, application was made to the Medical Society of
the state of New York, to favor the Public with its opinion of the nature of
that disease. The Society accordingly addressed a letter to the Magistracy upon
the subject, (a copy of which is enclosed) containing remarks, among others,
upon such nuisances, as appeared at least, to aggravate the then prevailing
fever, and to render it more malignant and fatal; and to the influence of this
letter, I presume we are to ascribe, principally, the act of the Legislature
above alluded to, for the removal of these nuisances. Why a law of such
magnitude has not been carried into complete effect, is a matter of surprise
and regret among the citizens in general. A law was conceived to be necessary
-- every hand was raised for its enaction -- and if, by the general expression,
it was thought proper, it is much to be lamented that we have not experienced
its salutary operation. How far otherwise, indeed, has it been? The vast
accumulation of perishable matter at White Hall, after the passing of the law,
affording effluvia of the most noxious kind, and which from the clearest
evidence, was the principal cause of the late sickness in that quarter, is a
lamentable instance of inattention to what was so much the general wish!

THE law for the removal of nuisances, passed the 1st of April last, among many
other things, respects, particularly, the manufactories of soap, candles,
vellum and starch. But, unfortunately, these very offensive repositories remain
exactly where they were; and the annoyance which the neigbouring inhabitants
have experienced from them, has been a subject of repeated complaint. They have
not only rendered the situations of many, extremely uncomfortable, but there is
reason for apprehending worse consequences, which the letter of Mr. Coals,
accompanying these remarks, pretty clearly evinces.

IT has been urged that the removal of the above nuisances, would be expensive
to the citizens; but a consideration of this kind, is surely not to be put in
competition with our lives. I trust there are few indeed who would not
cheerfully contribute to the execution of the law, both in letter and spirit;
and thus free a populous city of those causes of mortality, which are of a
nature extremely active, and certain in their effect; and which, if suffered to
remain, may bring thousands to their grave.

PERMIT me further to add, that the calamitous situation to which we have
lately been twice reduced, ought to stimulate our endeavors, and excite us to
vigilance and care. Timely precaution may prevent a return of Yellow Fever in
this city, or perhaps one of a more pestilential kind: or, failing in that, it
may alleviate their violence, and restrain their devastations.

IT is true that diseases seldom become Epidemic, independent of a certain
state of the air. We have experienced that state of the air and its effects,
and we have no security against its returning even the ensuing season -- And I
cannot but believe that every good citizen will consider the inconveniences to
which he may be exposed, by the operation of the law upon the subject, as
inseparable from the obligation and duty he owes to society; and he who
willingly submits, may have this consolatory reflection, that his acquiescence
may have been the means of saving the lives of thousands, in guarding a
populous city from the extreme miseries and fatality attending pestilential
diseases.

I SHALL conclude with observing, that if my remarks have extended beyond what
was intended to be understood by your request; or, if I have ventured further
than I ought to have done, I hope that my anxiety to preserve the reputation of
the city, and to promote the welfare and comfort of my fellow-citizens, will
plead my apology.

I am, etc. R. BAYLEY, Health-Officer.

John Murray, Esquire. C. C. H. O.
New York, November 28, 1798. SIR,
THE desire which your Excellency has expressed to see the causes of the late
Epidemic Fever investigated, has induced me to submit to your perusal the
enclosed narrative.

I have the honor to be, most respectfully, Sir, your most obedient servant, R.
BAYLEY.

BEFORE I undertake to account for the origin of the Fever, which made its
appearance in this city in June last, I must be permitted to revert to certain
facts and opinions contained in a work which I furnished to the public on the
subject of a similar Fever, which prevailed more generally in this city, during
part of the Summer and Autumn of 1795.

IN that publication it was stated, that the Fever was first observed in the
neighborhood of Fitch's wharf, in Water-street, and that it gradually extended
from thence, in different ways, but more particularly in the direction of the
prevailing winds.

NEAR where the Fever first began, there were several unfinished docks, which
had been receptacles, for several years, of every kind of filth and dirt. --
There was also, a considerable surface of new made ground in the neighborhood,
in a very unfinished state, upon which, dirt collected from the streets, was
frequently thrown: likewise, several storehouses, erected on piles: and, added
to these, a neglected and filthy state of the wharves. This representation, as
it regards the then condition of the docks in that part of the town, is
confirmed by the letter of Mr. Fitch, an extract of which is given in the
publication above alluded to, and which, as it is much to our purpose, I shall
again introduce. His words are, "Although the docks in the vicinity of the
store which I occupy, may be less offensive than in many other parts of the
city, yet, many of them are in a very exceptionable situation. The ponding of
water, by running a bulk head across an unfinished dock, and leaving the
vacancy for several years to be filled up with every species of filth and
perishable matter, is an object worthy the attention of the Police. The
situation of the grounds between Water-street and Cherry street, is rendered
very noxious, by Water-street being raised above a certain level, and thus
preventing those grounds from being drained. The effect of such nuisances on
the health of the inhabitants, in a crowded part of the city, cannot be
imaginary."

THOSE who have perused that publication, will find a number of reasons
assigned, why the inhabitants of the south east part of the city, would be
particularly liable to Fever during the hot months. This opinion was warranted,
in the first place, from matter of fact, as the Bilious Fever had appeared in
that quarter for several years successively; and, in the second place, as a
matter of reasoning, from the relative situation and exposure of that part of
the city. -- But fortunately the south east part of the city has been more
healthy this year, than for several years past; and the causes of Fever seem to
have been transferred to a part of the town, hitherto reputed little liable to
any particular sickness.

IN investigating the causes of this change, a recourse to facts only, will
afford a sufficient explanation. --

FIRST. THE docks spoken of, in the south-eastern part of the city, which were
in so loathsome a state, have been completed and generally covered with a
sufficient quantity of good earth, gravel or sand. The grounds have been
drained, or, where that was not practicable, the surface has been rendered
uniform with clean earth. The vacancies under the stores which were built on
piles, have been filled up in a proper manner, and the wharves have been kept
free from rubbish and filth. In short, so much care and industry have been
bestowed here, to remove the nuisances that so generally abounded, that, where
a person was before almost suffocated with intolerable stenches, one may now
pass without experiencing the least offensive smell.

SECONDLY. LET us see what has happened at the south-west part of the town.
Between the Whitehall and Exchange-slip, a new dock has been made, running on
an average 60 feet into the river, extending 458 feet in front, and 9 feet in
depth. If 9 square feet are calculated to be equal to a cart load, it will be
found that 24,000 cart loads were necessary to fill up the dock, which were
accumulating from July 1795 to July 1796. And what has been the nature of the
materials employed for this purpose? It is difficult to answer the question,
except in very general terms, namely, every thing subject to decay and
corruption. One third of the substance of this dock may be computed to be
lodged above the ordinary height of the tides -- therefore 8000 loads of these
perishable materials were exposed to the action of the hot summer sun. In the
month of April of this year, I had frequent occasion to visit White Hall: --
The stench which already issued from the dock, was highly offensive; and on
enquiring, I found that the matter which had been employed to make the new
ground, consisted chiefly of the dirt which had been accumulating in the
streets during the winter season; and that, besides dogs, cats, hogs, etc.
there had been actually two horses buried in the rubbish, which had died in the
spring, in a small hovel, erected on the margin of this nuisance.

REFLECTING on this state of things at White Hall, and recollecting what had
happened in another part of the city under similar circumstances, I found my
mind strongly impressed with the probable consequences; -- and was led from
thence to converse with several individuals of the corporation on the subject.
But nothing material could be done to guard against the supposed probable
mischiefs. There was a contract The above declaration will be found explanatory
of most of the evils which this city (...) experienced from that period to the
present, viz. -- the interference of (...) protracting from year to year, those
necessary (...) which the welfare of this city (...) should be (...).
between the proprietors of the ground and other individuals, for filling in
that dock, with which the magistracy did not think themselves authorized to
interfere, unless it was declared to be a nuisance on oath, or by presentment
of the Grand Jury. About the middle of June, the offensive smells arising from
the new dock and other nuisances in the neigbourhood, were very generally
observed in that quarter of the city, and their effects were manifest in many
who complained of head-achs, sick stomachs, etc. etc.

THE situation of the Exchange slip, as a source of noxious exhalations I feel
myself obliged to notice also particularly. This slip from its length and
narrowness -- from its being the receptacle of an extensive common sewer; --
and, especially from having a great proportion of its muddy bottom exposed at
low water, sends forth effluvia, which, in a very sensible manner, contaminates
the air to a considerable distance around.

IN a letter published in July last, I had occasion to mention the frequent
disagreeable state of the air in the south-west part of the city. It was there
stated, "that the poisonous exhalations which had abounded in that quarter
during the warm weather, had rendered the air so noxious, that the inhabitants
on the south side of Pearl-street, between the Old-slip and White Hall, almost
all concur in their testimony that the disagreeable effluvia have frequently
obliged them, especially in the evening, to close their windows on the
south side of their houses; and in several instances gentlemen have assured us,
that the offensive smell has been such, (...) to occasion vomiting." These are
circumstances of great moment and are entitled to serious consideration, if
they are regarded only as causes which increase the malignity of diseases.

IN the latter part of June, the fever began to show itself about White Hall,
and in the vicinity of the Exchange; but it continued for a short time only,
when the concurrence of high winds, heavy rains, much thunder and lightening,
and cool weather, which happened about the middle of July, were probably the
causes to which we may attribute the suspension of the disease. This, at least,
was rendered probable, because as soon as the weather became warm and dry
again, it was accompanied by those noxious exhalations which again produce the
fever. Thus the disease appeared, went off, and came on again, according as the
weather favored or impeded the generation of those vapors, which, in their
operation on the human body, are the exciting cause of fever.

I MUST take notice of some other circumstances relative to many of the houses
about White Hall, which, if they were not of themselves, in any instance a
cause of Fever, must certainly be considered of a nature to aggravate the
disease, when brought on by other causes -- namely, the state of the ground in
the rear of the houses, which, in consequence of the streets being raised, is,
in many places considerably below the ordinary level, and therefore liable to
accumulate matters which render the air impure, and which, in confined
situations, are often the cause of Fevers. -- Also, the old and decayed state
of many of the houses, and the inattention to cleanliness, which is always
neglected, where people of the poorer sort are much crowded together. The
bedding and clothes of the sick under these circumstances, must be supposed to
become more and more impregnated with the exhalations arising from their
bodies; and hence the dreadful havoc made by infectious diseases in the small
houses of the poor, and on such as are destitute of the means of cleanliness,
and who, of necessity, are obliged to remain a length of time without changing
their clothes.

THE further we enquire into the sources of the Fever, the greater is the
analogy discovered to be, between the state of things at White Hall, and in
that part of the city where the Fever first appeared last year. Accumulations
of decaying animal and vegetable matters -- a part of the ground below the
general level -- poor people crowded together in small uncleanly apartments,
were circumstances so perfectly coincident, that were particular effects to
take place in one situation, we should naturally expect similar effects to take
place in the other. If the Fever of last year, and that of the present year,
were brought on by the same causes, it may possibly be asked, how it happened,
that in the one instance, it was so widely extended, and in the other confined
to such narrow limits? This question admits of an easy solution. It is
generally acknowledged, that Epidemic diseases are either produced or widely
diffused, by some particular qualities of the atmosphere; and the extraordinary
prevalence of heat and moisture in the air, during the Summer and Autumn of
last year, must still be recent in the memory of the inhabitants of this city,
while the state of the air, during the warm season of the present year, has
been much cooler and drier than usual.

THUS, the Fever of the last year was more generally felt, because a
peculiarity of the weather predisposed the body, or rendered it more
susceptible of those causes which produced the disease: whereas, the weather of
this year, occasioning no predisposition, the Fever was generally confined to a
situation, where it required the exciting cause to be itself sufficiently
concentrated to produce its effects.

MANY of the men who belonged to the market vessels which came to the
White Hall dock, sickened from being exposed to the exhalations arising in this
situation. The boatmen of the Staten-Island and Elizabeth-town Ferry-boats,
suffered very generally, although many of them were so cautious as not to sleep
on shore, and to avoid all communication with the sick. Several of them died of
the disease.

MANY transient persons from Staten-Island, who frequently visited at Mr.
Cortelyou's, residing at White Hall, during their stay in New York, sickened,
and some died. It was said that Mr. Cortelyou's family were sick with the
Yellow-Fever, but this report was not well founded. The family were not well
during any part of the warm weather, but none of them had the Bilious Fever.
Their complaints were such as are commonly the consequence of living in foul
air, viz. -- sick stomachs and head-ach^, attended with considerable lassitude.

THE above facts respecting transient persons taking the Fever, are confirmed
by Dr. Clarke, of Elizabeth-town, New Jersey, who, in a letter with which he
has favored me, observes, "There were many instances of this disease among the
ferrymen, who resided chi^^ of their time at White Hall; and other persons who
slept there, sickened, and all had taken their passage from White Hall dock
within twelve days of the attack."

IT is worthy of remark also, that the disease, according to Dr. Clarke,
occurred in those only, who had been in New York.

HE writes that, "Amongst the cases which came within my practice, and from the
best information of others, there was no instance of the disease taking place
in any except (...) who had been at New York, and particularly (...)
White Hall."

DR. CLARKE states further, "That there was no instance of the Fever amongst
the nurses, or attendants upon the sick." This fact is confirmative of the
opinion which we have always endeavored to support that the Fever in question,
is not a contagious disease. The operation of local causes in producing
diseases, is well exemplified in the account of the Remitting and Intermitting
Fevers of the West Indies, given us by Dr. Hume: -- "And while," says he, "The
Hospital remained there (at Port Royal) the sick were seldom seized with
complaints of this kind."

"WHEN another Hospital was built on the opposite side, though only at the
distance of four miles, not one man in a hundred, escaped these Fevers, who
were sent to the Hospital and remained in it three or four weeks; -- and even
the marine guard, who were relieved once a fortnight or three weeks, fared no
better."

Dr. HUME describes the situation of this Hospital, to be in the neighborhood
of stagnant water marshes. He then adds, "It was the damp winds filled with the
putrid exhalations, which occasioned the frequency of remitting or
Yellow-Fever, and intermitting disorders of this place. At my request this
hospital was deserted, although in all other respects it was good, and had cost
near fifty thousand pounds sterling. -- Several plantations near this hospital,
were unhealthy from the same causes."

IT would be endless to quote authorities upon this subject, nor is it
necessary to look to a distance for them. What has happened within our own
state, abundantly confirms the fact, as may be seen from Dr. William's letter,
inserted in my publication upon the Fever of last year. I do not think it
necessary to be more particular in reciting facts, or in detailing those
circumstances which, in my mind, are fully competent to explain the origin of
the Fever which has excited so much alarm, and proved so great a scourge to the
citizens of New York. It is the less necessary, because I mean to show, by the
following documents, that the disease was not, as many have insinuated, nay
positively declared, brought here from abroad: and if we can advance sufficient
testimony to invalidate that opinion, the conclusion necessarily follows, that
the Fever was occasioned by causes of a domestic nature; and therefore, the
fact we are solicitous to establish, receives that degree of probability,
which, in matters of this kind, give an assurance, equal to demonstration.

I SHALL, then, in the next plaae, bring forward what appertains to the vessels
supposed to have introduced the Yellow-Fever into New York.

THE first suspected vessel was the ship Antoniette.

ON the 25th of May, the ship Antoniette arrived in this harbor from Breast, in
ballast, and anchored in the North-River. Two days after her arrival, I was
requested to visit sick on board. The Commander of the vessel assured me that
the men had not been confined, nor did he think their indisposition such as to
render it necessary they should be sent to the Hospital. One of the men was
then at work on deck, and the other came from below immediately on being
called. As, however, the ship was to be brought to a dock, it was thought
expedient that these men should be sent to the Hospital.

THAT they had not complaints of an infectious nature, shall not rest on my
assertion alone. The opinion and declaration of Dr. M'Farlin, under whose care
they were placed, will carry with them much stronger evidence.

October 20th, 1796. SIR,
I HAVE just received a few lines from you, wherein you request me to declare
my opinion respecting the nature of the complaints of the two patients from on
board the ship Antoinette, who were sent to Bellevue Hospital, and placed under
my care.

I DO not at present recollect the names of those people, as I did not note the
history of their complaints. Their cases, however, have not escaped my memory.
The one complained of a pain in his breast, attended with cough and difficulty
of breathing. His strength was considerably impaired -- the complaint, which he
attributed to cold, having been of some duration. By the application of a
blister to the sternum, and the continued use of expectorants, he was
discharged as cured from the Hospital.

The other labored under a complete Hernia Hermoralis. By the use of mercurial
^rictures, saturine applications, the suspensary bandage, etc. he was relieved
and discharged as such by his own request.

I am, etc. JOHN M'FARLIN.

To Doctor Bayley, Health-Officer.

On the 29th of May, the Antoniette hauled to the dock at White Hall. In this
situation, the crew could not come on shore, nor return on board, without
passing over the new made grounds; and thus were the men exposed to the
exhalations which arose from it whilst in the ship, and occasionally, in a
greater degree, by their visits on shore. During the month of June, most of the
men of the Antoniette, complained of an unusual weakness, and in the beginning
of July, several of them were attacked with the Fever.

Two of these cases terminated in black vomit and death. The causes of the
sickness on board the Antoinette, being no longer a subject of conjecture, the
remedy became obvious -- namely, the removal of the vessel to a more healthy
situation; and as the ship had lain more than a month at White Hall dock, it
must be supposed that the air beneath her decks had become completely saturated
with the noxious vapors arising from that mass of decaying materials, of which
the dock was composed.

IT was deemed necessary, therefore, to have recourse to the measures commonly
employed to purify vessels. For this purpose, the Antoinette was hauled out
into the stream; and after the process of purification was over, she was
directed into the North river to take in her cargo. After this period, the men
on board her remained in good health, except Captain Hendricks, who had the
ague and fever.

Now, as the men who were complaining at the time of the arrival of the
Antoniette, were not sick with fever (of which Dr. M'Farlin's letter is
sufficient evidene) and as the Fever did not appear among the crew, until five
weeks after she had been at the White Hall dock, and more than ten days after
it had appeared on shore, it must require a more than ordinary share of
pre-possession in any one, to believe that the Antoinette had any agency in the
origin of the Fever at White Hall.

ON the 29th of July, the brig Patty arrived in this port. After her departure,
a report was circulated, and by many credited, that she had introduced a
Malignant Fever into this city. Although on this subject I had no doubt, as I
had taken a manifest of the healthful situation of the brig Patty, and the crew
had undergone my personal examination, yet I was anxious that every suspicion
should, as far as possible, be removed from the minds of the citizens. I was
therefore induced to write to the commander of the brig, who was then at
Boston, to request he would give me an attested statement of facts respecting
such sickness as might have existed on board the brig during the voyage, and
the condition of the health of her crew at her arrival in this port -- whether
she had any Fever on board after that period, or whether any person had
sickened in Boston after her arrival there, who had had communication with her.
To these enquiries I shortly after received the following attested certificate:
--

THIS is to certify, that during my voyage in the Brig Patty, from Boston to
the West Indies, and back to New York, none of my crew were sick of a malignant
Fever; and that at my arival in New York, all my crew were in good health,
except my Mate, who was sick with the Ague and Fever, and who was taken out of
my vessel and put on board a Packet to be sent home to Trenton; and since my
arrival in Boston, my crew has remained in perfect health as before; -- nor has
any person who has been on board the brig Patty, received, or been apprehensive
of any disorder whatever.

JOHN SNOW
August 3d, 1796.

THE above statement of Captain Snow, is so clear and conclusive, that still to
entertain any doubt, would imply a mind disposed to contemn truth, even under
the serious garb of a sacred oath!

THUS, then, I have taken a cursory view of the circumstances relative to the
origin of the Yellow-Fever. In reviewing the situation of that part of the
city, we have found abundant reason for believing the Fever was produced by
causes of a local nature, and originating there. The importance of this fact
renders me extremely solicitous that the truth of it should be generally
established, and strongly impressed on every mind: for, if measures are to be
pursued, calculated to prevent the calamity in future, the extent and adequacy
of those measures, must depend on this conviction.

IT is to be hoped, that we may not deceive ourselves, by a mode of reasoning
adopted by some, which, however plausible it may appear at first view, must
certainly prove fallacious on examination.

IT is urged, that the city of New York has remained, for many years, exempt
from any particularly fatal diseases; and we have no greater reason now, to
suppose ourselves more liable to sickness, than formerly; and, that if diseases
of a malignant kind, should, at any time, prevail among us, we ought to look to
some foreign source for their origin. The answer to this argument is, that the
(...) of things is every day changing. This city is extending its dimensions --
the houses are becoming more compact and crowded together -- the inhabitants
are increasing in number -- and, more especially, the mode of making new
ground, which renders a considerable part of the city a low level -- are
changes which place us in a situation different from that of any former period.

THIS kind of calculation, it is to be feared, is not by many entered into; but
it is one which is entitled to serious consideration, inasmuch as it takes in
those circumstances which have a particular influence upon the health of the
inhabitants of the city of New York.

BEFORE I conclude, I must take the liberty of mentioning to your Excellency,
what has hitherto been the condition of the Hospital lately erected on Bedlow's
Island. I am induced to do this, in order that the inconveniences under which
it has labored, may be rendered apparent; and from a hope that measures will,
in consequence, be taken to provide for the Hospital in such a manner as may be
necessary to complete the establishment, and give it extensive utility.

THE necessary alterations and repairs which the buildings on Bedlow's Island
required to render them sit to receive the sick, were not completed till the
middle of August. As soon as these were done, application was made to the
Commissioners of Health, for a supply of necessaries to accommodate the sick --
who, at this period, were sent to the Hospital from White Hall, and from
several vessels just arrived from sea. The Commissioners directed the beds and
bedding which had been used the year before at Bellevue, to be sent to the new
Hospital on Bedlow's Island. Unfortunately, these articles were in a very
filthy state; but as the sick were already at the Hospital, we had no
alternative, but to select the cleanest of those articles and use them in that
state. The Hospital was also unprovided with wearing apparel, than which,
nothing is more necessary, as well for the comfort of the sick, as to prevent
the introduction of infection into the Hospital.

UNDER these circumstances, the consequences were such as might naturally be
expected; for, within eight days of the time in which these articles were
brought to the Hospital, those people who had been employed in transporting the
bedding from Bellevue, the nurses who attended the sick, and the steward of the
house, were attacked with fever. The attending Physician, Monsieur Bouvier, was
also indisposed for several days.

FROM this distressing situation, however, the Hospital was soon happily
relieved, by a supply of beds, bedding, and such clothes as were necessary for
frequent changes, and placing the sick in a state of the greatest cleanliness.
From this period, neither nurse, visitor, nor any kind of attendant, were known
to be attacked with fever.

I have the honor to be, With perfect respect, Sir, Your most obedient servant,
RICHARD BAYLEY, Health-Officer.

His Excellency Governor JAY.
The following is a copy of the Letter alluded to in the Letter addressed to
the Commissioners of Health.
To the MAGISTRACY of NEW YORK. Gentlemen,
IT would be improper, at least foreign to the design of this address, to enter
on the enquiry whether the late Epidemic which raged in this city, was
imported, or generated among us. Our motive for addressing you at this time,
arises from a desire to engage, and at the same time to assist, as far as we
are able, your respectable Board, in applying a corrective to some of those
causes, which, we conceive, served at once to extend its influence, and
increase its malignity.

ON this head then, we venture to point out the following objects, as
particularly demanding the notice of the Magistrates, and the interposition of
their authority.

First, the accumulation of filth in the streets.

THIS, being composed chiefly of dead animal and vegetable matter, is, when
exposed to a hot sun, a source of noxious effluvia, which have a tendency to
produce the most fatal effects; and, that such effluvia have been the cause of
Fever, has been confirmed by repeated observation and experience in all parts
of the world.

Secondly. Obstructed water-drains.

THESE, by occasioning stagnant waters, and collecting matter of various kinds,
which, undergoing de-composition, emit air of qualities extremely prejudicial
to health.

Thirdly. The ground of certain parts of the city, where the lots of houses are
considerably below the ordinary level of the streets.

IN such places, the necessary consequences must be an accumulation of various
substances, which, under the influence of heat and moisture, putrify, and thus
contaminate the atmosphere, and communicate properries to it, of a nature
extremely deleterious.

Fourthly. The situation of many of the Docks and Stores along the East-River.

IT is to be observed that in many places, large surfaces of mud are exposed at
low water, which throw up during the heat of the summer, an intolerable stench;
and this evil is greatly increased by a practice of filling in docks with every
species of filth collected from the streets, which proves an unfailing source
of unwholesome air. We remark, further, that a practice has been permitted in
this city, which we conceive very reprehensible, and what, we have no doubt,
has produced many instances of individual disease, if it has done nothing
worse; -- that is, the pernicious custom of collecting and throwing into one
heap, great quantities of manure (gathered from the street) on vacant lots.
This was the case (during the prevalence of the Fever) at the head of
George-street.

To the causes above enumerated, some others might, with propriety, be added,
as endangering, by their permission, the health of the citizens. -- Among these
last, are, Slaughter-Houses, Manufactories of Scap and Candles, Vellum,
heather, Starch, etc.

IN laying this detail before you, we cannot conclude without declaring, that
in our opinions, the malignity and fatality of the late Epidemic Fever, were
greatly influenced by the before mention causes; and were it necessary, we
could superadd the authorities of the first Physicians and Philosophers, as
corroborative of our own.

WE, therefore, with confidence and respect, submit the above to your serious
consideration; and hope that their importance, as affecting the health and
reputation of the city, will receive, as undoubtedly they claim, your early and
due attention.

NEW YORK, December 31, 1796. May it please the Governor,
THE Commissioners of the Health-Office, having hitherto, as far as
circumstances would admit, fulfilled the design of their appointment, conceive
it proper, in the further discharge of their duty, now at the close of the
year, to lay before the governor, an account of the manner in which they have
executed their trust, of their expenditures therein, and, in general, of the
situation of the public establishment under their care; together with such
observations as have occurred to them on the subject of preserving and
promoting the health of the city, and rendering more efficacious the public
provision for that purpose, and for the reception and accommodation of the sick.

THE Hospital at Bellevue, established by the Corporation of the city, had
remained, since the preceding year, furnished for the reception of the sick,
and offered, in the beginning of the season, a comfortable asylum to those who
might arrive from sea, until the establishment under the authority of the state
could be got ready. It was accordingly begun to be occupied for this purpose,
in the month of June, from which time, to the 18th of August, the number of
sick sent thither, was chiefly from vessels arrived from sea. In the mean time,
the buildings on Bedlow's Island, purchased of the French, being given up by
them, were cleansed and made ^eaday to answer the purposes of a Lazaretto, and
were furnished with beds, bedding, clothing, medicines, etc. and provided with
a Physician, nurses, and other necessary attendants, and to which the sick at
Bellevue, were removed about the 18th of August: And although from unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances, the accommodations there, were not so perfect as
could have been desired, they were, by care and attention, rendered as
comfortable and commodious as possible, and the place was visited by some of
the Commissioners as often as occasion required. The number of sick thus
received at the Lazaretto, from the 18th of August to the 1st of September,
(the latest period at which any have been sent there) including those from
Bellevue, was eighty-seven, of which seventeen have died: The greater part of
this number had arrived from sea, and the remainder were inhabitants of the
city, who could not find suitable accommodations at home.

THE Commissioners, at the recommendation of the Health-Officer, appointed to
attend the sick as Physician, Doctor Bouvier, a gentleman who had acquired much
reputation in a long residence and practice of Physic, in the French
West Indies, and who has fulfilled his duty with singular ability and
attention, and with great success; and although the allowance made him of four
dollars a day, during his attendance, is perhaps more than their scanty funds
would afford, it was, in their opinion, not adequate to his time and valuable
services; and they therefore think it just that he should receive such
additional pay, as may be judged to amount to a reasonable compensation, and
accordingly recommend him for that purpose.

THE Malignant Fever of the last summer and autumn, though for a time very
alarming, yet was happily, in a great measure, confined to a district of small
extent, and greatly limited in its effects, compared with that of the preceding
year. It prevailed in the White Hall and Moore streets, and in Water and
Front-streets and the South side of Pearl-street, from the Exchange downwards,
and in the lower part of Broad-street. -- The rest of the city was principally
free from it, and in a healthy state; and the few persons who, in the other
parts, were attacked with the Fever, could generally trace the origin of it to
that infected quarter, or to local circumstances, in their particular
neighborhood. It appeared in two or three instances in the month of June, but
did not cause alarm till about the middle of July, from which time to 1st of
November, the number attacked with it was about 247, of which there died 67; of
this last number 7 or 8 died at Bellevue, or Bedlow's Island, and are included
in the return of deaths from thence.

ON this occasion, attention was paid to the timely removal of such patients
whose circumstances rendered it necessary for their better accommodation, and
to every other point in which, in the opinion of the Commissioners, they could
contribute to the comfort and safety of individuals; and as far as their powers
extended, to the restoring and preserving the health of the city.

THE Commissioners have found, that the facts stated in the representation of
the Health-Officer, on the subject of this sickness, are just; and it appears
to them with satisfactory clearness, that the filthy and corrupt state of some
of the Docks and Slips in the neighborhood of the Exchange and White Hall, was
the cause of the sickness; and there is little reason to doubt, but that, if
the state of the air in general, throughout the summer, had been favorable to
the propagation of infection, it would have found, in various parts of the
city, from filthy and noisome manufactories, neglected vacant lots covered with
offensive matter, and dirty streets and lanes, an abundant supply of noxious
effluvia to increase and spread its baneful influence; and that the city would,
in all probability, have suffered perhaps a more general and destructive
calamity, than in the preceding year.

THIS impure state of things was obvious to all; and it was hoped that our late
severe experience would have stimulated to a complete reformation; and that
aided by the law "to prevent the bringing in and spreading of infectious
diseases," an effectual exertion would have been made to remove all nuisances,
and place the city, in all respects, in a respectable and wholesome state. But
the warm season arrived, and no measures of this kind were taken. The
Commissioners presented to the Corporation, a representation of the state of
the city, recommending a mode of cleansing and keeping the streets, etc. in
good order, a copy of which was delivered to the Governor.

AFTER some time, several of the most offensive slips and docks were cleansed
and filled up in a proper manner, and some new mode was adopted for cleansing
the streets, which, however, proved but partially efficacious, being, in the
opinion of the Commissioners, far short of that recommended by them. But none
of the offensive manufactories were removed -- they all still remain -- several
of them in the most populous parts of the city, and are most dangerous and
disgraceful nuisances; one of which appears from an affidavit of John Collis,
referred to in a letter from the Health Officer to the Commissioners, to have
occasioned the sickness of a whole family, and the death of one of its members.
The continuance of this unhappy state of things, notwithstanding the aid of the
law, and the representations on the subject, afford a gloomy prospect with
regard to the future welfare of the city, especially as there is no hope of
engaging the Corporation in vigorous and efficient measures for a complete
reformation. The Commissioners are convinced that the principal members of that
body, think justly and independently on this subject, and have been zealous in
their endeavors to effect a change, and that several others are disposed to
cooperate with them in the salutary work; but a majority have not been found
willing to engage in those measures, at the risk of offending many of their
constituents, and the consequent loss of their places; for, however obvious to
all intelligent and liberal minds, is the necessity of placing and preserving
the city in the most cleanly and wholesome state, yet a considerable number of
the inhabitants are opposed to any new and extraordinary measures being taken
for that purpose, from the contracted and erroneous considerations of increased
expense, partial inconvenience, or innovation.

THE measures necessary to place and preserve this city in a cleanly and
wholesome state, are not difficult to ascertain. They are -- to fill up all the
docks and slips with clean earth, gravel, or sand, in such a manner as that the
muddy bottoms shall not be left bare at low water; and also to complete the
filling up with the same materials, all the remaining vacancies under the
stores and about the wharves, and to prohibit the common dirt of the street, or
any filthy or corruptive matter from being used for this purpose, or thrown
into them; to remove all such matters from the vacant lots or yards, in and
about the town; and where such are so situated as to receive the wash of the
streets, or adjacent grounds, or retain stagnant water, that they be filled up
with good earth, etc. that the water may run from them into the streets; to
provide effectually for cleansing all the streets, lanes, wharves, etc. at
least twice a week, and carrying the dirt and rubbish immediately to a spot
from whence it will be taken away in boats, without any delay, and to prohibit
its being thrown elsewhere, and also to prohibit any filthy or corruptive
matter or rubbish, from being brought out of houses, cellars, or yards, into
the streets etc. except at the time the persons appear who are employed to take
them away; to complete the paving of all the streets, lanes, etc. and the
entrances of the docks, wharves, and slips; to provide that all the water
drains be kept clean and free from obstructions, that no water may remain and
stagnate in them; and, to remove out of town, all manufactories which have a
tendency to infect the air with noxious effluvia. These measures, carried into
full effect, with the necessary regulations to prevent the introduction of
disease from abroad, would, undoubtedly, preserve the city in as great a degree
of healthiness, as it enjoyed in former years.

AND for the attainment of this most desirable end, the Corporation appear to
be vested with sufficient powers; but, unhappily, the capacity for
accomplishing such important good, is rendered abortive by the prevalence of an
improper influence over the majority, as stated above.

THE Commissioners are aware that this representation is made in plain and
strong terms; but as they are not only convinced of the truth of it, from their
own observations, but also find themselves justified in it, from respectable
authority, which cannot be doubted, they conceive that the importance of the
subject requires, that the evil should be fully understood, in order that the
remedy, if any can be found, should be applied with the greater readiness and
effect.

By order of the Commissioners, JOHN MURRAY, Chairman of the Commissioners of
the Health-Office, for the year 1796. (A true copy.) RICHARD BAYLEY.

AS correct an account as could be obtained of the number of people who
sickened and died in the neighborhood of White Hall, in 1796, is annexed for
two particular reasons: -- 1st. To show that the devastations committed by that
formidable disease, were limited to a few acres of ground: -- 2dly. and what is
of equal importance, is, to show that its fatality was in a ratio to the
vicinity of the nuisance. From these facts, I would suggest the following
question, viz. -- If the Yellow Fever is to be considered as a contagious
disease, is it not remarkable that it should have raged with a violence almost
unequalled in so healthy an exposure as the south-west part of our city, and
that the other parts of the city enjoyed, at least, a usual degree of health?
This question cannot possibly, in my apprehension, admit of but one solution,
and I would allege that the temperature and disposition of the air during the
warm season of 1796, was not favorable to the propagation of the disease
generally. -- As far as the poisonous exhalations arising from 24000 cart loads
street manure, exposed to the influence of a hot sun, were distinguished by
their offensive smell, so far their effects were manifested by the appearance
of the disease and no farther.

MEMORANDUM Of Inhabitants taken sick and died in the vicinity of the Exchange,
from the 4th of July to the 10th of October, 1796.
In Water-street, from White Hall to Coenties-slip.
Recovered. Died. At Wessel Wessels' 1 Mr. Cooper's 1 George Remsen's 2 John
Duffie's 2 William Humphrey's 1 1 Nicholas Van Antwerp's 1 Mrs. Riley's 2 1
Peter T. Curtenius's 1 John M'Pherson's 2 Samuel Abrams's 2 Nathan Strong's 4
James Richardson's 3 Patrick M'Laughlin's 4 Thomas Martin's 3 1 John Jeremiah's
2 1 William Comb's 2 Margaret Adams's 2 1 The French Consul's 3 John Currie's 2
1 Andrew Morris's 1 Samuel Shaddock's 1 30 18 In Broad-street, from the
Exchange to the dock.
Recovered. Died. At William Reeves's 2 A French Boarding House 1 John
Delamater's 2 Samuel Gater's 2 Jonathan Penny's 2 Samuel Ackerman's 2 Samuel
Page's 1 Mr. M'Cullen's 1 Joseph Williams's 1 Jacob Ludlum's 1 14 1 In White
Hall street.
Recovered. Died. At Peter Perrine's 3 1 Peter Deremer's 1 Mrs. Shaw's 2
Elizabeth Hall's 4 1 John Flood's 1 3 Mr. Harrison's 2 3 Jacob Corshow's 1
Peter Cortelyou's 5 Mr. Deacon's 1 Peter Hawk's 3 John Jabine's 2 22 11 In
Front-street, from White Hall to Coenties-ship.
Recovered. Died. At Jacob Remsen's 1 James Stuart's 2 1 Captain Platt's 3 2
Mr. Adgate's 3 1 Spencer and Follet's 2 William Thorn's 1 James Robinson's 2 1
Patrick Cochran's 1 1 Denton and Suydam's 2 William Denneman's 3 William Bond's
3 Israel Dissesway's 2 Robert Rattoon's 1 Mrs. Laboyteaux's 2 Mr. Vandewater's
2 Samuel Doughty's 3 Doctor Mulenbright's 5 William Corwin's 2 James Duffie's 3
James Richardson's 1 John Anderson's 2 Isaac Wood's 4 Mr. June's 4 54 6 In
Moore-street.
Recovered. Died. At James Glasse's 2 John Thomson's 2 2 John Buddy's 3 2
Elizabeth Jackson's 1 1 Mrs. Mason's 1 Elizabeth Watson's 1 1 Margaret Ingram's
1 1 Mary Hogan's 2 1 Catharine Ross's 1 3 John Campbell's 1 Mrs. Davis's 5
Haines and Thomson's 1 1 David Dunham's 1 Peter Pollyon's 3 2 John Hillyers' 4
1 John Tuttle's 1 1 Room Bushett's 3 3 David Conklin's 3 1 Mr. Simmerman's 3 1
36 24 On White Hall Dock.
Recovered. Died. At Mrs. Dean's 4 1 Mrs. Day's 4 1 Samuel Gale's 6 4 Garrett
Fountain's 2 Mrs. Genea's 3 Lawrence Hillyer's 1 2 James Lent's 2 1 22 9
SUMMARY.
Recovered. Died. In Water-street 30 18 Broad-street 14 1 White Hall-street 22
11 Front-street 54 6 Moore-street 36 24 White Hall Dock 22 9 178 69

[ Conclusion of Correspondence for 1796.]
Extracts from the Correspondence of 1797.
LETTER NO. 3. TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, April 10th 1797. SIR,
THE deputation of the Common Council, consisting of Gabriel Furman, Jacob de
la Montagnie, and Thomas Storm, Esqrs. have, with the Health-Officer, and
Commissioners, inspected the situation of the streets, docks, wharves and
slips, from Whitehall to New Market, on the east river. The various objects
which, in their opinion, require the interposition and authority of the Common
Council, will be the subject of a subsequent representation. At present the
Commissioners (whose immediate duty it appears to be) beg leave to solicit your
attention to such measures as may be best calculated to remedy the following
existing evils, viz: --

NUISANCES of considerable magnitude are found on several vacant and open lots
-- particularly one next to the Circus in Broad-Way, and another at the corner
of Broad-Way and Beaver-street. These we think ought to be enclosed to prevent
a greater collecton of filth and dirt.

THE surface of the streets at the head of the Old-slip and Beckman-slip, want
considerable raising with wholesome earth or gravel.

EXCHANGE-SLIP ought to be filled up so far as the Common Council have already
determined: -- Also Burling-slip on a range with the south side of
Front-street, and the lot granted Messrs. Van Zandt and Carter, on the west
side of it. This, in its present situation, is likewise a receptacle for all
kinds of offensive filth.

THE Commissioners observe with regret, that adequate exertions are wanted to
dig out White Hall, Coenties, Coffee-house, Fly-market, and Peck slips. -- They
beg leave, therefore, to name Mr. Thomas Hazard, as a suitable person to assist
in the superintendance, and to press the execution of these important objects.

THE solicitude of the Commissioners to obviate the effects apprehended from
delaying this business, will, they trust, be a sufficient apology for the
present address.

With sentiments of respect and consideration, I am, SIR, Your most obedient
servant, JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 5. TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, April 24th, 1797. SIR,
I AM requested to enclose you the remaining observations on the situation of
the streets, etc, alluded to in our letter of the 10th inst. The Commissioners,
though desirous of brevity in their communications, do not find themselves at
liberty to abridge the present lengthy details; as, in their opinion, every
object is of more or less importance to the general health of the city.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

RESIDUE of the observations on the situation of the Streets, Slips, Docks,
etc. made by Gabriel Furman, Jacob de la Montagnie, and Thomas Storm, Esqrs.
the Health Officer and Commissioners, on the 10th of April, 1797.
WHITE HALL is very much incumbered with timber, brick and other lumber, and
generally very filthy. The dock, east side of the slip, wants paving, the
new-made part of which to Exchange-slip, is, at least, one foot lower than the
outer end and sides. The yards back of the new-built houses on it, are still
lower, exceedingly filthy, and must become very offensive in (...) hot weather,
unless filled up with wholesome earth or gravel, which the Commissioners beg
leave to recommend to the attention of the Common Council.

THE lower end of Moore-street wants paving, as also the dock on both sides of
Exchange slip, being almost impossible in their present state, particularly on
Mr. Delafield's side.

THE pavement east side of Coenties slip, is in great disorder, and much broken
up, which makes it exceedingly dangerous for foot passengers, particularly
women and children passing by the loaded wood-carts. The Commissioners,
therefore, suggest the propriety of widening that dock four or five feet from
the upper end to the south range of Front-street, by building a new tier of
wood against the old dock, well anchored together, which will be a very
moderate expense to the proprietor. Unless this be done, it cannot be made
safe, nor suitably commodious for accommodating the business constantly
transacted there.

MR. ASTOR's, and the adjoining vacant water jots, east side of Peter Schenk's
store, Cruger's wharf, require filling up, or digging out, as, in their present
state they are receptacles of filth, and of course, great nuisances. The walks
of Front-street, between Coenties and the Old-slip, are generally out of
repair, and some lots totally unpaved. Cases of this nature are so numerous in
Front as well as Water street, from the Old to the New slip, that it is almost
impossible to mention each in detail. On this head, therefore, the
Commissioners beg leave to suggest the propriety of an ordinance, embracing the
walks and streets of the whole city, unless such does already exist; for,
without they are repaired, it will be almost impossible to keep them decent.

THE same general remark must suffice with regard to filling up all the lanes
and alleys leading to the wharves on the east river, from Coenties slip to Kip
and Laurence's alley, above the foot of Dover street.

THE west side of the dock, at the Old slip, requires paving, nd the east side
both filling (...) and paving. At present, that also is almost impossible. The
yards, rear of Blaze Moore's and Nevin Wilson's stores, Front street, are
sunken, filthy nuisances, and the buildings on them fronting the river, though
small, are considerably on the street.

HERE, the Commissioners beg leave to particularize a few more of the most
important nuisances of that description, on the east river, which ought, at
least, to be covered with wholesome earth or gravel.

UNDER the new wooden buildings of William Byron, at the Fly-market slip -- the
stores of John Jackson, and those on the estate of Leffert Lefferts, at the
lower end of Fletcher street (which street requires raising and paving, being
at present a perfect mud-hole). Also under the store lately occupied by Knox
and Briggs, corner of Burling-slip, Front street, in which the yellow fever
originated last sprnig. Under the store, west side of Peck slip, corporation
property. -- Also under the corner store, on the east side, and the rear of
Thomas Burling's and John Thurman's lots. -- Likewise, Saml. Ackerly's lot, and
under John Dickenson's house. The two last mentioned are already very
offensive, and will soon become dangerous.

THE remaining sunken lots and yards throughout the town, particularly on the
east side from Whitehall to Catharine slip, are so numerous, and thought such
great sources of unhealthiness in the hot season, that the Commissioners are
much at a loss what to say on the subject of filling them up, as such an
undertaking must prove very inconvenient to numbers of houses, and be attended
with immense expense, which many of the occupants are at present but illy
prepared to bear.

THE docks on both sides of the Coffee-house and Fly market slips, want paving.
Front-street, from the east side of Burling slip to Peck slip, requires
regulating, filling up and paving: Almost the whole, in its present state,
being a perfect nuisance. If this great object be effected, it will compel a
number of proprietors of lots and buildings in that quarter, to fill up; by
which means many filthy and sunken places, will be so far covered, as not to
produce evils in hot weather, which otherwise, in the opinion of the
Commissioners, may result.

THE dock on the west and east side of Peck slip, requires paving; and the
wharves in front, on the east side regulating and filling up. Both sides of
James' slip, want paving; also the lower end of Oliver street from Cherry
street. Catharine slip wants some digging out; and the dock on the west side of
it, as well as Catharine market, require paving.

MAGAZINE, Augustus, Little Ann and Barley streets require a regulation and
great improvements. In the district of these streets, there are two large ponds
of stagnant water, which, with the noxious factories may render them a source
of disease in hot weather, and are therefore, objects that require timely
attention.

THE lower ends of Rector and Carlisle streets leading from Greenwich street to
the North river, want considerable raising, being at present sunken miry
places, and impassible.

THE large square in front of the new Albany basin, and the dock on each side,
require paving. Some pavement also is wanted at the foot of Cortland street;
and the slip at the foot of Dey street, should be filled up.

JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 18. TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, May 22d, 1797. SIR,
THE Commissioners have requested me to deliver you the annexed list of lots,
etc. on the low grounds along the east river, and its vicinity, some of which
are at present offensive, and great receptacles of filth; and respectfully
suggest the propriety of directing them to be immediately filled up.

SUCH other nuisances as they may, from time to time, discover, and which will
require the authority of the Common Council to rectify, will be reported.

I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, JOHN OOTHOUT,
Chairman.

THE estate of Jacob Walton's, Thomas Randall's, Theophylact Bache's and
Carlisle Pollock's lots; all in the rear of Front-street, between the Old slip
and Governeurs' alley, want filling up twenty-five or 30 feet in length.

THE estate of Joseph Griffith's and part of Joseph Hallett's lots, rear of
their stores in Front-street, facing the river, between Governeurs's alley and
the Coffee-house slip, want raising with wholesome earth.

SAMUEL Thurston's, John C. Freak's and Elizabeth Stillwell's lots, on
Fletcher-street, require so much raising with good earth, as to cast the water
into that street.

THE cellar of a house occupied by William Simmons, and another now or lately
occupied by Archer Peliren and Co. fronting on Fletcher-street, between
Front-street and the river, are offensive places, and require filling up with
wholesome earth.

JOSEPH Winter's and Samuel Thorne's two lots in the fifth ward, Water-street,
facing the river -- also, John Moore's in the third ward -- all want filling up.

Two lots of Samuel Ackerley's and Arch. Gracie, south side of Water-street, in
the fifth ward, want filling -- but it cannot be conveniently done, unless the
Common Council order Rosevelt slip to be filled up.

JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 27. (Extract.) TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, June 27th, 1797. SIR,
"AS the low grounds on the East river, South of Pearl-street, have hitherto
been very much the seat of disease, in summer, the Commissioners are resolved
to pay particular attention to their cleanliness; and will, as soon as
possible, submit to the consideration of the Common Council, some regulations
to prevent so great an accumulation of dirt and filth in that part of the city.
They think, that Mr. Hazard will be a suitable person, as well for this
purpose, as to prevent the landing and storing of damaged hides, coffee, and
any other articles of that kind, in a perishable or dangerous condition, They
propose, therefore, that his attention should be turned to these objects,
immediately after completing those in which he is at present engaged."

JOHN OOTHOUT.

No. 30. TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, June 26, 1797. SIR,
THE Commissioners in their letter of the 5th inst. requested, that as soon as
Mr. Hazard had completed the objects he was then engaged in, of cleansing slips
with the machine, he might be employed in the superintendance and care of
cleansing and removing the dirt and filth from the piers, docks, etc. of the
city, from White Hall to New-slip, on the East river. This is meant to be done
agreeably to some arrangement in contemplation, whereby the proprietors shall
bear a proportion of the expense, with the public, if possible. The
Commissioners think it most advisable to discontinue taking any more dirt out
of the docks for the present. If their opinion concurs with that of the Common
Council, they beg that Mr. Hazard may be directed to take charge of the other
object under the immediate direction of the Commissioners, during the time this
service may be judged necessary, and to receive his daily pay from them, which
is understood to be twelve shillings.

IN addition to the places already represented in disorder, the following
require the interposition of the board.

Peter Goelett's and John Delafield's side walks, each side of Exchange Slip,
ought to be made without delay.

THE L. from the Old to the new Albany pier, at Coenties Slip, wants filling up
with gravel or other solid materials.

THE front of Robert Watts's lots facing the River, East side of Fly-market
Stairs, where the Ferry House stands, is in a state highly exceptionable, and
requires considerable raising to cast off the water.

THE Alley leading from Peck Slip, between Water and Pearl Streets, is in a
state of great nuisance, and requires filling up, so as to cast the water into
Peck Slip. The proprietors are Thomas Ellison, Samuel Farmer, Benjamin Mott,
William Minturn, and others.

James and Catherine slips are also in a state of great nuisance. The
Commissioners, though averse to filling up slips: if even it were optional with
them) from a knowledge of their public utility, are at a loss what else to
advise in the present case, to remedy the evils that may arise from the
condition of these two. They conceive, however, that James's slip, as far as it
runs bare, and Catherine-slip, as far as the North side of Water-street, ought
to be filled up.

THE lower ends of Chamber and Murray-streets, on the North river, are in great
disorder, and require regulating and filling. The rear of Mr. Strachan's lot,
and Mr. Rhinelander's adjoining it, on Washington-street; and the lower end of
Robinson-street, from Greenwich-street to Washington-street, want filling.

THE pavement in Front-street, and the side walks from the Old slip to
Gouverneur's alley, particularly, are in such disorder, that it is impossible
to get them kept decent and wholesome without repairs. This leads the
Commissioners to express their regret that so little attention has been paid to
the streets and walks generally, where so much is wanted.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 35. TO JAMES KENT, Esquire, Recorder. (In the absence of the Mayor.)
Health-Office, July 17th 1797. SIR,
IT is with regret that the Commissioners are compelled to trouble the Common
Council so frequently. Their duty, however, obliges them to represent, without
loss of time, that Burling-slip is at present in a state of very alarming
nuisance; and that, from the constant accumulation of dead animals, offals and
other perishable substances, which lie putrefying on the mud and stagnant water
within the Bulk-head, it is hourly becoming more so. They, therefore, beg the
Common Council will order that the filling up (which appears to be suspended)
may go on, and be speedily completed.

THEY further remark, that the mode of filling this slip, is similar to that
observed last summer at the White Hall, which, in its consequences, was so
fatal to the neighborhood; and their solicitude with respect to the object of
their present application is heightened by reflecting that the Yellow-Fever
first made its appearance the past year, in this neighborhood.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 36. TO THE MAYOR,
HEALTH OFFICE, August 19th, 1797. SIR,
REPRESENTATIONS have been made to the Commissioners, that danger of sickness
is apprehended from the unfilled lots, late the property of Ireland, in the 6th
ward. These lots at present contain a great body of stagnant water, and are
common receptacles of filth and dead animals. The enclosed list of names has
been furnished by one of the proprietors of this ground, who expresses an
earnest wish to fill up immediately.

SENSIBLE that the exertions of any one willing individual, will be of little
avail in a nuisance of such magnitude, the Commissioners beg the Common Council
will direct each to do his respective part, without delay.

THE Commissioners take the liberty to remind the Board, that Mr. Delafield has
not yet filled under his stores at Exchange slip, which they think ought to be
done.

THE rear of Robert Bowne's and the late Messrs. Bruce's lots, at the foot of
Pine-street, are at present in a state of nuisance, being receptacles of
rubbish and filth of every sort, and require to be dug out, so as to be under
cover of the water.

I am, respectfully, Sir, Your most obedient servant, JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

To the Commissioners of the Health-Office.
Health-Office, New York, August 21st, 1797. GENTLEMEN,
THE ship Shepherdess, commanded by Isaac Hand, arrived in this harbor
yesterday.

MR. PARKER the person appointed by the Commissioners to inspect all vessels
arriving in this port from the southward of Cape May, in pursuane of his duty,
hailed the Sheperdess on her way into port, and enquired the state of health of
the crew. They returned for answer, that all was well. Determined, however, for
certain reasons, to obtain more particular information, he boarded her, and
made enquiries of the pilot, William Berwick, and of the mate, with respect to
the health of the people, and was told there was no sick on board.

AT eleven o'clock this morning, I received a written notification, that a man,
supposed to be sick of the yellow fever, was lodged back of No. 30, Pope's
alley, Rutgers' street. I repaired to the place, and found a Mr. William Moses,
who had, the preceding evening, been landed from the ship Shepherdess from
Savannah. On examination I found him in the last stage of the yellow fever.

IN pursuance of the trust reposed in me, I went immediately, and lodged the
necessary information with the Alderman of the ward, Mr. Jotham Post, after
which I proceeded to the ship, and requested the master, Mr. Isaac Hand, to
place colors in her shrouds, remove her from the dock immediately, and bring
her to anchor on the ground assigned for quarantine.

ON enquiry, it appeared that William Berwick, a pilot, conducted the
Shepherdess into port, and to the wharf. On being desired by the Captain to
remove her into the stream, and to the quarantine ground, he equivocated,
hesitated, and behaved otherwise improperly.

AFTER having given directions as stated above, I lest the vessel with colors
in her shrouds. Some time after, William Berwick, the pilot, damned the colors,
took a knife from his pocket, and ordered them from the shrouds -- a boy
accordingly took them down.

Two hours after my first visit, finding the ship had not dropped down to the
quarantine ground, I returned to her, and found the colors lying on deck, and
the ship lashed to the wharf.

With much respect, I am, GENTLEMEN, Your humble servant, R. BAYLEY, Health
Officer.

To the Health Officer.
August 23d, 1797.
MR. AKERMAN reports to me this moment, that a sick man was yesterday brought
by sailors in a coach to a public house, bteween Nos. 1 and 3, Ann-street, kept
by Henry Rice, and lodged there, which has greatly alarmed the neighborhood.

JOHN OOTHOUT.

Report of the Health Officer.
RIGBY, a sailor, is the person alluded to. -- He belongs to the ship Atlas,
lately arrived in the port of New York from Ireland. His complaint is fever,
attended with symptoms neither malignant nor otherwise dangerous or interesting.

R. BAYLEY, Health Officer.

To the Commissioners of the Health Office.
September 6th, 1797. GENTLEMEN,
NOT being acquainted what method is to be pursued in cases of contagious
diseases, when there are no public meetings or places appointed to receive
information concerning them, has been the cause of some hours delay in
reporting the case of Mr. Burchill, which I am of opinion, is yellow bilious
remitting fever, as described by authors, similar to what has prevailed in this
and other cities, for this some years past, and is considered to be contagious.
Mr. Burchill is to be found in Front-street, between Beekman and Burling slip.

I am, etc. ANTHONY L. ANDERSON,
Corner of Pearl and Chatham street.
From the Health Officer to the Commissioners.
GENTLEMEN,
ON receiving the letter directed to the Health Commissioners from Dr.
Anderson, I visited Mr. Burchill agreeably to the sentiments you expressed on
the subject.

I FOUND him laboring under symptoms characterizing a high grade of bilious
fever. The late hour of the night was very unfriendly to a particular
examination of the color of his skin. On repeating my visit this morning, his
face, neck and chest, had assumed a deep yellow tinge. This circumstance
renders his complaint unequivocally that species of fever generally denominated
Yellow Fever.

Mr. BURCHILL lives about midway on the left hand side of Front-street,
between Beekman and Burling slip, nearly opposite where Mr. Briggs of the house
of Knox and Briggs, died early in the spring of 1796, of yellow fever, before
that disease made its appearance at White Hall.

THE part of Front-street alluded to, has been in an unfinished state for
several years past, and is perhaps as dirty and filthy a spot as any in the
city. It has been repeatedly represented to the Common Council.

I am, with much respect, Your most obedient servant, R. BAYLEY, Health Officer.

September 12th, 1797.
Memorandum. -- Mr. Joseph Tailor, No. 158, Fly-market, reports, that Stephen
Kelly, who arrived in the Bellona, Captain Croker, from Savannah, lies ill at
his house.

Memorandum. -- The above being handed to the Health Officer, he called to see
Kelly, found him ill of yellow fever, and conveyed him to the hospital,
Bedlow's Island.

JOHN OOTHOUT.

TO THE HEALTH-OFFICER.
Health-Office, September 19, 1797. (11 o'clock.) SIR,
Dr. AMASA DINGLEY reports, that Mr. Havens, of the ship Hare, from St. Ubes,
lies sick of Yellow Fever, at Mr. Baker's, No. 19, Roosevelt-street, and that
he has had no communication with any of the Southern ports.

JOHN OOTHOUT.

September 19, 1797. (2 o'clock.) SIR,
I HAVE visited Mr. Havens, at No. 19, Roosevelt-street. He lies ill of Yellow
Fever, as the letter of Dr. Dingley specifies, and must die in a few hours.

Memorandum. -- He Died.

I am, etc. RICHARD BAYLEY, Health-Officer.

Mr. John Oothout, etc.
TO THE COMMISSIONERS.
New York, September 23d, 1797.
THE alarming situation of the inhabitants in George-street, near the Ship
Yards, particularly the lower part, obliges me to lay their case before you,
and entreat your speedy attention to that end of the city, that the rest of our
citizens may not be infected with the malignant disease, which prevails there
at this time, and which, in all probability, has there originated from the
filth and stagnant water.

THE houses, the lower rooms of which are three or four feet under ground, are
mostly occupied by poor people; and such numbers are crowded together, that it
is impossible to keep their apartments in such state of cleanliness as is
requisite for their health. It is needless to enlarge on the subject. I hope,
gentlemen, these hints will induce you to take a view of the place, and be
yourselves witnesses of the general distress.

I remain, with respect, Your most obedient servant, PETER FAUGERES.

To the Commissioners of the Health-Office.
New York, September 28, 1797. GENTLEMEN,
I AM very sorry in having occasion to inform you, that I was this forenoon
called to visit a gentleman from Norfolk, in Virginia, who is ill of Fever, in
the Hotel-Coffee-House.

THIS young man passed through Philadelphia on Sunday last, was taken unwell
yesterday, but was able to walk out this morning. I found him under pretty high
Fever, accompanied by those symptoms, which, at this season of the year, give
suspicion that it may assume a more formidable complexion. Finding him in such
circumstances, I have attempted the most decisive practice with him; and though
I consider him a good deal relieved, I cannot take upon me to say that the
advantage gained will eventually ensure his recovery; nor is it my province to
determine how far it will be proper to allow him to remain where he is. He
wishes much to be permitted to take a chance at his present lodgings, until
tomorrow.

I am, respectfully, Gentlemen, Your most humble servant, JAMES TILLARY.

October 7th, 1797.
DOCTOR VARICK reports, that captain Jones, at Mr. James's, east
Rutgers-street, 2 or 3 doors from Lumber-street, is ill of Bilious remitting
Fever. He arrived from Baltimore last Monday evening.

October 7th, 1797.
JAMES GREATON reports, that Mary M'Donald is ill of Fever, at No. 64,
George-street, and destitute of the common necessaries of life.

Memorandum. -- She was conveyed to Bedlow's Island.

October 21.
MR. HAZARD, keeper of the gaol informed the Commissioners, that two sailors
were sick there; and Dr. William M'Intosh certified, that the said men, viz.
Robert Fall and William Latham were in the stage of Typhus, or Yellow-Fever.

Memorandum. -- They were removed to Bedlow's Island.

No. 38. TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, October 23, 1797. SIR,
WHEN the Commissioners of the Health Office entered on the discharge of the
important trust reposed in them, they felt solicitous that nothing should be
wanted on their part, to accomplish the objects of their appointment.

WITH this view, they have frequently been led to address you, on the subject
of the numerous nuisances, which existed in various parts of the city; and they
acknowledge the readiness with which the Common Council have interposed their
authority for the removal of them. But, though much has been done, much more
remains to be done. The object of the present address is, to call the attention
of the board, to a subject which, in the opinion of the Commissioners, is of
great moment to the future welfare of the citizens.

THE experience of the part summer and present autumn as it regards the
operation and effect of the system of cleanliness introduced last spring, has
convinced the Commissioners that it is practicable to a still greater extent.
That it meets the general approbation of their fellow-citizens, is a pleasing
fact: and, that our exemption from diseases incident to the season, ought, in
some measure, to be attributed to it, is acknowledged. The few cases of yellow
fever which have occured during the past summer, were mostly on the borders of
the east river, and originated in situations where nuisances continue to exist.

WITH these impressions, the Commissioners beg leave to represent to the Common
Council, the necessity of directing by an ordinance, all the proprietors of
water-lots, especially on the East river, to fill them up with solid materials,
so that the whole extent of ground already granted, may be completely finished
by the first of May next, at farthest.

OF whatever magnitude this proposal may at first sight appear, in its effects
on the convenience or interests of individuals, the benefits contemplated are
incalculably great to the city in general: that is, the removal of those causes
which may contribute to aid the return of pestilential diseases in the city.

DESIROUS as the Commissioners are, that the experiment thus far successfully
attempted, of obviating disease by cleanliness, may be more fully tried, and
convinced that the Common Council is disposed to concur, in the same important
object they have only further to solicit their serious attention to this
application, which is made at so early a period, with a view to afford ample
time for carrying the proprosed regulation into complete effect.

I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, JOHN OOTHOUT,
Chairman.

To the Commissioners of the Health-Office.
Bedlow's Island, Nov. 10th 1797. GENTLEMEN,
THE enclosed report contains a particular account of the number of sick which
have been sent to the Hospital on Bedlow's Island, from August the 25th, the
period when I took charge of that institution, to the first of November, 1797.

AFTER having thus far acquitted myself on the score of obligation, my
inclination prompts me to lay before your Board, some remarks on the numerous
inconveniences which I have had to contend with during my residence on the
island -- inconveniences which have not only rendered the situation of the
sick, in many instances, very uncomfortable, but have also, greatly contributed
to render the medical treatment of them less certain.

IT was early in the spring discovered, that the buildings on the island, were
very illy calculated for the accommodation of the sick. The few alterations and
improvements which were made during the season, served the purpose of immediate
exigency only, and were by no means calculated to defend the sick against the
inclemencies of the weather, which necessarily take place at this season of the
year -- inconveniences with which they are at this moment contending.

ONE building only was intended for the reception of the sick, which in the
course of the season, was found incapable of lodging the whole: and although
another was fitted for the purpose, the want of separate apartments, made it
necessary to mix together, persons of all classes and descriptions, of
different sex, and laboring under different diseases, and in all the various
stages of their diseases.

NOTHING is more necessary in the treatment of the sick, than that the orders
of the Physician should be faithfully performed, the better to enable him to
render practicable the execution of his object. Yet such has been the state of
things, from the mixed and various employments of the nurses, as to render it
impossible in some instances, to carry into effect those measures which
suggested themselves to me as necessary to promote the recovery of the sick.

As a counterbalance of the foregoing short unpleasant narrative, I shall
proceed to make a few remarks of a more satisfactory nature.

THE liberal supply of linen, bedding, etc. etc. etc. which has been furnished
for the use of this institution, has enabled the attendants to keep the sick in
a state of complete cleanliness. The result has been, that notwithstanding the
many instances of Yellow-Fever, which have come under my care since my
residence on this island, some of which possessing a degree of malignancy
scarcely to be exceeded, there is no instance in which the disease has been
communicated to nurses, attendants or visitors, nor to the boatmen who have
conducted the sick to the island.

IF from the want of opportunity hitherto, I had not made up my mind on the
real character of the Yellow-Fever, I should now have no more hesitation in
attending the sick laboring under this disease, than in other entrances of
Fever, without fear of receiving infection, provided due cleanliness and
ventilation were observed.

I am, with great respect, Gentlemen, Your most obedient servant, SAMUEL OSBORN.

From the Health Officer to the Governor
Health Office, Dec. 1, 1797. SIR,
THE correspondence which I had the honor of holding with your Excellency, has
been on a subject which yields to none on the score of public utility.

THE patient attention and ready assistance, which you have always bestowed
upon it, emboldens me to trouble you on the present occasion, and inclines me
to believe, that the vouchers which have been lately submitted to your
inspection, have, as well as others, extremely interesting to the citizens,
received a share of your attention. Feeling myself in a situation of great
responsibility as it relates to the health of the city, it appears to me that I
cannot be too particular in details which fix the PUBLIC ATTENTION, by adducing
facts calculated, at once, to detect error and establish truth.

THE first representation that was made by the Commissioners of the Health
Office, to the Common Council of this city on the subject of nuisances, was in
the latter part of March, 1797. It is to be observed, that these nuisances were
found too numerous to be all removed in one season. The Common Council,
therefore, issued their ordinances for the removal of those only which were
conceived to be of the greatest magnitude. And while individuals were employed
in fulfilling the orders of the Magistrates, the Commissioners divided the city
into districts, to each of which a superintendant, and a suitable number of
scavengers were appointed, who engaged to see that their respective districts
were swept and properly cleansed twice in each week. By means of these
arrangements, the most salutary effects were produced, insomuch that it has
since been a common remark, that the city, during the last summer, has
generally been free from those disagreeable effluvia, which before, especially
in particular situations, rendered the air almost unfit for respiration. To
these regulations may fairly be ascribed in a great degree the universal health
of the inhabitants during the sickly season.

THE first communication that was made to the Commissioners on the appearance
of malignant fever in this city, was by letter from Dr. Anderson, dated
September the 6th. This letter was followed by others of a similar nature from
different gentlemen of the faculty. The measures which were in consequence
pursued, were such as were judged best calculated for the recovery of the sick,
and the safety of their attendants.

IF, on examination, the sick were found accommodated in such a manner, as to
allow of due cleanliness and good air, they were suffered to remain with their
friends; -- on the contrary, if they were in crowded and confined habitations,
where ventilation was impracticable, it was thought expedient to remove them
from the city. Here it is worthy of remark, that the instances of malignant
fever which occurred in different parts of the city, had their origin in the
neighborhood of a nuisance, which had been reported to the Corporation early
in the season.

ON the 23d of September, a letter was addressed to the Commissioners from Dr.
Faugeres, representing that the people in George street were sickening. The
Commissioners, in consequence, were led to inquire what were the probable
causes of disease in that quarter. On examination it was found that the houses
in that part of the street where the fever prevailed, were composed of small
apartments, with cellars eight and ten feet under ground. In these were crowded
together people of a description truly unfortunate, whose circumstances and
manners exposed them to all the diseases incident to poverty and intemperance.
To this unfailing source of the cause of malignant fever, was added the
manufactory of a Skinner in the same street, the emptying of whose vats threw
such a quantity of noxious vapors into the atmosphere, as proved a great
annoyance to the whole neighborhood. On the 20th of September there were
eleven persons sick within sixty yards of each other, in George street, five of
whom died in twenty-four hours after I had made my first visit, at the request
of the Commissioners. -- The measures which were adopted in this instance, were
to bury the dead without any unnecessary delay -- to cause the rooms of the
sick to be thoroughly cleansed, ventilated and white-washed, and the attention
of cleansing and ventilating was also paid to the bedding and clothes of the
deceased. Lime was also furnished for the use of the indigent in the
neighborhood, whose families had not suffered from disease. By these means
your Excellency may be assured, that the result was gratifying to the finest
feelings of humanity. In the course of a few days, the people of George street
were delivered from a calamity which threatened soon to become extensive, and
were restored to as healthy a state as usual.

IN the course of the season it happened that several persons were seized with
fever, who had but a short time previous, arrived from Philadelphia. The
conduct of the Commissioners was on these occasions similar to that which they
observed with respect to our own citizens. If they found the sick so situated
as to enjoy all the advantages of cleanliness and good air, they were left
under the management of their respective friends and Physicians: if otherwise,
they were removed from the city. Hence, in all human probability, it happened,
that there was no instance of communicated infection. This was particularly
remarkable in the cases of Messrs. Suydam, Havens, Burchill and others, with
whom the intercourse of friends was never restrained; and though their diseases
were distinctly marked, and of the most violent type, yet they were not
communicated.

AFTER engaging your Excellency's attention to the occurrences which took place
in the city, it will not, I hope, be deemed a trespass on your time, to request
it for a moment to those which occurred on Bedlow's Island.

THE Commissioners having used every means within their power, to guard the
city against the spreading of malignant fever, turned their attention to the
Lazaretto, in order to ascertain to what degree of hazard those were exposed,
who were employed in removing the sick from the city, and from the different
vessels, to the Island. To this end, the number of men employed (during the
season) was limited to 8. These men, though often obliged necessarily to and
lift carry the sick, suffered not, in the smallest degree, from their
occupation.

IN the Hospital, there were eleven persons employed as nurses, attendants,
etc. among all these, there was not one instance (...) Fever. Mr. Osborne,
Surgeon to the garrison on Governor's Island, was prevailed upon to attend the
sick on Bedlow's island, for a certain period; and in a letter which he
addressed to the Commissioners on his resigning his employment there, (which is
transmitted for your Excellency's perusal) he gives a particular account of the
state of the Hospital, and expresses much satisfaction at seeing the good
effects which cleanliness and ventilation had afforded it.

IF there needed any other confirmation than what has occurred through the
season, and happened within the knowledge of the Commissioners, it may be found
in the following facts:

MR. CASE, of Newburgh in this state, and his comrade, were sent to the
Hospital from the ship Margaret, captain Bebee, both sick of the Yellow-Fever.
As soon as the situation of Mr. Case was made known to his friends, his mother
and brother hastened to see him. Mrs. Case and her son were unlimited in their
intercourse with their sick relation; and Mrs. Case remained with him, and
performed all the duties of an affectionate mother and tender nurse, to the
moment of his death, which happened on the sixth day of his illness. His
comrade recovered. -- Mr. Case, before his death, was as yellow as an orange;
but neither the mother nor brother experienced the least indisposition in
consequence of their visit to the Hospital.

Two men were, from certain circumstances, received into the Hospital, with
fractured legs -- they remained in the same apartment with those ill of
Yellow-Fever, and neither of them took the disease.

THESE facts are from my own knowledge; and impressed as I truly am with their
importance, and particularly with the inferences which may be drawn from them,
I cannot be too earnest in my attempts to impress them upon your Excellency.

IT is at all times an arduous undertaking to conquer prejudices; and it is
commonly an unthankful office to rectify abuses which compel men to draw money
from their pockets. The city of New York, which offers to its merchants the
finest prospects of wealth, and to all its inhabitants the more pleasing one of
health, if properly attended to, should be put in a situation which would
render it capable of realizing both. The expense of doing this, is unworthy of
notice, compared to the end when attained; -- nay, the very expense is but
another means of enhancing the value of property, as well as of securing the
comforts of life. The legislature then, in ninety seven, have been commendably
employed in sanctioning a system, which if completed, must be attended with
effects incalculably beneficial.

PERMIT me to repeat, that as I have personally known all the facts previously
stated, as well with regard to the city as Lazaretto, and as I have personally
conducted the operations of the Health-Office, I can vouch for their truth, and
consider myself accountable for them.

BEING extremely desirous, as far as it is in my power, to render the
establishment of the Health-Office, a real good to the people, I most heartily
join the Commissioners in entreating your Excellency to make such a
representation to the Legislature, as you may judge proper on this important
subject.

(...) have been from time to time informed by the Commissioners of the last
and of the present year, of the very unfit condition of the buildings on
Bedlow's Island, to answer the purposes of a Lazaretto. I shall, therefore,
only add, that there is the most pressing necessity for fixing the spot on
which suitable and permanent buildings may be erected, so that the institution
may be rendered as complete and useful as possible, before the ensuing season.

I WILL take my leave, by remarking to your Excellency, that the ready
assistance which the Health Commissioners received from the Common Council, in
the execution of their several duties, greatly contributed to promote the
measures of the Health Office.

I am, with entire respect, Sir, Your Excellency's Most humble servant, RICHARD
BAYLEY.

[ Conclusion of Correspondence for 1797.]
Extracts FROM THE CORRESPONDENCE OF 1798.
No. 44. TO THE MAYOR.
HEALTH-OFFICE, New York, April 2d, 1798. SIR,
THE Commissioners enclose for the consideration of the Common Council, a
memorial from the inhabitants in the vicinity of the Common Sewer, at the lower
end of Broad-street, complaining of it as a nuisance scarcely to be borne in
hot weather.

THE Commissioners are convinced that this is a well-founded complaint, and
ought to be remedied without delay; and they most cheerfully offer their aid in
any measure the Common Council shall deem proper, to relieve the petitioners.

THE Commissioners take the liberty to remind the board of the necessity of
compelling the inhabitants of the city generally, to mend their streets and
side-walks. It will be almost impossible to keep them in decent order, without
-- and if it is deemed necessary to designate the particular places that
require repairs, or accompany the Alderman of each ward in a review, they are
ready to do either, on the first intimation.

I am, Sir, Your most humble servant, JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 48. To John Jacob Lansing, Esquire. Sheriff.
HEALTH OFFICE, May 2d, 1798. SIR,
A REPRESENTATION has been made to the Commissioners, that the present state of
the Jail yard is exceptionable -- in consequence of which, they, together with
the Health Officer, visited it this morning, and are of opinion, that removing
the rubbish daily, and keeping it as clean as possible hereafter, will not only
conduce very greatly to the health and convenience of the family as well as the
prisoners, but tend to prevent any bad effects upon the inhabitants in its
vicinity, from an accumulation of offensive objects in the approaching warm
season.

THEY are also of opinion, that if the walls of the different apartments, were
repeatedly white washed, it would purify the air of the prison, and render it
more wholesome.

THE Commissioners, therefore, beg leave to call your attention to this
interesting object; and trust, that immediate measures will be taken to
preclude the danger apprehended.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 50. [Delivered to Alderman Gabriel Furman.]
Health-Office, May 7th, 1798.
Various objects noticed by the Committee of the Corporation, and the
Commissioners of the Health-Office, this morning, viz. --

JOHN Jacob Astor's and the adjacent vacant lot, and Thomas Brown's Blacksmith
shop, Front-street, are in a state of perfect nuisance, and require filling up
at least upon a range with the rear of the adjoining buildings.

THE whole side walk from Coenties to the Old-slip, South side of Front-street,
requires to be renewed.

THE head of Coffee-House-slip wants clearing out with the machine; and the
East side, from Front-street to the end of the wharf, to be paved.

THE rear of Thomas Marston's lot, next to Mrs. Bruce's, should be filled, and
Mrs. Bruce's made level with Pine-street, and both so descending as to cast the
water into the East river -- within 14 days.

THE rear of Robert Bowne and Thomas Eddy's lots, East of Pine-street, to be
filled by the same period. The pavement in front of their stores is sunken, and
wants raising and repair.

THE street and side walks in front of Carey Ludlow's and William Byron's
houses, are sunken, and want raising and new paving.

THE alley and rear of George Codwise's and George Bowne's lots, Front-street,
should be filled and paved within 14 days -- also, their alley, (Front-street)
on the dock.

THE East side of Beekman-slip, in front of Mr. Rogers's stores, to the Bridge,
wants paving.

Simon Schermerhorn's alley, between Capt. Motley's and the corner of
Beekman-slip (Front-street) should be filled up with gravel.

UNDER Joshua Underhill's store, Front-street, next to Crane wharf, wants
filling.

THE lower end of Walton's alley, above Peck-slip, from Water-street to
Front-street, wants raising.

THE lower end of Archibald Gracie's and Samuel Ackerly's new wharf, should be
filled up and finished.

IT IS ALSO NECESSARY,

To pave Water-street, between James and Catharine-slips, and South of
Catharine slip, from the pavement to the bridge -- to run abulk head across
Catharine-slip, on a range with the South side of Water-street, West of the
slip -- to pave George-street from the North side of Lombard Street, to the
dock on Cherry-street -- and, level above Lombard Street, with gravel.

JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 54. TO THE RECORDER. (In the absence of the Mayor.)
Health-Office, May 21st, 1798. SIR,
I TAKE the liberty to hand you the enclosed representation from the
inhabitants in the neighborhood of the New slip, for the consideration of the
Common Council; and have only to observe, that the Commissioners who lately
examined this slip, did not hesitate to pronounce it in a state of nuisance.
However averse they may be to recommend the filling up of any one, from a
knowledge of their great public utility, they are at a loss what other measure
to suggest for obviating the danger feared, and quieting the alarms of the
people in its vicinity. In a letter of the 26th of June last, this slip was
represented by the Commissioners as in a state of nuisance.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 58. TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, June 23 d, 1798. SIR,
THE Commissioners received the enclosed representation of Catherine slip, a
few days ago. -- They find it a receptacle of all kinds of filth, and, from its
situation, must daily become more offensive. They, therefore, think it their
duty to apprize the Common Council, that this case will require their authority
and interposition.

THE Commissioners also inform the Board, that Thomas Marston has totally
neglected to fill the rear of his lot, next to the estate of Robert and Peter
Bruce, agreeable to the ordinance of Common Council; and that it still remains
in the situation it was when last reported.

THEY also inform the Board, that Mr. Delafield has only partially complied
with the order for filling under and in rear of his stores at Exchange slip.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 61. TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, August 6th, 1798. SIR,
THE unfinished situation of the docks in Front-street, between Coenties and
the Old slip, generally, was, in the opinion of the Commissioners of the Health
Office, a source of disease in that neighborhood last year, and occasioned the
death of several valuable citizens. At that period it became a subject of
remonstrance to the Common Council.

THE Commissioners cannot sufficiently regret, that they have reason to renew
their remonstrances on this subject, and that its present situation is likely
to be productive of still greater evils than those of last year.

SEVERAL persons have sickened in the neighborhood of these unfinished grounds
within a week, and with symptoms strikingly characteristic of Yellow-Fever.

IF the Common Council think proper to appoint two of their members, the
Commissioners will meet them early tomorrow morning, to concert measures
adapted to the exigency of the case.

I am, respectfully, Sir, Your most obedient servant, RICHARD BAYLEY,
Health-Officer.

No. 176. To his Excellency, Governor Jay.
Health-Office, August 10th, 1798. SIR,
IT has been rumoured that the Yellow-Fever had made its appearance in town. It
therefore seems proper that the Commissioners give your Excellency the earliest
information of the facts which, in their opinion, have led to it.

IN the spring of last year, the Commissioners, in one of their reports to the
Common Council, remarked that the whole east side of Front-street, from
Coenties to the Old slip, was in an unfinished and otherwise exceptionable
state; and that their interposition was necessary to prevent the evils which,
in hot weather, might result from it. Some difficulty arose at the time, which
suspended the reforms contemplated. A few solitary cases of violent fever and
death occurred in the vicinity of that ground, in the course of last summer,
which the Health-Officer and Commissioners have no doubt originated from the
causes represented.

THEY expressed the same apprehensions in some of their subsequent reports to
the Common Council; but fortunately nothing like a fever of a particular kind,
has manifested itself in the whole city till within a few days. Several
inhabitants in the neighborhood of these docks and open lots (which are yet
receptacles of filth, dirt and carrion) have been attacked, all with similar
complaints, and, we have no doubt, from the causes before enumerated. The
greater part, however, are recovered or convalescent. The rest of the city is
healthy. The Common Council have now taken such measures as, we hope, will
remedy the evils apprehended from those sources, for the present.

I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, JOHN OOTHOUT,
Chairman.

No. 63. To Messrs. Robert and S. Bowne, and THIRTEEN others holders of salted
Provision. (CIRCULAR.)
Health Office, August 13, 1798. GENTLEMEN,
THE Commissioners are informed that quantities of putrid or spoiled Beef are
now stored in different cellars of Pearl-street, and that the smell is very
offensive to the neighbors. These facts are taken for granted; and as you have
hitherto been in the practice of receiving salted provisions from your country
friends, and may possibly have a stock on hand, the Commissioners suggest to
you the propriety of having it examined by your packer, and of removing from
town such as may be found spoiled or unmerchantable.

With much respect, I am, GENTLEMEN, Your humble servant, JOHN OOTHOUT,
Chairman.

No. 71. Mr. Newton, Builder.
Health-Office, August 22d, 1798. SIR,
THE Commissioners of the Health-Office are informed, that you are preparing to
build for Mr. Marston, and that his dock, next to Mr. Kip's new store, is
breaking up for that purpose. They now inform you of sick people in every one
of Mrs. Bruce's houses, from Water-street to the foot of Pine-street; and that
instead of arresting the progress of the disease by covering the great mass of
filth and corruption of Bruce and Marston's lots, with wholesome earth or
gravel, you will, by exposing a greater surface of impurities, consisting of
unwholesome earth and decayed timber, to the influence of the sun, necessarily
increase the body of foul air in that neighborhood.

THE Commissioners therefore, forbid you to proceed in breaking up the old
dock, until the other is filled agreeably to the ordinance of the Common
Council.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT.

No. 70. TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, August 20th, 1798. SIR,
THE Commissioners, in discharge of their duty, inform the Common Council, that
the great mass of filth at the head of Cuyler's and Astor's lots, between
Coenties and the Old slip, in Front street, is covered -- that the operation is
progressing -- and that the sickness in that neighborhood, has nearly subsided.

THEY are sorry to inform the board, that the disease, which occurred at the
New slip and in its vicinity, has not so fortunately terminated. Nine persons
are reported to have died there -- five to be still sick -- and nine or ten
recovered, or removed into the country. Every thing which prudence suggested,
or exertion could perform for the indigent, has been done in the course of the
last week, and at as moderate an expense as possible to the public.

THE uncommon large body of water on Lispenard's meadow, north of his house,
has subsided only about ten inches since the rains on Tuesday last, by the
ordinary drain. It is the opinion of the Health Officer, that as soon as the
surface of the meadow gets exposed to the influence of the sun, the exhalations
arising from it, will generate disease in that neighborhood. He therefore
recommends a more sudden draining of it. The Commissioners have no doubt but
the board will take such order on this subject, as the exigency may require.

A NUMBER of the inhabitants have frequently expressed a wish, that carts might
be employed to take up the garbage and other offals, which, by standing in
confined places, from one sweeping day to another, become exceedingly
offensive. The Commissioners have reflected more seriously on this subject,
since the great heats set in, and believe it would be advisable to remove them
every Monday, Thursday and Saturday. They find that some of the Scavengers will
perform this service by the day. If the board approve of an experiment, the
Commissioners will agree with five men for the days abovementioned till the
last of September, as cheap as possible. They do not expect to exceed 12s. per
day for each.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 74. TO THE GOVERNOR.
Health-Office, August 28, 1798. SIR,
IN our last of the tenth inst. we stated to your Excellency, that a disease
had appeared in Front-street, between Coenties and the Old-slip. We are happy
to say it has since entirely subsided, and that the persons who had sickened,
are all recovered.

IT would give us much pleasure to announce that no case of apprehension had
since arisen; but, unhappily, about that period, some cases of sickness
occurred at the New-slip, east of Dover-street -- the 16th inst. at the foot of
Pine-street, west of the Fly-market -- and about the 20th inst. at the lower
end of John and Cliff-streets; -- at which places, but particularly the latter,
it is attended with considerable mortality. Individual cases have also appeared
in different parts of the town, principally in unventilated situations.

WE thought it our duty to state these facts to your Excellency, and have the
honor to be,

Sir, Your most obedient servant, JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

No. 76. TO PHILIP FULKERTSON,
Health-Office, August 30, 1798. SIR,
THE Commissioners request that you will attend at every store and cellar where
salted provisions are deposited, and see that whatever is condemned, by the
inspectors, as spoiled, be sent out of town, or into the stream of the river,
at such distance from shore, as you shall judge consistent with the safety of
the town.

THE Commissioners are informed, that the goodness of provisions can be
ascertained with great certainty, by only boring into the barrel with a
gimblet. This they take for granted. -- You will therefore not suffer it to be
tried in any other way. -- Do not be sparing in the use of quick lime, where
you find the cellars offensive.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT.

TO Messrs. Thomas Pearsall and Son.
Health-Office, September 5th, 1798. GENTLEMEN,
THE Commissioners again beg you will employ a packer to examine your salted
provisions. This may be done by boring a small hole in each barrel, in the
cellar or store where it lies; and whatever is found damaged, you will please
to have removed out of town, without further delay.

THE above letter was also sent to three other holders of provisions.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT.

Mr. Thomas Pearsall.
Health-Office. September 14, 1798. DEAR SIR,
I HAVE received your favor of the 7th inst. and am sorry to inform you, that
heavy complaints are continually made to us against the smell of putrid salted
provisions, generally. There is no doubt but it is daily becoming worse. To
continue such masses of animal putrefaction in town, which the Physicians agree
is a considerable cause of extending the existing calamity, would be an
unpardonable neglect.

THE Commissioners, therefore, beg you will inform them by the bearer, at what
places yours are stored, the quantity on hand, and finally, that you will give
them immediate and explicit information where to have it sent, under the
direction of such person as you may order to take charge of it.

CANNOT you find some place along the east river to store it? This would
greatly facilitate its removal by boats.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

GABRIEL FURMAN, ESQUIRE. Chairman of the Health-Committee.
Health-Office, September 15th, 1798. SIR,
ON the 13th August, the Commissioners recommended, in the strongest terms, to
such holders of salted provisions in Pearl and other streets, as they were
informed of, to examine them; and to remove out of town, or cast into the
stream of the river, whatever was found unmerchantable or spoiled. Similar
requests in writing were immediately made to such other holders of provision as
came to their knowledge on any subsequent days. Mr. Fulkertson was employed, to
attend to the prompt execution of this important object. Enclosed is a list of
proprietors who have willingly complied -- also a list of such, cellars, the
proprietors of which are out of town, and which cannot be examined, nor the
provisions removed by their consent. The Commissioners therefore submit to the
serious consideration of the Magistrates, what measures, with respect to the
latter, will be most proper in the present emergency. They enclose Mr.
Pearsall's letters on the subject for perusal.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

GABRIEL FURMAN, ESQUIRE.
Health-Office, September 18th, 1798. SIR,
ON a representation from the keeper of the gaol this morning, that a back man
was ill of fever there, Dr. Anderson was requested to visit him. Enclosed is
his report. As the Commissioners do not conceive themselves authorized to
remove prisoners, they beg leave to refer the case to the Magistracy.

JACOB ABRAMSE, C. H. O.

Mr. THOMAS PEARSALL.
HEALTH OFFICE, September 22, 1798. Respected Friend,
THE removal of all spoiled provisions from town, is now become indispensibly
necessary, for the preservation of the lives of our remaining fellow-citizens,
independent of the continual clamours against the offensive smells arising from
it.

You are therefore required to appoint a person to open your cellars, as well
as that of the house of Pearsall and Pell, containing salted provisions, on
Monday morning the 24th inst. for the purpose of having the whole inspected,
and whatever may be found spoiled, removed out of town, to such place as you
may direct.

THIS important business must not be delayed beyond the time limited -- If it
is, our duty will compel us to proceed immediately after, agreeable to the
directions of the law passed the 30th of March last.

THE Commissioners, therefore, beseech you to prevent this disagreeable
extremity. Mr. Honson, the inspector, has examined several parcels. His mode of
trying, is by boring into the cask with a small gimblet. If good, it remains in
the cellar -- if bad, he casts it into the stream of the river.

IF you cannot provide a person to undertake this business, the Commissioners
of the Health-Office will, at your expense, engage Mr. Honson, and Mr.
Fulkertson, a constable, to accomplish, it, on receiving your instructions for
that purpose.

Your answer is requested by the bearer.

I am, Sir, Your assured friend, JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

Health-Office, September 23 d, 1798.
THIS morning a letter was received from Mr. Thomas Pearsall, without date, in
reply to that of Commissioners of 22d. Enclosed was one for John A. Honson,
packer of provisions, which was delivered him, and is in the words following:
--

Respected Friend,
I AM requested by the Chairman of the Commissioners of the Health. Office, to
have all the salted provisions belonging to our house, and Pearsall and Pell's
examined by boring a hole in each cask. As the Chairman has mentioned thy name
as having examined a considerable quantity of provisions, it is very agreeable
to me, and my wish that thou should examine all the provisions I am interested
in. I will, therefore, thank thee to undertake it as soon a possible. I also
request thou will get sufficient assistance to put it up again in good order.
If there should be any provisions spoiled, take down the marks; and where there
are no marks, take down the brand, and keep the marks of ours and Pearsall and
Pell's separate. -- If any pork should be condemned, I will have that carted
here, if agreeable to the Commissioners.

I am thy friend, THOMAS PEARSALL.
P.S. Thomas Pearsall and Co.'s provisions are principally in Thomas Burling's
cellar -- some in Ross's cellar in John street. Pearsall and Pell's provisions
are in a cellar in John street -- I believe Ashe's. Z. Sickles has the key of
Burling's cellar. The rest of the Keys cannot be come at -- they must therefore
be broken open and locked again. Thomas Smith, Blacksmith, in Dey-street is my
Smith, if wanted.




The following was written Mr. Pearsall, in consequence of his letter to Mr.
Honson. forbidding him to proceed in the examination of his provisions: Mr.
THOMAS PEARSALL.
HEALTH-OFFICE, New York, September 27th, 1798. Respected Friend,
YOUR favor of the 26th inst. has been received, and that enclosed, handed Mr.
Honson.

HE assures us, that agreeably to your instructions, every cask in Ross's
cellar, No. 63, John-street, was first bored, and that he found a number good,
which remain in the cellar; but the spoiled he has taken on board a vessel to
examine, and when finished, he will replace them in the cellar. This is going
on as expepeditiously, and, we believe, as well as possible.

WE have invariably attended to your interest in this business, and have no
reason to think Mr. Honson is influenced by any other motive. If, however,
there is any other packer whom you prefer, we can have no objection to his
being employed; as Mr. Honson was proposed merely because he was in town, and
had been in the constant practice of examining provisions for different
Merchants.

WE are told that provisions have been improperly condemned and destroyed by
barely boring -- it, therefore, is certainly most for your interest, and best,
to examine it in the manner practiced by Mr. Honson.

IN consequence, however, of your orders, we have advised him to call on you,
and explain all his proceedings. We have only to add, that the whole must be
forth with examined, and the bad removed from town. We should be extremely
sorry to be compelled to have it taken out and sent you.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

Messrs. James and Gilbert Woodhull.
Health-Office, September 29th, 1798. GENTLEMEN,
COMPLAINTS have been made of a most offensive smell issuing from the cellar of
the house No. 61, John-street, containing provisions. -- We are told it has
been opened for the purpose of airing; but, as the effects of it are said to
already have been serious, its remaining there longer is now dreaded. The
Commissioners think it should be examined without delay. The bearer, Mr. JOHN
A. HONSON, has lately been much engaged in such business. He is at present, we
believe, the only inspector in town. We mention him to you, and think he will
do ample justice. The spoiled must be sent out of town at all events.

I am, etc. JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

Extract of a letter from the Commissioners of the Health Office, to his
Excellency, Governor Jay, dated
December 11, 1798.
"THAT the Fever received additional malignancy from the spoiled provisions
stored in town, the Commissioners will admit; but they possess evidence
sufficiently strong to induce them to believe, that it arose from other causes
-- namely, decayed docks, foul slips, lengthy sewers, and generally, the
new-made, sunken and unfinished grounds on the east river; and that the foul
air of spoiled beef, pork, and fish, which is the worst of the three, as well
as every other impurity, served only to increase the poison of the atmosphere,
and extend its destructive influence: -- for, in several streets, leading from
those sources (and where no provisions were stored) the Fever appeared first,
and, in its effects, proved equally mortal.

UNDER these impressions, the Commissioners fear, that until great reformations
take place with respect to the sources mentioned, there will be no security
against a similar scourge, whenever the heat and moisture of the air, shall
prove equally favorable to bring the hidden seeds of pestilence into action."

Health Office, December 15th, 1798. SIR,
THE Commissioners will thank you to inform them, whether any instances of
infection occurred among the attendants at Bellevue Hospital, during your
residence at that place: -- and if there did, be so good as to mention the
cases; the circumstances which, in your opinion gave rise to them; and in
particular, the cause to which your attack is to be attributed.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient servant, JOHN OOTHOUT, Chairman.

DR. ISAAC S. DOUGLASS, Medical attendant at Bellevue.
New York, December 17th, 1798. SIR,
AS it is the request of the Commissioners of the Health Office, that I should
inform them of the state of Bellevue Hospital during my residence there; as
also, point out particularly the source from whence I supposed the fever with
which I was so violently attacked, arose, I think it my duty to state to them a
few circumstances, and explain the manner in which I conceive my disease to
have originated.

MY attendance commenced on the 12th of June last. From that period, to the
14th of November, there were admitted into the Hospital, 389 patients, of which
number perhaps three fourths were sick with pestilential fevers. The nurses
employed during the same period, were 16 in number. The Health Office boatmen,
who were in the habit of bringing the sick to the Hospital, as well from the
city as shipping, were accustomed to enter the Hospital at all times, and
assist in placing as well as removing the sick from room to room. The number of
Washerwomen during the season, was 7. Several persons were also constantly
employed in cooking, preserving cleanliness, and burying the dead. There were,
besides, transient people, near relations of the sick, who were permitted by
the Commissioners to visit occasionally. Several persons accompanied their
friends to Bellevue, staid with them, and nursed them during their illness.
Under all these circumstances, to my knowledge, there happened no instance of
infection, although an opinion has been adopted by many, that my sickness, whilst
residing at Bellevue Hospital, arose from infection, imbibed at that place.

To what cause, then, is to be attributed the Fever with which I was seized at
Bellevue on the 5th of October?

HAVING occasion to visit my friends in New York, three days previous to my
illness, and having unfortunately slept in an highly infected part of the city,
no doubt can exist with me, but it arose from that cause. In making this
declaration, I must remark to you, that the situation of the medical attendants
at Bellevue, was by no means a propitious one. Before the new buildings were
erected for the acommodation of the sick, the Physician's room, (the only one
they had) was literally surrounded by them. The room adjoining, -- the front
and back piazas -- the hall -- the rooms and hall in the second story -- a room
in the cellar that had been used for a kitchen, all contained sick, -- THEY
were, likewise, placed in several Chinese summer houses, in the small space
between the main-house and the east river; and in the building erected for the
purpose of a bathing-house. A large canvass was also erected (for want of a
more convenient place) under the windows of the south-west part of the house,
for the reception of the dying and the dead. I add, Sir, that under all the
disadvantages enumerated, I know of no instance where infection resulted.

PERMIT me to conclude, by expressing the thanks due to the polite and humane
attention of the Commissioners to myself, and to the sick in general; and I
feel a pride in acknowledging, that to them -- the generous and persevering
exertions of my preceptor, Dr. RICHARD BAYLEY, and the interposition of a kind
Providence, I am indebted for my life.

With the greatest respect, I am, Sir, Your most obedient and Humble servant,
ISAAC S. DOUGLASS.

John Oothout. Esquire. C. C. H. Office.
To the Common Council of the city of New York.
Health-Office, December 4th, 1798. GENTLEMEN,
IN addition to the facts which are contained in the correspondence between the
Health Commissioners and the Common Council for the year 1798, I shall offer to
your consideration a few remarks upon the origin and progress of the
pestilential disease which has lately prevailed in this city; and in order to
corroborate what I may advance, I shall, in the first place take a retrospect
of events which have annually taken place in this city during the warm months
since the year 1795.

ACCORDING to the records of the Health Office, the Yellow Fever appeared in
1796 at White Hall, at the foot of Pine-street, at Burling-slip, and in the
neighborhood of Rosevelt-street, sewer.

IN 1797 between Coenties and the Old-slip, in Front-street, at the Fly-market
in several instances, in Fletcher-street, at Burling-slip, in Water-stret,
adjoining Roosevelt-street, sewer, in George-street, and at the foot of
Pine-street.

IN 1798 the disease first appeared about midway between Coenties and the
Old-slip, in Front-street, between the 1st and 7th of August. On the 7th August
about twenty-three were reported sick to the Health-Office. From that period
several others sickened, and of the whole number one died. By the 26th of
August, the complaint had disappeared in that quarter in consequence of the
measures taken to remove the cause, by covering the offensive lots with clean,
wholesome earth.

ON the 12th of August, it appeared at No. 283, Water-street, in the case of
Mr. Tailor, in an old broken building, on an unfinished lot at the foot of
Dover-street, in which 11 persons died early in 1795, and which has since been
repeatedly represented as a nuisance.

AUGUST 12, also, the disease appeared in the case of John Henderson, corner of
James-street and Batavia lane. On all sides of his residence, which was a small
crowded building, there were sunken lots in an unfinished state.

AGAIN, on August 12, the disease appeared in William Whitlock, Cardmaker, No.
51, Cherry-street. In the rear and to the south of his residence, the lots are
very generally below the level of the streets, and without drains.

August 13. Murdock M'Lean, Bruce's wharf, was seized, where the disease has
regularly made its appearance every warm season since the year 1795.

THE first arrival of sick in this harbor (to the knowledge of the
Health-Office) from Philadelphia, was on the 13th of August, in the New York
and Philadelphia Packet. The Captain died on the passage -- the Mate was sick
and was sent to Bellevue.

August 17. Tho. Collard sickened in Banker-street. 18. Nehemiah Fowler
John-street. 20. Fletcher-str. 21. R. Whitmore George-street. 22. A. Sharpless
corner of John and Cliff-str.
FROM the preceding statement, the Yellow Fever made its appearance in
different parts of the city on the same day, and in the course of six or eight
days, in different streets, remote from one another.

ON the 8th August the Mercury in Farenheit's Thermometer, at an elevation of
40 feet above the ground, and in the shade, at two P. M. stood at 91 degrees.
On the 9th. 96 10th. 90 11th. 89 12th. 86 13th. 83 The highest to which the
Mercury rose in July 1795, was 83 August 93 July 1796, 88 August 89 July 1797,
90 August 82 July 1798, 94 August 96


ON the morning of the 14th, the heaviest rain fell of any time during the
year. It began at 5 A. M. and continued without intermission till nine.
Numerous cellars, particularly those in the low parts of the city, were filled
with water. Lispenard's meadow, which may be considered as within the limits of
the city, was entirely overflowed. In six days it had not subsided above ten
inches; and the water did not pass off, till a large drain was opened for that
purpose, by order of the Common Council.

AFTER the immense fall of rain on the 14th, the Thermometer, which had fallen
on that day to 78, rose On the 15th to 82 16th 85 17th 90 18th 90
THE sudden and great increase of heat immediately after the violent rain,
appeared to have a proportionate influence in producing fever. Between that
period and the 22d August, upwards of twenty persons in Cliff-street, were
seized with slight indispositions, which they attributed to sleeping with open
windows during the preceding hot and moist weather, but which appeared rather
as the forerunner of yellow fever, for, not only the persons thus indisposed,
but a number of others (...) the same street, had that disease in the course of
a few days.

FROM this period the disease became more general; but its fatality was
principally felt in Cliff-street and its neighborhood, at Catharine slip, in
Water-street, and on the unfinished grounds in the southern part of the city.

NOW, having seen that the yellow fever has made its appearance in New York
every year, for several years past, but has prevailed in very different
degrees, it becomes a matter of great importance to determine, why the disease
was so generally prevalent on the low new-made grounds in this city in 1795,
whilst it was scarcely felt in the more elevated situations; why, in 1796 and
1797, its appearance was limited to particular spots; and why, in 1798 it not
only prevailed on all the new-made grounds, but also in parts of the city which
had before been exempted from the disease.

To answer these questions in such manner, as to prove satisfactory to every
one, might be a very difficult task. I shall, however, offer some reasons which
may tend to show why the fever was more prevalent this year, than in the
preceding years.

IT is well ascertained that in the year 1795, there was an unusual degree of
heat and moisture in the atmosphere during the warmer months -- that the
Thermometer was considerably higher than in 1796 and 1797, but that in 1798,
the heat greatly exceeded that of 1795.

Now, as heat and moisture are powerful agents in producing pestilential
diseases, so must the same causes necessarily promote the extension of those
diseases.

IN the year '98, there were besides, local causes of fever in this city, which
did not exist in the other seasons, and which, cooperating with the weather,
served to extend the disease beyond the limits, to which it would probably have
been otherwise confined. I have reference to the immense quantities of spoiled
beef, fish, and other articles of a perishable nature which were stored in
different parts of this city. The noxious exhalations arising from these
sources, in my apprehension was a great cause why, the disease arose and raged
with great violence in particular situations: And when we consider the sudden
appearance of the fever on Golden-Hill and in Cliff-street, and the great
number which sickened nearly at the same time, there is great reason to believe
this opinion well founded.

ABOUT the 20th of August, a report was made to the Health Office, that great
quantities of spoiled beef were stored in Pearl-steet, between Burling and
Beekman-slips. The stench which issued from some of the cellars in this
situation, was so considerable, as to prove very offensive to those who passed
by, and became a subject of general observation. Letters, in consequence, from
the Health Office, were addressed to the owners of provisions in that quarter,
enjoining them to have the beef examined, and to have such as was spoiled, sent
out of the city. Instead, however, of adopting this plan, the beef was brought
from the cellars into the street, the barrels opened, and the putrid pickle
thrown into the gutters. In some instances the examination was made in the
cellars, and the pickle disposed of in the same manner. The gutters which
conveyed away this putrid pickle, led to Burling-slip sewer.

THE relative situation of this sewer, and Cliff-street is such that the
southerly and south-easterly winds, force a current of air through the sewer,
carrying with it the exhalations arising from the noxious matters collected
together in that place, and having a direction to pass more immediately up
Golden-Hill, and into Cliff-street; and every person in that neighborhood with
whom I have conversed, agrees as to the offensive smell of the air, previous to
the appearance of the fever.

ON the 20th of August, the wind, which had been blowing from the north and
west some days previous, shifted to the south-east, and continued to blow from
that quarter some time. In 48 hours after this, there was scarcely a house in
Pearl-street, near where the spoiled provisions were stored, in the lower end
of John-street, and in Cliff-street, which did not contain sick.

THE sudden appearance of fever in this part of the city, and the great number
which were affected in so short a time, proves the local nature of the cause;
and to the one which I have just mentioned, I have no hesitation, in ascribing
all the effects which were experienced.

IF what we have alleged, be admitted sufficient to explain the appearance of
Fever which took place in Cliff-street, etc. we have made some advances toward
accounting for the general prevalence of the disease in 1798. Vide the H.
Office correspondence on the subject of spoiled provisions.


BUT, Gentlemen, we have further to remark, a particular difference in the warm
seasons, of 1798 and 1795.

IN 1795 the weather was warm and moist, but there was but very little rain.

IN 1798, the weather was not only much warmer, but was accompanied with sudden
and heavy rains.

IMMEDIATELY after the rains, the Public papers teemed with addresses to the
citizens, entreating them to empty their cellars of the water which had
collected in them, or the most fatal effects would be felt from neglect, or
inattention to this circumstance. -- It is not my intention to dispute the
opinion advanced by these writers. But, if the production of disease, was to be
apprehended from the lodgment of water in places where the sun's rays never
enter, what effects were to be expected from the ponding of water in those
numerous lots and yards within this city, which are several feet below the
level of the streets, containing dead animal and vegetable matters, and to
which the rays of the sun have full access? I wish, you, Gentlemen, to reflect
seriously upon this comparison, and believe, that whilst those sunken,
undrained lots are suffered to remain in their present state, unless causes
cease to produce their effects, diseases must inevitably result.

ON examining the records of the Legislature of this state, it will be found,
that petitions have been preferred to that body, for permission to erect
mill-dams on certain streams of water in some of the northern counties, and the
prayer of the petitioners has been granted. The consequence was, that
considerable tracts of low grounds in the neighborhood of the mill-dams, were
overflowed in the spring, and after the water had passed off, and the surface
of those grounds were exposed to the influence of the sun, exhalations of so
baneful a nature arose, as to produce a fever of the bilious type, which
attacked almost every body within a certain distance from their source, and
proved very mortal in its effects. The cause of this sickness being so obvious,
petitions were presented to the Legislature, praying for a redress of the
grievances. To correct the evil, it of course was necessary to destroy the
milldams, and as soon as the waters were unobstructed and allowed to flow in
their usual channel, the conutry became as healthy as before.

PERMIT me, Gentlemen, to ask the following questions: -- If the result of
exhalations arising from grounds which have been covered with water in an open
country, has been the production of bilious remitting fevers, attended with
considerable mortality, what result ought we to expect from those exhalations
which arise from the ponding of water on 150 acres of low grounds and sunken
yards and lots in a crowded city, and of a southern aspect?

BEFORE I conclude, I shall take the liberty of noticing some of the public
measures that have been adopted for the removal of causes of disease in this
city. I shall confine myself to two principal objects:

First. THE want of a sufficient descent on the low grounds along the east
river, to carry off the waters from the streets, is generally admitted. A
considerable quantity of water must necessarily stagnate in the gutters of
these streets, and also in the sunken pavement. In dry weather, this lodgement
consists principally of water which has been used for culinary and other family
purposes, and must therefore, be supposed to abound with matters to afford
noxious exhalations.

BY an ordinance of the Corporation for cleaning the streets, the inhabitants
are directed to scrape out the dirt and filth collected in the gutters and heap
them up in the streets, to be removed by the scavengers in the course of the
day.

Now, does this regulation in any degree subserve the purposes for which it was
ordained? Does not the spreading of this dirt and filth, and exposing new and
greater surfaces, increase the mischief which the measure was intended to
correct? I believe, gentlemen, there will be found no other means to rid the
low grounds of this city, from the baneful effects of stagnant waters, and an
accumulation of noxious matters, than their being freely washed by currents of
water flowing over them.

2d. IN the same ordinance, the citizens are prohibited from throwing into the
streets, from their respective houses, cellars, or yards any dirt, filth, or
offals whatever, except on certain days. How will this be found, to operate in
removing the causes of disease? Should we not rather ask, how this will be
found to operate in increasing the causes of disease? One moment's reflection,
I presume, will convince us that some means ought to be adopted to remedy a
system so fraught with mischief, and for these means I take the liberty of
referring you to letter 70, addressed by the Commissioners of the Health-Office
to the Common Council.

I have the honor to be, GENTLEMEN, Your most obedient and Humble servant, R.
BAYLEY, Health-Officer.

FINIS.

