FRAGMENTS OF THE NATURAL HISTORY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

BY BENJAMIN SMITH BARTON, M.D.

CORRESPONDENT-MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY OF THE ANTIQUARIES OF SCOTLAND; MEMBER OF
THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY; FELLOW OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS AND
SCIENCES OF BOSTON; CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL
SOCIETY; MEMBER OF THE PHYSICAL SOCIETY OF LENA; ONE OF THE FOREIGN MEMBERS OF
THE LINNAEAN SOCIETY OF LONDON; AND PROFESSOR OF MATERIA MEDICA, NATURAL
HISTORY AND BOTANY, IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

PART FIRST.

NEGLECTA, -- SPARSA COLLIGIT, UTILIA SELIGIT --.

BAGLIVI. QUAE PRAESENTI OPUSCULO DESUNT SUPPLEAT AETAS.

QUINTILIAN. COPY-RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

TO THE LINNAEAN SOCIETY, THE FOLLOWING FRAGMENTS (WHICH ARE INTENDED TO
ILLUSTRATE, IN SOME DEGREE, THE NATURAL HISTORY OF A COUNTRY EXTREMELY
INTERESTING TO PHILOSOPHERS, AND HITHERTO VERY IMPERFECTLY EXPLORED) ARE, WITH
GREAT RESPECT, INSCRIBED BY THE SOCIETY'S FRIEND AND BROTHER-MEMBER, BENJAMIN
SMITH BARTON.

PHILADELPHIA, April 18th, 1799.
INTRODUCTION.
. 1.
THE first ten pages of the following FRAGMENTS will, probably, be thought the
most interesting part of this little work. They exhibit a rude and imperfect
sketch of the Natural History-Picture in the neighborhood of Philadelphia: a
picture which, if it were drawn by an able hand, could not fail to prove
interesting to the lovers of science, in every part of the world. Each of these
pages is divided into five columns. The first respects the day of the month
when the birds mentioned in the second column arrived, or were first seen, in
the vicinity of Philadelphia. In the second column, I have given what may be
called the scientific Latin name of each bird. In this part of my subject, I
have always preferred the name of Linnaeus, when I could discover that the bird
had been described by this great naturalist. But several of the birds, which
are here mentioned, were not known to Linnaeus: at least, I do not find that
they have a place in any of the editions of his immortal work, the Systema
Naturae. I have, therefore, been obliged to adopt other names, and, in a few
instances, to impose them myself. I have often adopted the names of Professor
Gmelin, the laborious, and often successful, editor of the new edition of the
Systema Naturae. Printed at Leipsie, in 1788.
When this is the case, I have affixed to the scientific name, the letter G,
thus (G.) I have in this column, sometimes made use of the scientific names of
my ingenious and good friend, Mr. William Bartram, a gentleman who has
contributed much to our knowledge of the natural productions of North America.
To the names which I myself have imposed, I have affixed the word (mihi.) But I
by no means pretend to assert, that all the birds thus marked are new, or have
not been described by naturalists.

. II.
In the third column, I have given the English scientific and the English
provincial names. The former are chiefly taken from the Arctic Zoology The
second edition. London: 1792.
of my excellent friend Mr. Pennant, because this is a work of such extensive
merit, that I presume it is in the hands of almost every naturalist; and
because the names imposed by this gentleman are, with a very few exceptions,
just and significant. By the English provincial names, I mean the names by
which these birds are best known in Pennsylvania, and in various other parts of
the United-States. These provincial names are always enclosed within a
parenthesis, as in the instances (Pewe), (Turtle-Dove), etc. They are
designated in the same manner in the list of Resident Birds, etc. in Section
III. The greater number of these names are used in Pennsylvania.

. III.
The fourth column relates to the "Progress Vegetation." The greater number of
the vegetables which I have here enumerated are natives of Pennsylvania. Some,
which are not natives of this state, are natives of other parts of the
United-States; whilst others have not, hitherto, been found to grow
spontaneously in any part of America. In general, the plants are designated by
their Linnaean names. In a few instances, I have adopted the names of the late
Mr. Aiton, in his Hortus Kewensis; those of Marshall, and other botanists. All
the plants which I have mentioned are found, either wild, or growing in
gardens, in the neighborhood of Philadelphia, where the remarks on the time of
their flowering and leasing have been made.

. IV.
The fifth and last column contains "Miscellaneous Observations." In this part
of my Sketches, I have done but very little. Want of time has prevented me from
throwing into this column, many interesting facts, some of which will be
presented, perhaps to greater advantage, to the public, in my future
publications. The few Thermometrical and Barometrical observations, which occur
under this head, are given on the authority of my evervenerated maternal uncle,
the late David Rittenhouse, Esquire These observations were made in Philadelphia.

. V.
It must not be imagined, that I communicate these sketches to the public as
exhibiting even the names of all the migratory birds of Pennsylvania. I am
persuaded, that many of these birds have escaped my notice. This is, perhaps,
especially the case with the birds of the genera Anas, Tringa, and of the
extensive order of Passeres, etc. which I suspect are constant in their
migrations from the north to the south, and from the south to the north. A good
many of the birds which are mentioned by Mr. Pennant as natives of New York
have not hitherto, to my knowledge, been observed in Pennsylvania: but it can
hardly be supposed that those species which are common in New York (if we
except such as delight in the vicinity of the seacoast) are uncommon, or never
seen, in Pennsylvania. Here, however, I must observe, that I cannot but
suspect, that Mr. Pennant, Mr. Latham, and other able ornithologists, have
sometimes described as distinct species, birds which merely differ in sex, or
in age, and in their coloring, for which these animals, at different seasons
of the year, are so remarkable.

. VI.
Besides the constant migratory birds, there are others, which may be
denominated occasional migratory, or visitant, birds of Pennsylvania. Such, not
to mention several others, are the Columba passerina, or Ground-Pigeon, the
Fringilla bicolor, or Bahama-Finch, and a species of Psittacus, or Parrot.

. VII.
The two first of these birds were seen in the neighborhood of Philadelphia,
between thirty and forty years ago. The Psittacus, most probably the Psittacus
pertinax, Illinois Parrot, or the Psittacus carolinensis, Carolina Parrot, has
been occasionally observed in Shareman's Valley, on Shareman's Creek, a branch
of the river Susquehanna, within twenty miles of the town of Carlisle. A friend
of mine has informed me, that the Parakeet seen in this valley is the same
species which is frequently met with in the neighborhood of the river Ohio.
This Last is supposed to be Psittacus pertina^.
This last fact seems to contradict the observation of Mr. William Bartram, who
says, "The parakeet (Psittacus carolinensis) never reach so far north as
Pennsylvania, which to me is unaccountable, considering they are a bird of such
singular rapid flight, they could easily perform the journey in ten or twelve
hours from North Carolina, where they are very numerous, and we abound with all
the fruits which they delight in." Travels through North and South Carolina,
Georgia, East and West Florida, etc. P. 301. Philadelphia: 1791.
It is well known, that the late M. de Buffon had limited the range of the
whole of the Parrot-kind to exactly twenty-five degrees on each side of the
equator. Histoire Naturelle des Oiseaux. TOM. XI. P. 113 and 114.
Duodecimo-edition. Paris: 17^0.
Mr. Pennant has shown that the eloquent French naturalist was, in this
instance, mistaken. Arctic Zoology. Vol. 1. P. 285.
My observation is an additional objection to the hypothesis. I may add, that a
very large flight of parakeets, which came from the westward, was seen, a few
years ago, about twenty-five miles to the north-west of Albany, in the state of
New York. The arrival of these birds in the depth of winter In January, 17^0.
was, indeed, a very remarkable circumstance. The more ignorant Dutch settlers
were exceedingly alarmed. They imagined, in dreadful consternation, that it
portended nothing less calamitous than the destruction of the world. This fact
was communicated to me by Egbert Benson, Esquire of the State of New York.


. VIII.
I suspect it will be found, that, in general, our southern birds migrate
farther north in the tract of country west than in that east of the great
ranges of our mountains. With respect to the birds, I hazard this merely as a
conjecture: but it is a conjecture which derives support from many interesting
facts which I have collected, and which will be mentioned and explained in my
Geographical View of the Trees and Shrubs of North America. In that work, I
shall show, that the southern trees and shrubs (that is, those vegetables which
attain to their greatest perfection in the southern climates of our continent,
particularly of the United-States) are, in general, found much farther north in
the western than they are in the eastern parts of our country. This fact seems
to show, and the point is put beyond any manner of doubt, by thermometrical
observations, that the western climate, in the same latitudes, is more
temperate than the eastern. Of course, it were natural to suppose, that the
southern birds, to whom heat is so genial, would often be solicited farther
north in the western than in the eastern district. This, with respect to some
birds, is actually the case. Mr. Jefferson has observed, that "Perroquets even
winter on the Sioto, in the 39th degree of latitude." Notes on the State of
Virginia. Page 139. The original edition.
I have certain information, that these birds winter still farther north than
is here mentioned.

. IX.
Birds, in migrating, are fond of following the courses of rivers, and other
large streams of water. This circumstance, in my opinion, partly explains the
reason, why some of the birds of the southern parts of the United-States, and
also some of the South-American birds, which have never, or very rarely, been
discovered in the Atlantic countries of North America, are not uncommon in the
countries west of the Alleghaney-Mountains. These southern birds, following the
courses of the Mississippi, and its branches (the Ohio, the Illinois, etc.) are
spread or dispersed through the rich and extensive territories that are washed
by these waters. Whether or not this explanation be admitted, the fact is
certainly as I have stated; and to the naturalist it cannot but appear
interesting. The Psittacus pertinax is one of the birds of Brasil; and the
Muscicapa Tyrannus, which is held in so much esteem by the Naudowessies, and
other western Indian tribes, is a native of Surinam, and of the country
bordering on the river Plata.

. X.
It is, I think, in general, a just observation, that our Spring and Summer
birds of passage continue with us about six months, and are absent for the same
length of time. Accordingly, those birds which arrive early in the spring
disappear early in the autumn, and those which arrive late in the spring do not
disappear until late in the autumn. Our late springs are commonly succeeded by
late and warm autumns, which, by keeping alive the numerous species of insects,
which are the favorite food of almost all our summer birds of passage, detain
these birds for a considerable time among us.

. XI.
The greater number of the Spring and Summer birds of passage, which I have
mentioned, build and breed in Pennsylvania. See Appendix I. where I have
designated with an asterisk (*) those birds which are known to breed in
Pennsylvania. The greater number of them thus marked breed within a few miles
of Philadelphia.
Perhaps, they all breed in some part of this extensive state, with the
exception of the Vultur Aura (Turkey-Buzzard), and a few others, which do not
visit us until toward the close of the summer. It has lately been ascertained,
that the Ampelis Garrulus, or Prib-Chatterer (Cedar-Bird) does breed in
Pennsylvania; and I doubt not, that the same will, in time, be discovered to be
the case with the Emberiza Oryzivora (Rice-Bird, Reed-Bird), and others whose
nests have not hitherto been seen in Pennsylvania. It is not unlikely, however,
that some of these birds of passage continue their migration farther northward,
to New York, New England, Vermont, etc. and there breed and raise their young,
returning southward, through Pennsylvania, in the fall.

. XII.
It is an interesting fact, for which we are indebted to Mr. William Bartram,
that very few of our birds of passage from the south "build or rear their young
in the south or maritime parts of Virginia and Carolina, Georgia and Florida."
Travels, etc. Page 287.
This circumstance leads to a suspicion, that the principal cause (I will not,
out of complaisance to any one, call it a necessary instinct) which leads or
impels these birds to migrate to the northward, is that they may make choice of
a proper climate, abounding in their favorite food, to perform their amors,
to build their nests, and to rear their young. Much light might be thrown upon
this curious subject, if natural history were cultivated in the United-States,
with a portion of that innocent and useful zeal with which it is cultivated in
Europe: with only a small portion of that ardent zeal which so strongly
characterizes the Americans in their pursuit of gain. But, as yet, little
attention is paid to the study of nature in the United-States. In our colleges,
it is not taught as an indispensable branch of polite or useful knowledge, but
is obliged to yield its laurels to languages which are withered or dead, and to
studies which are useless or ignoble. I ever have been a friend to the study of
the two ancient languages, the Greek and the Latin, which are taught in our
schools. They are absolutely necessary to the complete attainment of some
sciences, such as natural history (including botany), and medicine; and I think
with Erasmus, that a physician should he ashamed not to know them. But too much
time is dissipated in the acquisition of these languages. If I do not greatly
mistake, this truth begins to be acknowledged among us. Video mediora. If only
one-sixth part of the time which is consumed in acquiring the Greek and Latin
languages (particularly the former), were appropriated to the study of natural
history, in less than twenty years, the animal, the vegetable, and the mineral
productions of the United-States would be pretty well investigated. But what,
in the cultivation of a science so extensive, and so difficult, can be expected
from the labors of two or three individuals, unaided by the public, and
tramelled by professional engagements and pursuits?


. XIII.
It has been supposed, that many of the birds which I have enumerated, pass, on
their return to the south, during the autumnal months, through the countries
which are situated to the west of the great ranges of our mountains. That this
is sometimes the case, I do not doubt: but it is not the general order of the
migration of our birds. My opinion, indeed, is opposed by the authority of some
very respectable naturalists, whose sentiments deserve to be mentioned in this
place. "The birds (says the late Mr. George Edwards), which pass through the
country northward in the spring, being never observed to return the same way,
Mr. Bartram supposes that they go to the southward in autumn by some other
passage beyond their inland mountains." Gleanings of Natural History, Part II.
P. 202.
This notion is likewise adopted by Mr. Pennant-Speaking of the Motacilla
vermivora, or Worm-eater, this able zoologist says, "It does not appear in
Pennsylvania till July, in its passage northward. Does not return the same way;
but is supposed to go beyond the mountains which lie to the west. This seems to
be the case with all the transient vernal visitants of Pennsylvania." Ar^tic
Zoology VOL. II. P. 100, 101.
In the above quotation, Mr. Edwards says, the birds are "never" observed to
return the same way that they went. This is, certainly, a mistake. Our
swallows, which are migratory birds, as I think I have rendered very probable
in the Appendix, See Page 16.
are generally seen on their return southward, in the autumn, far to the east
of the first ranges of our mountains. But independently of the swallows, the
same may be said of many other species of birds. Indeed, I believe it may
confidently be said, that most of the passenger-birds, which pass by us, in the
spring, return, in the autumn, southward, the same way they went. This
observation certainly applies to the Anas canadensis (Wild-Goose), the Columba
migratoria (Wild-Pigeon), the Fringilla tristis (Yellow-Bird), Motacilla Sialis
(Blue-Bird), Loxia Curvirostra (Crossbill), Fringilla -- (Hemp-Bird), and at
least fifty others, which are constantly observed on their migrations
southward, in the neighborhood of Philadelphia. These autumnal flocks
sometimes consist of many thousands of individuals together; and it has been
observed, that birds of different species sometimes migrate in the same bodies.

. XIV.
It must not be imagined, that the birds which I have enumerated arrive
uniformly, every year, at the times which are prefixed to their names, in the
first column. I have long been persuaded, that the uniformity of the arrival of
the migratory birds, in any given country, is not so great as many naturalists
have imagined. The attention which I have paid to this curious subject in
Pennsylvania, has convinced me, that my suspicion was well founded. The
migration of birds is not a "determinate instinct, Dr. Adam Ferguson.
but an act of volition, or will. Hence, the seasons and other circumstances
will greatly regulate the arrival of birds in, and their flight or removal
from, a particular country. Sometimes, there is a difference of three weeks or
a month between the arrival, or appearance, of the same species, in two
different years. This will appear from the following instances, which are
selected from many others.

. XV.
From an inspection of these Tables, it will appear, that the Alauda alpestris,
or Shore-Lark, the Alauda rubra, or Red-Lark, the Fringilla tristis, or Golden
Finch, and some others, were not observed, in the vicinity of Philadelphia,
earlier than the twelfth of March, 1791: whereas the same birds were seen, in
the same neighborhood, as early as the twenty-eighth of February, the
following year, on their passage northward.

I have placed the Anas canadensis (Wild-Goose) between the 15th and the 18th
of April, 1791, but in the year 1794, these birds were observed, on their
migration from the south, as early as the 3d of March. In the first mentioned
year the Ardea Herodias, or Great Heron, was not observed before the 15th or
16th of April; but in the latter year, numbers of these birds were seen as
early as the 1st of April. Many other instances might be mentioned.

. XVI.
How much the movements of birds from one country to another depend upon the
state of the seasons, will appear from different parts of this little work;
particularly from the Third Section. Here we find, that during our mild
winters, several of those species of birds which, in general, are undoubtedly
migratory, continue the winter through in the neighborhood of Philadelphia.
Such, which I have denominated the OCCASIONAL, or ACCIDENTAL, RESIDENT BIRDS,
are the Ardea Herodias, or Great Heron, Columba carolinensis, or Turtle-Dove,
the Fringilla melodia, and several others: I doubt not many more than I have
mentioned. The Columba migratoria, Passenger-Pigeon, commonly returns from the
northward late in the fall, and continues with us a few days, or weeks, feeding
in our fields upon the seed of the buckwheat, Polygum F^g^pyrum.
or in the woods upon acorns. But if the season be a very mild one, they
continue with us for a much longer time. This was the case in the winter of
1792 -- 1793, when immense flocks of these birds continued about the city, and
did not migrate farther southward, until the weather became more severe in the
month of January. The winter of 1792 -- 1793, was one of the mildest that had
ever been remembered in Pennsylvania. It is a common observation in some parts
of this state, that when the Pigeons continue with us all the winter, we shall
have a sickly summer and autumn. There is, perhaps, some foundation for this
notion. Large bodies I say "large bodies," for I believe individuals of those
birds continue with us almost every winter.
of these birds seldom do winter among us unless the winter be very mild; and
the experience of some years has taught us, that such winters are often
followed by malignant epidemics. The mild winter of 1792 -- 1793, was succeeded
by a dreadful malignant fever, which destroyed between four and five thousand
people in Philadelphia; and I am assured, that the same fever in 1762 was
preceded by an extremely open winter, during which the pigeons remained about
Philadelphia, and in other parts of the state. In the hands of a poet, a
Lucretius, or a Virgil, this coincidence between the accidental hiemation of
the pigeons and the appearance of the yellow-fever might be wrought up into a
system of beautiful extravagance.

. XVII.
If birds, in their migration from one country to another, were impelled by a
"determinate," or necessary instinct, the periods of their arrival and
departure would be more uniform and fixed. But we have seen, that there is a
considerable difference in these respects, even in two years immediately in
succession. Such great regularity in the migrations of these animals by no
means accords with those accommodating habits, which the naturalist discovers
in his investigation of the manners of all animals; those habits which have
been given to them, as to us, by a Creator whose works so loudly proclaim his
wisdom, and the extent of his benevolence and attention to the innumerable
living objects which he has formed.

. XVIII.
It is highly probable, that the periods of the migrations of birds will be
found to be more or less uniform in proportion as the climates of the countries
to which they migrate are more or less variable in their temperature. It is
perhaps, upon this principle, that we are to explain the difference of the
times of the arrival and departure of the birds of Pennsylvania, and other
parts of North America. The climates of these countries are extremely variable;
I suppose more so that most other countries that are known to us. If, as has
been supposed by many writers, the hand of man, by clearing and by cultivating
the surface of the earth, contributes essentially to the greater uniformity in
the temperature of climates, it is reasonable to conjecture, that the time will
come, when the periods of the migrations of our birds will be more constant and
fixed. For in North America, especially the United-States, the progress of
population, and of clearing and cultivating the earth, is more rapid and
immense than in any other portion of the world.

. XIX.
It would be a very curious subject of inquiry, -- What changes have taken
place in the periods of the arrival and disappearance of the passenger-birds,
in those countries in which observations have long been made by the ancient
poets, and by naturalists? Perhaps, an investigation of this question would, in
some degree, illustrate the changes which climates are said to have undergone.
Thus, the time of the Swallow's coming into Italy, is particularly mentioned
both by Columella and by Pliny, Columella says, the Swallow visits Italy about
the twentieth or twenty-third of February. The following are his own words:
"Decimo Calenda^ Martii leo desinit oce^dere, ve^^^ septentrionale^. qui
vocantur ornithiae, per dies trigint^ esse solent, tum et hirunda advena." In
another place, he says, "Septimo Calendas Marii ventosa temp^^cas, hi^^ndo
conspicitur." De Re Rustica. Pliny says, this bird appeared on the
twenty-second of February "Octavo calendas Martii hirundinis visus."
and it may be gathered also from a beautiful passage in the Georgies of
Virgil. C^orgic. IV. 305 -- 30^.
Do the periods meationed by these writers correspond with the periods of the
arrival of this bird, in the same country, at present? If the climate of Italy,
within the last seventeen or eighteen hundred years, has altered ^s much as it
is, by many ingenious men, thought to have done, it is not likely that the
Swallow now visits that country at the same time it did formerly, in the days
of Virgil, and the naturalists whom I have mentioned. I am sorry that I cannot,
without some trouble, ascertain the question.

. XX.
The fourth column of the tables will enable the curious naturalist to form
some idea of the temperature of our climate (by showing the time of leasing,
flowering, planting, etc. of a considerable number of vegetables, both native
and foreign); at the same time, that it will point out, in a number of
instances, the coincidence between this progress in vegetation and the arrival
and disappearance of the migratory birds. This last has long been deemed an
interesting subject by naturalists, though I am inclined to think, that they
have often imagined, that this coincidence is greater than it really is.

. XXI.
I will not deny, that there is a very remarkable conformity between the
vegetation of some plants and the arrival of certain birds of passage. This,
perhaps, is especially the case in those countries the climates of which are
the most regular in their seasons. Linnaeus has observed, that the Wood-Anemone
(Anemone nemorosa) blows in Sweden on the arrival of the Common Swallow,
Hirundo ^^b^^a.
and that the Marsh-Marygold (Caltha palustris) blows when the Cuckoo sings.
Amaenitates Academicae. Vol. IV.
The amiable Mr. Stillingfleet remarked nearly the same coincidence in England.
Dr. Darwin observes, that the "word Coccux in Greek signifies both a young fig
and a cuckoo, which is supposed to have arisen from the coincidence of their
appearance in Greece." Botanic Garden. Part II. Canto I. note.
Many instances of a similar coincidence might be pointed out between the
flowering of our Pennsylvanian vegetables and the arrival of certain birds.
Thus it is observed, that the Wood-Cock (Scolopax Gallinago) commonly visits us
when the American Elm (Ulmus americana) is in full blossom: that is between the
8th and 18th of March.

. XXII.
It is well known, that the ancients were of opinion, that the arrival of
certain birds of passage afforded one of the best and safest directions for the
planting of different kinds of vegetables, and for other agricultural purposes.
Thus Virgil, who was at once a naturalist and poet, tells us, that the best
time for planting vineyards (in Italy) is when the White bird, or Storck,
appears: Optima vinetis satio, cum vere rubenti
Candida venit avis longis invisa colubrit.
Georgic. Lib. II. 319 -- 320. I could point out, in the happy compositions of
this great poet, other instances of a similar kind. The following is too
beautiful to be omitted. The poet of Mantua is here describing the method and
the time for killing a steer for the purpose of obtaining from its putrid gore
a stock of bees, as was practiced by the ancient Egyptians. It appears to have
been a very general opinion among the ancients, that Bees were produced from
the putrid bodies of animals. A very curious passage in the 14th chapter of the
book of Judges shows the high antiquity of this notion. After Sampson had
killed the young Lion, "he turned aside to see the carcass of the lion: and
behold there was a swarm of Bees and honey in the carcass of the lion." The
Greeks believed, that these insects arose from putrid bullocks, and hence they
gave them a name expressive of this supposed origin. According to Archelaus,
bees proceed from bullocks, and wasps from horses. So rude were the opinions of
the ancients respecting the origin of these insects. It is certain, however,
that putrid carcases are often visited by bees, and it is not unlikely that
from these carcases, they may be able to procure honey. It was, doubtless, from
observing, that swarms of bees frequent the dead bodies of animals, that the
ancient Egyptians had recourse to such bodies for the purpose of repairing the
total loss of their honey-making insects. The manner of doing this is
beautifully related by Virgil, who traces back the practice to its first
source. See Georgi^. Lib. IV. beginning at line 281.
He tells us this must be done early in the spring, before the meadows are
painted with the colors of flowers, and before the Swallow builds its nest
upon the rafters.

H^^ geritur, zephyris primum impellentibus undas,
Ante novis rubeant quam prata coloribus, ante
Garrula quam tignis nidum suspendat hirundo.
Georgic. Lib. IV. 305 -- 307.. XXIII.
Although in Pennsylvania, and many other parts of the United-States, the
arrival of our birds does not appear to be as uniform as it is in many of the
countries of the old world; See Page 10.
the arrival of several species is, nevertheless, so regular, that it may be
considered as the signal for commencing certain agricultural operations. Thus,
the Muscicapa fusca, which we call Pewe, is one of the earliest Spring birds of
passage, visiting the neighborhood of Philadelphia about the middle of March.
We have seldom hard frosts after the arrival of this bird, which seems to give
a pretty confident assurance to the farmer, that he may very soon begin to open
the ground and plant. It is an old observation in Pennsylvania, that when the
Whip-poor-will (Caprimulgus virginianus) arrives, it is time to go barefooted;
that is, the spring season is pretty far advanced, and sufficiently warm to
admit of laying aside the use of shoes, without much inconvenience. This adage
originated in the days of greater simplicity than the present. Some of our
Indians believe, that this bird is a messenger sent to call their attention to
the planting of the ground. Accordingly upon the arrival of the Whip-poor-will,
they say to one another, "the Weecolis This is the Delaware. Indian name for
this bird.
is come: it is planting time;" and while the bird is uttering the sound of
whip-poor-will, or weecolis, they will repeat the word "Hackibeek," which is
"plant the ground."

. XXIV.
I am of opinion, that all the birds which are mentioned in the tables, with
the exception of the Alauda magna (Meadow-Lark), Tetrao virginianus
(Partridge), and a very few others, are migratory birds, or birds of passage.
But I do not expect that this opinion will be universally received by
naturalists. In almost every country in which natural history has been
cultivated, the places of retreat of birds at the times of their disappearance
has been a matter of dispute. The question concerning the Swallows is not yet
settled; and in this country the notion which I deem an erroneous one with
respect to these birds is gaining ground. Appendix I. P. 16.
The sportsmen find still greater difficulty in discovering the place of
retreat of their favorite "Rail," the Rallus virginianus; See Appendix I. P.
17. Naturalists, if not minute criti^^, will perhaps (...) the use of this
word, which is at least significant, and is certainly not far^s^re^! a word
derived from the (...) verb H^wo (...) Hy^r, which is (...) by (...) and by
(...), and which was defended by (...), in (...).
whilst some of the Indians assure us, that the Vultur aura (Turkey-Buzzard)
passes its winters in the hollows of trees, etc.

. XXV.
Some ingenious gentlemen, with whom I have conversed on the subject, are even
of opinion, that but a very few of our birds are, strictly speaking, birds of
passage. They imagine, that some of these birds, at the coming on of cold
weather, pass into a torpid state, whilst others merely take shelter from the
inclemency of the weather, in close thickets, in the hollows of trees, rocks,
etc. without becoming torpid. This opinion may be supported by plausible
arguments. Some species of Swallows have occasionally been found in a torpid
state. In mild winters, several of those birds which are thought to be commonly
migratory, are seen among us; and even after the disappearance of some species,
such as the Motacilla Sialis, or Blue-Bird, one or two warm days in the winter
time will bring them back again. This notion is likewise favored by the torpid
state into which so many of our animals pass, and continue, during the winter
season; such as different species of Lizards, Tortoises, Frogs, Serpents, and
Insects. Nor is it merely the animals with cold blood (Sanguis frigidus) that
become torpid. Some of our quadrupeds fall into a similar state. Such are the
Arctomys Monax, or Maryland Marmot (best known in the United-States by the
names of Ground-Hog, and Wood-chuck), and some of the smaller animals of the
order Glires, particularly some species of Dipus, or Jerboa. Other species,
again, that do not become torpid, keep themselves confined in close quarters,
during the greater part of the winter-season. Such are some of the species of
Squirrel, the Didelphis Opossum (Opossum), and others.

. XXVI.
These various facts, it must be confessed, seem to give some degree of
plausibility to the notion, that our birds hi^mate, or take up their
winter quarters among us, and that they do not migrate to a distance. Still,
however, I cannot but adopt the latter notion. The complete disclosure of the
fact, that the serpents, frogs, some quadrupeds, etc. become torpid, is rather
an argument against the torpid state of our birds. Why should it be so much
more difficult to discover the latter than the former in a torpid state, if
they actually went into this state? Ten thousand serpents may be found in the
torpid state as readily as a single Swallow, or Humming. Bird. See Appendix P.
18.
It is recorded in some part of Mr. Boswell's ponderous Life of the late Dr.
Samuel Johnson, that in a conversation which took place on the subject of the
annual disappearance of Woodcocks, in England, the doctor observed, that the
discovery of a few of these birds, in the summer time, only proved that the
species does, in general, emigrate from the country. "Exceptia probat regulam,"
said the literary Hercules. I must confess, that to me this seems good sense.
In like manner, the discovery of a few Swallows, a few Turkey-Buzzards, a
single Humming-Bird, or a few birds of any other species, deemed migratory, in
a torpid or other state, during the winter-season, seems rather to strengthen,
than to weaken, the argument, that these birds are, in general, migratory
birds. If all these birds continued among us, many of them would be found. The
labors of one century, or more, in cutting down the timber of the forest, in
blowing rocks, in draining millponds, and marshes, would furnish more than five
or six instances (and they not always quite so well authenticated as we could
wish) of Swallows, etc. being found during the winter-season, in a benumbed
state.

. XXVII.
The argument derived from the torpid state into which so many of our animals
are observed to fall upon the approach of winter, is of less weight than may,
at first sight, be imagined. These animals are much less capable of migrating
than the birds. If they were capable of making long journies to more favorable
climates, I do not doubt they would make them. For I am persuaded, by a variety
of experiments and observations which I have made, and may, perhaps, be induced
to communicate to the public at some future period, that most of our
hybernating animals go with reluctance into this state. I am even of opinion,
that the state of torpidity of many animals is a state of pain and sufferance.
This observation, at least, seems to hold good with respect to those animals
(and I believe they constitute the greater number of the hybernating animals)
which divide the winter between sleeping and waking: which, in other words,
under the influence of cold and other causes, fall into a kind of profound
sleep, during which the functions of the heart and the lungs are constantly
performed; and even that of the stomach and intestines, in some measure, goes
on: and during all which time, such animals are sensible to the influence of
mechanical and other stimuli. This class of hybernating quadrupeds often,
during the course of the winter, spontaneously awake from their slumber, take
food, and fall into slumber, again. I do not, however, imagine, that animals,
which are so torpid as to be incapable of being roused by the application of
the most powerful stimuli, can be said to be in a state of pain and sufferance.
But I believe, that the number of these continual sleepers is very small, even
in the coldest climates.

. XXVIII.
We are certain, that the torpid state of many animals is altogether an
accidental circumstance: that is, it is not necessary to the species. I will
not assert, with my learned and ingenious friend, Mr. Fabricius, that it is not
natural to, nor coeval with, the species. It would be difficult to prove this
position: but the position which I have advanced may be maintained. Animals of
the same species have often a very extensive range over the world. Thus, the
Ursus Lotor, or Raccoon, extends from Lake-Superior to the West-India-Islands,
and the warm parts of South-America. The Opossum has a range not much less
extensive. I trace the Rattle-Snake (Crotalus horridus) as far north as the Bay
of Saguena, on Lake-Huron, and it is known in the country of Brasil. In such
extensive tracts of country, these animals are exposed to very different
degrees of temperature: on the one hand, to a great alternation of heat and
cold; on the other hand, to a perpetual spring and summer. We ought not,
therefore, to expect to find any of them torpid in the whole of this extensive
range. In fact, several of those animals which become torpid in the northern
parts of our country do not fall into this state in the southern and warmer
climates. See my account of the Dipus Americanus, or American Jerbos, in the
4th volume of the Transactions of the American Philosophical Society.
As cold, however, is not the only cause of the torpidity of animals, we must
not be surprised to find instances of animals becoming torpid in climates that
are warm. Extreme heat, like extreme cold, seems to predispose the animal
system to this state, particularly, perhaps, when there is a deficiency of food.

. XXIX.
We see that quadrupeds and some other animals do occasionally, during severe
winters, migrate to more southern climates. I am assured, that the Bears
migrate, in great numbers, every autumn, across the Mississippi, going south
(perhaps to the mountains of New-Mexico), in search of a milder climate. In the
spring, they return again by same rout. This migration of the bears is
particularly observed at Manchac, on the Mississippi, about the latitude of --.
Many other quadrupeds perform similar migrations, both in the old and in the
new world.

. XXX.
Nothing seems more improbable than that a class of animals, such as the
greater number of birds, which are capable of rapid and immense flights, should
continue in a country in which the winter's cold is generally very intense, and
in which, at the same time, the principal articles of their food are not to be
procured. But I am far from denying, that some birds do pass their winters with
us, either in a torpid state, or otherwise. Some species continue with us
pretty regularly: and individuals of many species do occasionally continue with
us. I have already observed, that "during our mild winters, several of those
species of birds which, in general, are undoubtedly migratory, continue the
winter through in the neighborhood of Philadelphia." See page ix. XVI.
It must be evident, therefore, that extreme cold is the great cause which
compels these animals to retire south. But it is not the only cause. A
deficiency of their proper food is another, not much less extensive. The
greater number of our birds of the order of passeres feed upon insects, and the
seeds and berries of vegetables. These, particularly the former, are not to be
procured in the winter-season, in quantity sufficient to answer the demands of
the immense number of birds which visit us at other seasons of the year. If our
climate were more moderate than it is, and if an abundance of food were at all
times to be procured, the number of our Resident Birds would, doubtless, be
much greater than it is. It is evident, that a failure of their food is one of
the great causes of the migrations of birds. Thus no sooner has the Zizania
aquatica (Reed), which is one of the principal foods of the Rice-Birds, shed
its seed, than these birds disappear, returning southwards. See the Tables.
Page 8.


. XXXI.
Independent on the mildness of the season, and the continuance of an abundance
of their favorite kinds of food, individuals (and in some instances large
flocks) of many different kinds of migratory birds pass their winters with us.
Dr. Darwin observes, that "those swallows that have been hatched too late in
the year to acquire their full strength of pinion, or that have been maimed by
accident or disease, have been frequently found in the hollows of rocks on the
sea coasts, and even under water in" a "torpid state, from which they have been
revived by the warmth of a fire." Zoonomia, VOL. I Sect. XVI.
I suppose the learned doctor has not completely ascertained the fact, that
such swallows were actually hatched later than others, or that they had been
maimed by accident or disease. But it is highly probable, that the
circumstances which he mentions are some of the cause which compel these and
many other kinds of birds to pass their winters in climates, and in situations,
very different from those in which the species at large, are, at such times,
found.

XXXII.
Birds, in migrating, often lose themselves, particularly, perhaps, when they
get into the currents of strong winds, to which they must sometimes be
obedient. The large flight of Parakeets, See Page vi.. VII.
which visited the neighborhood of Albany, in the winter of 1780, was no doubt
carried thither by a strong westerly wind. Such wanderers, it is probable,
often go into a torpid state. It is said, that great numbers of Parakeets (I
suppose the Psittacus carolinensis) are sometimes, in the winter-season, found
torpid in the hollows of trees, in North Carolina. Admitting the fact, is it
not likely, that these birds have been wanderers, like the New York flock just
mentioned? Accidents of this kind are more frequent than is perhaps imagined.
And I do not doubt that to such accidents we must ascribe some of the instances
of swallows and other birds being found, in the winter-season, in a state of
hybernation. It will be said, that this idea favors the notion, that birds are
capable of entering into this state according to their situation. I do really
suppose so. Perhaps all birds, all quadrupeds, in short all animals, are
capable of this state. Nor are vegetables exempted from it. Those aquatic
plants which, at the approach of winter, withdraw themselves to the bottom of
the water, and, on the opening of the spring, emerge from their watery bed, may
be denominated HYBERNATING VEGETABLES. Perhaps this name might likewise be
applied to those vegetables, which are natives of warm, southern countries, but
gradually accommodate themselves to the rigorous winters of northern climates.
I think, it was the late Mr. John Hunter who first ventured to conjecture, that
man himself is not incapable of becoming torpid. Professor Fabricius is of the
same opinion. I am sorry, that I have not now an opportunity of examining Mr.
Fabricius's memoir. I speak, from memory, of his opinions: but I hope I do not
(...).
Nor is it at all improbable. In his internal structure, in the temperature of
his blood, man differs in no very essential circumstances from some of those
animals, which, in certain climates, almost constantly pass into the torpid
state.

. XXXIII.
It it important for our purpose, in the discussion of the question of the
disappearance of birds, that many of those species which are believed to be
migratory are annually seen on their passage; in the spring from the south to
the north, and in the autumn from the north to the south. Some of these
passengers migrate in immense flocks, whilst others go and return more
individually. Mr. Bartram has seen, in the autumn, large flocks of all our four
species of Swallows, on their return southward from Pennsylvania, through
Carolina, Florida, etc. and in the spring on their return to the northward
again. See Appendix I. P. 16.
The immense migrations of the Passenger-Pigeons are well known to every body
in this country. I have already hinted at the great flights of Fringilla
tristis, Motacilla Sialis, Loxia Curvirostra, Fringilla -- (Hemp-Bird), and
Anas canadensis, which are annually observed on their passage to the south. See
Page viii.. XIII.
I might mention a number of other species which move in similar bodies. I
shall content myself with mentioning one. This is the Brown Crane of Pennant.
This species is found in Mexico. It is described by Hernandez, who calls it,
Toquilcoyotl. Page 44. Cap. cxlviii.
They arrive in Florida and Carolina, from the south, in the months of Hebruary
and March. The flocks, which are immense, are heard and seen very high in the
air. Their phalanx is in the form of the letter V. They pass over Pennsylvania,
the Jersies, New York, etc. and continue their rout as far north as Hudson's
Bay, where they breed, and in the autumn retire to the south again. It is
curious, however, that in their return, they do not move in the same form in
which they came. They now form two or three circles intersecting each other,
often changing the figure of the body, and forming again, as they are joined by
other squadrons. Milton's description of the flight of the Common Crane Ardea
Crus of Linnaeus.
of the old world equally applies to our species.

"Part loosely wing the region: part more wise,
In common, ranged in figure wedge their way,
Intelligent of seasons, and set forth
Their aerie caravan, high over seas
Flying, and over lands with mutual wing
Easing their flight. So steers the prudent Crane
Her annual voyage, borne on winds;
The air slotes as they pass, fanned with unnumber'd plumes."
PARADISE LOST. Book VII. 425 -- 432.. XXXIV.
I fear, I shall be thought to have taken up too much time in endeavoring to
prove, that the greater number of our birds which disappear on the approach of
winter, retire to southern and milder climates. Indeed, I am of opinion, that
the migration of our birds is a fact so well established in the natural history
of these animals, that it will not, in general, be doubted, except by those
persons who are propense to doubt on every subject. In Asia, in Africa, and in
Europe, where observations on this subject have long been made, the migration
of many species has been completely established. In our own times, it has been
particularly observed that many species visit different countries of Europe in
the spring, and leave them in the autumn, in the same manner as other species
visit and leave us at the same seasons of the year.

. XXXV.
But it is said, we are unable to determine to what particular country these
American birds of passage emigrate. This, which respect to many species, is
strictly true. The observation, however, does not apply to all the migratory
birds which I have mentioned.

. XXXVI.
It is pretty certain, that some of our migratory birds do not remove to a very
great distance. Of this number are those species which even in the depth of
winter make their appearance among us when we have a few days of warm and open
weather. The Blue-Bird is one of these birds. See Section III. Page 12.
It is probable that it does not often remove far. Perhaps, it goes to the
seacoast, where the temperature is more equable. Perhaps, however, these birds
might, with more propriety, be considered as Residents. They, certainly,
sometimes continue with us the whole winter. They may easily find a secure
retreat from the winter's cold in the neighborhood of the sea, and in close
thickets of wood. Possibly, those species which are seen among us in mild
winters, do not commonly retire as far south as the others. But this is only
conjecture. We are certain that the Turdus Polyglottos, the Ardea Herodias, and
several others, which occasionally winter in Pennsylvania, do not always winter
in the southern states.

. XXXVII.
The greater number of our migratory birds seem to remove to a very
considerable distance from us. It is probable, that they pass their winters in
the Carolinas, Georgia, the Floridas, Mexico, Surinam, Brasil, and all the warm
parts of South-America, and the West-India-Islands. That, in general, they
remove farther south than the southern parts of the United-States may safely be
inferred from the very small number of our birds that is known to hiemate in
this part of the country. Thus, the Swallows are no more observed to winter in
the southern states than they are in Pennsylvania. And my friend Mr. Bartram
assures me, that he does not know more than three of the Spring Birds of
Passage that regularly winter in that part of the Union. These are the
Muscicapa carolinensis (Cat-Bird), Columba carolinensis (Turtle-Dove), and the
Turdus minor, or Little Thrush. They winter as far north as Cape-Fear, in
North Carolina. I do not suppose, however, that this is the whole list of the
passenger-birds of Pennsylvania that continue the winter through in the
southern states. Some have, probably, escaped Mr. Bartram's observation. At any
rate, it will not be doubted, that during very mild winters many species
continue in these states, since, during such winters, several species remain in
Pennsylvania. I am assured, that the Rice-Birds often pass the whole winter in
South Carolina; and some gentlemen, with whom I have conversed on the subject,
are even of opinion, that the species regularly hiemate in that state. This,
however, I presume is a mistake. Mr. Catesby says the Mocking Bird hiemates in
Carolina. That it does so occasionally, there can be little doubt: but it is
pretty certain, that, in general, it is a migratory bird. Arctic Zoology. VOL.
II. page 16. It is a curious fact, that previous to the cold winter of 1779 --
1780, or 1783 -- 1784 (I am not positive which), the Mocking-Bird more commonly
remained in the vicinity of Philadelphia and other parts of Pennsylvania,
during the winter-season, than it has done since that time. I am inclined to
think, that the extreme severity of the season I allude to has frightened these
birds away. I am sensible, however, that this mode of explaining the fact will
not appear satisfactory to those naturalists who believe, that the instinct of
animals is a vis impellent, a "determinate" something; and that they never
acquire any knowledge by experience. Very different is my opinion, as I shall
fully show in a work on the Instinct of animals, in which I have been, for some
time, engaged.
I suspect that, besides the three species mentioned by Mr. Bartram, the
following birds pretty regularly hiemate in some of the southern states,
particularly South Carolina, and Georgia, and in the country of Florida:
Oriolus phoeniceus, Gracula Quiscula, Picus auratus, Picus erythrocephalus,
Fringilla pecoris, Alauda alpestris, Charadrius vociferus, Rallus virginianus,
Scolopax Gallinago, and a good many of the Anseres.

. XXXVIII.
It appears from the works of Hernandez Re^um Medicarum Novae Hispaniae
Thesaurus, se^ Plantarum, Animalium, Mineralium Mexicanorum Historia, etc: etc.
Romae, 1651. Folio.
, Piso, Gulielmi Pisonis, Medici Amftelaedamensis, De Indiae Utrinsque Re
Naturali et Medica Libri Quatuordecim. Amstelaedami, 1658. Folio.
and several other writers, that many of the passenger birds of Pennsylvania,
and other parts of the United-States, are also natives of Mexico, Brasil, and
other southern parts of America. I shall here mention a few of these birds;
viz. the Vultur Aura, Psittacus pertinax, Oriolus phoeniceus, Oriolus
Baltimore? Gracula Quiscula, Gracula Barita, Picus principalis, Picus
carolinus, or Carolina Woodpecker, Alcedo Alcyon? Trochilus Colubris, Columba
migratoria, Columba carolinensis, Columba passerina, Turdus Polyglottos, Turdus
minor, Motacilla aurocapilla, Ampelis Garrulus, Emberiza Oryzivora, Emberiza
Ciris,* or Painted Bunting, Tanagra cyanea, Tanagra rubra, Muscicapa Tyrannus,
or Fork-tail-Flycatcher, Motacilla Sialis, Muscicapa Ruticilla, Motacilla
caerulea, Motacilla Guira,* or Guira Warbler, Platalea Ajaja,* or Roseate
Spoon-Bill, Ardea canadensis, or Brown Crane, Ardca Nycticorax? Tantalus
Loculator,* or Wood-Ibis, Tantalus ruber,* or Scarlet Ibis, Charadrivs
Hiaticula,* or Ringed Plover, Charadrius Himantopus, or Long-Legged Plover,
Haematopus Ostr^legus, or Pied-Oyster-Catcher, Anas sponsa, and many others. In
this list I have not given the English names of any of those birds which occur
in the Tables. I have annexed the mark of doubt to a few which, perhaps, are
not entirely the same species in the United-States and in Southern America.
Those which are designated with an asterisk are not known in Pennsylvania. Mr.
Pennant ( Arctic Zoology. VOL. II. P. 107.) mentions the Motacilla Guira as a
native of New York. -- The Emberiza Ciris has never (that I can learn) been
seen farther north than Cape-Fear in North Carolina, and not more than one mile
from the salt water. The Spoon-Bill is sometimes (though rarely) seen about the
mouth of Cape-Fear-River. They are common about St. Agustine, in East-Florida,
and even as far north as the Savanna-River. Mr. William Bartram.
This circumstance renders it very probable, that many of our migratory birds
pass their winters in these southern climates. How much is it to be wished,
that some intelligent naturalists would furnish us with a list of the migratory
birds of Mexico, Brasil, the West-India-Islands, etc. noting down, with care,
the times of their disappearance from those countries, and the periods of their
return to them. This would throw great light upon the difficult question which
I am examining. Meanwhile, I have little doubt it will be found, that several
of these birds visit us about the time they leave the warm countries just
mentioned. Some of the birds which I have mentioned, in the above list, are
known to migrate from and to Mexico, Brasil, and the West Indies.

. XXXIX.
My learned and candid friend Mr. Pennant (whose name I never mention but with
pleasure and with gratitude; whose works have contributed much to my
information, and whose example has stimulated me to the study of natural
history) thinks there is the "greatest probability," that numbers of the birds
of Kamtschatka are common to North America, "and that they pass there the
seasons of migration." Arctic Zoology. VOL. II. P. 314.
I may observe, on the other hand, that it is likely that many of the
North-American species pass into Asia and Europe, making between these
continents and the new-world regular migrations. I think (for I write from
memory) that it is Professor Biseke who has lately shown, that several of the
North-American birds annually visit the neighborhood of Mittau, in Courland.
Among others, I particularly recollect that this writer mentions the Loxia
Cardinalis, or Cardinal Grosbeak. In the farther investigation of the subject
of the migration of birds, we shall discover, that many species (many more than
is generally imagined) are common to the old and to the new-world; and that
several species are occasionally passing into countries which before they had
not visited. I am not afraid, that genuine naturalists will suppose, that the
regularity of migration, which I have mentioned, between the two continents, is
altogether imaginary. I certainly do not carry my birds as far, in search of
food, of resting places, and of better climes, as did Cotton Mather, of
New England, who fancied that the Wild-Pigeons, on leaving us, repaired "to
some undiscovered Satellite, accompanying the Earth at a near Distance." See
the Philosophical Transactions, Abridg'd, etc. Vol. V. Part II. P. 161.


The following TABLES are divided into two Sections. The first section contains
an enumeration of the SPRING and SUMMER Birds of Passage. All these, with the
exception of a very few, which may be called RESIDENT BIRDS, come from the
south. The greater part of them are known to build and breed in Pennsylvania.
At the close of the summer and in the autumn, they retire again to the south,
and visit us in the Spring.

The second section is devoted to the AUTUMNAL and WINTER Birds of Passage.
These passengers may be divided into two classes: viz. I. The Spring and Summer
Birds of Passage, which are now on their return to the south. In strict
propriety, these ought not to be considered as Autumnal and Winter Passengers:
for they leave us in cold weather, either because they are incapable of
supporting the severity of the winter-season, or because they cannot, during
this season, procure a sufficiency of their proper and favorite food. Perhaps,
for both these causes. II. The second class comprehends the real Autumnal and
Winter Birds of Passage. These, compared with the Spring and Summer Birds of
Passage, are very few in number. They all come from the north, and either
winter with us or in the southern states. In the spring (frequently very early
in the spring), they retire northerly, where they build, breed, and rear their
young.

ERRATA.
In the Introduction, page ix.. XVI. for Fringilla melodia, read Turdus
Polyglottos, or Moeking-Bird. page xvi.. XXXVI. (in a few of the copies), the
last line, for uniformly, read always.

In the Tables, page 2, for Scolopax candida. (Plover.) read Tringa Squatarola?
Gray Sandpiper? (Plover.) page 3, for Golden-Crowned Trush, read Golden-Crowned
Thrush.

In Appendix I, page 16, under the head of Hirundo purpurea, for, when it
supposed, etc. read, when it is supposed, etc.

1791. SECT. I. THE SPRING AND SUMMER BIRDS OF PASSAGE. PROGRESS OF VEGETATION.
MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. March 1. Oriolus phoeniccus. Red-Wing-Oriole.
(Swamp-Black-Bird.) Dracontium foetidum in flower. The whole plant has a most
offensive smell, very similar to that of the Viverra Putorius, or Polecat.
Hence its common names, Skunk-Cabbage, Polecat-weed. I believe, the seed are
very poisonous to birds, and other animals. Thermometer, 27, in the morning:
35, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. -- Barometer, ^0. Weather fair. -- 12.
Mus^i^apa sus^a (G.) Black-Headed ^ly-Catcher. (Pewe.) Draba americana, in
flower. This is commonly supposed to be the Draba verna of Linn^ ^s. To me it
appears to be a distinct species; and as it is common in a very extensive tract
of North America, I have named it as above. Thermometer, 43, in the morning. --
Barometer, 30.1. Rain, N. E. -- Fair. Alauda rubra (G.) Red Lark. Alauda
alpestris. Shore-Lark. (Sky-Lark.) Fringilla domestica (mihi.) Little Sparrow.
(Titt, Chipping-Bird.) Fringilla ferruginea (G.) Ferruginous Finch.
(Ground-Sparrow, Hedge-Sparrow.) Fringilla albicollis (G.) White-Throated
Finch. Fringilla melodia. Black-Throated Sparrow. Passer palustris of Bartr^m.
Reed-Sparrow. June^, campestris? in flower. Travels. Fringilla exilis (mihi.)
Least Finch. Fringilla tristis. Golden Finch. Fringilla pinus (mihi.) Sitta
canadensis. Red-Breasted Nuthatch. Picus auratus. Golden-Wing Woodpecker.
(Flecker, or Flicker.) Gracula Quiscula? Crow-Blackbird. -- 13. Fringilla
pecoris (G.) Cowpen-Finch. (Cowpen-bird.) Thermometer, 34, in the morning. --
Weather fair. -- 15. Motacilla Sialis. (Blue-Bird.) Thermometer, 47, in the
morning: 53, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. -- Barometer, 29. 9. Rainy weather.
Scolopax Gallinago. Common Snipe. (Wood-cock.) Betula Alnus? in flower. The
first Shad (Clupea Alosa) are commonly caught in the Delaware, Schuylkill, and
other rivers, about this time. -- The greatest height of the thermometer in
March was 78. This was about 2 o'clock in the afternoon, of the 18th. On the
19th, it rained and snowed: but the snow thawed. Charadrius vociferus. Noisy
Plover. (Kill-dee, Kill-deer.) 1791. THE SPRING AND SUMMER BIRDS OF PASSAGE.
PROGRESS OF VEGETATION. MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. April 3. Scolopax minor
(G.) Little Wood-cock. (Meadow-Snipe.) Anemone Hepatica? Anemone Thalictroides,
Ranunculus pennsylvanicus, Acer argenteum, Acer rubrum, Corylus rostrata, and
Saxifraga nivalis? in flower. Salix -- in leaf. Thermometer, 33, in the
morning. -- Barometer, 30.1. The Sun eclipsed this morning. The eclipse began
soon after sunrise: over a little past eight o'clock. -- 10. Hirundo purpurea.
Purple Martin. Thermometer, 44, in the morning: in the afternoon, between 4 and
5 o'clock, 61. -- Barometer 30.1. Weather Cloudy, -- Fair. -- 15. Hirundo
rustica? House-Swallow. Peace and Beans are planted. Radishes, Lettuce, Onions,
Parsnips, Carrots, Cabbages, etc. are sown. Shad and Herring are now caught, in
abundance, in our rivers. -- Thermometer, 45, in the morning. -- Barometer,
29.5. Cloudy, then Fair. Hirundo --. Little Bank-Martin. Arabis lyrata in
flower. About this time, the Sturgeons (Acipenser Sturio?) are first seen in
the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill, jumping out of the water. Falco
piscatorius. Fithing Hawk. Certhia Pinus. Pine-Creeper. Flax is sown. Fringilla
graminea (G.) Little-Field-Sparrow. Fumaria Cucullaris in flower. Motacilla
coronata (G.) Golden-crowned Warbler. Motacilla caerulea (G.) Caerulean
Warbler. Ardea Herodias. Great Blu^or Ashcoloured Heron. Aleedo Alcyon. Belted
Kingfisher. (Kingfisher.) Zanthothiza apiifolia in flower. Colymbus migratorius
of Bartram. Travels. (E^^-Crow.) Colymbus Podiceps. Pled-Bill Grebe.
(D^^chick.) Anas canadensis. Canada-Go^se. (Wild-Goose.) Epigaea repens
(sometimes called Ground Ivy) in flower. Anas bucephala. Bussel-Duck. Anas
discors. White-Faced Teal. Anas sus^a. Blue-Winged Teal. Anas subcaerulea of
Bartram. (The (...)-Bill.) Travels. Anas Boschas. Mallard-Duck. Mergus
cucullatus. Fan-crested-Duck. Direa palustris (Leather-wood, Moose-wood) in
flower. Aquilegia canadensis, Amygdalus Persica, Pyrus communis, Prunus
Cerasus, Ribes rubra, Viola cordata, Mespilus canadensis, Sanguinaria
canadensis (Puccoon, Indian Paint), and Salix --, in flower. Acer rubrum and
glaucum (of Marshall) in leaf. Caltha palustris, Erythronium carolinianum,
Viola pa^ma^^, Viola pedata, Viola tomentosa, Viola lutea, Viola alba, Viola
pallida, Sambucus canadensis, Claytonia virginica, and Houstonea caerulea, in
flower. -- 18. Anas sponsa. Summer-Duck. Thermometer, 49, in the morning. --
Barometer, 29.7, Weather fair. Columba carolinensis. Carolina-Pigeon.
(Turtle-Dove.) Columba migratoria Passenger-Pigeon. (Wild-Pigeon.) Scolopax
candida. (Plover.) The Tree-Frog (Ra^a ar^orea?) chatters. Tetrao virginianus
(Partridge, Quail) pair. -- The male whistles. Turdus rusus. Ferruginous
Thrush. (^hrush, Thrasher.) The Bull-Frog (Rana ocellata) begins its amors.
The male roars morning and evening. Ardea Ny^ticorax. Night-Heron. (Qua-Bird.)
Motacilla Troglodytes? (Marsh-Wren). 20. Ardea virescens. Green-Bittern, or
Poke. Strawberries (Fragaria ves^a) in flower. Thermometer, 44, in the morning.
-- Barometer, 30.0. Weather fair. 23. Certhia familiaris (mihi.) House-Wren,
Sociable Wren. Oats are sown. Thermometer, 59, in the morning: 71, at 4, in the
afternoon. -- Barometer, 30.0. S. Wind. -- Cloudy. Fringilla crythrophthalma.
Towhee-Bunting. (Towhee-bird, Ground-Robin, Chewink.) Hirundo pelasgia.
Aculeated Swallow. (Chimneybird.) Caprimulgus virginianus (G.) Whip-poor-will,
or Night-hawk. Pulmo^aria virginica, Orontium aquaticum (Silver-Weed) in
flower. Lanius Tyrannus. King-bird. Tyrant. Oriolus Baltimore.
Baltimore-Oriole, Baltimore-Bird Hang-Bird. Anemone nem^rosa, Anemone
quinquefolia, and Ram^^culu^ repells in flower. Oriolus spurius.
Bastard-Oriole, Bastard-Baltimore. Muscicapa carolinensis. Cat Fly-Catcher
(Cat-bird.) Motacilla varia. White-Poll Warbler. -- 27. Parus luteus. Summer
Yellow-bird. Pyrus Malus, Cercis ^anadensis (Sallad-Tree), Azalea n^dislora
(Wi^^-Honeysuckle), Lonicera media, Laurus Sa^^afras, Geranium maculatum, in
flower. A species of Scarabacus, called the Spring-Beetle, now appears. In the
evening, millions of them swarm over orchards and forests, performing their
amors. They occasion, at this time, a noise not unlike di^tant thunder. It is
a reddish-brown Beetle, of an inch in length, and of proportionable thickness.
-- 28. Motacilla fluvialis. Water Wag-tail. Muscicapa fusca (Catesby.) Warbling
Wren, or Green-Wren. -- 30 TrochilusColubris. Red-throated Honeysucker.
(Humming-Bird) Various species of Libellula, Papilio, Formica, and other
insects, appear in abundance. The Hermit (Apis --), or Borer, comes forth from
its cell. Turdus Trichas (G.) Yellow-breast Warbler. (Maryland yellow-throat).
Thermometer, 52, in the morning: 6^ l in the afternoon. -- Barometer, ^9.8. --
Cloudy. Picus crythrocephalus. Red-headed-Wood-pecker. Aesculus Pavia and
Aesculus slava (Buck-Eye) in flower. Motacilla aurocapilla.
Golden-Crowned-Trush. Tanagra rubra. Canada Tanager (Swamp-Red-Bird?) Muscicapa
subfusca of Bartram. Muscicapa olivacea. Red-eyed Fly-catcher. The greatest
height of the Thermometer in April was 79. This was on the 26th, at 2^ in the
afternoon. The greatest height of the 1791. THE SPRING AND SUMMER BIRDS OF
PASSAGE. PROGRESS OF VEGETATION. MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. Barometer was
30.4. This was on the 21st, at which time the weather was Hazy. May 1.
Muscicapa Ruticilla. Black-headed Warbler. Podophyllum peltatum (May-Apple),
Fothergilla alnisolia, Halesia terraptera, Leontice Thalictroides, Hydrastis
canadensis (Yellow-root), Dodecathcon Meadia, Calycanthus floridus
(Sweet-Scented-Shrub), Aesculus Hippocastanum, Cornus florida (Dogwood), in
flower. The Glowworm (Lampyris noctiluca? the female) begins to sparkle in the
grass, in humid situations, during the evenings. Turdus minor (G.) Wood-Thrush.
Little Thrush. Thermometer, May 1st, 56, in the morning: 79, in the afternoon.
-- Barometer, 29.8. Foggy, -- Fair. Anas Beruicla. Brent-Goose. Muscicapa
crinita. Crested Fly-Catcher. Plant Indian Corn (Zea maiz), Potatoes (Solanum
tuberosum), Sweet Potatoes (Convolvulus Batatas), Melos^^, Cucumbers, Squashes,
Water-Melons, Pumpkins, and French or Snap-short Beans. The Apis Crabo (called
Hornet) begins to build its curious citadels or nests. Muscicapa viridis (G.)
Yellow-Breasted Chat. Falco sparverius. Sparrow-Hawl. -- 12. Tanagra cyanea.
Indigo-Bunting, Blue Linnet. Thermometer, 61 -- 76, in the morning: 81 -- 82,
in the afternoon. -- Barometer, 30.2. Cuculus americanus. Cuckoo of Carolina.
Ampelis Garrulus, in flocks, visit the double flowered Cherry-trees, feeding
upon the petals of the flowers. Alaoda magna. Crescent State (Meadow-Lark.)
Parus americanus. Creeping Titmouse. Finch Creeper. -- 13. Motacilla mitrata.
Hooded Titmouse. Acer glaucum and Acer rubrum shed their ripe seed.
Thermometer, 69, at noon. -- Barometer, 30.0. Motacilla canadensis (G.)
Black-throat Warbler, Blue Fly-Catcher. Tringa macularia (G.) Spotted
Sandpiper. A species of Chrysomela? called Cucumber-Fly, now begins its ravages
upon the vines of the Cucumbers, Musk-Melon, Water-Melon, Pompiou, etc. but
especially upon the Cucumber. They scrape off the rind, and suck out the juice.
Against the depredations of this insect which has an extentive range through
North America) nothing has been found so beneficial as a mixture of tobacco and
capsicum (Red-Pepper) sprinkled over the vines. Motacilla chrysoptera.
Golden-winged Fly-Catcher. Motacilla petechia. Red-headed Warbler. A species of
Lampyris, called Fire-Fly, begins to illuminate the woods, meadows, gardens,
streets of the city, etc. The light of this insect continues through the whole
night, and for several months. Motacilla virens (G.) Green Warbler. Motacilla
pennsylvanica. Bloody-side Warblet. -- 18. Muscicapa rapax of Bartram. Olive
colored Fly-catcher, or Lesser Pewe. The young Blue-Birds (Motacilla Sialis)
now first venture upon their wings. Travels. Ardea cinerea. Marsh-Bittern. The
Rye begins to flower. -- 20. Emberiza oryzivora. Rice-Bunting, (Rice-Bird,
Reed-Bird, Bob-Lincoln?) Magnolia glauca (Common Magnolia, Beaver-Tree),
Liriodendron Tulipisera (Tulip-Tree, Poplar), Cornus alterna, Magnolia
tripetala (Umbrella-Tree), Magnolia acuminata (Cucumber-Tree), Rubus
occidentalis, Rubus odoratus, Rubus hispidus, Chionanthus virginicus
(Fringe-Tree), Vaccinium frondosum, Andromeda mariana, Bartsia coccinea,
Convallaria Polygonatum, C. racemosa C. bisolie, Phlox maculata, Phlox
subulata, Phlox alb^, Sisyrinchium Bermudiana, Aristolochia sipho, Hyoseris
virginica, Hypo^is crecta, Geranium carolinianum, Kalmia angustifolia, Kalmia
latifolia, and Ledum serpyilifolium, in bloom. Rallus carolinus (G.) Sorce
Gallinule. Rallus virginianus. Virginian Rail. Rallus crepitans (G.)?
Clapper-Rail, (Meadow-clapper?) Fulica atra. Common Coot. Ardea parva of
Bartram. The Little Striped Bittern. Travels. -- 25. Alauda Calandra.
Calandra-Lark. (May-Bird, Grass-Bird.) Andromeda aborea (Sorrel-Tree), Fagus
americana (Chestnut), Juglans nigra (Black Walnut), Juglans cinerea (Butternut),
Aralia nudicaulis (Sarsaparilla), Berberi, vulgaris, Platanus occidentalis
(Button-Tree, Sycamore), Crataegus Crus galli, Pisum sativum, Veratrum luteum,
Salvia lyrata, and many other vegetables, in flower. Motacilla vermivora. (G.)
Worm-Eater. A species of Curculio (Fruit-devouring Weavel) is now busy, at
nightime, in darting and depositing its eggs in the young fruit of Plumbs,
Cherries, Peaches, Apples, Pears, Mespilus, Juglans, etc. -- 28. Certhia
floridana (mihi). Great Yellow-throated-Wren of Florida. Strawberries and early
Cherries ripening. The Searabaeus nitidus, called Goldsmiths, now appears in
great numbers. The greatest height of the Thermometer, in this month, was 90.
This was in the afternoon of the 30th. June 20. Vultur aura. Carrion-Vulture.
(Turkey-Buzzard.) Saururus cernuus (Swamp-Lillies), Ceanothus americanus
(New-Jersey-Tea), Bignonia Catalpa (Catalpa), Actaca racemosa (Black
Snakeroot), Pyrola rotundifolia, Tilia americana, Ruta graveolens, in flower.
This is the most interesting season of the year for the music of our birds.
"Ipsi Laritid ^^^ces ad sider^ jactant
Ia^^^si mon^^^ Ipss jam carmuna rupes,
Ipsa sonant arbusta."
VIRGIL. July 4. Ardea alba. Great White-Heron. Pyrola umbellata, Pyrola
maculata, Lithospermum virginianum, Circea leutitiana, Clinopodium incanum,
Typha latifolia, in flower. Most of our birds have now done rearing their
young, and of course their melody begins to cease. 1791. THE SPRING AND SUMMER
BIRDS OF PASSAGE. PROORESS OF VEGETATION. MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. July.
Ardea aequinoctialis. Little White-Heron. About this time, a few days sooner or
later, the Coluber constrictor, or Black Snake, and other serpents begin to
shed their old skins. Falco furcatus. Swallow-tailed Falcon. Indian corn (Zea
Mays) in blossom. -- 15. Cherries still plentiful. Thermometer, 76, in the
morning: 88, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. -- 16. Thermometer, 89, in the
morning: 88, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. -- 20. Aselepiasdecumbens
(Pleurisy-Root, Flux-Root), Lilium superbum, Lilium Philadelphicum, Phlox
paniculata, Nymphea odorata, Bignonia radicans, Hypericum Kalmianum, Callicarpa
americana, Spigelia marilandica, Vitis arborea, etc. in flower. Thermometer,
80. -- Barometer, 30. 0. -- 30. Cucumbers, Melons, Squashes, and Water-Melons
are now ripe. Green Peace in plenty. Thermometer, 70. -- Batometer, 30. 0. --
Cloudy. Lobelia Cardinalis, Eupatorium giganteum, Eupatorium caelestinum,
Eupatorium caelestinum, Eupatorium perfoliatum, and Glycine Apios (Wild
Potato), in flower. Bruchus Pisi (Pea-Fly) lays its eggs in the green pea-pods.
It is chiefly occupied in this business at nightime, and during cloudy days.
August 12. Emberiza oryzivora. Rice-Bunting (Rice-Bird, Reed-Bird.) The females
exclusively? make their appearance. Zizania aquatica in flower. In the vicinity
of Philadelphia, where this plant grows spontaneously, it is best known by the
name of Reed. Another species, the Zizania palustris? grows very plentifully on
the margin of our northern lakes. Its seed is the principal vegetable food of
the Malhomines, and other northern Indian tribes. This last kind, which the
French in America call "Folle avoine," is next to the Indian corn, the most
important vegetable of the order Cerealia hitherto discovered in North America.
It ought to be cultivated in America, and might be transferred, with much
advantage, to some of the countries of Europe. Few birds are now heard to sing,
except the Tanagra cyanea, Turdus Polyglottos, Turdus migratorius, Turdus
rufus, Turdus minor, Muscicapa carolinensis, Oriolus spurius, and a few others.
None of these, however, are so constant; and regular in concert, or sing with
such animation, as they did in the last and preceding month, except the Tanagra
cyanea. The mornings and evenings begin to be cool. The Ka-te-did-it (Gryllus
laurifolius?) begins its cheerful chattering, in the midst of our thickest
forests, and in the heart of our city, etc. -- 20. Oat-harvest, and the second
crop of hay. Buckwheat (Polygonum Fagopyrum) is sown. "Et ca^tu querula rumpent
arbusta cicada."

VIRCIL. -- 25. Fagus pumila (Chinquapin) ripens its fruit. About this time,
the Corvus cristatus, called Blue-Jay, having reared its young, appears, in
great numbers, waiting for the nuts of the Beech, Chinquapin and Chestnut, to
feed upon, when ripe, and to store them up in its winter quarters. -- About
this time, that is from the 25th of August to the beginning of September, the
Hirundo rustica? or House-Swallow, the Hirundo pelasgia (Chimney-Bird), the
Hirundo purpurea (Purple Swift), and the Caprimulgus virginianus
(Whip-poor-will), disappear, and I believe retire far southward.

SECT. II. AUTUMNAL AND WINTER BIRDS OF PASSAGE. PROGRESS OF VEGETATION.
MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. -- 31. Thermometer, 71, in the morning: 81, at 2
o'clock in the afternoon. -- The greatest height of the Thermometer in August
was on the 30th, when it was 93, in the afternoon. -- Same day, the Barometer
30. 0. Weather fair. September 1. Zizania aquatica ripens its seed. Emberiza
oryzivora, Oriolus phoeniceus and Gracula Quiscula? appear in immense flocks.
The first of these birds frequents the Zizania, to feed upon its feed. They
also feed upon the feed of the Fox-tail-grass, the Polygonum sagittatum
(Tear-Thumb, Cow-Tongue), etc. The latter destroy maize, oats, rye, barley.
etc. that is stacked out of doors. -- 12. Parus domesticus. Amaryllis lutea,
Colchicum autumnale, some species of Rudbeckia, Helianthus, Coreopsis, Helenium
autumnale, Bupthalmum helianthoides, some species of Solidago, Silphium, and
Lobelia siphilitica, in flower. Parus bicolor. Crested-Titmouse. Parus
virginianus. Virginian Titmouse, Yellow-Rump. The Yellow-Rump and the
Prib-Chatterer at this time, arrive from the north, to feed upon the berries of
the Red-Cedar (Juniperus virginiana), which are now ripening. Ampelis Garrulus.
Prib-Chatterer. (Cedar-bird.) Anas querquedula. Blue and green wiag Teal. Most
of the summer birds of passage have now disappeared. The Cat-Bird, the
Fox-coloured thrush, Mocking Bird, Pewe, Olive-coloured Fly-catcher, Summer
Yellow-bird, -- 25. Anas nigra. Black Duck. Anas Boschas. Mallard. Parus
virginianus. Great numbers of these birds appear again, along with the Ampelis.
Virginian Titmouse. 1791. AUTUMNAL AND WINTER BIRDS OF PASSAGE. PROGRESS OF
VEGETATION. MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. Golden-crowned Thrush, and the
Wood-Thrush are still seen. All these, however, are soon to take their leave of
us, for some time. Anas canadensis. Passes southerly in great flights.
Canada-Goose. The Zizania aquatica is now full ripe At this time the
Rice-birds are very fat, and delicious food. As soon as the Zizania has shed
its seed, these birds disappear. Although they preser this grain to any other
that we have in our northern states, (the seed of the Polygonum sagittatum,
perhaps excepted), and although it seems to be principally this grain which
invites them to the north, yet they arrive above two months be^^re it is ripe.
Meanwhile, they feed upon varion, sorts of grass-seed, particularly the seed of
the Fox-tail-grass. Upon leaving us in autumn, the Rice-birds return to the
southward, and stop by the way, in Carolina, Georgia, and Florida, to feed
with their friends, upon the remains of the Rice. A second crop of this grain
(Oryza sativa), shooting up from the stubble, affords them a plentiful
gleaning, till late in the autumn, or till frost, when they resume their
migrations southward, and entirely disappear, until the return of the next
season. September 26. Hibiscus coccincus, Pentapetes phoenicea, Hibiscus
pentacarpos, Corchorus olitorius, Lagerstroemia indica, Convolvulus coccineus,
Gentiana ciliata, Gentiana serotina, Gentiana saponaria, Gossypium herbaceum,
Salvia coccinea, Eupatorium caelestmum, Eupatorium scandens, Eupatorium album,
Eupatorium serotinum, Euphorbia heterophylla? Monarda punctata, Clematis
crisp^, Caelos^a coccinea, Caelosia argentea, and Tagetes erect^, in flower. --
29. Picus varius. Yellow-Bellied Woodpecker. October 9. Motacilla Regulus.
Golden-crowned Wren. These two birds arrive from the north.
Phytolacca decandra, some species of Similax, Vitis labrusea, Juniperus
virginiana, Mespilus arbutisolia (Swamp Service), Cornus florida, Nyssa
sylvatica, Vaccinium frondosum, Ligustrum vulgar, and Hedera quinquefolia,
still support abundance of fruit. Nicotiana Tabacum, Tagetes patula, Lobelia
Cardinalis, Lobelia siphilitica, Lobelia inslata, Salvia coccinea, Ipomoea
Quamoclit, Stuartia Malacodendron, Canna indica, Franklinia alatamaha (Gordonia
pubescens?), and many other vegetables, are still in flower, in the open
ground. Motacilla Calendula. Ruby crowned Warbler. These two birds arrive from
the north.
Muscicapa carolinensis. Cat-Bird. These are still seen among us.
Scolopax Gallinago. Wood-Cock. These are still seen among us.
Sharp white frost. -- 15. Anas Bernicla. Immense flocks of these Geese are now
seen, at great heights in the air, passing southerly.
Brent-Goose. Thermometer, 58, in the morning. Fringilla Hudsonias. Snow-Bird.
These three birds make their appearance, from the northward, at the same time.
The two last pass on to the southward, before the setting in of winter, or
severe freezing weather. Fringilla ferruginea. Fox-colored Sparrow. Fringilla
albicollis. Large brown Sparrow, with red eyebrows. -- 30. Various species of
autumnal plants are still in flower. The greater number of them belong to the
class syngenesiae, such as species of Coreopsis, After, Solidago, the Hellenium
autumnale, Achillea Millesolium. Hamamelis virginica in full flower. It makes a
fine ^ppearance, the blossoms being of an agreeable yellow. The bushes are
quite destitute of leaves. Falco sparverius. Little Falcon. This species of
Falcon now arrives from the northward, and passes on farther south. November
10. The deciduous trees and shrubs have, in general, cast off their discolored
and worn-out leaves. The nocturnal Infects are hardly heard any more. They are
either destroyed by the chilling frosts, or have retired to their
winter quarters. Some species of Gryllus are still heard to utter a seeble
noise in the warmer evenings. ^ -- 20. Different species of testudo, serpents,
and frogs, approach near to their winter habitations, viz. springs and bogs,
basking at midday, on the banks fronting the south, which have received the
influence of the sun. -- 30. The Cat-bird, different species of Turdus, the
Fringilla erythrophthalma, and almost all the Spring Birds of passage, which I
have enumerated, have entirely disappeared, for some weeks, and will not visit
us again until the return of Spring and Summer. December 15. Strix diurnalis
(mihi). Sharp-winged Day-Owl. A few vegetables are still seen in flower in the
open grounds, such as Leontodon Taraxacum, Lamium amplexicaule, Viola cordata,
Viola palmata, and some species of Veronica. The two species of Viola are out
of season, being early spring flowers. Thermometer, 27. -- Barometer, 29.6.
Fringilla cannabina? Greater Redpoll? This species ^ow appears from the
northward. See Appendix I. Columba carolinensis. Carolina-Pigeon. The
Carolina-Pigeon, or Turtle-Dove, is still seen among us. -- 17 Thermometer, 34,
at 7 o'clock in the morning: 47, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. -- Barometer,
30.1. 1791. AUTUMNAL AND WINTER BIRDS OF PASSAGE. PROGRESS OF VEGETATION.
MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS. December 18. Thermometer, 37, at 7 o'clock in the
morning: 42, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. -- Barometer, 29.9. and 29.7. at
these two hours. 1792. January 1. -- 10. Frosts extremely severe. The
Snow-bird, Loxia Cardinalis, and one or two species of Sparrow are the only
birds that are seen. -- 25. Fringilla cannabina? Greater Redpoll? Large flocks
of these birds are now s^en.
Severe frosts and deep snows. -- 30. Emberiza nivalis. Snow-Bunting. February
15. Strix stridula? Tawney-faced Owl. Thermometer, 24, in the morning: 32, in
the afternoon. -- Barometer, 29.8 1/^. -- Cloudy. Strix Nyctea.?
Great-white-Owl..... -- 28. Alauda alpestris. Shore-Lark (Sky-Lark). These are
properly Spring Birds of Passage.
The severity of the frost relaxes. Alauda rubra. (G.) Red-Lark. Fringilla
pinus (mihi). Pine-Finch. Fringilla serruginea. Ferruginous Finch. Fringilla
albicollis (G.) White-throated Finch. Fringilla tristis. Golden Finch.

SECTION III. OF THE RESIDENT BIRDS OF PENNSYLVANIA.
By the RESIDENT BIRDS, I mean those birds which, in general, continue in
Pennsylvania the whole year; which build their nests, rear their young, and are
commonly thought to continue, near the district in which they themselves were
reared. I shall enumerate these birds in the order of the Linnaean arrangement.

ACCIPITRES. RAPACIOUS.
Falco Leucocephalus. White-Headed Eagle. (Bald-Eagle.) This, in the opinion of
some persons, is the same bird as the next species. But I cannot adopt this
notion.

Falco regalis of Bartram. Travels. Great Gray Eagle. This is our largest Eagle.

Falco aquilinus of Bartram. Travels. Great Red-Tailed Hawk. This is the
largest species of Hawk hitherto discovered in Pennsylvania. The tail is of a
red brick color.

Falco columbarius. Pigeon-Hawk.

Falce glaucus of Bartram. Travels. Bluish Hawk. A beautiful species. Color a
pale sky-blue. Tips of the wings black. Feeds upon its prey, as it flies along
with it.

Strix virginiana. Great Horned Owl.

Strix Aslo. Red Owl, Little Owl. (Screech-Owl.)

Strix varius of Bartram. MS. Hen Owl. This is a large species without ears. It
is next in size to the Strix virginiana, or Great Horned Owl. Of a clay or dirt
color, spotted with darker brown.

Lanius Excubitor. Great Shrike. (Gust Bird? Nine-Killer.) For some interesting
information concerning this bird, see Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society. VOL. IV.

Lanius Collurio? Red-Backed Shrike. This species comes to us from the
northward, in October or November. In very mild winters, stays in the vicinity
of Philadelphia. Is always with us in the spring, on its return to the north.
Does not breed with us: does not sing in the autumn, but does in the spring.

PICAE PIES.
Corvus Corax. Raven Crow. (Raven.) Corvus carnivorus of Bartram. Travels.
Larger than the next species.

Corvus Corone. Carrion Crow. (Crow. There is another species of Corvus which
differs from both the species here mentioned. It is larger than the Common Crow
(Corvus Corone) and makes a noise more like that of the Raven, or Corvus Corax.
It keep^ upon the seacoast. Mr. Bartram (Travels) calls this species Corvus
maritimus. I have never seen it.
) This is the Corvus frugivorus of Bartram. Travels.

Corvus cristatus. Blue-Crow. (Blue-Jay, Jay-Bird.)

Picus pileatus. Pileated Woodpecker. (Wood-Cock).

* Picus erythrocephalus. Red-Headed-Woodpecker. Continues about Philadelphia,
in mild winters. In very cold winters, it goes farther southward.

* Picus auratus. Golden-Wing-Woodpecker. Some few of these birds are seen
among us, in the warmer or milder winters. In general, they migrate farther
southward.

Picus villosus. Hairy Woodpecker. Se-se-ah of the Wyandot-Indians.

Picus pubescens. Downy Woodpecker. Sho-ah of the Wyandot-Indians.

Sitta. Black-Headed Nuthatch. (Sap-Sucker.)

Certhia fusca of Bartram. MS. Brown-Creeper. I believe this species is not
described. The general color is a nutbrown: speckled with black or deep dusky:
some white spots on the first coverts. Edwards ( Not. Hist. vol. I. 26.) has a
bird a good deal like this. I mean his Little Brown and White Creeper.

GRALLAE. CLOVEN-FOOTED.
* Ardea Herodias. Great Heron. In very mild, open winters.

* Charadrius vociferus. Noisy Plover. (Kildee, Kildeer). In very mild winters.

GALLINAE. GALLINACEOUS.
Meleagris Gallopavo. Wild-Turkey. I doubt if this be the same species as the
domesticated kind, which is now so commonly met with in various parts of the
world. But I do not, in the least, doubt that the domesticated kind was first
brought from America into Europe. Indeed, I believe with Mr. Pennant, that
America is exclusively its native country. The Delaware Indians call the
Wild-Turkey, Pe-le-oo, or Blac-u.

Tetrao umbellus. Ruffed Grous. (Grous).

Tetrao cupido. Pheasant of Pennsylvania. (Pheasant). Pab-ha-cku of the
Delawares.

Tetrao virginianus. Maryland Partridge. (Partridge, Quail). Po-po-cus of the
Delawares.

PASSERES. PASSERINE.
* Columba migratoria. Passenger-Pigeon. (Wild Pigeon.) See the Introduction,.

* Columba carolinensis. Carolina-Pigeon. (Turtle-Dove). It is only during our
very mild winters, that this species of Columba continues with us the whole
year.

Alauda magna. Crescent State. (Meadow-Lark). Commonly continues with us during
the whole year. In very severe winters, migrates farther south.

Turdus migratorius. Red-Breasted Thrush. (Robin). Tschis-go-ckus of the
Delawares.

* Turdus Polyglottos. Mimie Thrush. (Mocking Bird).

Ampelis Garrulus. Prib Chatterer. (Cedar-Bird.)

Loxia Cardinalis. Cardinal Grosbeak. (Virginia Nightingale.)

* Loxia Curvirostra. Crossbill. (Shear-Bird.) In moderate winters stays with
us; but generally goes farther south. Commonly comes to us, from the northward,
about the beginning of September.

Motacilla Sialis. (Blue-Bird.) Stays with us in mild winters. In general,
disappears upon the setting in of the very severe weather. A few days, however,
of southerly wind and open warm weather, it is observed, will bring them back
to us, even in the depth of winter.

Motacilla Troglodytes? (Marsh-Wren.) Commonly continues with us the whole
year; in the winter time, taking shelter in our houses, stables, etc.

Parus bicolor. Toupet Titmouse.

Parus atricapillus. Canada Titmouse. Little Pied Titmouse.

* Parus virginianus. Virginian Titmouse. This species sometimes continues with
us all the winter.

NOTE.
In strict language, there are very few of our birds entitled to the name of
RESIDENTS. Pennsylvania, like every other portion of the United-States, is
subject to great extremes of heat and cold; and these extremes are known to
have a decided insluence upon the dispositions of animals. During our coldest
winters, therefore, many of those birds, which I have considered as residents,
migrate to the south. This was the case in the ever-memorable winter of 1779
and 1780, when very few of the usually resident birds continued with us: and
many of those, which did continue, perished with the severity of the cold.

OCCASIONAL, OR ACCIDENTAL, RESIDENTS.
There is a propriety in the division of the Resident Birds, into such as
commonly continue in the country the whole year through, and such as only
occasionally continue. The latter may be called OCCASIONAL, or ACCIDENTAL,
RESIDENTS. They seldom continue with us except in open, mild winters. These, in
the preceding list, are marked with an asterisk.^ I have had the less
hesitation in blending them together, because it is highly probable, that in a
tract of country so extensive and various as the state of Pennsylvania, some of
the birds, which about Philadelphia are only occasionally resident, may be more
generally so in other parts of the country.

OCCASIONAL VISITANTS.
Some of the birds which are observed in Pennsylvania may, with propriety, be
thrown into a section called OCCASIONAL VISITANTS. Of these I have already made
mention in the Introduction to these Fragments. These Occasional Visitants are
such birds as occasionally come to Pennsylvania, either from the more northern
or from the more southern parts of North America. With all the causes which
induce them to visit us, I am not sufficiently acquainted to speak on the
subject, with confidence. The following, however, are certainly some of these
causes, viz. severity of cold, scarcity of food, and intensity of heat.

I. The birds which are driven by the severity of cold all come to us from the
northward. These occasional visitants are pretty numerous, during our very
severe winters, when some of the birds of Canada and Labrador are seen among
us. The two following species of Strix deserve to be mentioned under this head,
viz. the Great White Owl (Strix Nyctea?). This species is never seen in the
vicinity of Philadelphia, except in those winters which are very severe, long,
and close. This and the following species (See the Tables) were seen about
Philadelphia, at the close of the winter of 1791-92, which was one of our
severest winters. The Tawney-Faced Owl (Strix stridula?) is a very beautiful
species. It makes its appearance, in the daytime, near houses and barns,
watching for mice, or for those weakly birds which have been compelled by the
severity of the cold to take shelter there.

II. It may readily be imagined, that a scarcity of food, particularly of their
favorite food, is one of the causes which induce birds to make occasional
visits to other countries than their own. I am even of opinion, that this has
been the original cause of some of those migrations which are now regular and
extensive.

III. I have mentioned intensity of heat, or very warm weather, as one of the
causes which sometimes impel or induce birds to migrate to us. It is probable,
however, that this cause more frequently operates in a secondary manner; that
is, by producing a scarcity of food. All the Occasional Visitants that fall
under this section come from the southward. See the Introduction, where I have
mentioned some of these visitants.

ADDITIONS TO THE LIST OF BIRDS.
The following deserve a place in an history of the birds of Pennsylvania. They
are all, except the Psittacus, found in the vicinity of Philadelphia, or within
eighty miles of it.

ACCIPITRES.
1. Falco Ossifragus? Sea-Eagle. I mention this on the authority of my
ingenious friend Mr. G. S. Oppelt, of Nazareth, in Pennsylvania. He says it
agrees with the Falco Ossifragus, "only that the cera is not lutea but
obscura." The one which he examined measured seven feet from wing to wing.
Killed near Nazareth. MS.

2. Strix Aluco. Speckled Owl. On the authority of Mr. Oppelt.

3. Strix Naevia. Mottled Owl. On the authority of Mr. Oppelt.

4. Strix passerina. Little Owl.

PICAE.
5. Psittacus pertinax? Illinois Parrot? Either this or some other species of
the genus deserves to be mentioned among the birds of Pennsylvania. It has been
seen in Shareman's Valley. See Introduction,. VII.

GRALLAE.
6. Scolopax nutans? Nodding Snipe? Seen and killed in the wintertime, near
Nazareth, in Pennsylvania. On the authority of Mr. Oppelt. Mentioned by Mr.
Pennant, as having been observed in Chateaux Bay, on the coast of Labrador, in
September. Arctic Zoology. VOL. II. P. 167.

7. Charadrius Himantopus. Long-Legged Plover. On the authority of Mr. Oppelt.

8. Haematopus Ostralegus. Pied-Oyster-Catcher.

PASSERES.
9. Loxia ludoviciana. Red-Breasted Gross-Beak.

10. Fringilla purpurea. Purple Finch. This is one of our birds of passage.
Early in the spring, sometimes in February, it comes up from the south, and
returns from the north, going southward, in October.

11. Fringilla --. (Hemp-Bird.) This is one of our migratory birds. It is not
the Fringilla cannabina of Linnaeus; but, like it, feeds on the ripe hemp-feed.
Is often seen about Philadelphia. On the authority of Mr. William Bartram, who
thinks it an undescribed species.

12. Hirundo Subis. Canada Swallo, Latham.
Great American Martin. Edwards.
On the authority of Mr. Oppelt, who observed it in the neighborhood of
Bethlehem. Has never been seen about Philadelphia. Yet it is probable, that it
is a bird of passage. Perhaps, it passes from the north to the south, and
returns to the north, through the country west of the great ranges of our
mountains, which is certainly the rout pursued by some of the migrato birds
that are seldom, or never, seen in the Atlantic parts of the United-States.
Perhaps, this is no other than the Tapera of Brasil, the Hirundo Tapera of
Gmelin.

13. Caprimulgus curopacus. European Goatsucker. (Night-Hawk). In Maryland, if
I mistake not, it is called Bull-Bat. Pischk? of the Delaware-Indians. This, or
a variety of it, is certainly a native of Pennsylvania. So that now all the
fifteen species of this genus (mentioned by Gmelin) are known to be natives of
America; and all, with the exception of the Caprimulgus curopaeus, are, as far
as is yet known, exclusively confined to this portion of the world. This is an
interesting fact, which does not favor the opinion of those writers who have
imagined, that all animals and all vegetables were originally created in the
old world, from whence they have been spread over every portion of the earth:
an opinion which ought never to have been advanced by philosophers; and which
it is not likely will prevail among those naturalists who observe with
attention, and deliver their sentiments without reserve or timidity. See New
W^ws of the Origin of the Trib^s and Nation^ of Amrica. Pages ci, cii, ciii,
civ. Philadelphia. 1798.


I. APPENDIX: CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS On the greater number of the Birds, which
are mentioned in the preceding Tables. Those species which are known to l^^^d
in P^nnsylvania are designated by an asterisk.

* ORIOLUS phoeniceus. I cannot altogether admit of the propriety of placing
this bird among the Picae, as Linnaeus and other naturalists have done. The
female appears to be an Emberiza, or Fringilla. This bird is the Sturnus
predatorius of Mr. William Bartram. See his Travels.

* Muscicapa fusca. This is the Muscicapa nunciola of Bartram. Travels.

* Alauda rubra. The Alauda migratoria of Bartram. Travels. Alauda fusca of the
same gentleman. The specific name rubra is an improper one: for the bird has no
red feathers.

* Alauda alp^^iris. This is the Alauda campestris of Bartram. Travels.

* Fringilla domestica (mihi). Motacilla domestica, or Regulus rufus of
Bartram. Travels. In very mild winters, this social domestic little bird
continues with us. It is the earliest of our spring singing, birds. Its note is
tremulous and agreeable. Catesby has sigured it, VOL. I. P. 35.

* Fringilla ferruginea. I suspect this is the Hedge-Sparrow of Lawson, P. 144.
It is the Fringilla rufa of Bartram. Travels. Edwards calls it Little Sparrow.
Pl. 354. In New York it is called the Shepherd.

* Fringilla albicollis. Fringilla fusca of Bartram. Travels.

* Fringilla melodia. In mild winters, this bird continues in Pennsylvania,
associating with the Snow-Birds. Does not appear to be deseribed.

* Passer palustris of Bartram. This appears to be a species of Fringilla. I do
not find that it is described.

Fringilla exilis. This a good deal resembles the Motacilla Regulus, or
Golden-crested Warbler. Perh^ps, they are the same.

* Fringilla tri^^is. In different parts of the United-States, this bird is
known by a variety of names, such as Gold-Finch, Yellow-Bird, Lettuce-Bird,
Sallad-Bird, Flax-Seed-Bird.

Sitta canadensis. I have been mistaken in calling this the Sitta canadensis.
It is a distinct species: perhaps Le Torchepot de Canada of Brisson. Tom. 3. P.
592, 593, 594. Pl. 29. Fig. 4. Sitta peregrina of Bartram. MS. Sitta varia,
ventre rubro of Bartram. Travels. I think Mr. Pennant, to whom I sent a drawing
and description of it, considered it as a new species.

* Picus auratus. I am informed, that this bird is known, in Maryland, by the
name of Dish-Washer. Linnaeu^ says this species does not climb trees; but this
is a mistake: and it builds its nest, like the other species, in the holes of
trees.

* Gracula Quiscula? Several respectable authors, and among others Mr. Pennant,
Arctic Zoology. Vol. 1. p. ^08, ^09.
have confounded the bird thus noted in the Tables with the Gracula Quiscula of
Linnaeus. But they are certainly distinct species. I do not know that the
Gracula Quiscula has ever been seen immediately about Philadelphia. It is
commonly seen on or near the fea-coast, and not often twenty miles distant from
it. It loves the neighborhood of the sea, and of brackish water. The Gracula
which I mention, in the Tables, is very common about Philadelphia, where it
associates with the Red-Wing Oriole, or Oriolus phoeniceus, and with Crows
(Corvus Corone), committing great depredations on the mays in the fields; and
in the Southern States, on the rice that is stacked in the barn yards. Builds
on trees, pretty high up, and seems, for this purpose, to give a preference to
the evergreens, such as tall Pine-trees, etc. Our Gracula is either the Gracula
Barrita, Boat-Tail-Grakle, or very nearly allied to it.

* Fringilla pecoris. This bird certainly belongs to the same genus as the
Oriolus phoeniceus, whether that be Emberiza or Fringilla. It follows cows and
horses, pulling asunder their excrements, in order to get at the feeds. It
alights on their backs, eating flies and other insects from them. In some parts
of Pennsylvania, it is best known by the name of Cow-Bird. It is the Sturnus
stercorarius of Bartram. Travels.

* Motacilla Sialis. This is one of our earliest singing birds. Its note is
highly agreeable. It is the Tschi-boa-pe-ke-lis of the Delawares. See P. 12.
Sect. III.

* Scolopax Gallinago. Scolopax americana rufa of Bartram. Travels. It is the
Me-me-u of the Delaware-Indians.

* Charadrius vociferus. This species is observed to increase in proportion as
the country becomes cleared. Is very seldom seen remote from the habitations of
man.

* Scolopax minor. Scolopax minor arvensis of Bartram. Travels. Pi-si-co-lis?
of the Delaware-Indians.

* Hirundo purpurea. Pons-pau-cloo-moosc, or "the bird that never rests," of
the Mohegan-Indians. I am of opinion, that this and the three other species of
Swallow, which I have mentioned, are migratory birds. I am not ignorant, that
an opposite opinion is gaining ground among us. See Dr. Belknap's History of
New Hampshire, Vol. III. p. 174. My friend, Mr. William Bartram, assures me,
"that he has seen, in the spring, large flocks of all our Swallows, upon their
passage from the south, and in the autumn, on their return southward from
Pennsylvania, through Carolina, to Florida, where, however, neither of them
winter; but continue farther on southward" MS. penes me. I cannot but consider
the testimony of this gentleman, in matters of this kind, as of high value.
Indeed, all my enquiries convince me, that our swallows are migratory birds. I
am, however, far from denying, that swallows have occasionally been found in
the hollows of decayed trees, in different parts of our country, during that
very season, when it supposed these birds are in a more southern climate. I
will not even deny, that they have been found under the mud of rivers, etc.
These, however, must be considered as extraordinary instances, which very
rarely occur. They only serve to show the accommodating powers of birds, which
sometimes continue in a country the whole year through, and in other times
migrate from these countries. It is not difficult to account for some of the
instances of Swallows being found in trees, etc. In these instances, I presume,
the birds have been compelled to take up their habitations here, after their
return from the south, having been surprised by very cold weather. The Swallows
are, certainly, very impatient of cold. My very respectable and learned friend
Dr. John Walker, Professor of Natural History in the University of Edinburgh,
used to inform his class, that he "Once knew a cold night (in Scotland) to
overtake the Martin^ (Hirundo urbica), the Swifts (Hirundo Apu^), and the
Swallows (Hirundo rustica), which benumbed them to such a degree, that they
seemed dead, but when they were brought into a warm room, they recovered, and
after the sun rose, they all took to the wing. Not one of them was destroyed by
the cold."
No wonder, therefore, that in a climate so variable as that of Pennsylvania,
these birds should sometimes retire into trees, etc. to seek shelter. I have
observed, that several weeks after the first appearance of the Swallows in the
spring, the coming on of a cold day, has occasioned in them great distress. The
following fact will strikingly illustrate what I am saying. The beginning of
the month of April, 1773, was unusually warm. In the vicinity of Philadelphia,
the clover, in some of the fields, was five or six inches high. The Martins
(Hirundo purpurea) were seen about the city: at this time, there came on
suddenly a very severe spell of cold weather. It destroyed many of these birds,
several of which were seen to drop down, benumbed or dead, among the clover.

If any species of our swallows continues with us the whole year, I think it
most likely to be the Hirundo --, or Little Bank-Martin. I have been informed,
that in several instances, this species has been found in a torpid state, in
the holes of banks. I am also told, that above thirty years ago, a number of
these birds were found in a Gum-tree (Nyssa sylvatica Of Marshall: Nyssa
integrisolia of Aiton.
), about four miles from the town of Lancaster. This was in the depth of
winter. They were all torpid, but some of them, upon the application of heat,
recovered.

Of the four species of Pennsylvania swallows, (viz. Hirundo purpurea, the
Hirundo rustica? the Hirundo --, and the Hirundo pelasgia) the first, or Purple
Martin, is the one which commonly visits us the earliest, viz. at the end of
March, or beginning of April. The House-Swallow and the Little Bank-Martin come
next, and the Chimney-Bird last of all. This, at least, is the general order of
the appearance of the four species.

* Hirundo rustica? This is not the Hirundo rustica of Europe. It wants a name.
It may be called Hirundo horreorum, from its so generally frequenting our barns
to build its nest. But this name is liable to objections. I do not know any of
our Indian names for this species. One of these (if not too long) would be the
best specific name we could give to it.

* Hirundo --. Little Bank-Martin. This is not the Hirundo riparia of Linnaeus.
It has, however, very much the manners or habits of that bird. I have never
seen the Hirundo riparia in any part of America. Kalm, Pennant, Gmelin, and
other writers assert that it is a native of this continent. Dr. Belknap (P.
173) mentions the Hirundo riparia in his list of the birds of New Hampshire:
but I do not doubt that he means our Little Bank-Martin. I know (without any
particular allusion to my excellent deceased friend) how the nomenclature of
natural history has been conducted in America.

* Falco piscatorius. This is Catesby's and Bartram's name. It is the
Ni-me-nees of the Delaware-Indians.

* Certhia Pinus.

* Fringilla graminea. This is the Passer campestris of Bartram. MS.

* Motacilla caerulea. Perhaps, this bird is more properly a species of the
genus Parus. It forms a very curious nest of the moss which grows upon rocks,
trees, etc.

* Ardea Herodias. See Section III. p. 12.

* Alcedo Alcyon. Tis-ke-man-nis? of the Delaware-Indians.

* Colymbus septentrionalis. Flocks of these birds frequent our large rivers,
diving for fish. Their voice is musical, especially when a southerly wind blows
strong. This is the Colymbus musicus of Bartram. Travels. It is as large as a
goose.

* Colymbus migratorius of Bartram. This is near the size of a goose. Color
black. Bill red. Their principal food is eels and other fish. They visit the
neighborhood of Philadelphia, when the frosts are passed. They generally fly
in companies of two, three, or four together, and but a little above the
surface of the water.

* Colymbus Podiceps. This is sometimes called the Water-Witch.

* Anas sponsa. This beautiful species is the Gi-gi-tschi-mu-is of the
Delaware-Indians. It builds its nest in the holes of trees. Attempts have been
made to domesticate it. but hitherto, they have not, I believe, been successful.

* Columba carolinensis. See Section III. P. 12. It is the Me-med-ba-cke-mo of
the Delaware-Indians.

* Columba migratoria. These birds commonly pass the winter-season in the
forests of Carolina, Georgia, and the two Floridas; and pass over the Gulf of
Mexico to the Bahama-Islands. Upon their return southward in the autumn, they
sometimes stay with us a considerable time, and they have been known, during
our mild winters, to continue with us, as I have already observed. See Section
III. P. 12. and Introduction. P. ix. XVI.

* Turdus rufus. Builds its nest of loose sticks, using no cement. In this
respect, it agrees with the Turdus Polyglottos, or Mocking-Bird, but differs
from the Turdus migratorius, or Robin. This last uses a kind of mud or mortar,
in making its nest.

* Ardea Nycticorax. The Ardea clamator of Bartram. Travels.

* Motacilla Troglodytes? This is the Motacilla palustris, or Regulus minor, of
Bartram. Travels. In many respects, this little bird agrees with the Motacilla
Troglodytes of Linnaeus: the Wren of the English. I am not quite certain,
whether they are not both the same species; but, I believe, they are different.
Our bird construct, a very curious nest, resembling in shape a bottle, or
pitcher. The materials which it makes use of are dry grass, among the living
grass of meadows. The Motacilla Troglodytes? of which I am speaking, is a
species of Certhia, or Creeper. It certainly belongs to the same genus as the
Certhia familiaris mentioned below, and the Certhia floridana, afterward taken
notice of.

* Ardea virescens. Commonly called S -- e-Poke.

* Certhia familiaris (mihi). I now suspect, that this is no other than the
Certhia familiaris of Linnaeus, the European Creeper of Pennant; Le Grimpereau
of Buffon. Mr. Pennant mentions this as an inhabitant of North America, and
tells us, that it is found in Sweden, "and never quits the country." Arctic
Zoology. VOL. I. P. 334
This to the American naturalist, is an interesting fact; for the Creeper is
with us undoubtedly a bird of passage: a bird of passage, in a much milder
climate than that in which it is a continual resident!! But many facts like
this will be discovered in the progress of natural science.

* Hirundo pelasgia. This is the Hirundo cerdo of Bartram. Travels.

* Caprimulgus virginianus. This is the We-coo-lis of the Delaware-Indians.
Although it feeds entirely upon insects, its flesh is said to be delicious. I
have been informed, that some of these birds have been found in a torpid state,
in hollow trees, in Jersey. But I cannot entirely depend upon the fact; and I
have little hesitation in saying, that this bird, as well as the Swallows, to
which it is allied, is a bird of passage. For some notices concerning the
superstitious opinions of our Indians respecting this bird, see my letter to
Dr. Priestley, in the Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. VOL.
IV.

* Lanius Tyrannus. This I rather consider as a species of Muscicapa. It may be
called Muscicapa rex. It eats both infects and fruit. Is very destructive to
bees, and to grapes.

* Oriolus Baltimore. As far as I know, this is the only Pennsylvania bird that
builds a pensile or hanging nest. Mr. Pennant is mistaken in saying that the
Oriolus phoeniceus, or Red-Wing Oriole, which I have already mentioned, builds
such a nest. "The Red-Winged Orioles, (says he) build their nests in bushes,
and among the reeds, in retired swamps, in form of a hang-nest; leaving it
suspended at so judicious a height, and by so wondrous an instinct, that the
highest floods never reach to destroy it." Arctic Zoology. VOL I. P. 300.
Hernandez seems to have known this bird (the Red-Wing) very well. He describes
it under the name of "Acolchichi, scu avis rubeorum humerorum." Page 14. CAP.
IV.

* Muscicapa carolinensis. This is the Lucar lividus of Bartram. Travels. This
bird seems to be nearly allied to that tribe of birds which is called, by
Edwards and Brisson, Manakin. Besides insects, it feeds on many sorts of ripe
fruit.

* Parus luteus. This is Bartram's name. Travels. Catesby has figured and
described this bird under the name of Parus Carolinensis luteus, or the Yellow
Titmouse. Page 63. Plate 63.

* Muscicapa fusca (Catesby). The Muscicapa cantatrix of Bartram. Travels.

* Trochilus Colubris. I have not been able to learn that the Humming-Bird
winters in any, not even in the warmest, parts of the United-States. I cannot
hesitate to consider it as a bird of passage. A gentleman, however, (whose name
I do not recollect) wrote a little paper to prove, that these birds continue
with us all the winter: why? because one of them was one frosty day, in the
month of October, found a good deal benumbed in a church, in some part of
New England; I think in Connecticut.

* Turdus Trichas. This bird is most improperly arranged by Linnaeus under his
genus of Turdus.

* Picus erythrocephalus. This is the Me-ma-koch-cus of the Delaware-Indians.
See Section III. P. 11.

* Motacilla aurocapilla. This is very properly considered as a species of
Turdus, or Thrush, both by Edwards and by Pennant. It is the Turdus minimus,
vertice aurio, of Bartram. Travels.

* Tanagra rubra. This and the Summer-Red-Bird of Catesby (VOL. I. P. 56.) both
belong to the same genus. Their note and their manners are the same. They both
eat the same food, viz. fruit and insects.

* Muscicapa olivacea. I do not think, with Mr. Pennant, Arctic Zoology. V. II.
P. 79.
that this is the same bird as the Whip-Tom-Kelly of the West Indies. Our bird
has no such note; but a great variety of soft, tender, and agreeable notes. It
inhabits forests, and does not, like the West India bird, build a "pendulous
nest."

* Muscicapa Ruticilla. Ruticilla americana of Bartram. Travels.

* Turdus minor. Turdus melodes of Bartram. Travels. This is, perhaps, the most
musical of all the birds of the United-States, notwithstanding the assertions
of Catesby and other writers to the contrary.

* Muscicapa viridis. This is a bird of very singular form, manners, and
language. I am not satisfied as to its genus. It seems to be allied to the
Manakin of Edwards and Brisson.

* Falco sparverius. In the month of March, it builds its nest in hollow trees,
and feeds its young with mice, frogs, and small birds.

* Tanagra cyanea. This is sometimes called in Pennsylvania, Indigo-Bird. It is
the Linaria cyanea of Bartram. Travels.

* Cuculus americanus. Cuculus Carolinensis of Bartram. Travels. This bird is
better figured by Buffon (Pl. Enlum.) than by Catesby.

* Alauda magna. See Section III. P. 12.

* Tringa macularia (G). Tringa maculata of Bartram. Travels.

* Motacilla chrysoptera. Parus alis aureis of Bartram. Travels.

* Motacilla petechia. Mr. Pennant is mistaken in saying that this pretty
species does not breed in Pennsylvania.

* Muscicapa rapax of Bartram. I take this to be the Lesser Crested Fly-Catcher
of Mr. Pennant: the Muscicapa acadica of Gmelin. It is a very useful little
bird, destroying numbers of the common house-fly and other troublesome insects.
It continues with us until late in September, when it retires southerly to pass
the winter.

* Ardea cinerea.

* Rallus virginianus. This is the bird which is so well known in Pennsylvania
by the name of Rail. It is a question much disputed among our sportsmen,
whether this be a bird of passage, or whether it continues among us. I have no
doubt, that it is a bird of passage. It is well known in Carolina and Florida,
where it commonly continues late, devouring the seed of the Zizania, Rice, and
other aquatic plants. Whether it hiemates in these countries, or goes still
farther to the south, I do not know.

* Ardea parva of Bartram. I cannot find that this species is described. It
builds its nest in the grass of meadows. It is the smallest species of the
genus that is known to me.

* Alauda Calandra. This is the Calandra pratensis of Bartram. Travels. The
Calandra floralia of the same gentleman.

* Motacilla vermivora. Mr. Pennant is mistaken when he asserts, that this bird
"does not appear in Pennsylvania till July, in its passage northward." Arctic
Zoology. Vol. II. P. 100. -- See Introduction. P. viii.


Certhia floridana (mihi). This bird I do not find figured or described. It is
mentioned by Mr. Bartram (Travels), under the name of Motacilla coroliniana, or
Regulus magnus. It is nearly twice the size of the House-Wren, or Certhia
familiaris? Like it, its voice is loud and musical. The upper side of the
Certhia floridana is of a nutbrown color, delicately marked with transverse
waved lines, of a darker color. The throat, breast, and belly are of a
yellowish clay color. A line of the same color passes, in form of an arch,
over each eye. The bill is long, and a little bent downwards. This is a common
bird in Carolina and Florida. It only occasionally visits Pennsylvania, viz. in
long and warm summers. Is much more common in the Jerseys.

Vultur Aura. This bird rears its young in the southern states, before its
arrival among us. I cannot learn, that it ever breeds in Pennsylvania. I have
been informed, that these birds have occasionally been found, in the
winterseason, in the hollows of trees, and in the crevices of rocks, in
different parts of the United-States, even to the north of Philadelphia. It is
the Wi-nan-go-u and A-ma-tschi-pu-is of the Delawares, Sot-seh-tah of the
Wyandots, and Gus-soo of the Mohegans.

* Ardea alba. Ardea immaculata of Bartram. Travels.

Ardea aequinoctialis. Ardea alba minor of Bartram. Travels. It is Pennant's
Red-Billed Egret.

Emberiza oryzivora. If I do not mistake, this bird in Connecticut is called
the Strawberry-bird. On the authority of Mr. Catesby, it has been believed by
the most respectable naturalists (Pennant and others), that the male and female
Rice-Birds migrate separately, at different seasons. Thus, it is imagined, that
the males make their appearance in the vicinity of Philadelphia in the spring,
and the females in the autumn, or the close of summer. Some facts which have
come under my notice induce me to suspect, that this is a vulgar error: one of
the many mistakes with which natural history is crowded and deformed. But, at
present, I can only throw out the suspicion.

* Parus bicolor. This is the Parus cristatus of Bartram. Travels. This species
feeds both upon insects and upon seeds, picking the kernel out of the husk. In
Pennsylvania, it is called Tom-tit.

* Parus virginianus. Parus cedrus of Bartram. This bird feeds upon feeds and
berries, particularly upon the resinous berries of the Juniperus virginiana, or
Red-Cedar. Commonly comes to us, from the northward, about the time these
berries are ripe, See the Tables. P. 7.
and seems peculiarly fond of harboring itself among these trees. Generally
continues with us as long as the berries and insects (upon which also it feeds)
last, and then goes northerly. Sometimes, however, it continues with us all
winter.

* Ampelis Garrulus. In some parts of New England, this species is called
Cherry-Bird. Like the Parus virginianus, it is very fond of the ripe berries of
the Red-cedar. It is also very ^ond of the ripe fruit of the Diospyros
virginiana, or Persimmon. Builds its nest in trees of a moderate size, about
the end of May, or the beginning of June.

Fringilla cannabina? I am not quite certain whether this be the Fringilla
cannabina of Linnaeus. It is certainly very nearly allied to this species.
Large flocks of these birds visit us toward the end of the fall, or the
beginning of the winter. They often fly at very great heights in the air: so
high that they cannot readily be seen, though their noise is distinctly heard.
Either this species or one very nearly allied to it is found as far south as
the country of the Cheerake-Indians, who call it O-na-clo-nei-ta. If this be
the Fringilla cannabina, it has an extensive range in North America, for it is
found in the northern parts of this continent. It is one of the species which
is common to the old and new world. It is not improbable, that it performs
regular migrations from the one continent to the other.

* Scolopax Gallinago. I have already mentioned this species, See Appendix I. P
16.
and have taken notice of the regularity of its arrival among us. See
Introduction. P. xi.
It is, certainly, a bird of passage. This seems to be the same species which
is so common in England, and in other parts of Europe, and concerning whose
disappearance the learned have so much disputed. There are pretty good reasons
for believing, that these birds perform regular migrations between Europe and
America. It is remarkable, that they are more numerous on the western than on
the eastern shore of Britain. They are still more numerous in the west of
Ireland than in the west of Scotland. "For one Wood-Cock on the east-coast of
Scotland there are twelve in the west, and for one in the west of Scotland
there are twelve in Ireland." Reverend Dr Walker, of Edinburgh.
Lord Kenmor, about the last of September, sailed from Lisbon to Falmouth, in
England, and for ten or twelve days was becalmed on the coast of France. Every
day, he saw from ten to twenty Wood-cocks passing from the west toward the
land. These it was imagined, came from the continent of America. But I do not
suppose that all our Wood-cocks thus migrate to Europe. It is pretty certain,
that these birds when they visit us in the spring come from the south, and in
the autumn they return to the south again. How far south they proceed, I am
unable to determine. They are known in Florida, where it is not improbable,
that many of them pass the winter-season.

Fringilla pinus (mihi). This is one of our spring birds of passage, and I
think is not described. It commonly continues with us until the middle or the
end of April, at which time the Apple and the Pear trees are in bloom. These
blossoms, during some particular seasons, are remarkably infested by a species
of Chermes, which proves very destructive to the fruit. By feeding on these
devouring insects, the Fringilla pinus is one of the most useful of our birds.
This bird, the Fringilla tristis, my Fringilla exilis, and the Fringilla
cannabina? together with the Fringilla Carduelis of the old world, all belong
to the same natural genus, or family. They seem, in some respects, to
constitute a genus distinct from the Fringilla.

AS these FRAGMENTS profess to contain some useful observations, See the motto,
in the Title Page.
I think this a proper place to observe, that many of the birds of
Pennsylvania, and other parts of the United-States, are so extremely useful to
man, by destroying insects and reptiles of various kinds, that they ought
studiously to be preserved, if not by the LAWS, at least by the GOOD-SENSE, of
the country. It would require many observations to give a complete list and
history of these USEFUL BIRDS. I am not in possession of a sufficient quantity
of facts for this purpose: but some observations I can offer, as materials for
future inquirers.

It may, in the first place, be observed, that insects appear to be the first
food of almost all the birds of our country. The more I have inquired, the more
I have been convinced, that almost all birds live, in some measure, upon
insects. Even those species which consume considerable quantities of feeds,
berries, and fruit, also consume large quantities of insects: and there are
reasons to believe, that others whose principal food is the nectar of plants
also live partly upon these insects. Thus Mr. Brandis See the article Trochilus
in Ginelin's edition of the Systema Natr^ae. TOM. I. P. 485.
found the vestiges of insects in the stomach of the Trochilus, or
Humming-Bird, one of the last birds one would have suspected of feeding on
animal food.

The greater number of our smaller birds of the order of Passeres, seem to
demand our attention and protection. Some of them feed pretty entirely upon
insects, and others upon a mixed food, that is, insects and the vegetable
feeds, etc. Many of them contribute much to our pleasure by the melody of their
notes. I believe the injury they do us is but small compared to the good they
render us. I shall mention, under six different heads, a few of the useful
birds of this and some other orders.

I. Muscicapa acadica of Gmelin? This is the Lesser Crested Flycatcher of
Pennant. It is called in Pennsylvania the Lesser or Wood-Pewe. This little bird
builds in woods and in forests. After the young have left the nests, the
parents conduct them to the gardens and habitations of men. Here the whole
brood dwells in trees near the houses, where they are fed with the common
house-fly, and other insects, that are caught by the old birds. The young ones
are soon capable of obtaining their food in the same way. This species of
Muscicapa visits us in the spring, and commonly continues with us until late in
September, when it retires southerly to winter.

II. The Motacilla Sialis, or Blue-Bird, feeds principally, if not entirely,
upon insects, both such as are flying and and such as are reptile. It is said
they eat currants.

III. Most of our species of Picus, or Woodpecker, appear to me to be very
useful in destroying insects, particularly those which injure our forest and
orchard-trees. It is true, these birds are sometimes injurious to us, by eating
some of our finest fruits, particularly our cherries, and therefore pains are
taken to expel them from our gardens. But they devour vast numbers of insects,
particularly some of those species which prove so destructive to the trunk of
the trees, such as the coleopterous insects, which, perhaps, do as much
mischief as the caterpillars.

IV. As a devourer of pernicious insects, one of the most useful birds with
which I am acquainted, is the House-Wren, or Certhia familiaris? In the Tables,
it is called Certhia familiaris (...).
This little bird seems peculiarly fond of the society of man, and it must be
confessed, that it is often protected by his interested care. From observing
the usefulness of this bird in destroying insects, it has long been a custom,
in many parts of our country, to six a small box at the end of a long pole in
gardens, about houses, etc. as a place for it to build in. In these boxes they
build and hatch their young. When the young are hatched, the parent birds feed
them with a variety of different insects, particularly such as are injurious in
gardens. One of my friends Mr. John H^^kewelder, of B^^hl^hem, in Pennsylvania.
was at the trouble to observe the number of times that a pair of these birds
came from their box, and returned with insects for their young. He found that
they did this from forty to sixty times in an hour; and in one particular hour
the birds carried food to their young, seventy-one times. In this business,
they were engaged the greater part of the day; say twelve hours. Taking the
medium, therefore, of fifty times an hour, it appeared that a single pair of
these birds took from the cabbage, sallad, beans, peace, and other vegetables in
the garden, at least six hundred insects in the course of one day. This
calculation proceeds upon the supposition, that the two birds took each only a
single insect each time. But it is highly probable they often took several at a
time.

The species of Certhia of which I am speaking generally hatches twice during
the course of the summer. They are very numerous about Philadelphia, and in
other parts of the United-States.

The fact just related is well calculated to show the importance of attending
to the preservation of some of our native birds. The esculent vegetables of a
whole garden may, perhaps, be preserved from the depredations of different
species of insects by ten or fifteen pair of these small birds: and
independently of this essential service, they are an extremely agreeable
companion to man: for their note is pleasing. A gentleman, in the neighborhood
of Philadelphia, thinks he has already reaped much advantage from the services
of these Wrens. About his fruit trees, he has placed a number of boxes for
their nests. In these boxes, they very readily breed, and feed themselves and
their young with the insects, which are so destructive to the various kinds of
fruit trees, and other vegetables.

V. The services of the Ibis in devouring the reptiles of Egypt are well known.
They procured to this bird a veneration and regard which form an interesting
fact in its history, and in the history of human superstitions. The Storks are,
perhaps, not less useful. Pliny tells us, that these birds were so much
regarded for destroying serpents, that in Thessaly, in his age, it was a
capital crime to kill them, and that the punishment was the same as that for
murder. Virgil hints at the usefulness of the stork when he describes it as
"longis invisa colubris." In Holland, even in our times, they go wild,
protected by the government, from a sense of their usefulness in the way I have
mentioned.

In Britain, if it were not for the Herons, and some other birds of this tribe,
the frogs, the toads, and other reptiles, would increase to so great a degree,
as to prove a real nuisance. North America abounds with birds of this order;
and we even have some species of Ibis, very nearly allied to the Ibis of Egypt,
such as the Tantalus Loculator, or Wood-Pelecan; Wood Ibis of P^nnant.
the Tantalus ruber, or Scarlet Ibis, Red Curlew of Catesby.
the Tantalus fuscus or Brown Ibis, Brown Curlew of Catesby.
and the Tantalus albus, or White Ibis. White Curlew of Catesby.
Mr. Bartram informs us, that the first of these birds feeds "on serpents,
young alligators, frogs, and other reptiles." Travels, etc. P. 150.
It is commonly seen "near the banks of great rivers, in vast marshes or
meadows, especially such as are caused by inundations, and also in the vast
deserted Rice plantations." lord.
This bird, both with regard to his general aspect, and his manners and habits,
may be considered as the Ibis of America. In the midst of all their
superstitions, I do not find, however, that the native Americans have ever paid
any particular regard to this bird. I cannot learn that any of these species of
Tantalus have ever been seen in Pennsylvania.

VI. Some of the birds of the Vultur-kind are extremely useful to man, by
destroying immense quantities of carrion, which serve to vitiate the air, and
perhaps in some instances to give rise to malignant epidemics. The Vultur Aura,
or Turkey-Buzzard of our country, is one of the most useful of these birds. In
Virginia it is protected by a law of that state. The Abbe Clavigero speaks of
the usefulness of the Cozcaquauhtli, or King of the Zopilots, the Vultur Papa
of Linnaeus. "The Zopilot, says this writer, is a most useful bird to that
country (Mexico), for they not only clear the fields, but attend the crocodiles
and destroy the eggs which the females of those dreadful amphibious animals
leave in the sand to be hatched by the heat of the sun. The destruction of such
a bird ought to be prohibited under severe penalties." The History of Mexico.
Vol. 1. P 48.


I am sensible, that these few facts, which are thrown together without any
regard to order, can be of little use except in as far as they may turn the
attention of other persons, who possess more leisure and information than
myself, to the subject, which is at once curious and important. It appears to
to me be a subject peculiarly interesting to my countrymen. Perhaps, few parts
of the world are more infested with noxious insects than the United-States. The
greater number of these insects are, I believe, natives of the country, though
our partiality to the soil which gave us birth has not always allowed us to
acknowledge this truth. Thus we give to the Hessians the honor of introducing
among us that most pernicious insect, the Hessian-Fly, which, for several
years, has committed, and still commits, such alarming ravages on some of our
most valuable grains, particularly the Wheat and the Rye. But this insect is,
undoubtedly, a native of America. How it came to be, for so long a time,
overlooked, will probably be mentioned in a memoir, concerning this and other
noxious insects, which I hope to publish.

Many of the pernicious insects of the United-States seem to be increasing,
instead of diminishing. Some of these insects which originally confined their
ravages to the native or wild vegetables, have since begun their depredations
upon the foreign vegetables, which are often more agreeable to their palates.
Thus the Bruchus Pisi, or Pea-Fly, is a native, and seems originally to have
fed, in a great measure unnoticed, upon the indigenous vegetables which are
allied to the Pea: but since the introduction of this last Pisum sativum.
among us, it is the principal, if not the only, vegetable which suffers from
the ravages of this insect. The Hessian-Fly could not originally have inhabited
the Wheat, the Rye, and other similar gramina of this kind, for these
vegetables are not natives of America. It is now more formidable to us than
would be an army of twenty thousand Hessians, or of any other twenty thousand
hirelings, supplied with all the implements of war. The caterpillar, which has
begun its ravages upon the leaves of the Lombardy Poplar, Populus dilat^ta of
A^ton.
that contributes so much to beautify our city, is most probably a native of
our woods. It prefers this fine foreigner to the less palatable leaves upon
which it has been formerly accustomed to feed. Other instances of this kind
might be mentioned. They show how very necessary it is to watch the migrations
of insects from the native to the introduced vegetables; and they teach us a
truth, not I think sufficiently attended to by naturalists, that different
kinds of insects are much less confined to vegetables of the same species, or
to species of the same genus, than has been commonly imagined. It is certain,
that the same species of insects, in America, often feeds indiscriminately, and
in succession, upon plants of very opposite genera, and even of very different
natural orders.

Hitherto, too little progress has been made among us in the discovery of
remedies for the great mischiefs occasioned by insects. The subject has not
been examined with sufficient attention. It has given place to discussions and
inquiries of very inferior utility; and I fear it will not claim all that
industrious attention which it so well merits, until the evil shall have spread
still farther. It is, doubtless, difficult, but it is by no means impossible,
to prevent the ravages of noxious insects. In this important business,
something has already been done in our country. We have discovered a method of
diminishing the depredations of the little bug, called Cucumber-Fly, which
proves so destructive to the cucurbitaceous vines, particularly those of the
Cucumber, and Musk-melon. See the Tables. Page 4.
By manuring our wheat-lands, and thereby increasing the strength and vigor of
the wheat, we have lessened the evil of the Hessian-Fly. By suspending to our
young apple and other trees pieces of tow, impregnated with a mixture of
brimstone and train-oil, we have learned how to frighten away the periodical
Locusts (Cicada septemdecim of Linnaeus), which often do so much injury to our
orchards. It is only the female Cicada septemdecim that does mischief to our
orchards, etc. This she does by making incisions into the tender branches, to
deposit her eggs. In consequence of this operation, the leaves perish. The
insect does no mischief "by devouring the leaves," as has been ass^rted by some
respectable writers. See Transactions of the American Philosophical Society.
Vol. III. Introduction. Page xxii.
The American Philosophical Society, by calling the attention of the public to
the decay of our Peach-trees, has brought us to a better acquaintance with the
causes of this decay, and with the means of preventing it. Insects are no doubt
one of these causes. The peach-insect (It is an Ichn^umon) is observed to
injure young trees more than old ones. Perhaps the best remedy against the
mischief of this insect is to dig up the ground about the roots in the
spring-season, and to take out the larva or worm. This may be done without much
difficulty, and the operation does not injure the tree. Do not the peach-trees
suffer more from our late night-frosts than from insects? These night-frosts,
especially after rainy whether, in the months of February and March, when the
sap is ascending, are certainly very pernicious. They occasion the bark to
crack so that the sap is permitted to run out. I suspect that this is one of
the principal causes of the decay of our peach-trees.
We have made some progress in preventing the mischief of the Bruchus Pisi, or
Pea-Fly, which proves so destructive to one of the finest esculent vegetables.
But all that has yet been done is very little compared to that which remains to
be done. The subject is as new as it is important.

I am very far from imagining, that the preservation of some of those species
of birds which I have mentioned would be the only means of guarding against, or
of limiting, the depredations of any of our noxious insects. In a system so
complex, and so difficult, as this, many agents must be employed. Most of them
have a necessary connection with the industry of man, which is an implement
that gives him an immense, an almost unlimited, command over all the living
objects of this earth. (...) is in his power to increase or diminish the number
of animals and vegetables about him; and even to destroy whole species. Some of
these means must be suggested, if they cannot be put into immediate practice,
by the ingenuity of philosophers, or observers. Their speculations will
sometimes, perhaps, be trivial, and useless. Now and then, their "wild blunders
and risible absurdities" (to use the words of Dr. Johnson, See the Preface to
his Dictionary of the English Language. Q^^^.
on a subject, indeed, very different from the present) may for a time furnish
folly with laughter, and harden ignorance in contempt; but useful diligence
will at length prevail."

The few facts which I have mentioned will be sufficient to show, that some
good in the prevention of mischievous insects, may be expected from different
species of birds. Every American farmer's experience will furnish him with some
additional fact in support of this notion. If careful observations on this
subject are made, we shall soon know which are our friends, and which are our
enemies: which deserve to be cherished and preserved, and which it will be our
interest to banish or destroy.

END OF PART FIRST.
POSTSCRIPT.
THE preceding "fragmentary rubbish" (to use the words of Done) is thrown upon
the public with some degree of confidence: -- with confidence, merely because
it regards a country, the natural history of which has hitherto been so little
attended to. I must observe, though perhaps the reader will not believe me,
that I could render these pages more worthy of his notice. But I want leisure.
It is this want of leisure that has prevented me from publishing a number of
tracts, relative to the natural history of North America, which have long lain
in my closet, in a state nearly as imperfect as these very imperfect FRAGMENTS.
Whether they will ever be published, will depend, in some measure, upon the
reception given to the present work.

I ask, I look for, no slattering reception. All I ask, all I require, is to be
informed, by those who love and study nature, that my present labors are not
altogether useless, and unentertaining. Until there shall arise among us some
happy genius, qualified by that union of talents, of leisure, and enthusiastic
ardour, which is necessary to form the character of a genuine naturalist, every
collection of facts, every individual fact, that will tend to illustrate the
natural history of the United-States, ought to be received with candor, and
indulgence.

I have entitled these Fragments, "Part First," because if this is favorably
received, I shall publish, in the course of the next year, two other parts,
relative to other subjects of the natural history of our State. I have made
considerable progress in an extensive work on the Vegetables of Pennsylvania,
and some of the adjoining States. But this will appear in a separate form: -- I
will not say when. For who does not know, that "the promises of authors are
like the promises of lovers?"


