Mr. Beede's Oration, DELIVERED AT ROXBURY, JULY 4, 1799.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT ROXBURY, JULY 4, 1799, IN COMMEMORATION OF American
Independence.

BY THOMAS BEEDE.

Immoderate valor swells into a fault;
And fear, admitted into public councils,
Betrays like treason. Let us shun them both.
-- Let us draw our term of freedom out
To its full length, and spin it to the last.
ADDISON. BOSTON: From the Chronicle Press, Court-Street, BY EBENEZER RHOADES.

1799.

AN ORATION.
Citizens and Fellow Countrymen,
I ADVANCE to address you on the subject of our national freedom. A subject as
dear as happiness; as important, as existence itself.

This gladsome day announces the twenty-third Anniversary of our political
Independence. This is our birth day. If at any time we have thought it worthy
our attention to celebrate with festive joy the birth of one man, how much more
shall we deem it so, to celebrate the birth of six millions of people In 1783
the number of inhabitants in the United States was computed at 2,389,300; and
according to the census in 1791 the number was 4,131,616: if they have
continued to increase in the same proportion as they did from 1783 to 1791, the
present number exceeds 7,000,000.
!

On an occasion like the present, you cannot but be filled with sentiments the
most magnanimous and interesting. To enliven your conceptions, and to fan the
flame of pure patriotism in your bosoms, is the design of the present address.

Patriotism is a noble and a powerful virtue. It has resisted the rod of
oppression, and quelled the rage of tyrants. It has freed captives, plead the
cause of innocence, and broken the bands of slavery. Had not Americans at the
commencement of the late revolution been inspired with this virtue, we had
never seen this day, we had never sitten under our own vines and fig trees
unmolested, to enjoy the glorious light of liberty.

Such is the construction of our nature, that the meanest objects engross the
greatest share of our attention. Self preservation is and ought to be our first
care. When this is effected, the laws of benevolence require us to consult the
interest of our dearest connections. To become patriots then, we must have a
rational regard for ourselves; for the interest of our friends, and must
delight in the prosperity and happiness of our native country.

Previously to the formation of civil society, the law of nature authorized men
to defend themselves against the unjust attacks of enemies. In a civilized
state the same law justifies the sovereign of a nation in collecting his forces
to repel any combination of invaders. The sovereign has a right to compel his
subjects to action whenever the public good renders it expedient. But,
citizens, in the late contest with Great Britain you did not wait to be
compelled to duty: you esteemed it your highest interest and your supreme
delight to appear in the defense of your rights. No object was to you so noble;
no cause so glorious, as the cause of justice and of national freedom.

We are not assembled to boast of our heroism, but we are assembled to show to
the world that we prize our privileges; that in spite of opposition we are
determined to preserve them, and to transmit them inviolate to our posterity.

At present we are independent. Thanks to our parent patriots, who exhausted
the ardor of their lives to procure us this happiness. Thanks to our present
illustrious statesmen, whose unwearied exertions have hitherto protected us
from foreign intrigue, and from domestic violence.

No nation can be happy without freedom. But there is an essential difference
between freedom and licentiousness. All men by the law of nature are free to do
good actions, but none are free to do bad ones. An enthusiastic notion of
liberty has induced some Americans in their most unguarded moments to suppose
their rights infringed, because their liberty was limited to virtuous actions.
But such limitation of liberty is the grand pillar of political safety. Remove
this and the whole fabric will totter into promiscuous ruin.

Every man has a right to form his connexions and to educate his children in
the principles of honesty and justice, but he has no right to use the insidious
arts of seduction, nor to instruct his children in fraud and deceit. He has a
right to obey the laws, and to revere the rulers of his choice: but he has no
right to trample on authority, nor to reproach men grown gray in their
country's service. He has a right to enjoy his religious opinion; but has no
right either to profess or to practice a religion which interrupts the devotion
of any worshipping assembly, or disturbs public peace and order. Finally, he
has a right to be a good man, and a useful man; but he has no right, nor ever
will have a right to be a villain.

From general principles we pass to a general survey of our natural and civil
advantages.

We possess a vast tract of continent, computed at a million of square miles.
This tract is bordered by an extensive seacoast, and interspersed with
numerous bays and harbors eminently commodious, and inviting to commerce. -- A
climate temperate and salubrious; a soil yielding to culture, and luxuriant in
its productions.

With regard to civil liberty, we enjoy as much of it as is consistent with
human nature. We have a happy constitution; framed by the hands of wisdom and
experience, which guarantees the most sacred rights of the people. Our
government is inferior to none on earth. It encourages sound morality and pure
religion. It breathes compassion toward deluded offenders, while it punishes
with rigorous severity the wilfully vicious. It has spirit to resent foreign
impositions, and energy to suppress domestic outrage. It is administered by men
whom the people can trust; men of sagacity and discretion; men of eminence and
respectability; men of sound principle and of tried patriotism.

Are we not contented and happy with these distinguished privileges? Not
perfectly so. Ambitious, unprincipled foreigners have viewed and envied our
tranquillity. These have injudiciously been invited to come and dwell among us.
They have come, and have brought their vices and their prejudices with them.
They have excited jealousy, and sown division and discord among our honest
citizens. Through this medium has been introduced a licentious philosophy; the
principles of which eventually tend to destroy social and individual happiness.
A philosophy denying our holy religion; denying divine revelation, denying the
existence of God and a future state. A philosophy dissolving the tenderest of
human connections, breaking down family distinction; confounding systems;
freeing men from the obligation of oaths, and reducing the beautiful inequality
of nature to a dead level, whose loathsome exhalations are pregnant with
pestilence and death.

These disorganizing principles in the vitals of our country are more to be
dreaded, than millions of external open enemies.

We are happy to persuade ourselves that this philosophy is chiefly confined to
a few paltry clubs of aliens. During the last year, however, either through
ignorance or malice, it has wrongfully been imputed to our ancient and
honorable Masonic fraternity. It therefore becomes you, gentlemen of that
respected order; conscious of your own innocence; conscious of the purity of
your intention, to exhibit on all suitable occasions your attachment to the
government under which you live; and constantly to cause your light so to shine
before others, that they seeing your laudable actions may be influenced to
reverence law, and to maintain due subordination.

Our greatest enemies have ever appeared amongst those, whom we had reason to
expect would be our best friends. An unnatural mother in a fit of phrenzy
banished us from her presence; persecuted us in exile, and sought to bind us in
servitude. But her severity provoked resentment. We resisted; we looked to
Heaven. Propitious Heaven smiled approbation and crowned our struggle with
success.

Our maternal affection being alienated, we pressed to our bosoms a beloved
sister. With her we entered into the strongest bonds of alliance and
friendship, and unreservedly trusted her with the secrets of our own breasts.
This beloved sister, this entrusted, and as we thought, confidential friend,
betrayed us.

Having been thus treated, shall we again seek friendship? If so, with whom
shall we form the desired connection? Shall we return to our parent Britain, who
has striven to reduce us to slavery? Shall we again court the pestilential
embraces of sister France, who under the garb of friendship has meditated our
ruin? Or shall we trust to strangers, and hazard the chance of being again
betrayed? Shall we not rather be a nation by ourselves, subject to our own
laws, ruled by our own magistrates, and under the Great Supreme, rely on our
own strength for protection? You cannot hesitate to answer these
interrogations. By celebrating this day you declare your sentiments. You show
that you are decided in your politics; that you understand your rights; and
that you are determined independently to enjoy them.

The manly exertions of the military department of this place have extorted
praise even from their enemies, and have demonstrated that they are actuated by
noble motives. The uniformity, discipline, and public spirit, which you this
day exhibit, Soldiers, not only do honor to yourselves and to your patriotic
commanders, but also furnish us with a fresh testimony that you are determined
to maintain the constitution, and to preserve the freedom and independence of
your country.

Much of the public safety depends on you. -- Much also, depends on our naval
forces. They are our outer guards. They protect our commerce, which is the
staple commodity of national wealth. We ardently wish them success, until they
have freed our coasts from infesting pirates; until they have exterminated
those blood-thirsty cannibals, who feed on murder, and fatten on human misery.

A standing army in time of peace has long since been the subject of popular
declamation. -- It has been represented as a national curse. -- It has been
considered, as destructive to morality; and to military discipline among the
yeomanry.

Undoubtedly the standing army of an enemy is a national curse; and to be
compelled to maintain an unnecessary body of troops in time of peace, we grant,
is a national grievance. But every judicious man knows, that the surest method
to continue peace, is to prepare for war. -- If then we may not have a standing
army, bred to war as a profession; still in case of imminent danger, we may
have a provisional army, composed of volunteers from our militia. Otherwise how
can we prepare for war? Our forts and garrisons, unless properly manned, can
afford us no protection. The militia in the interior of our country
unquestionably constitute our defensive strength. But their business is at
home. -- They are engaged in secular employments; and cannot, therefore, be
constantly in arms. Is it not necessary then, to have certain detachments from
the body of our militia, so stationed, as to be able to watch, and warn us of
approaching danger? Suppose twenty thousand men are raised. Is it extravagant
to employ twenty thousand men to guard nineteen hundred miles of seacoast and
frontier, when threatened by rebels, Savages and Frenchmen? Is it extravagant
also, to arm merchantmen; and to prepare a navy, when the ocean is covered with
the pirate ships of our enemies, ready to plunder our property, and to sport
with the precious lives of our brethren? -- It may perhaps be thought
extravagant. But, I believe it would be thought more extravagant, if an
enlightened, powerful, and independent nation should, like unhappy Switzerland,
be lulled into security, until the enemy had advanced into the very bowels of
their country. May the fate of Switzerland never be the fate of America. May we
ever be furnished with able and faithful watchmen, to guard our liberty. That,
should our enemies approach at evening, at midnight, or in the morning, our
cannon may be prepared to give them a volley of death.

Citizens, you are once more invited to revert your attention to the
distressing scenes of Seventy-Five. The particulars of that Crisis need not be
related. You yourselves know them. The unbounded prospect of war and blood, was
then before you. You hurried from your embraces the fair partners of your joys;
and converted your houses and your temples into barracks and garrisons. You
exchanged the plough and the hoe, for the sword and the musket. Amid perplexity
and consternation, however you dared assert your rights; and in the memorable
epoch of Seventy-Six, to declare yourselves Independent. Fired with indignation
for the injuries done you; and inspired with genuine love of your country, you,
in conjunction with your patriotic brethren, assumed the armor of war; and
under GOD, and WASHINGTON, vanquished the foe; and left the field victorious.

Great have been your efforts. The advantages, you now enjoy, have been bought
with blood. Much has been done. But does there nothing yet remain for us to do?
Have we no part yet to perform in the grand political Drama? -- Because we are
now Free and Independent, may we flatter ourselves, that we shall always remain
so, without any further exertion? Can we behold other free and independent
Republics, ravaged, plundered, and enslaved by a rapacious monster in Europe,
and not tremble for our safety? -- Can we behold the Terrible Republic of
France blaspheming GOD; voting him out of existence; dissolving treaties;
trampling on the sacred law of nations; and not be admonished to be on our
guard? Can we behold this same Terrible Nation capturing our vessels;
imprisoning our seamen; rejecting our Ambassadors; vilifying the character of
our venerable PRESIDENT; and insulting our Government by seditious appeals to
the People, and not burn with indignation? Can we hear them demanding Tribute;
threatening us with the fate of Venice and Switzerland, in case of refusal; and
not think it our duty to be in a posture of defense? If we can, we deserve not
the advantages of Freemen. No man deserves the protection of a Government,
which he attempts to destroy; nor does any nation deserve liberty, who will not
contribute to its support.

Shall it be said of us, that we are unwilling to support our Liberty? Shall it
be said that we are a nation divided against ourselves, mutually endeavoring to
destroy that Government, which protects our lives and our property? Is this our
national character? No; the late numerous addresses to the President from every
quarter of the Union, have declared the contrary. These have expressed the
sentiments, and the dispositions of a great majority of the people; and proved,
that they are satisfied with the present administration; that they are opposed
to party and cabal; that they will join heart and hand, in rallying around the
Standard of our Independence; and will sacrifice existence, rather than crouch
to foreign subjugation.

Yes, Americans, you have proved, that no flattery can pervert your resolution;
nor peril daunt your courage. You have declared, that you prefer honorable war
to dishonorable peace; and that you will again haste to the field of battle, if
your country be again invaded, and administer vengeance to its foes.

The spirited answers also, of our beloved PRESIDENT, not only show his
fidelity, integrity and firmness; but also exhibit his watchful zeal for our
preservation. Dignified Sage! He has spent the morning and the meridian of his
life in our service; and shall we in return load him with reproach and
ingratitude, and denominate ourselves patriots? GOD forbid, that such patriots
should enjoy the blessings they thus despise. No; while we live, we will
respect and honor him; and when we are dead, future generations shall bless his
memory.

While we bear in grateful recollection our illustrious heroes and statesmen,
we pause to shed a tear on the tomb of our late Excellent Governor. The
remembrance of SUMNER spreads a gloom over the joys of this festive day. For
him we weep. But why should we weep? Heaven knew his goodness; and seeing he
could not be better beloved, nor farther promoted on earth, received him; and
he has rewarded him according to his merit.

May we, his fellow-citizens, while we lament his death, imitate his patriotic
virtues. Let us cherish the same principles of rectitude, which he cherished.
Let us exhibit the same firmness and intrepidity, which ever dignified his
character. Divesting ourselves of narrow prejudice, and of lawless ambition,
let us be actuated by the same generous motives, which marked all his public
actions; that should we fail of human promotion; should we not be thought
qualified for Judges and Governors here; we may become qualified for Kings and
Priests in a better world.

Citizens, if you regard your present happiness; if you regard the future
welfare of your nation; show your detestation of seditious practices, whether
from the press, or the pen. Instruct your children not only in their right; but
also in their duty. By your own example teach them submission to constituted
authority. Teach them to despise factious demagogues, who mistake popularity
for patriotism. Show them how dearly you prize civil liberty by your exertion
in its support. Teach them veneration for religious liberty by your devout
attention to the worship of GOD. That, when you shall have paid the debt of
nature; when ADAMS and WASHINGTON shall be no more; and when the despotisms,
and republics of the ancient world shall be corrupted, and crumble into ruin,
-- America may flourish in untainted youth, in the full enjoyment of her
Liberty, her Independence, and her GLORY.

FINIS

