THE ANNUAL REGISTER, AND VIRGINIAN REPOSITORY, FOR THE YEAR 1800.

The advantages of HISTORY are of three kinds: -- It amuses the fancy -- it
improves the understanding -- and, it strengthens virtue. FROM THE BLANDFORD
PRESS. SOLD BY ROSS AND DOUGLAS, PETERSBURG, AND BY ALL THE BOOKSELLERS IN
VIRGINIA, ETC.

PREFACE.
THE favorable reception given to the first attempt at something like a
REGISTER for the Year 1800, has induced the Editor to lay before the Public a
volume more enlarged, and rather more methodical in its arrangement -- but he
does not expect that to give complete satisfaction to others, when he himself
is conscious of its defects. Amongst many inconveniences with which he has had
to contend, was much ill health, both in his own person, and in those of his
workmen -- This, with his distance from any ready help, and the difficulty he
found in obtaining the necessary intelligence, have prevented its appearance in
the month of January, as he wished and expected.

But as every misfortune is said to bring along with it some alleviating
circumstances, the book, in fact, has gained by the accidental delay. The
Editor has had an opportunity of inserting several important articles relative
to the late Election of a President, which otherwise would have been defered
till next volume -- indeed he could not with any propriety pass over a
transaction which so highly interested the feelings of the new, and attracted
the serious attention of the old world -- "When the sword hung suspended by a
hair."


If small matters may be compared to great, in order to show our Readers the
nature of the work, the English Annual Register for the year 1799 was not
published in September last -- As a Record of what is past, it is not necessary
it should appear exactly on the first day of the new year like an Almanac --
And it may easily be imagined, that it takes some time and trouble to arrange
and prepare materials even for so small a work as the present.

In the arrangement of the materials which compose this little volume, it was
the Editor's object to combine historical instruction, with a collection of the
local events and occurrences of the year. His historical extracts are taken
from the best authorities, and are inserted with a view, that the people of
this country might thereby form a judgment of the nature of the
corrupt-and-tottering Governments of Europe, and learn from them, to appreciate
the advantages which they enjoy; and taking example from the awful scenes now
acting in that part of the world, to cherish and support a form of Government
founded on the principles of justice and natural right.

On a review of the materials which he had collected, he perceived that he had
as many as would make a very thick Octavo volume, all of them, in his opinion,
worthy of preservation, either for use or entertainment -- His chief labor,
therefore, has been, to reject a great many of these articles, and so to
contract and compress others, as to bring them into such a compass as he
thought would fit the size of his book, and enable him to sell it at a moderate
price.

It is easy to see, that the Editor had in contemplation a publication similar
to the English Annual Register, in which should be recorded the principal Acts
of both the General and State Governments, the National Accounts, etc. -- to
insert every article tending to encourage Agriculture, Commerce, and
Manufactures, all useful inventions and, discoveries, the most remarkable
occurrences of the year, etc. these to be enlivened with choice Poetry, remarks
on new Publications, and historical extracts and details.

Such a work, if executed with calmness and impartiality, it is evident, would
be both a useful and entertaining publication -- Several Gentlemen, who are of
this opinion, and who wish such a scheme carried into execution, have suggested
to the Editor, either to publish a large volume annually, or a smaller one
halfyearly -- Either way, for such a work, there would be an abundance of
materials, in an age when every week, almost every day, produces something new
and wonderful.

Whether this idea will be carried into execution, will depend on certain
concurring circumstances, and upon the reception which the present volume shall
receive. Late as it is in its appearance, and imperfect as it may seem to those
who are accustomed to consult that justly admired work published in London,
Although the Annual Register, by the restrictions laid upon the Press in England,
has lately been obliged to omit, or very slightly notice, certain political
subjects and events, and although it contains many articles that are
uninteresting to an American reader, yet, the importance of its historical
chapters, and the number of curious and literary articles which it annually
presents to view, renders it a work highly useful in a Gentleman's library.
the Editor hopes that the unavoidable causes of its delay will plead his
excuse; and that the local usefulness of the articles which it contains, will
recommend it to the notice of a discerning public.

In the following pages, two leading principles are meant to be openly and
decidedly inculcated -- namely, the importance of a religious and moral
conduct; and, the superior excellence of a Republican form of Government.

The Editor thinks it right at once to display his colors, and avowedly to
declare his sentiments -- in order, that those who expect to find other
principles in this book, by reading these few lines, may save both their time
and their money.

In what is now called "the Age of Reason," a Censor Morum is but an unthankful
office. The man who only talks of Religion, subjects himself to the charge of
hypocrisy; and if he attempts to inculcate it, he is accused of presumption --
On this subject, therefore, the Editor will be very concise -- In a few words,
he would humbly plead the cause of that belief in, and reliance on, the
goodness and providence of an all-seeing, all-directing Deity, which gives
dignity to the individual, and safety to the community; The following anecdote
is related of Dr. Franklin, whose bust, long ago, should have filled one of the
vacant niches in the Capitol at Richmond: -- A young man, one of the new
Philosophy, after pouring out a number of flippant remarks derogatory of all
religion, turned to the Dr. with a look of self-approbation, and asked his
opinion? -- It is best to believe, said the Philosopher -- The opinion of this
truly great man, after the experience of 80 years, should outweigh the hasty,
ill-judg'd assertions of a million of pretenders to philosophy.
which is a balm of comfort to the poor, and is a check and control on the
rich -- If the word of one who has seen and felt much of the world could obtain
any credit, he would assure his readers, that the man, the family, the
community, or the nation, who observes a religious and moral conduct, will,
eventually, be found not only the most happy, but also the most prosperous.

But he does not plead for political Religion -- that kind of religion which
has exalted Kings, and Popes, and Cardinals, and Dignitaries to high places, to
riot on the hard earnings of a deluded people, and which, more than all the
writings of Ath^ests and Infidels, has depressed, and almost annihilated, true
religion -- that religion, which the Kings and Despots of Europe, at the
expense of so much blood and treasure, are still endeavoring to support --
that religion, called the Protestant, which the English, in the war of 1756,
spent so many millions to protect -- nor that religion, the Popish, which the
same nation, in the war of 1793, has expended so many more millions to restore!
"Neither Protestant nor Papist! -- Of what religion are you then?" -- Look, my
friend, into the 5th and 6th chapters of Matthew, and behold the simple,
unadulterated tenets of the true Religion.


In this country, and in these teeming times, it is impossible for any Writer,
or Editor, to avoid Politics, -- Indeed, that man must have a cold heart, or an
empty head, who can look on unmoved by what is now passing in the world. Every
man has his bias; and every man who beholds the wonderful changes taking place
in opinions, in systems, and in empires, must be affected. Whether the Editor
has subjected his bias to the dictates of candor and impartiality, atleast, to
the rules of decency and good manners, the Public -- the dispassionate Public
-- will pronounce. With every good American, it must be cause of vexation, to
observe the unbounded abuse and illiberality which daily pour from many of the
presses on both sides of the question -- One would think, that Peter Porcupine
had spread his poisonous mantle over the whole continent, and infected the
general mass! -- such extravagant licentiousness, if it does not tend finally
to annihilate the Liberty of the Press, as it has done in Europe, must at least
greatly imbitter its sweets.


Religion and Politics are the two great engines by which mankind have been
agitated, and deceived, and enslaved, from the earliest times. -- It is not
surprising, that a diversity of opinion should arise on metaphysical subjects
-- The being and attributes of the Deity, predestination or free will,
philosophical necessity or human volition, the beginning of eternity, etc.
cannot be brought to mathematical demonstration by all the skill of human
learning -- But, one should think, that the science of Government, after the
experience of five or six thousand years, could not be so very abstruse and
mysterious a subject -- nor would it, but for the folly and knavery of men. To
a plain, unprejudiced, unsophisticated understanding, can there be a doubt
whether one man should rule a million by his mere will and pleasure, or, that
the million should govern themselves upon the principles of equity and justice?
-- There would not, but for ignorance on one side, and cunning on the other.
What a degrading picture does the history of the world present to our
astonished view -- a very small proportion of mankind, who were knaves,
deceiving and domineering over all the rest, who were fools! -- The new
Philosophers say they will mend this matter -- Yes, that they will -- when
Godwin establishes the perfectability of human nature!
In a word, whether a Kingly or a Republican form of Government is the most
eligible, the most rational, and the most conducive to the happiness of the
people?

If the question was to come fairly before the bar of Reason, it would not
admit of a moment's hesitation -- but, unfortunately, pride, ambition, ancient
partialities and modern antipathies, and Emolument, often more powerful than
all those together, come in "to puzzle the will, and perplex the
understanding." -- When one man gets a million a year for being a King, another
ten thousand a year for being a Bishop, and others thousands a year for being a
Lord of the Bedchamber, a Groom of the Stole, a Master of the Hounds, a Yeoman
of the Scullery, etc. etc. Whoever looks at the English Red-Book, if he can
maintain the gravity of his muscles, will not be surprised that there are so
many strenuous advocates for Monarchy with all its trappings -- indeed, without
its trappings, there would be very little contention about it.
no wonder so many men are ^ound eager to maintain so lucrative a craft!

But all cannot be of one opinion; diversity is the order of Nature. It is to
be acknowledged, that there are good men who adopt the monarchical system
merely upon principle; and such men are entitled to our respect, however they
may differ from us in sentiment -- But the greatest misfortune to the cause of
Liberty is, that many men, particularly those of property, take refuge under
the wings of Kingly power, disgusted with the tumults and disorders of
Democracy. This is a rock which the Americans, in the navigating of their
political bark, would do well to avoid -- it is the more dangerous, because it
is a popular one. Democracy, or the Will of the People, is unquestionably the
first principle and groundwork of the American Constitution; but, as soon as
the people have fulfilled their grand, inestimable privilege of choosing their
Representatives, then it becomes Republicanism, or a system marked and bounded
by certain known and definite regulations. The Democracy here deprecated,
consists in a confusion of system, of ill-timed interferences of one body with
another, and of violent and unnecessary exertions of the people, etc. -- It is
this Democracy, that is kindled and enflamed by cunning and ambitious men, who
first raise themselves on the shoulders of the mob, and then trample on their
rights, under the pretext of restoring order and good government -- It is this
Democracy, that, sooner than any other, will become a prime engine in the hands
of foreign emissaries, first to divide the people, and then reduce them to
foreign obedience.

One would think that the geographical situation of the American States would
keep them clear of that destructive and all-devouring vortex, European
politics, and that an ocean 3000 miles broad, would protect them from insult
and danger. Of what import, it may be asked, is it to the nations of Europe,
whether John Adams or Thomas Jefferson presides at the head of the American
government? -- The Connecticut pretensious can neither open nor shut the
Scheldt; nor can the Georgia claims either obstruct or facilitate the
navigation of the Baltic -- But it is the baneful nature of the Kingly system
ever to intermeddle with the affairs of other nations -- The history of Europe
is full of it -- Amongst innumerable instances suffice it to mention, that both
the profligate Charles and the bigoted James of England were pensioners of
France, which country, till lately, held Sweden in her pay -- At present,
Russia either pays or overawes both Sweden and Denmark -- the infamous
partition of Poland is still fresh in our minds -- and England, amidst all her
encumbrances and difficulties, is grasping either at conquest or influence in
every country in the world!

It is the pervading, prevailing ambition of the two rival nations, FRANCE and
ENGLAND, that will long be endeavoring to exert itself over and in the
councils of this country -- They are the Sylla and Charibdis of AMERICA -- But
it is from the last-mentioned of these Powers that the American Union is in
most danger, and has most to fear. The bitter recollections of the American
Revolution, the rooted hatred which she holds for Republican principles, and
her insatiable thirst after commercial dominion, will, for a long time, render
her a dangerous enemy. -- Against an enemy so powerful and enterprising,
possessed of innumerable means either of Corruption or Conquest, the people of
these States cannot be too much on their guard -- Let them remember, that their
best guard is UNION; and that whilst they act toward England agreeably to the
rules of justice, they should ever be vigilantly and jealously on the watch to
counteract her machinations, or check her ambition. Let it be understood, that
the writer of this article makes a wide distinction between the people of
England and their Rulers -- Whilst he disapproves, nay abhors what seems to be
the ambitious and tyrannical conduct of the latter, he thinks he can never
enough applaud the genius and virtues of the former.


Unshackled by a Monarchy, a Nobility, and an Hierarchy, America, at present,
is divided between two great interests, the Agricultural and Commercial. --
Agriculture and Commerce are said to be intimately allied, and to depend on the
mutual assistance of each other -- We believe they do -- but the latter should
always be subordinate to the former. In that country where agriculture
predominates, the people will have the best chance of maintaining their
independence -- where the latter prevails, they will sink, by rapid steps, into
a state of luxury, venality, and subjection.

It is with nations as with individuals; they must first be in a state of
probation, and acquire wisdom by experience -- But no people ever began the
business of Government with so much advantage as the Americans With the whole
history of the world before them, and the awful example of perturbed Europe
present to their view, they have in their hands, be it for good or for evil,
the important experiment of REPRESENTATIVE REPUBLICANISM -- with them it is to
be proven, whether it be a real, substantial good, or only an idle dream, a
fanciful theory.

Shall it be said, that what the power of Great Britain could not achieve in a
fierce and bloody war, was, in a few years, effected by petty, personal broils,
pecuniary interests, and provincial antipathies? -- Shall the Federal chain so
soon be broken, and Republicanism become the theme of Aristocratical derision?
-- Shall it be said with Monarchical scorn, that the virtue of the Americans
depended on the existence of ONE MAN, and that when Washington ceased to
direct, they would sink into discord, anarchy, and disunion? --

What the Greeks, and Romans, and other nations have tried in vain, should be a
lesson to the people of these countries, to examine with caution, and to decide
with prudence, neither adopting rashly, nor expunging precipitately -- Absolute
perfection is not to be found in this world; we must deal with human nature as
it is, not as we wish it to be, and what it never will be -- The lesser evil
must give way to the greater good; the wish of the minority most yield to the
voice of the majority -- The effervescences of Zeal have often been as fatal as
the machinations of Malignity -- On one side they have "the turbulent Ocean of
Democracy," on the other "the calm sea of Despotism" -- Republicanism is a
goodly, regular fabric, standing half way between the lawless rage of the Mob
and the arbitrary will of the Sovereign -- If after a fair experiment, they
perceive that their labor is in vain, and that the great Political Panacea is
not to be found, they know the alternative -- if they cannot be freemen, let
them be slaves -- they can get a King at any time.

AN EXPLANATORY AND APOLOGETICAL PREFACE TO THE ALMANAC.
PRINTERS and PRINCES have long been in the habit of speaking and writing in
the imperative style plural, as, WE do this, WE order that, and so forth. If
any of our Federal readers should be offended at the Printer preceding the
Prince, let them recollect, that this is, as yet, a Republican country, and
that both of them are often, very often, mischievous characters. It is true,
they don't much like fighting in their own proper persons, but often, too
often, they are the cause of much blood being shed by others.

Be it known then to all the good people of this Commonwealth, that the Printer
hereof will descend from his imperative chair, and, for a little while,
condescend to talk like a common Citizen, in the first person singular.

When URBAN'S Almanac made its first appearance, it naturally attracted the
attention of all the Critics in that line of literature, and two grand faults
were found with it; namely, that it had too much religion, and too little
weather. -- To do the Sovereign People "Sovereign People" -- I believe this
very emphatical expression was first made use of by that superior genius
Mirabeau, at the beginning of the French Revolution -- Edmund Burke, when he
saw things through another medium, and got a pension of 3 or 4000l. a year,
called the people "the swinish multitude" -- and Fenno, the compeer and
successor of Porcupine, whilst he was Printer to the Senate, and published his
libels within a few doors of their chamber, had the boldness to liken the
Federal Government and the different States, to "a sow with her ^arrow of
pigs!" -- Here was the liberty of the press with a vengeance -- Where was the
^edition Law then, or was it only made to punish the black guardism of one
Party? -- In London, for an expression half as gross upon the King or
Government, the Printer would soon have found himself enclosed within the
strong walls of New gate.
justice, there was some truth in the first remark; the book was rather dull
for a winter evening's amusement; and however good the thing may be in itself,
it is not right to cram religion down a man's throat whether he will or not --
besides, there is no law for such doings in this country; now, in England, a
man must swallow the Trinity, the Athanasian ^reed, the 39 Articles, etc. at
one gulp, or woe be to both his temporal and spiritual concerns. Take a peep
into the English statute book (it only contains about 100 folio volumes) and
see how the rod of ecclesiastical Power is held over the People in that
country, and yet it is perfect freedom when compared with the Popish countries
-- It would appear, that the old nations had too much religion, and that some
of the new ones have too little. -- Is there no medium?


To remedy the first complaint, there was no great difficulty -- with one dash
of my pen, I swept the whole pack of Saints, Martyrs, and Virgins out of the
Calendar! -- "Ladies and Gentlemen, said I to them very civilly -- putting the
Virgins foremost) you see there is no business for you here; here there are
neither images, nor shrines, nor cathedrals, nor votaries -- Heaven knows it
was not worth your whiles to leave your snug births at home, to cross the
Atlantic ocean for all the profit, or honor either, you have got in this
country. -- God help you, poor emigrants, I don't know where you can now
sojourn, unless it be among the Chickisaws and Catabaws, who live, or rather
wander, some hundreds of miles beyond the Ohio. -- Now, as I gave you a decent
welcome to my table -- and would have kept you there, if my masters had been so
pleased -- the only request I have to make of you is, that you will be so kind
as take this vile Ague and Fever along with you, and drop it in one of the
lakes on to'ther side of the mountains -- If you do, I shall pray for you, and
to you, all the days of my life." --

On the subject of Religion, I have only to add, that I have retained a few of
the capital Saints, just to show that there were such a people once upon a
time, and to put some folks in mind when they may expect a merry day -- By the
bye, I never could learn the reason, why these holy men are placed, as one may
say, at the very head of our drinking parties. -- It is said, indeed (but I
don't pretend to vouch for the truth of the report, as it has too much the
appearance of scandal) that both St. Andrew and St. Patrick were fond of a
little whiskey in the morning; and Mr. Gibbon has given us to understand, that
St. George was not so holy a man as John Bull imagined him to be. -- Be this as
it may, I cannot conceive how the two John's, who were said to have been
remarkably sober Saints, happened to be of the Fraternity. -- The only way I
can account for so curious a connection is, that with all their outward
sanctity, like some of our modern Parsons -- in the old country -- they liked,
"under the rose", good eating and drinking as well as their neighbors.

To remove the second complaint, I soon found a much more serious undertaking
-- it was the more difficult, because unexpected It never entered into my head,
that "the most enlightened nation in the world" would have asked ME to foretell
all the gusts and storms of the ensuing year! -- I could not help thinking the
request, or rather command, a little unreasonable -- but there is no accounting
for the whims of your very sensible people; and so, right or wrong, I must
obey; I must be a Conjuror, nolens volens, as the saying is. -- Well, what was
to be done? -- Isaac briggs, a plain honest Quaker, declared he never made a
gust or a storm in all his life; and the other Stargazers said, that as I was
no customer of theirs, they would have nothing to do with it -- I ran from one
end of the town to the other, in a hot day, popping my head into every open
door, and begging of every one I saw, to foretell me next year's weather --
Nobody knew any thing of the matter -- Even the Mayor, who, by virtue of his
office, is by much the wisest man in the community, could tell nothing about it
-- In short, I was completely posed -- as the man in the play says, "I faith it
was a puzzler."

In this dilemma, I luckily cast my thoughts on the capital, the city on the
hill -- Surely, said I, striking the palm of my right hand on my forehead, if
there are any weather-wise men in the nation, there they must be, and thither
wilt I go -- No sooner said than done -- I stuffed myself into the stage-waggon
for Richmond, and, in little more than 48 hours, was furnished with "as pretty
an assortment of weather," as any Almanack-maker in the 16 United States of
America, with the western Territory into the bargain -- Not satisfied with this
expedition, I sent off a special messenger (as I could not go myself) to
Raleigh, the capital city of North Carolina, and got from thence another
parcel; by which means I have become possessed of a "well assorted stock" both
from the North and from the South. -- And having now got into the right track,
next year, I am determined, for the satisfaction of my customers, to have
weather from the East and from the west, and every point of the compass. --

It is not very decent for a man to blow his own trumpet -- yet, methinks, I do
deserve well of the Country.

Now, other Printers would have done all this in silence, slily pretending it
be their own cleverness A Printer in a neighboring town has very industriously
borrowed almost the whole of our this year's Calendar, without saving, by your
leave ISAAC BRIGGS, or with your permission Mister URBAN; even Neighbor
Spriggans is thrust in to fill up a barren title page! -- There is something in
an old book about modesty, decency, etc.
-- whereas I freely own my obligations to other heads -- I let every man have
his due -- I would "give the Devil his due" -- Besides, it answers two good
purposes -- In the first place, it shows the (...) of my candor -- In the next
place, IF it should happen, that some of the frosts and snows do not fall
exactly in their right places, remember, Citizens, it is none of my fault --
let the wise-acres of Richmond and Raleigh answer for their mistakes -- it is
enough for me to be at the trouble of printing them.

But, notwithstanding the putting out of the Saints, and the putting in of the
weather, I am not vain enough to suppose, particularly in these combustuous
times, that all the world will be pleased with my work -- A French writer has
somewhere said, Parbleu, dit^le meunier, est bien fou du cerveau,
Qui pretend contenter tout le monde est son pere.
Which, in plain English, is as much as to say, "he is a great fool who thinks
he can please every body" -- And a celebrated Poet, who well knew the
imperfections of human nature, has said, Whoever expects a faultless piece to
see,
Expects what never was, and never will be."


I can only say, that I will do the best in my power to please the Public, by
giving them much good advice, a collection^ of comical stories and anecdotes, a
number of wise sayings and useful tables, and the very best weather that can be
had on the continent -- Over and above all these good things, I will introduce
them to the heathen Gentry, to Jupiter and Juno, Mercury and Venus, etc. Mr.
Gibbon shows a considerable partiality for these gentry; he calls them "the
elegant Mythology of the Greeks;" and seems as if he would have no objection to
their once more "ruling the roast." -- See Cotton's Travesty.
who were very great folks in their time, and with whom, if they should happen
again to come into power, it would prudent to be acquainted "Wit going into the
Pantheon during the meridian splendour of the Popish religion, made a very low
bow to the statue of Jupiter -- "Remember, Master Jupiter (said he) if ever you
come into power again, that I took notice of you wh^^ in adversity."
-- Stranger things have come to pass; as one system goes out, another comes in
its place -- The Whale must have have a tub before it of some fashion or other
-- Even Mr. Harper's tubs amused for a while!

Now, all this and a great deal more, may be had for a very small price indeed
-- for nine pence, a man will get what may be of service to him all the days of
his life; whilst that sum will scarcely get me as much bread as will serve my
breakfast.

Much good may this cheap book do the Sovereign People -- and if there be any
efficacy in a Printer's blessing, I give them that into the bargain --
sincerely praying, that peace, and plenty, and liberty, may be the portion of
us (...) th^s year, and every year during the century -- at the end of that
period; methinks, the youngest and the stoutest of us now, will then be far
beyond the reach of either hunger or thirst, of sickness or sorrow.

HISTORICAL DOCUMENTS.
FROM THE LIFE OF VOLTAIRE.
TIRED of the lazy and sycophantic life which I was obliged to lead at Paris,
and meeting with a young lady who happened to think nearly as I did, in the
year 1733, we took the resolution to go and spend some years in the country,
there, far from the tumult and corruption of Courts, to cultivate her
understanding, and increase her knowledge.

This lady was the Marchioness de Chatelet, who, of all the women in France,
had a mind the most capable of all the branches of Science. Her father, the
Baron de Breteuil, had taught her Latin, which she understood perfectly; she
knew, by ro^e, the most beautiful passages in Virgil, Horace, and Lucr^tius,
and all the writings of Cicero were familiar to her. Seldom has there been
united in the same person, so much justness of discernment and elegance of
taste, joined to so ardent a desire for information.

At Cirey, on the borders of Champagne, we sought only instruction, and
troubled not ourselves with the follies of the world -- but, after having spent
six years in our retreat, we were obliged to go to Brussels, where the family
of the Chatelets had long been embroiled in a lawsuit with the family of the
Honbrooks. I had the pleasure of terminating the lawsuit, by which the two
families had been ruining each other with law expenses for sixty years, and, by
an amicable accommodation, I gained 226,000 livres in ready money to the
Marquis du Ch^^^l^t.

While at Brussels, in the year 1740, the ironhearted Frederick William, the
unpolished King of Prussia, died at Berlin. His son, who has since gained so
singular a reputation, had held a regular correspondence with me several years.
The world never, perhaps, beheld a father and son who less resembled each other
than these two Monarchs.

The father was an absolute Goth, a Vandal^ who thought of no other thing,
during his whole reign, than amassing money, and maintaining, at the least
possible expense, the finest army in Europe. Never were subjects poorer, or
King more rich. He bought up, at a low price, the estates of a great part of
his Nobility, who soon devoured the little money they got for them, most of
which returned to the Royal coffers by means of heavy taxes. All the King's
lands were farmed out to tax-gatherers, who held the double office of Judge and
Exciseman; insomuch, that if a tenant did not pay on the very day appointed, he
put on his Judge's robe, and condemned the poor delinquent to pay double the
sum. It must also be observed, that if this same Exciseman did not pay by the
last day of the month, the day following he was himself obliged to pay treble
to the King!

Did a man kill a hare, or lop a tree, or any other trifling offense, he was
instantly condemned to pay a fine to the King -- Money! Money! -- Was a poor,
deluded girl found guilty of making a child, the father, or the mother, or some
other relation, was obliged to pay a sum of money to his Majesty! His
successor, the great Frederick as he is sometimes called, pursued a different
system -- He did not care how many children were gotten in his dominions, nor
after what fashion, provided he got soldiers enough -- The virtue of chastity
was not in very high repute with his Majesty. -- See Moore and other travelers.


The Haroness of Kniphausen, who at that time, was the richest widow in Berlin,
that is to say, she had between 3 and 400l. a year, was accused of having made
a child clandestinely in the second year of her widowhood. His Majesty was
graciously pleased to write her a letter with his own Royal hand, informing
her, that it was necessary, if she mount to preserve her character, to send him
30,000 livres, (1250l.) -- She was obliged to borrow the sum, and was ruined!

His Majesty had an Ambassador at the Hague, whose name was Lusius; and
certainly of all the Ambassadors that ever appertained to Royalty, he was paid
the worst. This poor man, that he might be able to keep a fire, had cut down
some bushes in the Royal domain. His next dispatches brought him word, that the
King, his gracious Sovereign, had mulcted him a year's salary; and Lusius, in a
^it of despair, cut his throat with the only razor he had! -- An old valet
unhappily saved his life -- I afterward met his Excellency at the Hague, and
gave him alms at the gate of the Palace, where this wretched Ambassador had
formerly lived.

It was by such means that he acquired 120 millions of crowns (15 millions
sterling) all casked up in barrels, hoop'd with iron, end deposited in double
vaulted cellars.

This Monarch used to walk from his palace clothed in an old blue coat, with
large copper buttons half way down his thighs, and when he bought a new one,
which was but seldom, these buttons were made to serve again. It was in this
dress, with a large rusty hat and patched boots, and armed with a huge cane,
that his Majesty sallied forth every day to review his regiment of giants.
These giants were his greatest delight, and for whom he went to the heaviest
expense. The men who stood in the front rank were none of them less than 7 feet
high, and he sent to purchase them from every part of Europe. They were after
wards made Heiduques by the new King to attend the Queen's coach. As they
walked on each side of an old ill shapen coach, in order to keep it from
falling, these Heiduques could shake hands with each other over the roof.

After his Majesty had been graciously pleased to review his giants, he used to
walk through the town, when every body fled from before him. If he happened to
meet a woman, he sternly demanded, why she staid idling her time in the streets
-- "Get home, ye lazy b -- h! an honest woman has no business over the
threshold of her own door" -- which words he would accompany with a box on the
^ar, a kick on the b -- side, or some strokes on the shoulders with his huge
cane! -- Nor did this gracious Monarch treat the holy Ministers of Religion in
a more gentle style, if ever he caught them wandering near to his parade. --
The bare sight of his cane was more terrifying to them, than the sound of the
Inquisition is to an unprotected heretic!

In short, Turkey is a Republic when compared to the despotism exercised by
Frederick William of Prussia!

We may easily imagine, what would be the wrath of a Vandal like this, to find
he had a son endowed with wit, sense, and good breeding; who was eager in the
acquisition of knowledge, who made verses, and afterward set them to music. If
his Majesty caught his son with a book in his hand, he rudely took it from him,
and threw it into the fire; or playing on the flute, he broke it into pieces;
and he often treated the Prince as he did the unfortunate women and preachers
when he caught them near to his parade.

The Prince, at length weary of the attentions of so kind a father, determined
to elope, without well knowing whether to fly, to France or to England -- His
father's economy deprived him of the power of traveling even in the style of
an English tradesman, and he was obliged to borrow a small sum of money. -- Two
young gentlemen, both very amiable, were to accompany him. One named Kat, the
only son of a brave Officer; the other Keit, who had married the daughter of
the Baroness Kniphausen, who had to pay 30,000 livres for making a child
without his Majesty's permission, as before mentioned. The day and hour were
appointed; but the jealous Monarch getting intelligence of the affair, the
Prince and his two companions were arrested, and sent to prison.

At first, the King believed that the Princess Wilhelmina, his daughter, was
concerned in the plot (...) and as he was remarkable for dispatch in the
executive branch of justice, he instantly proceeded to kick her out of a large
window, which reached from the floor to the cieling. The Queen Mother, who
happened to be present at this kingly exploit, with great difficulty saved her
daughter, by catching hold of her petticoats at the moment she was going out of
the window. The Princess received a violent confusion on her breast, the mark
of which remained with her during life, and which she did (...) the honor of
showing some years afterward.

The Prince had a sort of mistress, the daughter of a schoolmaster. This girl
played tolerably well on the harpsichord, and the Prince accompanied her with
his flute; he thought he he was in love, but he was mistaken -- However, the
King extended his Royal authority over this misguided girl, by causing her to
be paraded by the public hangman, and afterward whipped in the Prince's
presence! -- His Majesty then sent his son to the citadel of Custrin, situated
in the midst of an unwholesome marsh; here he was closely confined for six
months, in a sort of dungeon; at the end of which time, his Royal father was
graciously pleased to allow him a soldier as an attendant.

This soldier, who was young, handsome, and played upon the flute, had more
ways than one of arousing the Prince -- So many fine qualities made his
fortune; and I since knew him, at once Valet de Chamber and Prime Minister,
with all the p^^tness and insolence which two such prime posts may be supposed
to inspire.

Whilst the Prince was in the citadel of Custrin, one morning an Officer
entered his apartment weeping, accompanied by four grenadiers. Frederick had no
doubt he was going to be made a head shorter -- the Officer, still in tears,
ordered the grenadiers to take the Prince to the widow, and hold his head out
of it by force, that he might behold the execution of his friend Kat upon a
scaffold built for the purpose. -- The tenderhearted Monarch stood present at
this exhibition, as he had been at the poor girl's whipping bout!

Keit, the other confidant, had fled into Holland, whether the King dispatched
his military messengers to seize him. Luckily he escaped by a minute, embarked
for Portugal, and there remained till the death of the most tenderhearted
Frederick William, King of Prussia.

But it was not his Majesty's intention to have stopped here; it was his design
to have beheaded the Prince also. He considered, that he had three other sons,
not one of whom wrote verses, or played on the flute, and that they were
sufficient to maintain the grandeur of the Prussian throne. Measures were
accordingly concerted to make him suffer, as the Czarowitz, eldest son of Peter
I. had before suffered See the interesting history of the Czar Peter I. who was
one day a great man, and the next a ferocious savage -- See also the Life of
that most illustrious and most magnificent Impress Catherine II. during whose
reign the same artful and inhuman game was played in more instances than one.
-- In those instructive Histories the American reader will discover the methods
taken to obtain a throne, and how to keep possession of it.
.

It is not very clear, from any regular laws, either human or divine, that a
man should have his head struck off because he had a wish to travel. But this
tenderhearted King had sound judges in Prussia equally as learned and
equitable as the Russian expounders of law -- Besides, his own paternal
authority, in case of need, would, at any time, suffice.

The Count Sekendorf, whom I since knew in Saxony, declared to me, that it was
with great difficulty indeed, that he could prevail with the King not to behead
his son! -- This is the same Sekendorf who commanded the arm^^^ of Bavaria, and
of whom the Prince, when he became a King, drew a hideous portrait in his
History of Brandenburgh -- Who would not, after this, serve Princes, and
prevent Tyrants from cutting off their heads!

After 18 months close imprisonment, the solicitations of the Emperor, and the
tears of the Queen, obtained the Prince his liberty. -- As the King did not
suffer him to have any connection with the affairs of government (the affairs
of which only consisted in reviewing troops, and oppressing the people for
money) the Prince employed his time in writing to men of letters in France --
He flattered me as something divine, and I him as a perfect Solomon! --
Epithets cost us nothing -- I took the liberty to send him a beautiful
ink-stand, and he had the goodness to send me a few gew-gaws in amber -- but
they came from a Prince, and all France envied my good fortune! -- Certainly,
if I had been inclined Voltaire did indulge personal hopes, and sacrificed his
same to his vanity, by strutting about in the Court of Potsdam with a gold key
dangling at his button-hole! -- Even after the gross treatment which he
received from the King's (...) at Frankfort, he again became the dupe of
Frederick's cunning, who, in his own expressive words, "first squeezed the
orange, and then threw away the skin."
to indulge personal hopes, I had great reason so to do; for the Prince, in his
letters, always called me "his dear friend," and frequently mentioned the solid
marks of friendship which he intended to confer on me when he should ascend the
throne.

Well, at length Providence was pleased to take the iron-hearted Monarch to
another world, and the Prince succeeded to the throne. He began his reign with
a piece of wit. He sent (...) ^^mas, who had lost an arm, as his Ambassador to
(...); he said, as there was a Minister from Paris at Berlin who had only one
hand, it was right to send his Most Christian Majesty an Ambassador with only
one arm!

My kingly Solomon came to Strasburgh -- a whim had brought him, incognito, to
view the frontiers and troops of France. From Strasburgh he went to visit his
territories in Lower Germany, and signified his wish to see me at Brussels --
Apartments were prepared for him in Chateau de Meuse, where I went to wait upon
his Majesty. One soldier was the only guard I found -- the Minister of State,
Rambonet, was walking in the courtyard, blowing his fingers; he had on a dirty
shirt with long dirty ruffles, an old hat all in holes, and an old judge's wig,
one wing of which hung into his pocket, whilst the other scarcely touched his
shoulder.

I was conducted into his Majesty's apartment, in which I saw nothing but four
bare walls. By the light of a bougie, I perceived a small truckle-bed, in a
sort of closet, upon which lay a little thin man wrapped in a morning gown of
blue cloth -- It was his Prussian Majesty, who lay shaking with a ^it of the
ague under a beggarly coverlet. I made my bow, and began my acquaintance by
feeling his pulse as if I had been his first physician. -- The ague left him,
he arose, dressed himself, and sat down to table with Algarotti, Maupertius,
the Ambassador, and myself, where, at supper, we treated most profoundly on the
immortality of the soul, of natural liberty, and the Androgynes of Plato.

Whilst we were thus philosophizing upon liberty, the Minister Rambonet,
mounted upon a post-horse, in his judge's wig, was riding all night toward
Liege, at the gates of which, next day, he proclaimed, with sound of trumpet,
the name of the King his master, whilst 2000 soldiers laid the city under
contribution! -- The pretext for this fine exploit was, certain rights which
his Majesty pretended to have over a part of the suburbs. The drawing up of the
manifesto was committed to me, which I performed as well as the nature of the
case would let me -- not suspecting that a King, with whom I had the honor of
supping, who called me his dear friend, and who talked so beautifully of
natural justice and the immortality of the soul, could possibly be in the
wrong. The affair was soon brought to a conclusion; the innocent people of
Liege were obliged to pay a million of livres in hard cash, which more than
defrayed his Majesty's expenses caused by his journey to see Strasburgh, etc

I soon felt an attachment for him, as he had wit and an agreeable manner, and,
moreover, he was a King, which is a seduction seldom vanquished by human
weakness. Generally, authors flatter Kings; but, in this instance, I was
praised by a King from the crown of my head to the sole of my foot.

Some time before the death of his father, the Prince had written against the
detestable principles of Machiavel -- but this was before he became a King, and
whilst his father gave him no great reason to admire despotic power. This
manuscript he had sent to me at Brussels, to have it corrected and printed.
With all my admiration for my kingly friend, I could not help feeling some
remorse at being concerned in printing this Anti-machiavelian book, at the very
moment the Royal author, who had a hundred millions in his cellars, was robbing
the poor inhabitants of Liege of a million of livres!

I began to perceive, that my kingly friend would not stop here. His father had
left him 70,000 well-disciplined troops; he was busily augmenting them, and
appeared to have a vast inclination to give them employment the very first
opportunity.

In the month of October 1740, the Emperor Charles VI. died of an indigestion
caused by eating champignons, which brought on an apoplexy -- and this plate of
champignons occasioned the death of many thousands of brave men, and changed
the order of things in Europe. It was soon very evident, that the King of
Prussia was not so great an enemy to Machiavelism as the Prince Royal!

He had already assembled his troops, yet none of his Ministers or Generals
knew his designs. I had some reason to suppose, that he meant to quarrel with
France; as, three months before, he had sent to me a political dissertation,
written in his manner, wherein he considered France as the natural enemy of
Germany -- But it was constitutional in Frederick to do the very reverse of
what he said or wrote.

He departed, on the 15th of December, for the conquest of Silesia, at the head
of 50,000 well disciplined combatants. As the Queen of Bohemia was illy
prepared to repel him, he soon effected his purpose. He wrote a history of that
conquest, which he showed to me -- Here follows one of the paragraphs, which I
carefully transcribed, as a thing worthy of recording: --

"Ambition, interest, and a desire to make the world speak of me, determined me
to go to war! -- Add to these considerations, I had a fine army and a full
treasury; these, with the vivacity of my nature, urged me to make war on Maria
Theresa, the Queen of Bohemia and Hungary!"

It is much to be regretted, that I prevailed upon him to omit these passages,
when I afterward corrected his works. A confession so uncommon should have
passed to posterity, in order to show upon what principles Kings make war, and
shed the blood of their deluded subjects.

I now returned to Cirey, and afterward passed the winter in Paris, where I
had a multitude of enemies; for, having written the History of Charles XII.
presented several successful pieces to the theater, and composed an epic poem,
I had, of course, all those who write either in bad verse or prose as my
enemies -- and, as I wrote likewise on philosophic subjects, of necessity,
according to ancient custom, I was treated as an Athiest by all Church bigots
and devotees.

I was the first who dared to develope to the people of France, in an
intelligible style, the discoveries of the great Newton. I was likewise an
admirer of Lock; I considered him as the only reasonable metaphysician. I
praised that moderation so new, so prudent, where he says, we have not
sufficient knowledge to determine, by the light of reason, that God could not
grant the gifts of thought and sensation to a being which we call material. --
The poor creatures who were the most forward and the hottest in this dispute,
knew very little of either matter or spirit.

The fact is, that none of us know what or how we are, except that we are
convinced we have life, motion, and thought, but without the least conception
of how we came by them. The very elements of matter are as much hidden from us
as the rest -- We are blind creatures, groping in the dark -- and Lock was
right when he asserted, that it was not for us to determine what the Almighty
could or could not do.

Whilst the literary grubs of Paris were making war upon me, the King of France
began to make war upon the Queen of Hungary upon principles equally iniquitous
as those of the King of Prussia. -- After having solemnly guaranteed and sworn
to the Pragmatic Sanction, and the succession of Maria Theresa to the
inheritance of her father, and after having received Lorraine as the purchase
of these promises, it does not appear to be consistent with the rights of
nations, or the ideas of common justice, to break such sacred engagements.

The King of France was in alliance with the King of Prussia, at the very time
he was seizing upon Silesia! -- Two armies were sent into Germany at a time
when the Queen of Hungary had none -- The King of Prussia having gained his
prize, he made a separate peace, and left his brother King to get out of the
scrape as well as he could! -- The French Generals being left to fight their
own battles, made many blunders, and, with difficulty, regained their own
country, after losing half of their army. This is one instance amongst many,
how Kings make alliances, and break them in a manner that would disgrace
private gentlemen. -- After the many millions spent by the English Ministry in
bribing and subsidizing the German Princes to take part against the French
Republic, all of them, one by one, after receiving the English gold, deserted
the ^oalition, and left Britain alone to fight their quarrel! -- Even the
Elector of Hanover left his brother George in the lurch!


The King of Prussia now turned his attention to the embellishment of the city
of Berlin, where he built several beautiful edifices, and whether he invited
artists of all denominations -- His Majesty wished to acquire glory of every
kind, but, like his father, he wished to obtain it in the cheapest manner
possible.

His father had resided at Potsdam in a vile old house; he turned it into a
palace; and Potsdam became a pleasant town. Berlin grew daily more extensive,
and the Prussians began to taste the comforts of life. Some people began to
have furniture in their houses, and some even to wear shirts; formerly, like
their iron-hearted Monarch, they only wore sleeves and sore-bodies, tied on
with packthread --

FROM THE LIFE OF CATHERINE II.
A Book has lately appeared, which has excited very general attention -- it is
entitled, "The Life of Catherine II. Empress of Russia." It not only developes
much of the secret history of that extraordinary woman, in her private life and
amors, but also discovers a great deal of the political maneuvers both of the
Russian and other European Courts. -- The importance of this publication may be
judged of, by the uncommon demand for it in every country in Europe, and the
extreme solicitude which the Emperor Paul shows to have it suppressed wherever
his power, or influence, or authority, can reach. Besides the general history
of the times, which were sufficiently eventful and interesting, the book
contains many curious anecdotes, not only of the Empress herself, but of many
public characters which the ignorant and uniformed world were wont to reverence
or esteem -- It exhibits, in bold and legible characters, the deep designs of
Courts, and the treacherous venality of Courtiers -- from a view of which,
every honest American will be thankful to Providence for placing his country at
so great a distance from that busy, perturbed scene, where a combination of
Kings, and Politicians, and Generals, by their intrigues and their ambition,
are daily misleading and oppressing mankind. -- In short, after a careful
perusal of these entertaining and instructive volumes, we are at a loss which
most to abhor the artful and cruel means by which Catherine ascended and then
kept possession of the Imperial throne, or to wonder at the surprising address
with which she ruled her vast Empire, whilst she guided, or agitated, or
convulsed, the politics of almost all Europe.

THE book opens with a succinct account of occurrences in the Court of
Petersburgh previous to the Revolution of 1762, when the unfortunate Peter III.
(husband of Catherine II.) was dethroned and put to death -- As this part of
the history is too lengthy for our present purpose, we select for the attention
of our Readers, the melancholy story of the Princess Tarrakanoff, daughter of
the Empress Elizabeth, who became a victim, by the basest means, to the jealous
and unrelenting policy of Catherine -- Let it be remembered, that the
treacherous agent in this insiduous business, Alexius Orloff, was the principal
murderer of the Emperor Peter -- But we must first give some account of the
Empress Elizabeth --

Elizabeth Petrovna was the daughter of Peter the Great, and the first
Catherine, who was obliged, at her death, to leave the throne to the young
Peter II. (in 1727) son of the unfortunate Tzarovitch Alexius, beheaded by
order of his father. -- Peter II, reigned only three years, and was followed by
the Empress Anne, daughter of the Tzar Ivan, elder brother of the first Peter.

To Anne, in 1740, succeeded her nephew Ivan the Third, yet in his cradle, and
who, by a conspiracy headed by a German surgeon named Lestock, was dethroned,
13 months afterward, in order to raise Elizabeth to the throne.

Elizabeth, it is said, had a resemblance to her mother, the handsome
Catherine. But, if she equalled her in those advantages which render the
society of women so agreeable, she surpassed her in the immoderate love of
vicious pleasure. Instead of having the art of commanding, like her mother,
Elizabeth submitted herself to the guidance of others; and this weakness was
the primary cause of the misfortunes of Peter III.

That she might maintain her independence, Elizabeth refused to take a husband,
with whom she must have shared the empire; but she did not the more abstain
from voluptuous gratifications; and as, with her other infirmities, she had
that of being a bigot, the Field Marshal Razumousky, her Grand Veneur, had the
art to persuade her to give him her hand in a private manner. The two Counts
Tarrakanoff and their sister, were the fruit of this clandestine union.
Elizabeth, however, did not content herself with one lover; she had frequent
changes; but Razumousky permitted none to approach her, except such as he
thought to have too little understanding, or ambition, to attempt a competition
with him.

To her violent propensity to voluptuousness, Elizabeth added first the love of
good eating, and then the pleasures of wine. Banquets, feasts, balls,
masquerades, and the most frivolous amusements, were preferred to business --
By degrees, she proceeded from moderate enjoyments to the extravagance of
sensuality; and her taste for devotion augmented her voluptuousness, and added
to the absurdity of her character. She continued whole hours on her knees
before the picture of her favorite Saint The Russians are of what is called
the Greek Church and differ in certain particulars from the Church of Rome --
for instance, they will not worship any graven image, but they kneel before and
pray to painted ones! -- This is only one of the many gross absurdities which
mankind have fallen into and practiced these 15 or 1600 years. Whenever they
departed from the original purity of the Gospel, their errors became
innumerable, and the Priesthood artfully encouraged them. -- The Romish
superstitions are nearly come to a conclusion -- those of the Greek Church are
still in full operation; the Sun of Knowledge has not yet beamed upon the
frozen regions of Russia.
, to which she spoke, and which she even consulted -- She passed alternately
from acts of bigotry to the intemperance of just, and from scenes of extreme
lasciviousness to the quieting opiates of prayer -- To describe her unblushing
excesses, would stain the page of History, and shock the ear of Modesty.

Such was the woman destined to rule a mighty Empire, and who had it in her
power, at any time, to inflame all Europe, and sacrifice the lives of thousands
of men!

At length, on Christmas Day 1761, after an inglorious reign of 21 years,
Elizabeth expired in the ^ad year of her age. -- The indolence of her character
subjected her to the selfish and wicked designs of her Favorites, who made a
bad use of her authority. -- Her devotion rendered her impious, and her
clemency cruel. At the commencement of her reign, she made a vow, never to
punish a malefactor with death; the Judges, therefore, who could not decapitate
criminals, deprived them of life by the barbarous punishment of the knout; and
never were more tongues cut out, or miserable wretches sent to Siberia, than
under the clement reign of the Empress Elizabeth! -- In dungeons not far from
her own palace, were languishing in misery, a dethroned Emperor, several
Princes and Dukes, besides many Courtiers, Statesmen, Generals, Officers, and
even women!

It is computed, that her conduct cost the Empire every year at least a
thousand lives, either by imprisonment or banishment. Nothing was more easy
than to obtain a secret order for these cruel purposes, by the base flatterers
that always surrounded her person This was exactly the case, by Lettres de
Cachet, under the old Regime in France, which the British Ministry are so
anxious to restore -- All the difference is, that the Grand Monarch had no
Siberia to which he could banish his subjects; but he had abundance of Bastiles.
, It was sufficient for one of the Maids of Honor to think herself slighted,
to obtain an order to have a person taken out of bed in the night, carried away
gagged and blindfolded, and immured underground, there to drag out the
remainder of a miserable life in a loathsome dungeon, without ever being
charged with any crime! -- Many of these unfortunate persons were known to be
still existing under the bastions and towers of different fortresses so late as
the year 1780, besides the many hundreds that were sent to famish in the frozen
regions of Siberia.

[Upon the death of Elizabeth, the ill-fated Peter III. succeeded to the
throne, whose deposition and murder are ably and circumstantially narrated in
these volumes.]

It has already been mentioned, that the Empress Elizabeth had three children
by her clandestine marriage with the Grand Veneur, Alexey Gregorievitch
Razumoffsky. The youngest of these children was a girl, brought up under the
name of Princess Tarrakanoff. Prince Radzivil, informed of this secret, and
irritated at Catherine's trampling under foot the rights of the Poles The
Reader will perceive, that this passage alludes to the infamous partition of
Poland, the King of which, Stanislaus (formerly Prince Poniatowsky), had been
one of the Empress's Favorites. As a reward for his SERVICES, she set him on
the Polish throne -- in a few years after, at the final division of that
unhappy country, the unthroned the puppet, and he died a contemptible pensioner
in Petersburgh! -- It is one of the grand uses of History, to withdraw the
viel, and to develope characters who have imposed upon the credulous world.
, conceived that the daughter of Elizabeth would furnish him with a signal
means of revenge. He thought that it would not be in vain if he opposed to the
Sovereign, whose armies were spreading desolation over his unhappy country, a
rival whose mother's name should render dear to the Russians. Perhaps his
ambition might suggest to him yet more lofty hopes -- Perhaps he might flatter
himself with being one day enabled to mount the throne on which he intended to
place the young Tarrakanoff. However this be, he gained over the persons to
whom the education of this Princess was committed, carried her off, and
conveyed her to Rome.

Catherine, having intelligence of this transaction, took immediate steps to
frustrate the designs of Prince Radzivil. Taking advantage of the circumstance
of his being the chief of the confederacy of the Malcontents, she caused all
his estates to be seized, and reduced him to the necessity of living on the
produce of the diamonds and other valuable effects he had carried with him to
Italy. These supplies were soon exhausted. Radzivil set out in order to pick up
what intelligence he could concerning affairs in Poland, leaving the young
Tarrakanoff at Rome, under the care of a single Gouvernante, and in
circumstances extremely confined. Scarcely had he reached his own country, when
an offer was made to restore him his possessions, on condition that he would
take his young ward to Russia. He refused to submit to so disgraceful a
proposal; but he had the weakness to promise that he would give himself no
farther concern about the daughter of Elizabeth. -- This was the price of his
pardon!

Alexey Orloff, charged with the execution of the will of the Empress, siezed
the first moment on his arrival at Leghorn, of laying a snare for the Princess
Tarrakanoff. One of those intriguers who are so common in Italy, repaired
immediately to Rome; and, after having discovered the lodgings of the young
Russian, he introduced himself to her in a military dress, and under the name
of an officer. He told her that he had been brought thither by the sole desire
of paying homage to a Princess whose fate and fortunes were highly interesting
to all her countrymen. He seemed very much affected at the state of destitution
in which he found her; he offered her some assistance, which necessity forced
her to accept; and the traitor appeared to this unfortunate lady, as well as to
the woman that waited on her, in the light of a savior, whom Heaven had sent
^o her deliverance!

When this treacherous emissary thought he had sufficiently gained their
confidence, he declared that he was commissioned by Count Alexius Orloff to
offer to the daughter of Elizabeth the throne that had been filled by her
mother. He said, that the Ruffians were discontented with Catherine; that
Orloff especially could never forgive her for her ingratitude and her tyranny;
and that, i^ the young Princess would accept of the services of that General,
and recompense him by the grant of her hand, it would not be long ere she saw
the breaking out of that revolution which he had prepared.

Proposals so brilliant ought naturally to have opened the eyes of the Princess
Tarrakanoff, and shown her the treachery of him that made them. But her
inexperience and her candor permitted her not to suspect any guilt. Besides,
the language of the emissary of Alexius Orloff seemed analogous with the
notions she had imbibed from Prince Radzivil. She imagined herself destined to
the throne; and all the airy dreams that any way related to that opinion could
not but encourage the deceit. She accordingly gave herself up to these
flattering hopes, and with a grateful heart, concurred in the designs of her
treacherous adviser, who "flattered but to destroy."

Some time after Alexius Orloff came to Rome. His emissary had already
announced him. -- He was received as a benefactor. -- However, some persons to
whom the Princess and her gouvernante communicated the good fortune that was
promised them, advised them to be on their guard against the^ designs of a man
whose character for wickedness had been long established, and who doubtless had
too much reason to remain faithful to the Empress to think of conspiring
against her. Far from profiting by this good council, the Princess was so
imprudently frank as to speak of it to Alexius Orloff, who with great ease
delivered his justification, and thenceforth threw a deeper shade of
dissimulation and address into his speeches and behavior. Not satisfied with
fanning the ambition of the young Russian, he put on the semblance of a passion
for her, and succeeded so far as to inspire her with a true one. So soon as he
was assured of it, he conjured her to enter into a union with him by the most
sacred ties. She unhappily consented; and it was even with joy that the poor
unfortunate Lady promised to solemnize a marriage which must consummate her
ruin. She thought that the title of spouse of Count Alexius Orloff would
shelter her invincibly from those treacheries which she was taught to
apprehend. She entertained not the least suspicion that a man could make
religion and the most sacred titles subservient to the destruction of an
innocent victim. But, alas! was any religion, was any title sacred to the
barbarian into whose snares she had fallen? -- He who could strangle the
unfortunate Peter III. could he dread to dishonor the daughter of Elizabeth?

Feigning a desire that the marriage ceremony should be performed according to
the ritual of the Greek Church, he suborned subaltern villains to disguise
themselves as priests and lawyers. Thus profanation was combined with imposture
against the innocent and unprotected Tarrakanoff!

When Alexius Orloff was become the husband, or rather the ravisher of this
unhappy Princess, he represented to her, that their stay at Rome exposed her to
too close observation, and that it would be advisable for her to go to some
other city of Italy, to wait for the breaking out of the conspiracy that was to
call her to the throne. Believing this advice to be dictated by love and
prudence, she answered that she would follow him wherever he chose to conduct
her. He brought her immediately to Pisa, where he had previously hired a
magnificent palace. There he continued to treat her with marks of tenderness
and respect; but he permitted none to come near her, except persons who were
entirely at his devotion; and when she went to the play or to the public
promenade, he accompanied her always himself.

The division of the Russian squadron under the command of Admiral Greig, had
just entered the port of Leghorn. On relating this news to the Princess, Orloff
told her, that his presence was necessary at Leghorn for the purpose of giving
some orders, and offered to take her with him. To this she readily consented,
as she had heard much talk of the beauty of the port of Leghorn and the
magnificence of the Russian ships. -- Imprudent Lady! the nearer she approached
the catastrophe of the plot, the more she trusted to the tenderness and the
sincerity of her faithless betrayer!

She departed from Pisa with her customay attendants. On arriving at Leghorn,
she landed at the house of the English Consul, who had prepared for her a
suitable apartment, and who received her with marks of the profoundest respect.
Several ladies were early in making their visits, and sedulously attended her
on all occasions. She saw herself presently surrounded by a numerous court,
eager to be beforehand with all her desires, and seeming to make it their only
study incessantly to procure her some new entertainment. Whenever she went out,
the people ran in her way. At the theater all eyes were directed to her box.
All circumstances conspired to lull her into a fatal security. All tended to
dispel the idea of any danger at hand.

It is doubtless impossible to believe that an English Consul The English
Editor, anxious, no doubt, for the honor of his country, denies that the
English Consul had any knowledge of this infamous transaction -- we hope and
believe that he had not -- but we know, that Admiral Greig was a Scotchman, and
that he had many English and Scotch Officers on board of his fleet.
, an English Admiral, and ladies of their family or acquaintance, could be so
base, so inhuman, as to draw into the snare, by deceitful respect and caresses,
a victim, whose youth, whose beauty, whose innocence, was capable of affecting
the most insensible heart. It is not to be imagined that they were in any
degree privy to the plot contrived against her, or that they studiously
inspired her with a confidence, only the more infallibly to betray her.

The young Tarrakanoff was so far from suspecting her dangerous situation,
that, after having passed several days in a round of amusements and
dissipation, she asked of herself to be shown the Russian fleet. -- The idea
was applauded. -- The necessary orders were immediately given; and the next
day, on rising from table, every thing was ready at the waterside for
receiving the Princess. On her coming down, she was handed into a boat with
magnificent awnings. The Consul, and several ladies, seated themselves with her
-- A second boat conveyed Vice Admiral Greig and Count Alexius Orloff; and a
third, filled with Russian and English officers, closed the procession. The
boats put off from shore in sight of an immense multitude of people, and were
received by the fleet with a band of music, salutes of artillery and repeated
huzzas! -- As the Princess came alongside the ship of which she was to go on
board, a splendid chair was let down from the yard, in which being seated, she
was hoisted upon deck; and it was observed to her, that these were particular
honors paid to her rank.

But no sooner was she on board than she was handcuffed -- In vain she implored
for pity of the cruel betrayer, whom she still called her husband -- In vain
she threw herself at his feet, and watered them with her tears -- No answer was
even vouchsafed to her lamentations -- She was carried down into the hold, and
the next day the fleet set sail for Russia!

On arriving at Petersburgh, the young victim was shut up in a fortress; and
what became of her afterward was never certainly known -- Some thought that
she was drowned in the waters of the Neva; others, with more probability, that
she was poisoned in prison. The wretched sat of the young Tarrakanoff may be
compared to that of the daughter of (...): A carnifice laqueum juxta,
compressam -- -- Ta^^t. Ann. lib. v.


The inhabitants of Leghorn, who had seen the Princess embark, heard shortly
after, with horror, that, instead of a grand entertainment, which she was led
to expect on board the fleet, she was put in irons. The Grand Duke of Tuscany,
whose territory was so shamefully insulted, wrote immediately to Vienna and to
Petersburgh to complain of the outrage; but the iron-hearted Orloff insolently
braved both the complaints of Leopold and the public indignation.

[We have seen, by the extract here given, that the system of Favouritism had
been introduced into the Russian Court by the Empress Elizabeth, in a manner
not very refined or decorous -- Catherine pursued the same system, but in
rather a more orderly and methodical manner, although not less open and avowed --
Catherine's passions were as ardent as Elizabeth's, but she conducted all her
affairs, whether of business or pleasure, with vastly more skill and address --
The gratification of her desires, however, was not obtained but at a great
price; the Reader is astonished at the sums of money, jewels, and palaces,
given to these Paramours, particularly to Potemkin, who had the art to obtain
from his imperial mistress a left handed marriage. It appears by this History,
that the present Emperor is not the son of her husband, Peter III but of a
Count Sultikow, Vice Chamberlain to the then Grand Duke, who, shortly after her
marriage, had the honor of becoming Catharine's (...).
-- With a short account of Catherine's method of conducting her system of
Favouritism, we shall conclude these extracts.]

The post of Favorite being peculiar to Russia, it will naturally be expected
that it should here be treated of somewhat more at large. -- Ever since the
year 1730, this Empire has been governed by women, the reign of Peter III.
having been too short to form any striking exception, or for giving the
Russians a notion of any other government. It is a trite remark, that when
Kings reign Women rule, and when Women reign Men govern; but there seems
nothing more in this pretended axiom than an antithesis consecrated by custom,
and repeated from one to the other, like many more, without reflection or
foundation. Henry IV. Gustavus III. Catherine II. are invincible proofs that
both men and women are capable of grand undertakings, without the aid of the
other sex, not to mention more examples in confirmation of the fact. For a
series of seventy years the Monarchs of Russia have always had Favorites
officially: it is no wonder then that the custom, thus sanctioned for so long a
period, and scrupulously observed by four Empresses, should be almost deemed a
fundamental law of the Empire, and an appendage to imperial grandeur! -- As the
reign of Catharine was of a longer duration than any of the Empresses her
predecessors, it is highly natural that the number of her Favorites should be
more considerable.

It is necessary then to show what were the duties and distinctions of the
Favorites of Catherine. -- When her Majesty had fixed her choice on a new
Favorite, she created him her General Aid-de-camp, in order that he might
accompany her every where without attracting reproach or inviting observation.
Thenceforward the Favorite occupied in the palace an apartment beneath that of
the Empress, to which it communicated by a private staircase. The first day of
his installment he received a present of 100,000 rubles, and every month he
found 12,000 on his dressing-table. The Marshal of the Court was commissioned
to provide him a table of 24 covers, and to defray all the expenses of his
household. The Favorite attended the Empress on all parties of amusement, at
the opera, at balls, promenades, excursions of pleasure, and the like, and was
not allowed to leave the palace without express permission. He was given to
understand, that it would not be taken well if he conversed familiarly with
other women; and if he went to dine with any of his friends, the mistress of
the house was always absent!

Whenever the Empress cast her eyes on one of her subjects, in the design of
raising him to the post of Favorite, she caused him to be invited to dinner by
some lady in her confidence, on whom she dropped in as if by chance -- There
she would enter into discourse with the new comer, with a view to discover
whether or not he was worthy of the honor she designed to vouchsafe him. When
the judgment she formed was favorable, the confidant was informed of it by a
significant look, who took care to notify it to him who had the happiness to
please. The day following he received a visit from one of the physicians of the
Court, who came to inquire into the state of his health; and the same evening
he accompanied the Empress to the hermitage, and took possession of the
apartment that had been prepared for him. It was on the selection of Potemkin
that these formalities began; and since that time they have been constantly
observed.

When a Favorite had lost the power of making himself agreeable, there was
also a particular manner of giving him his dismission. He received orders to
travel; and from that moment he was debarred all access to her Majesty. But he
was sure of finding at the place of his destination recompenses worthy of the
munificent Catherine.

[ To be continued.]
HORACE WALPOLE, LORD ORFORD.
Mr. Walpole was the youngest son of the famous Sir Rob. Walpole, many years
prime Minister to George I. and II. -- Horace was born in the year 17^5, and
received a complete education at Eton school, at Cambridge, and by his travels
in Italy, etc. He was many years a Member of Parliament, latterly he ascended
to the Peerage, was acquainted with the first wits of the age, was
disencumbered of either wife or children, and was possessed of an independent
fortune -- in short, he had every opportunity that a man could have, to improve
his mind and increase his knowledge. He died in the ^0th year of his age,
leaving a fortune of 95,000l. in the 3 per cent. Stock. -- He bequeathed
10,000l. to the Duchess of Gloucester, 5000l. to Lady Waldegrave, 5000l. to
each of the Miss Berrys, and 500l. to each of his nephews. -- When he was above
70 years of age, he offered to marry either of the Miss Berrys, but, strange to
tell, both of them had the courage to refuse a Lord and 95,000l. yet he
generously remembered them in his will. -- To Mrs. Damer (celebrated for her
uncommon taste as a statuary) he left 2000l. and the beautiful seat of
Strawberry Hill, situated on the bank of the Thames, near to London.

After Mr. Walpole had retired from Parliament, he dedicated himself entirely
to the fine arts and literary pursuits. He published a Catalogue of Royal and
Noble Authors, which displays much industry and judicious criticism. His
historic doubts respecting the life and true character of Richard III. are
replete with great ingenuity and sound argument. The only dramatic work he ever
produced was, The Mysterious Mother, a tragedy, printed at his own press (for
he was both a Poet and a Printer, kindred Arts) at Strawberry Hill; the story
is worthy of perusal in the closet, but too horrid, perhaps too indelicate, for
public representation. The Castle of Otranto, a romance is an unique of its
Kind, was favorably received, and was the prolific parent of a number of
incoherent compositions that daily load and disgrace the press. The Old English
Baron may be considered as the best imitation of the Castle of Otranto -- but,
beyond all modern Writers, the fanciful pen of Mrs. Radcliffe has carried the
mavelous to the highest pitch of imagination, whilst, in (...), she naturally
accounts for all her seemingly supernatural appearances.
He also published entertaining Anecdotes of Painting, with some interesting
particulars of the celebrated Hogarth. -- He was one of the combination of Wits
who supported Moore in his periodical paper entitled The World. -- Mr.
Walpole's works, particularly his letters, are characterised by a playfulness
of imagination, and a delicacy of wit, a talent seldom acquired by Writers in
general. He was uncommonly agreeable in his manners, shone greatly in company,
and was thought to possess a greater stock of literary and political anecdotes,
than any gentleman in England; indeed it may be said, that, with his genius, no
man had ever better opportunities of acquiring knowledge, having it in his
power, for 60 years, to associate with every man in Great Britain and France,
from the Prince to the lowest grade in society.

MR. Walpole's works are handsomely printed in 5 volumes 4^o. adorned with a
number of well-engraved copper plates -- These volumes, however, with an
American reader, cannot have very much interest; they are almost entirely
adapted to an English reader, one too acquainted with the times they describe,
and the characters that then figured on the public stage. Mr. W. aware of this,
acknowledges, "that his books are only calculated for the idle and the curious"
-- but the curious reader will find many articles worthy of his attention, as
Mr. W. had a very general connection with both the fashionable and political
world, and an intimate knowledge of all the leading men, and women too, of the
times in which he lived.

Mr. Walpole was a staunch Whig, and, in some instances, borders even on
Republicanism. He delineates characters with much wit and ridicule, and
withdraws the veil which had hidden several great men "from the world's ken."
We admire the style of Mr. W's letters; they are witty, sprightly, and
unaffected; he writes like a Gentleman and a Scholar, and wields the weapon of
ridicule with uncommon dexterity. We think his manner a model for certain kinds
of familiar correspondence, perhaps preferable even to that of Lord Chesterfield
-- At present, we select from his works some parts of what he calls his
Reminiscences, which contain interesting anecdotes relative to the two first
Georges, who, with all their Gothic clumsiness and German stateliness, had
their Favorites and th^^r Mistresses, for whom the English nation, as usual,
had to provide both in titles and pensions!

George I. while Electoral Prince, had married his cousin the Princess
Dorothea, only child of the Duke of Zell; a match of convenience to reuntie the
dominions of the family. Though she was very handsome, the Prince, was
extremely amorous, and had several Mistresses; which provocation, and his
absence in the army of the Confederates, probably disposed the Princess to
indulge some degree of coquetry. At that moment arrived at Hanover the famous
and beautiful Count Konismark Brother of the beautiful Countess Konismark,
mistress of Augustus II of Poland. -- The Count had the honor of being wounded
at a bull feast in Spain, where he behaved wi^h vast intrepidity!
the charms of whose person ought not to have obliterated the memory of his
vile assassination of Mr. Thyone. His vanity, the beauty of the electoral
Princess, and the neglect under which he found her, encouraged his presumption
to make his addresses to her, and that not very secretly; and she received them
rather too indiscreetly. The old Elector flamed at the insolence of so
stigmatized a pretender, and ordered him to quit his dominions the next day.
The Princess, surrounded by women closely connected with her husband, and
consequently enemies of the lady they injured, was persuaded by them to suffer
the Count to kiss her hand before his abrupt departure; and he was actually
introduced by them into her bedchamber the next morning before she rose. From
that moment he disappeared; nor was it known what became of him, till on the
death of George I. on his son the new King's first journey to Hanover, some
alterations in the palace being ordered by him, the body of Konismark was
discovered under the floor of the electoral Princess's dressing room, the Count
having probably been strangled there the instant he left her, and his body
secreted. -- The disappearance of the Count made his murder suspected, and
various reports of the discovery of his body have of late years been spread,
but not with the authentic circumstances.

Of the circumstances that ensued on Konismark's disappearance I am ignorant;
nor am I acquainted with the laws of Germany relative to divorce or separation:
nor do I know or suppose that Despotism and Pride allow the law to insist on
much formality when a Sovereign has reason or a mind to get rid of his wife.
Perhaps too much difficulty of untying the Gordian knot of Matrimony thrown in
the way of an absolute Prince would be no kindness to the ladies, but might
prompt him to use a sharper weapon, like that butchering husband our Henry
VIII. Sovereigns, who narrow or let out the law of God according to their
prejudices and passions, mould their own laws no doubt to the standard of their
convenience. Genealogic purity of blood is the predominant folly of Germany:
and the code of Malta seems to have more force in the empire than the ten
Commandments. Thence was introduced that most absurd evasion of the
indissolubility of marriage, espousals with the left hand; as if the Almighty
had restrained his ordinance to one half of a man's person, and allowed a
greater latitude to his left side than to his right, or pronounced the former
more ignoble than the latter! -- The consciences both of princely and noble
persons in Germany are quieted, if the more plebeian side is married to one who
would degrade the more illustrious moiety -- but, as if the laws of Matrimony
had no reference to the children to be thence propagated, the children of a
lefthanded alliance are not entitled to inherit. -- Shocking consequence of a
senseless equivocation, that only satisfies Pride, not Justice; and calculated
for an acquital at the Herald's Office, not at the last Tribunal.

The Duchess of Kendal, of whom I have said so much, was when Mademoiselle
Schulemberg, maid of honor to the Electress Sophia, mother of King George I.
and destined by King William and the act of settlement to succeed Queen Anne.
George fell in love with Mademoiselle Schulemberg, though by no means an
inviting object -- so little, that one evening when she was in waiting behind
the Electress's chair at a ball, the Princess Sophia, who had made herself
mistress of the language of her future subjects, said in English to Mrs. Howard
(afterward Countess of Suffolk), then at her court, "Look at that (...), and
think of her being my son's passion!"

The Duchess, under whatever denomination, had attained and preserved to the
last her ascendant over the King: but notwithstanding that influence he was not
more constant to her than he had been to his avowed wife: for another
acknowledged mistress, whom he also brought over, was Madame Kilmansegge,
Countess of Platen, who was created Countess of Darlington, and by whom he was
indisputably father of Charlotte married to Lord Viscount How, and mother of
the present Earl. Lady How was never publicly acknowledged as the King's
daughter; but Princess Amelia treated her daughter Mrs. How, upon that foot;
and one evening, when I was present, gave her a ring with a small portrait of
George I. with a crown of diamonds.

Lady Darlington, whom I saw at my mother's in my infancy, and whom I remember
being terrified at her enormous figure, was as corpulent and ample, as the
Duchess was long and emaciated. Two fierce black eyes, large and rolling
beneath two lofty arched eyebrows, two acres of cheeks spread with crimson, an
ocean of neck that overflowed and was not distinguished from the lower part of
her body, and no part restrained by stays -- no wonder that a child dreaded
such an Ogress, and that the mob of London were highly diverted at the
importation of so uncommon a Seraglio! -- They were food for all the venom of
the Jacobites; and indeed nothing could be grosser than the ribaldry that was
vomited out in lampoons, libels, and every channel of abuse, against the
Sovereign and the new Court, and chanted even in their hearing about the public
streets. The following Anecdote is related of George I. -- When his ^ajesty
came first to London, in 1714, the only expression he could utter any way
intelligibly, when the senseless mob were huzzaing him through the streets, was,
"My kood peoples, I pe kum for your koods" -- "Yes (said a Wit) and for our
chattels too, by G --." -- When we consider the load of heavy taxes under which
the English people now groan, the Income Tax the most vexations of all, the Wit
spoke prophetically.


It was not till the last year or two of his reign that their foreign Sovereign
paid the nation the compliment of taking openly an English mistress. That
personage was Anne Brett, eldest daughter by her second husband of the
repudiated wife of the Earl of Macelesfield, the unnatural mother of Savage the
poet. See Dr. Johnson's Life of Savage, said to be the most finished piece of
Biography in the English language.
Miss Brett was very handsome, but dark enough by her eyes, complexion, and
hair, for a Spanish beauty. Abishag was lodged in the palace under the eyes of
Bathsheba, who seemed to maintain her power, as other favorite sultanas have
done, by suffering partners in the Sovereign's affections. When his Majesty
should return to England, a Countess's coronet was to have rewarded the young
lady's compliance, and marked her secondary rank. -- She might, however, have
proved a troublesome rival, as she seemed so confident of the power of her
charms, that, whatever predominant ascendant the Duchess might retain, her own
authority in the palace she thought was to yield to no one else. George I. when
his son the Prince of Wales and the Princess had quitted St James's on their
quarrel with him, had kept back their three eldest daughters who lived with him
to his death, even after there had outwardly been a reconciliation between the
King and Prince. Miss Brett, when the King set out, ordered a door to be broken
out of her apartment into the royal garden. Anne, the eldest of the Princesses
offended at the freedom, and not choosing such a companion in her walks,
ordered the door to be walled up again -- Miss Brett as imperiously reversed
that command. The King died suddenly, and the empire of the new mistress and
her promised coronet vanished. She afterward married Sir William Leman, and
was forgotten before her reign ^ad transpired beyond the confines of
Westminster.

Miss Henrietta Hobart was daughter of Sir Henry and sister of Sir John Hobart,
since created Earl of Bucking hamshire. She was married to Mr. Howard,
afterward Earl of Suffolk. Mr. Howard was not opulent, the King was amorous in
the German manner, and the lady was inconstant, or ambitious. The intrigue
would not have attracted much public notice, but for the indiscretion of the
husband, who, far from ceding his wife quietly to the Royal couch, when heated
with wine, went one night into the quadrangle of St. James's, and vociferously
demanded her to be restored to him before the soldiers, etc. Being thrust out,
he sent a letter to her by the Archbishop of Canterbury, who gave the letter to
the Queen, who had the malicious pleasure of delivering it to her. -- During
the summer, a negotiation was commenced with the obstreperous husband, who sold
his own honor and his wife's chastity for a pension of 1200l. a year!

After the death of the Queen, Lady Yarmouth came over, who was the King's
mistress at Hanover. She was created a Countess, and had much weight with him.
-- The King's last years passed as regularly as a clock. At 9 at night, he had
cards in the apartment of the Princesses Amelia and Caroline, with Lady
Yarmouth, two or three of the late Queen's ladies, and as many of the favored
Officers of his own household. Every Saturday he carried this party to dine at
Richmond; they went in state coaches about the middle of the day, with the
heavy horse-guards kicking up the dust before them. They dined, walked an hour
in the garden, and then returned in the same dusty parade to St. James's -- and
so his Majesty fancied himself the most gallant and lively Prince in Europe!

WALPOLIANA.
The expensive system of Favouritism (on this occasion, we mean female
Favouritism) to say nothing of its immorality, seems to be an almost
inseparable accompanyment of Monarchyism. Both religious and profane History is
full of it. We shall say nothing, at present, of the Jewish authorities, but
point entirely to English chronicles. -- William the Conqueror, himself a
bastard, is the legal founder of the English system -- Passing over several
ages of Favouritism, we have only time to remark, that some of the first Nobles
in England are the offspring of Charles II's titled concubines -- James II with
all his gloomy superstition, had his Mistresses Lady Dorchester, well known for
her coarse wit, said, "that she wondered for what James chose his mistresse^ --
We are none of us handsome (continued she), and if we have wit, he has not
sense enough to find it out!" -- This same Lady meeting the Duchess of
Portsmouth and the Coun^ess of Orkney, King William's favorites, one day at
the drawing room of George I. "God! (she exclaimed) who would have thought,
that we three whores should have met here?" -- Having, after James's
abdication, married Sir David Collycar, by whom she had two sons, she said to
them, "If any body should call you "sons of a whore," you must bear it, for you
are so; but if they call you bastards, fight till you die, for you are the sons
of an honest man."

Lady Susan Bellasis, another of James's mistresses, had wit but no beauty --
Mrs. Godfrey had neither. Grammont has recorded why she was chosen.


-- and even William III. with all his Dutch taciturnity, had likewise his
Favorites -- all of whom, together with those of the two first Georges, To the
credit of George III. none of his w -- s disgrace the English Peerage. His
lawful progeny are burdensome enough in all conscience on his people, without
the aid of left handed productions.
were pensioned and ennobled at John Bull's expense!

Lord Harvey had dedicated himself to the Queen, and stood well with Sir Robert
Walpole; and he contrived to make a deep impression on the heart of the
Princess Caroline. A change of Ministry afterward displaced him; rage,
disappointment, and a distempered constitution carried him off, and overwhelmed
his Princess with grief, who never after appeared in public Lord Harvey had a
violent break with Frederick Prince of Wales, when his Poyal ^ighness came to
know, that his Lordship had shared the favors of Miss Vane, one of the Maids
of Honor, and one of the Prince's mistresses. -- When this virtuous Maid of
Honor was delivered of a son at St. James's, ^he said it was the Prince's;
whilst Lord Harvey, and Lord A and several other Lords, each of them thought
the child his!


The celebrated Dr. Johnson, who was a Jacobite both in politics and religion,
held the whole Hanoverian race in utter contempt, and was pretty free in his
expressions of dislike, until (by means of Lord Bute) he obtained a pension of
200l, a year, when the Doctor found it necessary to be more circumspect -- See
Boswell's endeavor to white-wash his bearish friend.

The notoriously reprobate Lord Ross being on his deathbed, was desired by his
Chaplain, "to call on God." -- "If I go that way (said the dying Peer), but I
don't believe I shall."

A Vicar and Curate of a village where there was to be a burial, were at
variance. The Vicar not coming in time, the Curate began the service, and was
reading the words "I am the resurrection," when the Vicar arrived, almost out
of breath, and snatching the book out of the Curate's hand, cried, in a
passion, " You the resurrection -- you lie -- it is I who am the resurrection!"
--

Mr. Walpole, speaking of the late Lord Clive has the following just and noble
sentiments, of the truth of which, the people of England, we believe, has this
day the fullest experience: -- "Lord Clive In the white-washing of this Lord in
the House of Commons, the present Lord Loughborough, then Mr. Alex. Wedderburn,
first distinguished himself, and laid the foundation of his present fortune. --
But although his eloquence could quiet the scruples of a venal assembly, he could
not bring to his client a quiet conscience; his cruelties in India so
continually haunted his guilty mind, that at length he dashed out his brains
against a marble statue in his own garden!
was qualified, like Caesar, either to write or to conquer. Still, however, one
who neither reverences Roman usurpations, nor Spanish massacres, will never
allow his pen to applaud the invasions and depredations of the English in
India. Suffered to traffic as merchants, we have starved Alluding to the famous
rice monopoly in India, when, according to some accounts, two millions of the
innocent inhabitants were starved to death! -- Several Peers and Nabobs n^w
flourish away in England on the produce of that infamous transaction.
, plundered, enslaved, and butchered the innocent inhabitants of foreign
countries. All the imported diamonds of the East cannot out-blaze the crimson
that ought to stain our cheeks, or the indignation that ought to fire them,
when more recent Machiavels have called for applause on these shocking
devastations Our readers must recollect the mock-trial of W. Hastings, which
lasted seven years, and concluded with giving him a pension of 3000l, year, as
an unequivocal approbation of all his atrocities in the East!
-- But, as Cesar's conquests lifted the yoke on the neck of Roman liberty,
Indian gold has already undermined the English constitution -- For when Heaven
inflicts Heroes on mankind, it generally accompanies them with their
consequences, the loss of liberty -- to the vanquished, certainly -- to the
victorious, often.

" By foreign gold are British morals changed,
" And Afric's sons, and India's blood, avenged."
A Clergyman at Oxford, who was remarkably absent and nervous, going to read
prayers at St. Mary's, heard a show-man in the same street, who had an
exhibition of wild beasts, often repeat, "Walk in and see the show; all alive,
all alive, ho!" -- The sounds struck the absent man, and ran in his had so
much, that when he began to read the Service, and came to the words "does that
which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive," he cried out with a
louder voice, "he shall save his soul alive; "all alive, all alive, ho!" -- to
the astonishment of the congregation.

ANECDOTE. -- Sampson Gideon, a Jew, having accumulated a great fortune in
England, had a mind to make his son a Christian, and conform to the established
religion of the country. Accordingly, he received Episcopal baptism, and was
put under the care of a clerical tutor, in order to learn the formularies of
that branch of the Christian faith. After some time, Sampson had a curiosity to
know what progress his son had made in the new religion; and having heard the
Tutor examine him in the Catechism, he thought he would proceed in the same
manner -- "Who made you?" said the old Jew to the young Christian? "God,"
answered the boy -- "Who redeemed you?" -- "Jesus Christ" -- Here, unluckily,
old Sampson forgot the next question, and stood foolishly twirling his fingers,
striving to recollect himself; at length, determined to say something or other
like the third question, "And who gave you that hat?" -- "The Holy Ghost,"
answered the youth!

This same youth was afterward admitted to all the rights and franchises of an
English subject -- was first created a Baronet -- then a Lord -- and is now, by
virtue of his patent, a well-beloved cousin of the King himself, and an
hereditary Legislator of the Imperial Kingdom of Great Britain -- greater
honors, in the estimation of this world, than all that the Maccabees received!

[ To be continued.]
MODERN ROME, Immediately previous to the French Revolution.
ON coming out of the Pantheon, I went to the Caiptol. -- This is the place
which gave law to the universe; where Jupiter had his temple, and Rome her
senate; from whence the Roman eagles were continually flying to every quarter
of the globe, and from every quarter of the globe continually winging their way
back with victories; and from whence a single word from the mouth of Scipio, of
Pompey, or of Caesar, quickly reached the most distant nations, menacing their
liberty, or dooming their Kings to death! -- Alas, where is now all its
greatness? -- Its Senate, its Citizens, its Liberty? -- Rome retains only her
name; she is now only known by her ruins; by the pusillanimous superstition of
her Nobles, and by the bigoted ignorance of her degraded inhabitants!

At Rome there is now only three classes; the Pope, the Clergy, and the People.

The number of inhabitants is estimated at 170,000 -- Fully 10,000 of these are
beggars; menial servants are more numerous; and the Clergy may be reckoned a
sixth part of the whole.

Such is the state of professed celibacy, that upwards of five women are
reckoned to one man. -- This will enable us to form an idea of the libertinism
of popish Rome -- The best education a girl here can get, is to get none -- The
multitude have some wit, a great deal of imagination, and no reason!

The Ecclesiastical State, without troops, without money, surrounded by States
casting a longing eye on its possessions, should seem an easy prey to the first
ambitious invader. -- Observe, that the jealousy of these States with holds
them from the attack; the political interest of the Catholic Princes watches
over a Despotism upon which every other depends, that Kingly maxim, more
powerful than armies, viz. That all authority is derived from God.

It is incontestible, that it is the crown of the Monarch that supports the
tiara of the Pontiff -- To separate them, would be to destroy both.

The temporal authority of the Pope will, probably, never be lost, till no
religion shall exist, but one free from superstition. In this point the writer
was mistaken -- We have seen the French Republic overturn the power of the
Pope, and cut the Gordian Knot. It is true, the combined Kings, both Catholic
and Protestant, have restored the puppet; but the veil is withdrawn, the
mystery is disclosed; and the Pope's political existence hangs, at present, on
the point of Buonaparte's sword.


What a duration does this promise? -- For it is impossible for Reason or
Philosphy ever to purge the Catholic religion of all superstition. This
sentiment is the more remarkable, as it comes from a Frenchman, who, very
probably, was bred a Roman Catholic.


The natural weakness of the human mind, the ignorance of the lower classes,
the power of habit, and the interest of various passions, prevent the Christian
religion from attaining a state of perfect purity; from elevating itself to
Heaven, from whence it descended, and from returning to those simple and
sublime ideas, to which vulgar minds can never rise. We hope the American
people will disprove this position, and show the world, that Liberty and a
rational system of Religion can exist together, without the aid of Superstition
or a Kingly Hierarchy.


It is easy to explain the tranquillity which reigns at Rome. -- Though the Pope
is in possession of absolute power, he is not much in the way of abusing it --
he is not born a Prince -- the crown is to him the gift of Fortune -- and he is
an old man before he gets it.

The despotism of the Popes, therefore, consists more in not exerting their
power, than in abusing it.

With respect to the people, an infinity of moral causes bends their obedience,
like their faith, under the Pontifical yoke. They have an absolute master, but
they have only one, and they believe his authority is derived from God!

If the people of Rome live in peace, though neither kept in order by a good
police, nor restrained by regular justice, it is because the absence of the
causes of disorder there supplies the place of the usual means of preserving
order. -- Robberies and housebreakings are rare, but assassinations are
frequent -- These, however, occasion neither disturbance or horror; the
inhabitants of Rome coolly see them committed, and relate them with
indifference; the murderer is not looked upon either as dangerous or infamous;
"No doubt (say they) he has had provocation!"

Thus, the dagger is the duel of the populace -- and thus, revenge constitutes
the police of Rome!

In short, in Rome, there is neither military spirit, nor municipal justice --
Besides, there are near seven hundred Places of Refuge in Rome, and every house
on which a Cardinal has placed his arms, is a place of refuge for creditors! --
Some Cardinals make a gainful traffic of their asylums!

Mendicity, that degeneration of poverty, the precarious state of which in
other countries is the ordinary source of robberies, has not that inconvenience
at Rome; here it is a certain profession. A man, a woman, or a child, has only
to hang out a few rags, or expose a sore, and they procure victuals. The pity
of the Romans never reasons -- and what does a mendicant want? -- Degraded by
misery, or disease, or idleness, animal life is enough for him; give him
something to eat, and he is as happy -- as his dog!

There are more beggars at Rome than any other City. They swarm on all sides;
and the pilgrimages add to their number. Every place is open to them; they are
permitted to seek every where for charity. Delicacy suffers and murmurs at
this; but Humanity bids us to consider that they are men.

At Rome, therefore, misery, indolence, ambition, or the desire of women, do
not excite to robbery -- I say, the desire of the sex; for the climate and the
manners of the country, furnish women even to satiety -- Private debauchery is
so great, that public debauchery is not perceived!

In the history of civilized nations, the Chapter of Women is divided into
three sections; Beauty, Gallantry, and Dress. The Roman women, like the Italian
women in general, are still in a state of ignorance in an art so extensive and
important as that of Dress; in the art of adapting ornament to dress, and both
to the shape, features, complexion, age, and the different hours of the morning
or evening; in the art of softening by gradations, of adjusting by shades, of
availing themselves of contrasts -- in short, in that art, so costly and
scientific, of completely equipping a woman for vanity, coquetry, or fashion.

Shall I tell it? -- Will it be believed! -- All the women in Rome wear WIGS!
-- It is a sacrifice made to indolence by their coquetry. Accustomed to lie
down every day, after dinner, till six in the evening, to place a second night
in the middle of the day, they have found it too troublesome to build up the
edifice of a head-dress twice in the same day, and therefore indolently resign
their locks to the scissors.

The Roman ladies are in the habit of putting on white paint when in full
dress. The Italian lady wishes to be a lilly; the French lady, a rose What, has
not beneficent Nature made them women? -- Why will they thus disfigure
themselves? -- They must have gauzes, feathers, flowers, and artificial heads;
has not Nature given them beautiful hair? -- Rouge; has she not adorned them
with the blush of modesty? -- White; although she has given them the most
delicate complexion?

It is a fact, that the superfluity of existence, if I may use the expression,
never fails to produce that uneasy sensation, which the French call ennui, and
the English, listlissness, sometimes, nothing to doishness. -- But this
superfluity of time, after the gratification of their most pressing appetites,
the modern Romans expend in sleep, in love, in frivolities, or in religious
processions.

From dinner they pass to sleep, which lasts till six in the evening; they then
do nothing, or in trifles which amount to nothing. Night arrives; all business
is suspended, and all the shops are shut up; men and women, boys and girls,
every body takes flight till three or four in the morning. They hasten to the
public walks, to the Corfo, to coteries, and to taverns -- In short, every
night is a public festival, at which love, or rather lust presides. The senses
speak to the senses, and they soon make themselves understood. -- Intrigues are
so numerous in Rome, that nothing can be called an intrigue -- In modern Rome,
the morally beautiful is absolutely lost and unknown.

The modern Romans have a wonderful facility of changing faces; they are
perpetually masked. -- In their dealings with each other, they never give
credit to countenances, to language, or even professions -- they believe only
in the event!

Throughout all the intercourse of the great with the great, and of the great
with the little, in Rome, there reigns a certain ease, politeness, and
universal flattery. This proceeds from the opportunities Fortune here enjoys of
exercising all her caprices, and this, generally, in secret and in silence, by
means of valets, monks, secretaries, and intriguing women. -- Nobody,
therefore, is acquainted with whom he has to do, -- Tomorrow, perhaps, that
Priest may be a Pope, that Monk may be a Cardinal, or that valet a man in
power. -- In this state of doubt, every body is civil to every body; and, in
this state of uncertainty, every body lavishes good wishes, smiles, and
squeezes of the hand!

Would you wish to know the behavior of a Cardinal when he visits another
Cardinal, especially when the latter is in place? -- On entering the first
antichamber, where the servants are, his Eminence makes a profound bow; in the
second, where sit the valets de chamber, he smiles; in the third, where the
Cardinal's gentlemen stay, he takes them by the hand; in the fourth, where he
finds the introductor, he again bows, and smiles, and takes him by the hand,
and even chats with him; at length, he arrives at the great man's chamber. In
appearance, you see two friends cordially embracing each other -- no such
thing; they are two rivals, ready to cut each other's throat!

Life, here, knows only childhood and age -- The other seasons are wanting --
Yet the people here appear to be satisfied. Their hunger is not violent; one
daily repast satisfies them. Their thirst consumes little wine, but great
quantities of ice and lemons. And us for clothing, the climate reduces this to
a mere covering; every body not naked, is clothed. -- The wants of the sexes
find aliment in Cicisbeism, the manners of the country, and in religion!

The Romish religion, by its absolutions, throws a convenient veil over the
past, and, by its promises, gives a favorable coloring to the future. The
common people are those who fear the least, and hope the most. They possess a
most commodious religion. Let them be present at their religions ceremonies,
that is to say, their sacred theatrical exhibitions, to make certain signs, and
pronounce cerbain words, and they are sure of Heaven!

Religious ceremonies are very frequent in Rome; indeed they are necessary to
amuse, and to deceive, this worthless people; but I thought them uninteresting,
without dignity or propriety -- The procession of the Fete Dieu owes its
splendour to the presence of the Pope.

All the Monks, all the Priests, all the Prelates, all the Cardinals, etc. are
now in St. Peter's, and the procession is arranging -- Whilst this is ordering,
I walk in the church, and am hurried about by the crowd -- What noise, what
confusion! occasioned by the floods of people perpetually pouring in, and the
floods rushing out! -- By devotees, who, pressing around the feet of St. Peter,
are contending for the happiness of kissing them; by persons of every
description, every sex and age, kneeling before Confessionals filled with
crafty Monks, and receiving absolution dispensed at the end of a long switch,
which the Monks shake over their heads; by young men and girls, wandering from
tomb to tomb, wantoning with each other, and talking of love! -- Here I see
Englishmen gravely taking the dimensions of the pillars; Frenchmen, skipping
about and jesting; Germans, astonished to perceive on the gates of the finest
church in the world, the most lascivious pictures! -- On the other side, I
observe a row of Abbes bending their bodies to the earth, and flattering the
Cardinals, who, as they pass, assume great stateliness; and a number of
mendicants, who, to impose on pity, or fatigue delicacy, shock every eye with
sores and nudities!

At length, the order of march is given -- Behold a numerous train of dirty
penitents, who file off, and make room for a multitude of dirty monks, dirty
curates, and a thousand dirty wretches, clad in dirty surplices, bearing each
of them a flambeau, and exciting, every where as they pass, by their grotesque
appearance, an universal laugh. Now come the Prelates, the Cardinals, and the
Pope himself! -- His military attendants receive him, and the holy Sacrament
that is waiting for him. The union of the two powers takes place, to the sound
of trumpets; the Pope and the Sovereign are intermingled, and the Crown and the
Tiara united on the same head! -- The Pontiff King then mounts on a throne, and
seats himself with the Host before him, yet it is so managed, that he appears
as if on his knees, whilst a dozen robust men bear him along. It is in this
manner that the chief of the Christian Bishops advances among the people,
holding the Sacrament in his hands, and his eyes lifted toward Heaven, whilst
a general murmur runs through the crowd, whispering How handsome the Pope is! --
The procession returns to the Church; a thousand torches are ranged along the
whole extent of the immense building, and round the High Altar. The Pope
descends from his moving throne, crosses the church, mounts the steps of the
altar, and, depositing the Host, falls upon his knees -- rises up again --
gives his benediction -- and the business is concluded.

Is this the religion of Christ^ -- Are these the ceremonies of the meek and
lowly Jesus? -- Truly has it been said, that if Peter and Paul, and the whole
Twelve, were to return on earth, they would not believe that this was the
religion for which they bled and suffered, but that these whimsical ceremonies
were the fantastic and unhallowed rites of a Pagan people! Such are the people,
and such the religion, of modern Rome -- of which religion, the people of
England, not many years ago, stood in so much fear, and to destroy which, they
(...) so much blood, and spent so much money -- and, strange to relate, to
restore this same superstition, they are now sacrificing so many thousands of
lives, and wasting so many millions of money! -- What is all this State
juggling? -- Is it King-craft, or Priestcraft, or both?

How wonderful, how immeasurable, are the folly and the wickedness of man!




What a contrast between the religious festivals of modern Rome, compared with
those of the ancient Romans -- in which, priests crowned with laurel,
priestesses with myrtle, young virgins decked with flowers, augurs, flamens,
vestals, a band of venerable men, the flower of the Roman youth, and the
conquerors of the world in flowing robes, glittering with gold and purple,
followed the sacred statues, in ivory or gold, of Apollo, June, or Jupiter,
which, surrounded by the spoils and trophies of Asia, and borne on triumphal
cars drawn by lions and leopards, descended majestically from the Capitol, and
followed by the Roman people, the sovereigns of the world, amongst whom Kings
themselves are confounded, advanced, to the sound of cymbals and clarions,
through the streets of the capital of the universe, under triumphal arches, and
before the statues of their great men, either to the Forum, the Pantheon, or
the field of Mars -- and thus advancing, amidst all the splendour, all the
magnificence, all the religion, and all the Republican virtue of Rome, seemed
to be the Gods themselves, of whom they were the images, descending from
Olympus, and alighting amongst men!

[Some of our Readers, no doubt, have seen St. Paul's Church in London, and
admired that noble pile, worthy of so great a city, and of so opulent a people
-- How much will they be surprised to hear, that that building is as nothing
when compared to St. Peter's Church in Rome! -- With the Author's account of
that celebrated structure, we shall conclude these extracts.]

If I have not yet said any thing of the famous Church of St. Peter, it is,
because no language can furnish expressions to speak of it as it deserves.

The square which is before this superb building, is one of the handsomest in
Europe. -- In the middle of an immense enclosure, surrounded by a vast portico,
which supports, on 400 majestic columns, 200 colossal statues; between two
superb basins, blackened with bronze and time, whose waters, perpetually in
motion, spout up, sparkle, fall down again, and murmur night and day, a
magnificent Obelisk pompously rears its head.

This Obelisk is of the finest granite, and was hewn in Egypt -- It was erected
by Sextus V.

But it is not very astonishing that St Peter's should become so prodigious an
edifice. It was projected by the vanity of Julius II. who desired that his tomb
should be a temple. It was undertaken by the genius of Leo X. It was the
scandalous sale of Indulgencies in order to raise money for this building, that
gave rise to the Reformation, and which Luther so boldly and successfully
carried into effect. The unfortunate Wicklist had attempted a reformation of
religion long before (about the year 1350), but he appeared too soon; he had
not the noble Art of Printing to assist his endeavors, by opening the minds of
the people; and so he and his followers fell beneath the power of the Roman
Poniffs. -- Here again we see the effects of success -- Wickliff is stigmatized
as a Heretic; Luther is celebrated as a Reformer! -- Washington is a Hero;
O'Connor is a Rebel!
who was ambitious of forming one perfect work from the masterly productions of
all the Fine Arts. At length, at the end of several centuries, it was finished
by Sextus V. A cotemporary of Queen Elizabeth, both of them bold and singular
characters, and whose histories are well worthy of perusal. -- It was once
projected to marry them together. If they had, it was said, they would have
produced Heroes capable of enslaving, or destroying, the world.
who wished to finish every thing.

This is one of the most extensive edifices the world has seen. It divides the
Vatican Mount into two parts; it covers the circus of Nero; and closes up,
between Rome and the world, the Triumphal Way.

It is impossible to give an idea of the sensations which fill the soul on
entering, for the first time, St. Peter's Church -- at finding ourselves on
that extensive pavement, amidst enormous pillars, and before these columns of
bronze; at the sight of all those paintings, of all those statues, of all those
tombs, of all those altars, and under that vast dome -- in a word where the
pride of the most powerful Pontiffs, and the ambition of all the Fine Arts,
have, for centuturies, been adding to it ornaments of gold, granite, marble,
bronze, and canvas, increasing its grandeur and magnificence, and insuring its
beauty and duration! It took 36 years to build St. Paul's church in London, and
it cost one million sterling. -- Sir Christopher Wren had the singular good
fortune to begin and finish it. -- St. Paul's is unquestionably the noblest
piece of modern Church architecture in the British dominions; but these who
wish to form an idea of the Gothic style of building, will look with wonder and
astonishment on the great Cathedral at York.

Bad Sir Christopher Wren's plan been followed in rebuilding London after the
great fire of 1666, it now had been the handsomest as well as the largest city
in Europe, perhaps in the world.




It is possible, no doubt, to pile up to a greater height, and on a more ample
superficies, a greater number of stones. But, from so many colossal parts to
compose one edifice which shall appear wholly grand; from so many rich and
brilliant materials, to erect a building which shall appear wholly magnificent;
and, from so many parts, to form one single whole, must be acknowledged to be a
masterpiece of human art and perseverance.

And this masterpiece, in part, is the work of Michael Angelo -- It contains
the labor of 28 years of the great Michael Angelo!

But, says the nice Critic, there are faults -- None to my mind; not even to
the eye. If there are any, they must be found by the compass.

And would you take a rule to measure the grandeur of this Temple? -- No -- All
the time I was in it, I thought only of GOD -- of Eternity! -- By inspiring
such ideas, consists its true grandeur.

It is impossible, in this noble edifice, to entertain ordinary sentiments or
vulgar ideas.

What a theater is here for the eloquence of Religion, for the demonstration of
Virtue! -- I could wish, amidst all the splendour of Romish pomp, that the voice
of St. Paul himself might thunder on a sudden, rolling from tomb to tomb,
re-echoed by all these vaulted roofs, and denouncing to an audience of Kings,
in the awful voice of the KING of KINGS, demanding an account from the awakened
consciences of those pale and trembling Monarchs, for all the blood shed, and
all the tears flowing, at this very moment, by their command, in every quarter
of the world!

[We are sorry we have not room for this Author's account of Naples; perhaps we
may find room for it on another occasion -- In some respects, however, it is
only a repetition of the sad corruption of modern Italy, the same sloth,
ignorance, and superstition, mixed with the same effeminancy, profligacy, and
abominable debauchery!]

P. S. -- Our Readers know, that after the late Pope Pius VI. had been driven
out of Rome by the French army, and attempting to obtain several asylums, he at
length took refuge in France, where he died; when a sham election was held at
Venice, and a creature of the House of Austria was advanced to the dangerous
and degraded honor of the Popedom. -- He took upon him the name of Pius VII.
and when the French were, in their turn, in the absence of Bunoparte in Egypt,
obliged to relinquish their conquests in Italy, the new Pope took possession of
the Pontifical chair, when one of his first acts was, to restore the
Inquisition, that powerful but most abominable instrument of slavery and
despotism! -- From which act we cannot be at a loss to guess the views and
intentions of the combined Monarchs, and justifying the sentiment of the Writer
from whom we have made our extracts: "That it is the crown of the Monarch which
supports the tiara of the Pontiff, and that both conspire to keep the people in
subjection."

On this occasion, it cannot be improper to relate the following Anecdote of
the amiable Ganganelli, Clement XIV. commonly called the Protestant Pope.

An English gentleman, on his travels, taking leave of Voltaire, said to him in
a jocular manner, that as he was going to Rome, he wished to know if he had any
commands to the Pope? -- "Present my humble respects to the Holy Father
(answered the Philosopher) and tell him, I would be much obliged to him, if he
would send me the eyes and ears of the Inquisitor General." The Englishman, on
his arrival at Rome, being presented to the Pope, was so charmed with his
affability and condescension, that he thought he might, without offense,
venture to execute the Philosopher's commission -- "When you return to Ferney
(said the good old man) make my compliments to M. Voltaire, and assure him,
that the Inquisitor General has neither eyes nor ears since Ganganelli became
Pontiff." It is generally believed, that this good man died by poison: his
liberal and truly christian mind gave offense to the more rigid members of the
Conclave, as well as to certain Catholic Princes; such liberality did not suit
either the temporal or the spiritual views of the Parties. On his death, the
Conclave chose a man of a contrary disposition; one of a gloomy morose
disposition superstitious, bigoted, and an inflexible observer of all the
dogmas of Mother Church.

It is of Clement that Moore relates the excellent story of the Scotchman's
going from Aberdeen to Rome, in order to convert the Pope to Presbyterianism!




MODERN PARIS, In the sixth Year of the Revolution.
IF the morning, in Paris, is devoted to business, the evening at least belongs
to Pleasure. Over those hours she holds an undivided empire, but is worshipped
at innumerable altars, and hailed by ever var^ying rituals.

During the last winter the amusements of 24 theaters, which were opened every
night, were every night succeeded by public and private balls, in such numbers,
that there were no less than 2000 ball rooms inscribed on the registers of the
Police, which keeps its wakeful vigils over every sort of amusement, in all
their gradations, from the bright blaze of waxen tapers which displays the
charms of nymphs dressed a la Sauvage, or a la Grec, who grace the splendid
ball de Richlieu; to the oily lamp which lights up the seventh story, or the
vaulted cellar, where the blind fi^ler's animating scrape calls the Sovereign
people to the cotillion of wooden shoes.

These 2000 ball rooms of the capital afford ample proof that no revolution has
taken place in the manners of the French, and that they are still a dancing
nation. They have indeed of late fully demonstrated to the world that they are
capable of greater things; and that when the energies of their souls are called
forth, they can follow Buonaparte across the bridge of Lodi; but when their
minds return to its natural position, every barrack has a room approriated for
dancing, and the Heroes of Arcole, as well as the Muscadins of Paris, All knit
hands, and beat the ground
In a light fantastic round.


The fetes of the Court, it is asserted by the few persons remaining in France,
by whom they were frequented, were but tawdry splendor compared with the
classical elegance which prevails at the fetes of our republican Contractors.
As a specimen of these private balls, I shall trace a short sketch of a dance
lately given by one of the furnishers of stores for fleets and armies, in his
spacious Hotel, where all the furniture, in compliance with the present fashion
at Paris, is antique; where all that is not Greek is Roman; where stately
silken beds, massy sophas, worked tapestry, and gilt ornaments, are thrown
aside as rude gothic magnificence, and every couch resembles that of Pericles,
every chair those of Cicero; where every wall is finished in arabesque, like
the baths of Titus, and every table, upheld by Castors and Polluxes, is covered
with Athenian busts and Etruscan vases; where that modern piece of furniture a
clock is concealed beneath the classic bar of Phoebus, and the dancing hours;
and every chimney-iron is supported by a Sphinx, or a Griffin.

The dress of his female visitors was in perfect harmony with the furniture of
his hotel; for although the Parisian ladies are not suspected of any obstinate
attachment to Grecian modes of government, they are most rigid partisans of
Grecian modes of dress, adorned like the cotemporaries of Aspasia -- the loose
light drapery, the naked arm, the bare bosom, the sandaled feet, the circling
zone, the golden chains, the twisling tresses, all display the most inflexible
conformity to the laws of republican costume. The most fashionable hair-dresser
of Paris, in order to accommodate himself to the classical taste of his fair
customers, is provided with a variety of antique busts as models; and when he
waits on a lady, enquires if she chooses to be dressed that day a la Cleopatre, la
Dianne, or la Psyche? -- Sometimes the changeful nymph is a vestal, sometimes a
Venus; but the last rage has been the Niobe; of late fat and lean, gay and
grave, old and young, have been all a la Niobe; and the many-curled periwig,
thrown aside by the fashionable class, now decorates the heads of petty
shopkeepers.

The fair Grecians being determined not to injure the contour of fine forms by
superfluous encumbrances, no fashionable lady at Paris wears any pockets, and
the inconvenience of being without is obviated by sticking her fan in her belt,
sliding in a flat purse of Morocco leather, only large enough to contain a few
louis, at the side of her neck, and giving her snuff box and her
pocket-handkerchief to the care of the gentleman who attends her, and to whom
she applies for them whenever she has occasion.

For a short time during the winter, in defiance of frost and snow, the costume
of a few reigning belles was not a la grec, but a la sauvage. To be dressed a
la sauvage, was to have all that part of the frame which was not left uncovered
clad in a light drapery of flesh color. The boddice under which no lin^n was
worn (shifts being an article of dress long since rejected at Paris, both by
the Greeks and the Savages) the boddice was made of knitted silk, clinging
exactly to the shape, which is perfectly displayed; the petticoat was on one
side twisted up by a light festoon; and the feet, which were either bare or
covered with a silk stocking of flesh color, so woven as to draw upon the toes
like a glove upon the fingers, were decorated with diamonds. These gentle
savages, however, found themselves so rudely treated whenever they appeared by
the sovereign multitude, that at length the fashions of Otaheite were thrown
aside, and Greece remains the standing order of the day.

But to return to the Contractor, and his ball -- After several hours had past
in dancing cotillions, which the young women of Paris perform with a degree of
perfection -- a light nymphish grace unseen elsewhere -- and after the walse,
which is now never forgotten at a Paris ball, had proved that the steady heads
of Niobes were not to be made giddy, the company were led to a supper furnished
with Eastern magnificence, and decorated with attic taste. After supper the
folding doors of the saloon were thrown open to a garden of considerable
extent, beautifully illuminated with colored lamps, and its trees bending with
lavish clusters of fruits of every season, and every climate, formed of ice,
while fountains poured forth streams of orgeat, lemonade, and liqueurs!

But while these imitators of Greece and Rome are revelling in Asiatic luxury,
you hear them lamenting most pathetically the subversion of the ancient Regime;
that Regime, which would at least have had thus much of justice, that it would
have retained these personages in the anti-chambers of the saloons they now
occupy; to which anti-chambers they would with a counter-revolution most
probably return. One is obliged to offer up an invocation to Patience, when
condemned to listen to their declamations against that new order of things to
which solely they owe their elevation.

There is indeed one class of persons, before whose complaints of the
Revolution, however bitter, the mind humbles itself in sympathetic sorrow. The
poor Noble, while he sips his Spartan black-broth, which he is forced to
procure by parting, in sad gradation, with all the relics of his former
splendor, with watches, rings, furniture and clothes; he indeed, if he
complains, is to be pitied, and if he forbears complaint, it is to be revered!
But alas, there is so much of tragical detail in the pages of the Great Book, a
thing which has long since been called a great evil, that we must give it at
least a whole chapter to itself.

At present I shall only observe, that the reign of Terror has acted upon this
country like some mighty pestilence, which not only sweeps away devoted
millions in its fury, but leaves an obnoxious taint upon every object where it
has passed. The reign of terror has given a fatal wound to the energies of
public spirit; ordinary minds have mistaken the execrable abuses of Liberty for
an effect of the generous principle itself the victims of revolutionary
government have lifted up their complaining voice; all emotions of sympathy,
and all the feelings of indignation have been called forth; and the partisans
of the ancient Regime have left no art unpractised, no seduction untried, to
take advantage of these dispositions in favor of their own system.

Those who have been too rapidly enriched by the Revolution, have endeavored
to hide the obscurity of their origin, by mimicking the tones of those who have
titles and honors to regret, till Aristocracy has descended so low, that it
will soon perhaps be exploded, like any other fashion, when taken up by the
vulgar. These very ladies, who have taught their new-made Liege Lords to ape
their counter-revolutionary follies, will at length be ashamed of their
Aristocracy, when they find how successfully they are rivalled in those
sentiments by their milliners and mantua-makers. A writer of a late political
pamphlet has given an admirable reason why our Parisian belles will soon lay
aside the tone of eternal lamentations for the overthrow of despotism. "Seven
years," says he, "have already elapsed since the epoch of the Revolution:
seven years is a period of some length in the history of a youthful beauty, and
a lady will not regret the Monarchy under the penalty of passing for old." I
believe every person who has studied the female heart, will agree with this
writer, that the Republic has a tolerable chance upon this principle of
obtaining ere long many fair proselytes.

Public balls, as well as concerts, were held last winter at the Theater
Francais, which, after having been long shut up, was repaired, embellished, and
baptized by the Greek name of the Odeon; and that no jealousy might exist
between the balls and concerts, on account of this classical nomenclature, the
balls immediately received the appellation of Thiases.

But the most singular species of amusement which the last winter produced,
were subscription-balls, entitled as des bals a la Victime. Such, and so
powerful was the rage for pleasure, that a certain number of its votaries who
during the tyranny of Robespierre, had lost their nearest relations on the
scaffold, instituted, not days of such solemn, sad commemoration, as is dear to
the superstition of tenderness, when, in melancholy procession, clad in sable,
and wreathed in cypress, they might have knelt, a mourning multitude, around
the spot where the mutilated bodies of their murdered parents had been thrown
by the executioner; and bathed the sod with those bitter tears which filial
affection, or organized love, shed over the broken ties of nature, or of
passion -- no! -- the commemorative rites which these mourners offered to the
manes of their massacred relations, were festive balls! To these strange,
unhallowed orgies, no one could be admitted who had not lost a father, a
mother, a husband, a wife, a brother, or a sister, on the guillotine; but any
person with a certificate of their execution in his pocket book, not only
obtained admission, but might dance as long, and as heart could wish. Had
Holbein been present at such a spectacle, no doubt he would have enriched his
death-dance with new images, and led forward each gay nymph by an attendant
headless spectre. The indignant cry of public opinion, however, was at length
heard above the music of the walse and the cotillion; and the bal a la victime
exists no longer to bear its powerful testimony to a depravation, not merely of
manners, but of the heart.

If in the winter, conformibly to our Grecian ideas at Paris, concert rooms
became Odeons, and the Niobes and the Titus's danced in a thiase, summer can
boast of more than equal honors; since then we never tread but once the attic
ground, and never suffer ourselves to be pleased but when pleasure presents
herself with a classical appellation. Witness ye gardens of Tivoli, ye bowers
of Idalia, ye winding walks of Elysium, ye grotos of Venus, ye vales of Tempe,
ye groves of Thessaly! witness with what fond alacrity the lovers of antiquity
fly in multitudes to your enchanting recesses, where the arching trees are hung
with innumerable lamps of varying colors, where the ear is exhilerated with
the sounds of music, and the eye is cheated with the movements of the dance;
and where every evening the hour of ten serves as a general signal, at which
the whole city of Paris seems one vast theater for the display of fireworks. A
stranger who should enter this city at night by the bridge of Neuilly, might
suppose he had reached this scene of great events at some important epoch,
which had occasioned a general rejoicing. On his right he would discern the
lights of Bagatelle, beaming through the Bois de Boulogne, and would pass close
to the brilliant entrance of Idalia; on his left he would be dazzled by the
illumination of the Elysium; while, as he advanced, he would discern, above
every quarter of the town, the tall sky rockets darting their vivid flash, and
would hear, in all directions, the light explosions of enchanted palaces, with
bright arcades and fairy columns: The crackling flames appear on high,
And driving sparkles dance along the sky.


Bagatells alone, the once gay retreat of the Comte d'Artois, is suffered, by
our Grecian amateurs, to retain its old appellation in favor of the regal
images which it brings to memory. What food for the ramblings of the mind along
the paths of history, when it contrasts the light French modern graces of
Bagatelle, with the massy, Gothic gloom of Holyrood-house! A gloomy Gothic
building at Edinburgh, formerly the palace of the Kings of Scotland -- It was
this sombre dwelling that was assigned by the British government for the
residence of his Royal Highness the Count d'Artois, and where he did reside for
some time, eating his eighteen penny dinners, a striking contrast to the
splendid and voluptuous entertainments at Versailles. In the absence of
Buonaparte in Egypt, and when the French armies were driven out of Italy, the
affairs of the Royalists bore a more promising appearance, the Count was called
up to London, and had various meetings with the ci-devant Nobles, Bishops, etc.
preparatory to their embarking in triumph for France -- It was then that young
Orleans, the same who was some time in this country, fell upon his knees, shed
tears of contrition, and received the Royal pardon! -- On a sudden, the
Conqueror of Italy made his appearance in France, and the affairs of the
Royalists once more assumed a desperate appearance. -- At present, the world
waits in awful expectation, to see whether Buonaparte will become another
General Monk, whether he will endeavor to retain the power in his own hands,
or whether he will restore to the French people their rights and liberties.
-- It may be observed that, the persons who are forever lamenting the
subversion of the ancient Regime, are not prevented by their regrets from
giving all the encouragement in their power to those who convert one palace
after another into scenes of public amusement; and that they eagerly purchase
for half a crown, the privilege of treading gaily every evening with the
plebeian multitude, those magnificent gardens and sumptuous hotels, of which
the possessors have, for the most part, as in former proscriptions, paid for
their beautiful retreats at Alba, with their lives. But while these lovers of
despotism forget their regrets in their pleasures, the philosophic mind wonders
often in musing mood along these festive haunts, where the most singular
combinations crowd upon reflection; and, amidst the glowing enthusiasm of
liberty, mourns those partial evils that have clouded its brightness, and
abhors those cruel abuses that have sullied its cause!

When the multiplied engagements of the evening do not offer leisure for an
excursion to Tivoli, or a trip to Idalia, the gay would at least find
sufficient time in the interval between the play and the petit sou^er, to
lounge for half an hour at one of the fashionable Glaciers. A glacier is a sort
of coffee-house, established in the fine hotels of emigrants, splendidly
illuminated, open to persons of both sexes, and where you pay for your
admission by eating ices, for which there is now so extraordinary a demand in
Paris, that if the following winter should prove mild, the ice-purveyors
perhaps will be forced to send to the department of Mont Blanc, in order to
furnish themselves with means of supplying the enormous wants of their
customers.

[As the foregoing picture is drawn by a friend of Liberty, the friends of
Liberty will have strong fears, that so frivolous and fantastic a people are
unfit to enjoy or unable to practice the principes of Freedom. -- The various
events of the Revolution, however, have gone beyond all human calculation or
conjecture, and we have seen the wonders that this volatile, but truly brave
people have performed. -- Surrounded by all the Despots of Europe, and not yet
entirely divested of religious prejudices and superstition, they are liable to
the innumerable snares and machinations of their former Priests and Nobles; and
it is long before ancient habits and opinions can be eradicated even in a state
of tranquillity. -- But as they they shook off the bloody fetters of
Robespierre, let us cherish a hope, that they will at length overcome all their
difficulties, that they will escape the bold and deep designs of Buonaparte, if
he is insincere, and finally enjoy the blessings of true and well-regulated
Liberty.]

MODERN LONDON, At the Close of the 18th Century.
LONDON, the metropolis of Great Britain, one of the largest and most opulent
cities in the world, is mentioned by Tacitus as a place of considerable note in
the time of Nero. London is nearly 8 miles long on the banks of the Thames,
above 3 miles wide, and 24 miles in circumference, containing 8000 streets,
lanes, and alleys, and 65 squares in which are above 162,000 houses, besides
warehouses and public buildings; the inhabitants are reckoned 1,250,000, being
fully 400,000 more than what are estimated in the city of Paris. Taking a
compass of ten miles round St. Paul's church, which would include nearly 100
towns and villages, the number of inhabitants would then be 1,500,000, a fourth
part of the whole of the people in the United States estimated at their
greatest number, and more than all the inhabitants of Virginia, both black and
white!

London, with all its opulence, is not remarkable for its elegance. The streets
are crooked, narrow, and irregular; nor are its public buildings appropriately
magnificent. St. Paul's Church is the most remarkable modern fabric; indeed it
is a noble pile, and only inferior to St. Peter's in Rome. It is 2292 feet in
circumference, and 365 feet in height (see Note p. 44) -- As a Gothic building,
Westminster Abbey is a grand specimen of that kind of architecture; it was
founded by the East Saxons in the year 610; it is 365 feet in length, and 195
broad. It contains a greater number and variety of monuments than any church in
the world; and Henry the VIII's Chapel has been called one of the Wonders of
the World. The bridges over the Thames are a great ornament to London. The most
ancient is London bridge, finished about the year 1200; it has 19 arches, and
is 950 feet long. Westminster bridge is one of the finest in the world; it was
built by Labelle, a native of Switzerland, and was finished in the year 1750;
it has 15 arches, and is 1225 long. Blackfriar's bridge, built by Mylne, a
Scotchman, was completed in the year 1768; it is 995 feet long, and consists of
9 elliptical arches, the center one 100 feet wide, and all of them wider than
the famous Rialto at (...).

But as we have not room to particularise all the public buildings, we must
mention in the gross. -- London contains 240 churches and chapels of the
established Religion; 207 Meeting Houses for Dissentters of different
denominations; 45 Chapels for Foreigners; and 6 Synagogues for Jews. It has
4050 seminaries of Education, 170 Almshouses, and 750 Institutions for
charitable uses, etc. etc. etc.

The broad stream of the river Thames flowing between London and Southwark,
continually agitated by a brisk current, or a rapid tide, brings constant
supplies of fresh and wholesome air into this vast city, which is remarkably
healthy, considering its size. The cleanliness of London is greatly aided by
its situation on the Thames; and the New River further contributes to the
abundance of that very necessary element. The situation also is fortunate with
regard to navigation; had it been placed lower on the Thames, it would have
been annoyed by unwholesome marshes, and more liable to the attacks of foreign
enemies; had it been higher, it would not have been accessible to vessels of
burden. It now possesses every advantage that can be derived from a seaport,
without its dangers; and, at the same time, by means of its noble river, enjoys
an extensive communication with the internal parts of the country. London,
therefore, unites in itself all the benefits arising from navigation and
commerce, with those of a metropolis at which all the public business of a
great commercial nation is transacted. In the port of London alone, 13,500
vessels, and 50,000 wagons (including their repeated voyages and journies)
annually bring and carry away property to the amount of 120 millions! -- Add to
this sum, the merchandise, provisions, bank-notes, cash, jewels, etc.
deposited, and in constant circulation within the metropolis, in the course of
the year, the whole may fairly be estimated at 170 millions sterling! Aggregate
Value of Goods imported into London in one Year 29,706,477 British Merchandise
exported 11,396,540 Foreign Do. Do. 14,208,915 -- 25,605,455 Value of Goods
imported in upwards of 9000 coasting vessels, averaged at 500l. each, 4,500,000
Do. exported coastways in about 7000 vessels, at 1000l. each 7,000,000 --
11,500,000 Total Amount of Property shipped and unshipp'd in the river Thames
in the course of a Year, estimated at L.66,812,933

Besides the numerous small inland cargoes of merchandise, grain, malt, flour,
coals, and other articles laden and discharged in the Thames and the Lea; and
also the tackling, apparel, stores, and provisions of above 13,500 ships and
vessels (including their repeated voyages), which lade and unlade in the course
of a year, estimated at four millions more -- making a floating, moving,
circulating capital of 170 millions sterling, greater, by far, than any city in
the world!




Paris is called the Seat of Pleasure; London, the Seat of Commerce. We have
seen, that Paris, with much fewer inhabitants, has 20 or 24 theaters; whilst
London has only two in winter, and one in summer. -- It is therefore not only a
commercial, but also a manufacturing city; some manufactures are peculiar to
itself, as ministering to the demands of studied splendour and refined luxury,
such as the richest silks, gold and silver works, jewelery, etc. The porter
brewery is of vast consequence to London, both as to home and foreign
consumption; and several important branches of commerce are entirely confined
to its port, such as, the Turkey, Hudson's Bay, and the East India trade, that
great source of wealth, and luxury, and corruption!

Where there is much good, it too often happens that there is also much evil.
-- If London contains a great portion of the most useful and the most
meritorious of mankind, it also contains an astonishing number of the vilest
and most corrupt of both sexes, who resort to this great emporium of wealth and
luxury, and either individually, or in conjunction, pillage and defraud the
community by a thousand different schemes! -- It cannot be unentertaining, and
it may be instructing, to take a short view of the various classes of
unfortunate persons who live by stealth, or fraud, or violence, in the city of
London. -- Whilst it demonstrates the vast riches and population of that
immense metropolis, it will show the corruption of great cities, and prove the
necessity of just and vigorous laws.

ESTIMATE of Persons who are supposed to support themselves in and near London
either by immoral, illegal, or criminal practices.
Coiners, colourers, utterers of base money, etc. 3,500 Thieves, pilferers,
embezzlers of goods, etc. 10,000 River pilferers, lumpers, scuffle-hunters,
mud-larks, etc. 2,500 Itinerant Jews, wandering from street to street, holding
out temptations to pilfer and steal, and Jew-boys crying bad shillings, etc.
and who receive and purchase stolen articles from unfaithful servants, etc.
2,500 Professed thieves, burglars, highway robbers, pickpockets, and river
pirates, etc. -- Note, There will be a considerable increase to this squad on
the return of peace It is one of the most plausible arguments for war, that it
rids the country of men fit for nothing else than being soldiers, and that the
halberds tame those who do not fear the gallows. -- The argument would be a
good one, if, after taking away these useless beings, it would keep them away;
but we know, that on the return of peace, and the disbanding of the army, they
return again in double numbers, and doubly corrupted (as is stated above), to
annoy and disturb the community. Thus, to make the argument complete, we should
always be at war, in order always to keep the country clear of idlers and
vagabonds. -- The truth is, that, with certain Politicians, who have certain
objects in view, war is a gainful trade, and a Standing Army is a useful thing,
even at the expense of eight per cent. interest!

Good and effectual laws should either provide employment for idle men, punish
them if they are wicked, or banish them from the country entirely.


8500 Professed and known receivers of stolen goods, several of whom are very
opulent, 100 Receivers of stolen goods from petty pilferers at store shops, rag
and thrum shops, etc. 4000 Chimney-sweepers, costard-mongers, ass-drivers,
dustmen, rabbit-sellers, bear-baiters, dog-keepers, etc. 1500 Warehouse
porters, journeymen, apprentices, and under clerks, who defraud in a little
way, 3500 A class of swindlers, cheats, and low gamblers, composed of idle and
dissolute characters, who have abandoned every honest pursuit, such as
Moroccomen, Russians, Bludgeon-men, etc. who, at times, assume the trade of
duffers, hawkers, pedlars, horse-dealers, gamblers with E O tables at fairs,
races, etc. 7500 Various other classes not included in the above, 1000 Idle,
dissolute, and fraudulent Publicans and Tavern-keepers, who harbor or are
connected with idle and criminal characters, who allow their houses to be
rendezvous for gamblers, swindlers, thieves, etc. 1000 A class of inferior
Officers in the Revenue, who connive at pillage and thefts, and share the
plunder, 1000 A class of persons who keep Chandler's Shops; the total number is
said to be 10,000 in the metropolis, many of whom cheat their customers by
false wts. 3500 Strangers out of work who have wandered up to London in search
of employment, etc. above 1000 Servants, male and female, porters, hostlers,
stable-boys, etc. out of place, principally from ill behavior and loss of
character, 10000 Persons called Black Legs, and others proselyted to the vice
of gaming, who are in the habit of frequenting houses opened for play, of which
there are at least fifty in Westminster, where Pharo Banks, etc. are kept. Of
these five are kept by Ladies of Fashion, who receive 50l. each rout, besides
1-8th of the profits! -- Seven are subscription houses, 5 have particular
customers, and 13 admit foreigners and every idle and dissolute character, 2500
Spendthrifts, rakes, giddy young men inexperienced and in the pursuit of false
pleasure; profligate, loose, and dissolute characters, vitiated in themselves,
and in the practice of seducing others to drunkenness, lewdness, debauchery,
gambling, etc. 5000 Foreigners, who live chiefly by gambling, 500 Common
beggars and vagrants asking alms, supposing one to every two streets, 4000
Strolling minstrels, ballad-fingers, show-men, etc. 1500 Grubbers, Gin-drinking
idle women, destitute boys and girls, wandering and prowling about the streets
picking up nails, chips, old metals, etc. and who are constantly on the watch
to pilfer or steal, 2000 Bawds, who keep houses of ill fame, brothels, etc.
2000 Unfortunate Females of all descriptions, who support themselves partly or
wholly by prostitution! 50000 RECAPITULATION.
Annual loss by Small Thefts 710,000 Thefts upon the river and quays 500,000
Thefts in the dock-yards, etc. 300,000 Burglaries, highway robberies, etc.
250,000 Coining base money 200,000 Forging bills, swindling, etc. 200,000 Total
Annual Loss L. 2,150,000

This sum will astonish the Reader at first view; but when the vast extent of
the trade and commerce of London is considered, and that in the exports and
imports of the Capital alone, there is an annual movement of about 70 millions
of property laden and unladen in the river Thames, independent of the great
quantity of stationary or fixed property, all which cannot amount to less than
100 millions -- it will cease to be a matter of surprise, that under a
defective system of Police, the depredations are estimated so high.

In contemplating this shocking catalogue of human depravity, which, however,
does not include every description of fraud or dishonesty practiced, before the
mind shall imbibe unfavourable impressions, it may be necessary to remind the
reader, that in order justly to appreciate the moral turpitude which attaches
to such a corrupt community, in many respects deluded and misled by the
numerous temptations which assail them in a rich and luxuriant city, it must be
measured by a scale proportioned to the unparalleled extent and opulence of the
metropolis. -- London is not only the grand magazine of the British empire, but
also the general receptacle for the idle and the depraved of almost every
country in the world -- where, temptations for criminal pleasures, gambling,
fraud, and depredations, almost exceed imagination -- besides, being the seat
of Government, and the center of fashion, amusements, dissipation, folly and
extravagance, it is a great manufacturing town, and the first commercial city
in the universe.

Under these circumstances, whilst immorality, licentiousness, and crimes are
known to advance in proportion to riches, it is much to be lamented, that in
the rapid increase of the latter, sufficient attention has not been bestowed to
remedy the defects, by a better system of police, and a more effective code of
laws.

[From the foregoing account, our Readers will naturally draw a comparison
between the police of Paris and that of London. But besides that Paris is less
than London by 3 or 400,000 ^inhabitants, they will recollect, that the police
of the former is the work of a long series of despotism under the kingly
Regime; and, as a system of police, it was wonderfully complete and effective,
but subversive of every principle of Liberty; it is said, the Court of
Versailles had a spy in almost every house in Paris! -- Since the Revolution,
the same system has been continued by the different leaders, or usurpers, of
the French government -- It was exercised by Robespiere in order to perpetrate
his horrible butcheries; and it is now exercised by Buonaparte, to maintain the
kingly powers of his Consulate! -- Happily the people of England have not yet
been subjected to such despotic rules; and, whatever may be the faults of their
Ministers, or the ambitions projects of their Kings, we hope in God they never
will.]

CRITICISM.
HUME'S HISTORY. For the VIRGINIAN REPOSITORY.
SIR,
THE Editor of the Collection, entitled WASHINGTONIANA, has taken upon him to
recommend Hume's History of England for "the purity of its style." I know it is
a common opinion, that Mr. Hume is a very elegant historian; a powerful set of
men, who find it their interest to support a conjunction of Church and State,
have said so -- but a popular opinion is not always a just one; the voice of
the People is not always the voice of God, in literary disquisitions; and, in
the present case, I am inclined to think, that the public has been led to
believe what will not bear the test of a critical examination -- I am one of
those who think, that the style of Hume's History does not deserve such high
recommendations as it has received; on the contrary, it appears to me to be
often clumsy, frequently incorrect, and never elevated beyond mediocrity.

As the subject is worthy of consideration, I am in hopes you will give the
following observations a place in your Repository. -- I freely confess,
however, that they are not altogether original; but they will not, I presume,
be considered the less curious and important, because they happen to accord
with the judgment of an able Critic in London. And I think it a duty. I owe to
my fellow citizens of the United States, not only to guard them against Toryism
and Infidelity, Mr. Hume's first essay as a Historian was two volumes in
defense of the House of Stewart. These met with so favorable a reception from
a numerous Party, that he lengthened his book into a History of England,
including the affairs of Scotland. From whence it will be seen, that Mr. Hume's
outset was a professed defense of Tory principles, and how unfit he is to be
considered as an impartial historical guide with respect to political doctrines
-- indeed he is the favorite Author of all the advocates for Monarchy, and is
considered by them as a standard authority.

Goldsmith was also on the Tory side, and yet his Abridgement is become a
School-book!


but also from being led believe, that there are purity and elegance of style
where they are not.

As Mr. Hume's character of Queen Elizabeth has been particularly admired, I
shall select that portion of his History, and try it by the touchstone of
grammatical correctness and classical purity.

"There are few personages in History, who have been more exposed to the
calumny of enemies, and the adulation of friends, than Queen Elizabeth; and yet
there scarcely is any whose reputation has been more certainly determined by
the unanimous consent of posterity." --

Now, the writer did not mean what is here asserted. Elizabeth's character is
no more exposed to calumny and adulation, than the character of any other
personage, because Calumny and Adulation make no rational distinctions. Her
character may, indeed, have incurred more calumny and adulation, or have been
the object of them, than that of most other people; and this is what the Writer
would have expressed, had he known how to write English.

"The unusual length of her administration, and the strong features of her
character, were able to overcome all difficulties; and obliging her detractors
to abate much of their invectives, and her admirers somewhat of their
panegyrics, have, at last, in spite of political factions, and, what is more,
of religious animosities, produced a uniform judgment with regard to her
conduct." --

No judge of the English language will venture to say, that there is either
purity or elegance in this passage. A correct writer would have put reign
instead of administration. The fancy too of a feature as able to overcome a
prejudice, will have but few admirers amongst readers of taste and discernment.
-- Instead of a uniform, it should be written an uniform judgment, etc. And
how insipid is the conclusion? -- "a uniform judgment with regard to her
conduct!" -- The poorest scribbler for a News-paper could not have clothed his
sentiment in more beggarly language.

"Her vigor, her constancy, her magnanimity, her penetration, vigilance,
address, are allowed to merit the highest praises, and appear not to have been
surpassed by any person that ever filled a throne." --

Where is the elegance of this passage? -- Besides, constancy, in its general
sense, is well represented by the constantia of the Romans, but English readers
apply the word to love or friendship. Perseverance, or firmness, or some
equivalent expression, would much better have represented the writer's
intention in this place. And the last clause of the passage is particularly
cold and undignified.

"A conduct less rigorous, less imperious, more sincere, more indulgent to her
people, would have been requisite to form a perfect character." --

How, would have been? -- It should be " is requisite" in addition to her
excellencies.

"By the force of her mind, she controlled all her more active and stronger
qualities, According to the idea of some Writers, the word quality does not
properly apply to Vice, but only to Virtue. -- Thus we say, the quality of
courage, of temperance, or of chastity; but we cannot, according to this
opinion, with propriety, say the quality of cowardice, of drunkenness, or of
lasciviousness -- These, say they, are propensities, not qualities -- A
question for the Critics.
and prevented them from running into excess." --

This passage is a flat contradiction to the former. If she were free from
excess in her stronger qualities, why should we wish her to have been less
imperious, or less rigorous than she was? -- The Writer appears to be actuated
by a strong desire to exhibit a striking antithesis, without possessing a
clearness of conception or a dexterity of language, sufficient for his purpose.
It is this superficial glitter that imposes upon the negligent or unskilful
reader, but will not impose upon the calm and judicious Critic. -- The whole of
this sentence is insipid, and does not show a single stroke of a master artist.

"Her heroism was exempt from temerity, her frugality from avarice, her
friendship from partiality, her active temper from turbulence and a vain
ambition." --

The wording of this passage may be well enough put together, but the positions
are very disputable, and will be acceded to by very few who have carefully and
impartially studied this Queen's character.

"She guarded not herself with equal care, or equal success, from lesser
infirmities; the rivalship of beauty, the desire of admiration, and the sallies
of anger." "Rivalship of Beauty" -- Queen Elizabeth had no beauty to boast of;
on the contrary, by the best accounts we have of her person, she was a very
ordinary, forbidding figure, but possessed of strong passions, and immoderately
fond of admiration; even the grossest flattery was acceptable to her. -- Hence
arose her implacable hatred to Queen Mary, who was the most beautiful woman of
the age. -- Her long premeditated murder of the unfortunate Mary, under the
mockery of legal forms, stands upon authentic records, as the most atrocious
and treacherous act that has been perpetrated in any country. -- Taking in all
the circumstances, it is one of the most affecting stories related in History.
-- [For the best accounts of Mary's life and misfortunes, consult Robertson on
one side, and Stewart on the other.]

From the assumed chastity of Elizabeth -- she was called the Virgin Queen --
arose the name of this State, Virginia. Perhaps the present generation of
Virginians will applaud the fitness of this appellation -- certainly they will
wonder at the curious, and oft-times ridiculous circumstances, which give rise
to the most important affairs of the world.


--

"The desire of admiration" wants vigor, and the "sallies of anger" make a
most unmusical conclusion. A well-tuned ear will perceive the superiority of a
different arrangement; "the sallies of anger, and the jealousies of love."

"Few Sovereigns of England succeeded to the throne in more difficult
circumstances; and none ever conducted the government with such uniform success
and felicity." --

The specific term succeeded has no propriety in this place; he should have
said, ascended the throne. And what a tame redundancy in the two last words of
the sentence -- they should be expunged.

"Though her enemies were the most powerful Princes in Europe, the most active,
the most enterprising, the least scrupulous, she was able, by her vigor, to
make deep impressions on their states; her own greatness, meanwhile, remained
untouched and unimpaired." --

"The least scrupulous" -- in what? -- Some addition is necessary to a clear
perception of the Writer's meaning; and we may readily conclude, that what has
been untouched is unimpaired. The whole paragraph wants consecution, cohesion,
and correspondence.

"The same of this Princess, though it has surmounted the prejudices both of
Faction and Bigotry, yet lies still exposed to another prejudice, which is more
durable, because more natural; and which, according to the different views in
which we survey her, is capable either of exalting beyond measure, or
diminishing the luster of her character." --

As nothing was said above of any thing but religious factions, the words "both
of Faction and Bigotry" are inaccurate and indistinct. The character of the
passage, instead of the disparaging term another prejudice, evidently required
a word of middle power, as it is made susceptible of two opposite applications.
More natural is foolish; no comparison is necessary, and none, in reality, was
intended. -- Whether "to survey according to a view" be either English or
sense, I much question; and, "to exalt a luster," will command no admiration
from readers of taste; besides, regularity demands this collocation: "either of
exalting, or diminishing, beyond measure, the luster -- ". Measure, too, as
applied to luster! -- It is like a peck of moonshine!

"The true method of estimating her merit, is to lay aside all these
considerations, and consider her merely as a rational being, placed in
authority, and entrusted with the government of mankind," --

Has this passage any claim to purity or elegance? -- None.

"We may find it difficult to reconcile our fancy to her as a wife or a
mistress; but her qualities as a Sovereign, though with some considerable
exceptions, are the object of undisputed applause and approbation" --

The latter part of this period is every way illaudable. What is meant by the
words "though with some considerable exceptions," is not clear from their
position in the context. Instead of object, he should have put subject; and
applause, according to the rules of propriety, should have followed approbation.

In short, Mr. Editor, I feel no difficulty in stating it as my opinion, that
the style of Hume's History is replete with harshness, coarseness, clumsiness,
and impropriety; that correctness and elegance are very rarely found, and true
dignity of composition never. There is no instance on record, I think, of so
great a reputation that rests on so flimsy a foundation. If any of his
admirers, after seeing what Hume is, should be inclined to view what he is not,
let them turn to Johnson's preface to his edition of Shakespeare, and their
conviction will be complete. They will pass from the contemplation of a puny
bantling, to the achievements of a mighty giant, "piling Ossa on Olympus, and
Pelium on Ossa, till he reach the skies!"

CRITO.

MEMOIRS of the Author of "A Vindication of the Rights of Woman." By W M.
GODWIN.
VULGAR tears fall and evaporate without leaving any trace behind them: but the
tears of affection is often chrystialised by the power of genius, and converted
into a permanent literary brilliant. Mr. Godwin, whose abilities are
indisputable, endeavors thus to dignify and render illustrious his sorrows for
the loss of his wife; we therefore regret the necessity of observing that not
only the general reader, but the most judicious and reflecting part of mankind,
will arraign the prudence and the utility of these memoirs, though he himself
commences them with this sentence of high expectation: -- 'there are not many
individuals with whose charcter the public welfare and improvement are more
ultimately connected, than the author of "A Vindication of the Rights of Woman."

After an exordium so splendid, we could not expect to find such a narrative;
-- a narrative which we must indeed read with pity and concern, but which we
should have advised the author to bury in oblivion. Blushes would suffuse the
checks of most husbands if they were forced to relate those anecdotes of their
wives which Mr. Godwin voluntarily proclaims to the world. The extreme
exentricity of Mr. G.'s sentiments will account for this conduct. Virtue and
Vice are weighed by him in a balance of his own. He neither looks to marriage
with respect, nor to suicide with horror. He relates with complacency of Mary
Wollstonecaft, afterward his wife, that she cultivated a platonic affection
for Mr. Fuseli the painter: -- that she cohabited with Mr. Imaly as his wife,
took his name and had a child by him, without being married; and that she even
lived with Mr. G. himself, and was pregnant by him; and that it was only her
pregnancy which induced them to think of marriage; fearing that, otherwise she
might be excluded from society. He gravely records, also, (what was mentioned
at the time in the Newspapers, and was considered by some persons as calumny,)
her attempt to drown herself in the Thames, in consequence of the ill-treatment
which she experienced from Mr. Imlay.

How the public welfare and improvement are connected with or can be advanced
by the studied and uniform eulogium of such conduct will not be easily
perceived; nor will any reader of discernment who appreciates the merits of
this unfortunate female, even on the evidence of her own husband, be able to
say with him that 'there are no circumstances in her life that, in the judgment
of honor and reason, could brand her with disgrace!' -- Peace to her manes!
She was the child of Genius, but she was also the child of Error!

Most of the incidents which composed her short life are neither very singular
nor very striking. Where she was born her husband does not know. She commenced
the career of fame, like Milton, Sir Richard Blackmore, Dr. Johnson, and
others, by keeping a school; -- she then became a writer for a bookseller, and
an occasional critic. She attracted notice by entering the lists against Mr.
Burke, and particularly by her "Vindication of the Rights of Woman;" by the
publication of which, in the opinion of her biographer, 'she will perhaps be
found to have performed more substantial service for the cause of her sex, than
all the other writers, male or female, that ever felt themselves animated in
the behalf of oppressed and injured beauty.' Though this must be deemed
exaggerated praise, it may be forgiven from a husband, who, no doubt, most
sincerely mourns her loss; and our other female authors must not take it amiss
that he should wish to have it believed, that 'no female writer ever obtained
so great a degree of celebrity throughout Europe.'

Mr. and Mrs. Godwin possessed congenial mi^^^, and perhaps no two people
better suited each other; though, (a^ this memoir relates) at the first time of
their meeting, they did not reciprocally excite any very prepossessing
impressions. At last, however, a strong and mutual affection took place, and
ripened into love.

'There was (Mr. G. says) no period of throes and resolute explanation
attendant on the tale. It was friendship melting into love. Previously to our
(...) declaration, each felt assured, yet each felt a (...) trembling anxiety
to have assurance complete!' --

To this account of the sincerity and ardour of their mutual passion, it is
concisely added, ' We did not (...),' -- and then follows this poor, turgid
attempt at a justification: --

'It is difficult to recommend any thing to indiscriminate adoption, contrary
to the established rules and prejudices of mankind; but certainly nothing can
be so ridiculous upon the face of it, or so contrary to the general march of
sentiment, as to require the overflowing of the soul to wait upon a ceremony,
and that which, wherever delicacy and imagination exist, is of all things most
sacredly private, to blow a trumpet before it, and to record the moment when it
has arrived at its climax.'

Apprehending that this very refined and sentimental logic would not be
sufficient to convince the public of the propriety of their conduct in this
respect, Mr. G. adds -- 'There were other reasons why we did not immediately
marry -- Mary felt an entire conviction of the propriety of her conduct.' -- We
question this. Her experience, with Mr. Imlay, of the miserable consequences to
which a woman exposes herself by an unmarried connection, must have taught her
the imprudence at least of disregarding the law of society respecting marriage.
No evil may result from recording the Vow of Love; but many evils must result
from a neglect, or a contempt of the Law of Marriage. It is one of the most
important institutions of civil society.

On this subject, Mr. Godwin rather gives his own opinions than those of his
wife; or, he exhibits here is with the coloring of his theoretical system thrown
over them, -- But let us listen to his account of her religion? --

'Her religion was little allied to any system of forms; it was founded rather
in taste, than in the niceties of polemical discussion. Her mind
constitutionally attached itself to the sublime and the amiable. She found an
inexpressible delight in the beauties of Nature, and in the splendid reveries
of the imagination! -- When she walked amidst the wonders of Nature, she was
accustomed to converse with God. To her mind, He was pictured as not less
amiable, kind and generous, than great, wise, and exalted. In fact, she had
received few lessons of religion in her youth, and her religion was almost
entirely of her own creation. Here we perceive the source of all Miss
Wolstancroft's misfortunes, "the want of an early religions education." -- She
entered into the world without a system of either morals or religion, she fell
a victim to a " glowing imagination," and became an object of shame, and
reproach, and misery! -- Such are the effects of a glowing imagination,
particularly in a female, without the restraining helps of Morals and Religion.
-- We understand by her life, which has been lately published, that her father
was of an unsettled disposition, continually moving from place to place, until
at last he wasted all his property, and died in poverty.
She could not recollect the time when she had believed the doctrine of future
punishments. -- The tenets of her system were the growth of her own moral
taste, and her religion was a gratification not a terror to her. She sometimes
listened to the sermons of Dr. Price, but more frequently attended public
worship according to the forms of the Church of England. Latterly her
attendance on Divine Service became less constant, and at length was wholly
discontinued. -- I believe (continues Mr. G.) that no person of a well
furnished mind, that has shaken off the implicit subjection of youth, and i^
not the zealous partizan of a Sect, can bring himself to conform to the regular
routine of sermons and prayers!'

The matrimonial happiness of Mr. and Mrs. Godwin was but of short contiuance.
Their marriage was declared in April 1797, and she died the September
following, in childbed, aged 38.

In the posthumous works of Mrs. Godwin, we perceive a series of letters to Mr.
I. who lived with her at Paris for a short time in matrimonial intimacy, but
without the forms of marriage; he forsook her when she was pregnant, a prey to
despair, and took up with another woman. -- Almost any other husband than Mr.
Godwin would have suppressed these letters; yet he not only publishes them, but
introduce them with a preface, in which he declares them to 'contain the finest
examples of the language of sentiment and passion ever presented to the world!'
-- We think such language little short of insanity; especially when it appears,
that her sentiments not being guided by prudence, she was left to shame, misery
and despair!

The following extract from one of her letters to her unfaithful lover, will
give our readers an idea of her glowing imagination: --

"I obey an emotion of the heart, which made me think of wishing thee, my love,
a good night, before I go to rest, with more tenderness than I can tomorrow,
when writing a hasty line under Colonel -- 's eye. You can scarcely imagine
with what pleasure I anticipate the day, when we are to begin to live together;
and you will smile to hear how many plans of employment I have in my head, now
that I am confident my heart has found peace in your bosom -- [ deluded,
mistaken woman!] -- Cherish me with that dignified tenderness, which I have
only found in you; and your own dear girl will try to keep under a quickness of
feeling, that has sometimes given you pain! -- Yes, I will be good, that I may
deserve to be happy; and, whilst you love me, I cannot again fall into the
miserable state which rendered life a burden almost too heavy to be borne.

"But, good night -- God bless you! -- Stern says, that is equal to a kiss;
yet I would rather give you the kiss into the bargain!

" P. S, I will be at the Barrier a little after ten o'clock tomorrow" --

The consequence of this barrier assignation was a child. It was called the
Barrier Girl, from a belief that she owed her existence to this willing
interview on the Lady's side -- The man who could resist such an invitation,
must be more than a Joseph!

Although Miss W. went, of her own accord, without form or solicitation, on this
occasion, to make a child, yet she frequently lamented the evils to which
Nature had subjected her sex in the article of children; a subject which she
never could discuss with patience, it being an evil to which man was not
subjected.

"What signifies (cried she) all the freedom of our souls, all the exaltation
of our intellects, if we are to be confined for months to carry a burden which
we have no means to lay down; and when the little wretch appears to the world,
what a dreadful idea! -- With intellects that soar beyond the firmament, are we
to be confined to swaddle and dandle an animal that has no ideas, and would at
every moment destroy itself, if we did not preserve it? -- O horrid! that
Nature did not provide some middle, some stupid, lumpish being, to rear and
take care of the human progeny -- Why not make man an oviparous animal? -- Then
we might have hatched the eggs in stoves, as they do chickens in Egypt!"

Is this a woman to be held up as a pattern for the sex? -- Are her writings
fit to be put into the hands of our wives and daughters? -- We may pity her
misfortunes, but we must blame her conduct, and detest her sentiments.

If Mr. I. was soon cloyed with the excessive fondness of this willing dame, it
must be confessed, that Godwin and her were "congenial souls," both of them
disregarding the ceremonies of the Law, and the respect of the Community.
Indeed the whole of Godwin's doctrines tend to destroy all law Striving to
realize Pope's well-known poetical maxim,
" Curse on all laws but those that Love has made."

and all decency, under the flimsy, but deceiving pretext of what he calls "the
perfectability of human nature." -- But, let him speak for himself, and let
every good citizen think of the consequences: --

"If genuine liberty were established, all the female sex would be within our
choice. -- What business has one man to monopolize a woman to himself? -- Love
and affection are as various as any other passion. -- What are the names of
Mother, and Wife, and Daughter, and Sister? -- In a state of nature, men pursue
their own inclinations, and do not each grasp a female to himself, the slave of
his caprice -- Over this imaginary prize, men watch with perpetual jealousy,
and one man will find his desires to circumvent as much excited, as the other
is excited to traverse him. -- As long as this state of society continues,
philanthrophy [what a perversion of the word!] will be crossed and checked in a
thousand ways." --

"When the distinctions of society shall be confounded, and men shall cease to
appropriate a whole female to themselves, two men might easily enjoy one woman!
-- because it would be her company they desired, and the sensual gratification
would be considered as a trifle, Reasonable men will propagate their species,
not because a certain pleasure is annexed to the action, but because it is
right the species should be propagated, and the manner in which they exercise
this function, will be regulated by the dictates of duty and reason! -- It is
true, in such a state, it will not be ascertained who is the father of this or
that child -- What matter -- it is of no consequence! -- I ought to prefer no
human being to another, because that being is my father, my wife, or my son!"

Again -- "The institution of marriage is a system of fraud! -- It is true,
marriage is law, but it is the worst of all laws! -- Whatever our
understandings may tell us of the person from whose connection we should derive
the greatest improvement, of the worth of one woman, and the demerits of
another, we are obliged to consider what is law, and not what is justice. So
long as I seek to engross one woman to myself, and prohibit my neighbor from
proving his superior deserts, and reaping the fruits of them, I am guilty of
the most odious of all monopolies."

These extracts are taken from Godwin's Political Justice, an imposing title to
very pernicious doctrines.

The last work we have seen of Godwin's is one entitled St. Leon. It is written
in his usual style, o^ strong and nervous language, and contains a well drawn
picture of the fatal effects of g^ming, which, when they meet with the book, we
recommend that part of it to our gambling readers -- But never was book
written, since the days of witchcraft and credulity, on so absurd and
improbable a principle, viz. the supposed existence of the Philosopher's Stone,
and of a Panacea to preserve life perpetually! -- The a^surdity of the plan,
however, is perfectly innocent when compared with its immoral tendency. -- As a
proof, we select from St. Leon the following passage: --

"It must be confessed, that this offense (Gallantry -- the hero of the work is
then supposed to be at Paris) has a thousand advantages over Gaming. Few women
of regular and reputable lives, have the ease of manners, that flow of fancy,
and that graceful intrepidity of thinking and expressing themselves, that is to
be found among those who have discharged themselves from the tyranny of custom.
There is something irresistibly captivating in that voluptuousness, which,
while it assumes a certain air of freedom, conforms itself to the dictates of
unsophisticated delicacy! -- A judicious ^oluptuousness is necessary to the
cultivation of the mind, to the polishing of the manners, to the refining of
sentiment, and the developement of the understanding: and a woman deficient in
this respect, may be of use in the management of our families, but can neither
add to the enjoyments, nor fix the partiality of a man of taste or animation!"

Such is the Writer, whose works are put into the hands of our young men, to
prepare their minds for a general system of immorality and licentiousness -- to
free our young women from the tyranny of custom, to disengage them from the
dictates of sophisticated delicacy, and to give them a captivating
voluptuousness!

BIOGRAPHY.
"BIOGRAPHY is the Eye of HISTORY."
BUONAPARTE.
IT requires but a very superficial examination into the history of mankind to
discover, that great events are productive of great characters. They excite the
passions; invigorate individual talents; rescue merit from undeserved
obscurity; and setting aside the fictitious distinctions founded on the
follies, rather than the conventions of society, give full play to exertion,
and ample scope to genius. But this fact is never more satisfactorily
illustrated, than in the contests connected with, and founded on, the love of
Freedom, a principle intimately blended with our existence and our happiness,
and which, being founded in nature, is latent in the basest and most selfish
hearts.

The hemisphere of Greece exhibited a galaxy of (...), during her struggle for
Liberty, against the domestic tyrants who oppressed, and the foreign kings who
endeavored to enslave her. The names and actions of Pelopidas and Epaminondas;
of Leonidas and Agis; of Harmodius and Aristogiton; are familiar to every
classical scholar, and have been long dear to mankind. In Rome, we behold one
Brutus arise to expel Tarquin, and another to punish Caesar. The burning hand
of Scaev^la appalled the heart of the king of Etruria; and a single citizen, in
the person of Horatius Cocles, defending a bridge against a little army, struck
an astonished enemy with terror and dismay.

Similar causes in France have produced nearly similar effects, and the
triumphs of the Monarchy have been already obliterated by the glories of the
Republic. Disorganized, undisciplined, dissatisfied, her armies, at the
beginning of the contest, exhibited numbers without valor, and enterprise
without success. It can have been no common principle^ then, that has forced
the veteran troops of Europe to turn pale before her fresh levies, and the
Brunswicks, the Clersayes, the Warmsers, to bend their silver locks to men, new
to the science of war, and unknown to history. At one time we have seen (...)
opposing the allies, and actually deprecating their efforts; at another time,
invading their possessions, and, soon after, flying to them for succor and
protection. Jourdan, by the exertion of soldierly bravery alone, taught the
enemy to respect his countrymen; Pich^gr^ displayed all the resources of a
great tactician, and directed every movement by the rules of art. Moreau, in
imitation of Xenophon, acquired more glory by retreat, than others have
achieved by victory; and Buonaparte, by uniting the warrior and the statesman
in his own person, has consummated the glory of his adopted country.

This extraordinary man, BUONAPARTE, was born in the town of Ajaccio, in
Corsica, in 1767, is the son of Char. Buonaparte and Laetitia Raniolmi. His
father, who was also a native Ajaccio, was bred to the law, at Rome, and took
part with the celebrated Paoli, in the memorable struggle made by a handful of
brave islanders, against the tyrannical efforts of Louis XV, and the
Machiavelian schemes of his minister, Choiseul.

I am assured, by a near relation of the family, that he not only laid aside
the gown upon this occasion, but actually carried a musket as a private
continel.

On the conquest of the island, he wished to retire, with the gallant chieftain
who had so nobly struggled for its independence; but he was prevented by his
uncle, a Canon, who exercised a parental authority over him.

In 1773, a deputation from the three estates was sent to wait on the king of
France; and, on this occasion, Charles Buonaparte was selected to represent the
Nobles. He was soon after promoted to the office of Procurotore Reale of
Ajaccio, where his ancestors, supposed to have been originally from Tuscany,
had been settled nearly two hundred years.

The family of the elder Buonaparte was numerous, for he had seven children:
four sons, and three daughters. It was his good fortune, however, to be
cherished by the French; and both he and his family lived in the greatest
intimacy with M. de Marboeuf, the Governor, who received a revenue of 60,000
livres a year, on condition of doing nothing! An Intendant was paid nearly as
much, and a swarm of hungry leeches, engendered in the corruption of the court
of Versailles, at one and the same time sucked the blood of the Corficans, and
drained the treasure of the mother country; in short, like the conquests of
more recent times, the subjugation of that island seems to have been achieved
for no other purpose, than to gratify avarice, and satiate rapacity.

On the death of his friend, Charles Buonaparte, M. de Marhoeuf continued to
patronize his family, and placed his second son, Napoleone, the subject of
these memoirs, at the E^^le Militaire, or Military Academy. The advantage
resulting from this seminary, which has produced more great men than any other
in Europe, were not lost in young Buonaparte; he there applied himself with
equal assiduity and address to mathematics, and studied the art of war as a
regular science. Born in the midst of a republican struggle, in his native
land, it was his good fortune to burst into manhood, at the moment when the
country of his choice sho^k off the chains with which she had been manacled for
centuries. There was also something in his manners and habits that announced
him equal to the situation for which he seems to have been destined; instead of
imitating the frivolity of the age, his mind was continually occupied by useful
studies; and from the Lives of Plutarch, a volume of which he always carried in
his pocket, he learned, at an early age, to copy the manners, and emulate the
actions, of antiquity.

With this disposition, it is but little wonder that he should have dedicated
his life to the profession of arms. We accordingly find him, while yet a boy,
presenting himself as a candidate for a commission in the artillery; and his
success equalled the expectations of his friends, for he was the 12th on the
list, out of the 36, who proved victorious in the contest. In consequence of
this event, he became a lieutenant in the French army, and served as such
during two or three years, in the regiment of La Fe e.

On the second expedition fitted out against Sardinia, he embarked with his
countrymen, and landed in the little island of Maddalena, which he took
possession of, for the French Republic; but finding the troops that had been
got together for this expedition neither possessed organization, nor
discipline, he returned to the port of Ajaccio, whence he had set out.

In the mean time, a scheme was forming for the annexation of Co^si^a to the
crown of England; and the cabinet, in an evil hour, acceded to a proposition
which while it diminished the wealth, has contributed but little either to the
honor or advantage of that country.

Buonaparte had a difficult part to act upon this occasion; he was personally
attached to Pasquale Paoli; he resented the treatment he experienced during the
reign of the Terrorists, and had actually drawn up, with his own hand, the
remonstrance transmitted by the Municipality of Ajaccio against the decree
declaring the General an enemy to the Commonwealth. Indeed, he was supposed to
be so intimately connected with him, that a warrant was actually issued by
Lacombe de St. Michel, and the two other commissioners of the Convention, to
arrest young Buonaparte! -- Notwithstanding this, he was determined to remain
faithful to his engagements, and learning that the English fleet, in the
Mediterranean, had failed for the purpose of seizing his native island, he
embarked, along with his family, for the continent, and settled within eighteen
leagues of Toulon.

That town, the second seaport in France, was at this moment in the possession
of the English, having been just seized upon by Admiral Lord Hood, who had
substituted the British cross in the place of the three-coloured flag. The
military talents of the young Corsican were well known to Salicetti, who
introduced him to Barras, to whom he afforded indubitable proof of the
sincerity of his professions, at a period when suspicion was justified by the
most serious and frequent defections. He was accordingly advanced from the rank
of Chief de Brigade, to that of General of Artillery, and directed, under
General Dugommier, the attacks of the various redoubts that surrounded and
strengthened this important port, in which Collot de Herbois soon after
declared, "that he had found the galley-slaves alone, faithful to the
Republic!" -- It is almost needless to add, that the energy of the French
troops, added to the scientific arrangements of the engineer, overcame the zeal
and the resistance of the motely garrison, and restored the key of the
Mediterranean to France.

The conquest of Toulon contributed not a little to raise the credit of
Buonaparte; and it proved equally advantageous to his friend Barras. That
deputy had been also bred a military man, and was employed by his colleagues on
all great energies. One of these soon occurred; this was the commotion among
the sections of Paris, known by the name of the Insurrection of Vendemaire. On
this occasion, he took care to be surrounded by able men, among them was
General Buonaparte, whom he had invested with the command of the artillery, at
the siege of Toulon. It was to another Corsican, however, that he confined the
superintendance of the army; this was Gentili who had just acquired a great
reputation, by his gallant defense of Ba^^ia. On trial, however, it was
immediately discovered, that the deafness of Gentili was an invincible bar to
success, as he could neither hear nor attend to the multiplied and complicated
reports of the Aids du Camp, who were continually bringing him messages, or
addressing him relative to the situation of the enemy. Luckily for the
Convention, Napoleone Buonaparte was, at this critical and decisive moment,
appointed h^s successor, and it is to be the masterly dispositions made by him,
that the triumph of the representative body is to be principally ascribed* It
is but justice to add, that the moderation displayed on this occasion is
perhaps unequalled in the history of the civ^l wa^s of modern times!

A nobler field now opened for the exertions of Buonaparte, for he was soon
after invested with the chief command of the French army in Italy, which, under
his direction, prepared to open the campaign of 1796. In the spring of that
year, we find the Austro-Sardinian army defeated within forty miles of Turin;
15.000 were either killed or taken prisoners on this occasion, and the cannon
and camp equipage siezed on by the victors. The army of Lombardy was also
doomed to experience a most humiliating defeat, although led on by a cautious
veteran, Beaulieu, in person; t^is was attributed solely to the maneuvers of
the commander in chief, seconded by the active exertions of Generals Laharpe,
Massena, and Cervona. The Austrian General Provera was taken in a third
engagement; in consequence of which, forty fieldpieces, with the horses,
mules, and artillery wagons, etc. were captured by the French; 2500 of the
allies killed, and 8,000 made prisoners. In short, the battles of Millesimo
Deg^, Mondovi, Monte Lerino, and Montenotte, were de^^sive of the fate of
Sardinia; and the aged and superstitious Monarch then seated on the throne,
found himself reduced to the humiliating situation of relinquishing Savov and
Nice, and subscribing to (...) terms as were granted by a generous conqueror,
who could have driven (...) from his throne, and obliged him to spend the short
remainder of a wretched life in (...), and perhaps in poverty!

The battle of Lodi, fought on the 21st Florea^ (May 10th) nearly completed the
overthrow of the Austrian power in Italy, and added greatly to the reputation
of the French arms. On this occasion, a battalion of grenadiers bore down all
before them, and reached the bridge of Lodi, shouting, "Long live the
Republic!" but the dreadful fire kept up by the enemy having stopped their
progress, Generals Berthier, Massena, Cervoni, etc. rushed forward; even their
presence would have proved ineffectual, had it not been for intrepidity of
Buonaparte, who snatching a standard from the hand of a subaltern, like Caesar,
on a similar occasion, placed himself in front, and antimating his soldiers by
his actions and gesticulations (for his voice was drowned in the noise of the
cannon and musketry) victory once more arranged herself under the Gallic
banners.

In consequence of this signal defeat, or rather series of victories, Beaulieu
was obliged to yield the palm to a younger rival, for he felt himself reduced
to the necessity of retreating among the mountains of Tyrol, on which the
French took possession of the greater part of Lombardy, and acquired
astonishing resources, and immense magazines.

After crossing the Mincio, in the face of the Austrians, the republican army
entered Verona, which so lately had afforded an asylum to one of the titular
kings of France, and siezed on Pavia. Here a new and a more dreadful enemy
attempted to stop the progress of the conquerers. It was Superstition, clothed
in cowls and surplices, brandishing a poniard in one hand, and a crucifix in
the other; but the speedy punishment of the priests and other adherents put an
end to the insurrection, and thus saved Buonaparte and his army from a more
eminent danger than they had as yet experienced, and from which no French army
that has hitherto crossed the Alps, has been exempt.

At length, Mantua, alone, remained in possession of the Austrians, and this
also was soon invested by the victors, who, at the same time, made inroads into
Tyrol, and, by the battle of Reveredo, and the possession of Trent, became
masters of the passes that led to Vienna.

In the mean time, the gallant Wurmser determined to shut himself up, with the
remainder of his dispirited troops, in Mantua; and the Austrians made one more
grand effort, by means of General Alvinzy, to rescue his besieged army, and
regain their ancient preponderance in Italy. But the battle of Arcola
completely disappointed their expectations, and the capture of Mantua at one
and the same time concluded the campaign and their humiliation.

In the winter of 1796, General Buonaparte was united to Madame Beauharnois, a
beautiful Frenchwoman, who had experienced a variety of persecutions during the
time of Robespierre. Her former husband had attained the rank of General in the
service of the Republic, and had always conducted himself as a friend of
liberty. On that memorable day, when Louis XVI, and his family, repaired to
Paris, M. de Beauharnois fat as president of the National Assembly, exhibited
great dignity of demeanor; notwithstanding this, he fell a victim to the
Terrorists, who, joining the narrow ideas of sectarists to the ferocious
character peculiar to themselves, persecuted all whose opinions were not
exactly conformable to their own standard. M. Bar^as, at length, luckily for
her, extended his protection to the widow, who is now the wife of his friend.

The campaign of 1797 opened under the most auspicious circumstances for
France, as well as Spain, who was now in alliance with her; Sardinia acted a
subordinate part under her control; Tuscany obeyed her requisitions; Naples had
concluded a separate peace, and Rome was at her mercy. In this situation, the
eyes of the Court of Vienna, and indeed of all Europe, were turned to the
Archduke Charles, who was said to inherit the military talents of the House of
Lorraine. It was accordingly determined that this young Prince should be
appointed Commander in Chief, and that the hero of Kehl should oppose the hero
of Italy. The contest, however, was not long between Birth and Genius --
between a young man of Royal extraction, educated in the corrupting circle of a
Court, and surrounded by flatterers; and a (...) Corsican, brought up an (...)
perils, accustomed to danger, and breathing the spirit of republicanism;
acquainted with all the machinery of war, and boldly and skilfully directing
every movement under his own eye -- whose mistress was the Commonwealth, and
whose companion was Plutarch!

The war was then thought to be at an end -- An Emperor and a Pope humbled; the
Imperial Crown reduced to almost an empty name, and the Pontifical one (...) at
the will of the Conqueror -- two Kings subjected; one to humiliation, the other
to unconditional submission -- Corsica restored to France -- and a new and
formidable Republic erected in I^a^y, which beheld the overthrow of five armies
belonging to its late master! -- Such is the summary of the political and
martial achievements of a General before he had attained the 30th year of his
age!

As to his person, Buonaparte is of small stature, but well proportioned; he is
of a spare habit of body, yet robust, and calculated to undergo the greatest
fatigues. His complexion, like that of all the males of southren climates, is
olive; his eyes blue, his chin prominent, the lower part of his face thin, and
his forehead square and projecting -- The whole-length Italian print, published
in London by Sestolini, exhibits a good likeness; but the best portrait ever
taken of him was at Verona, in consequence of the solicitations of an English
artist, who applied to him for this purpose by means of a letter from London.

In respect to his mind, he possesses great and uncommon talents, He converses
freely, and without pedantry, on almost all subjects, and writes and speaks
with fluency and eloquence. Above all, he has attempted, and obtained, a
mastery over his passions; he is abstemious at his meals, and was never seen
intoxicated. He has many friends, but no minions; and he preserves an
inviolable secrecy, by means of a (...) silence, far better than some other men
do by a hypocritical loquacity.

[An account of the treaty of Campo Formio, in which the French most unjustly
ceded Venice to the Emperor, and which treaty the Emperor afterward shamefully
violated -- Buonaparte's expedition to Egypt -- his sudden return to France:
his new modelling the Constitution, and his assuming the Chief Consulship --
his unparalled six weeks campaign in Piedmont, where, in the ever memorable
battle of Mariago, this most extraordinary man, again prostrated the Imperial
Eagle at the feet of the Gallic Cock -- these, with other of his surprising
transactions, must be deferred until our (...) Register]

MASSENA.
NO nation in Europe has experienced a greater degree o^ degeneracy than the
inhabitance of modern Italy [see our account of modern Rome]. Does this proceed
from Superstition that degrades, Tyranny that debases, or a womanish corruption
that bursts into childish ecstacies at the esseminate warblings of a Castra^o,
that unmans the sex in order to deceive the ear, that cuts off population to
gratify the momentary longings of a debauched appetite?

It has been asserted by a respectable Traveller, that the descendants of a
nation (the Greeks) which once enriched the world with the Arts and Sciences,
and afforded the noblest monuments of human virtue and of human skill,
notwithstanding the cruel, degrading yoke of the Musselmans, shall call to mind
the greatness of their ancestors. We are assured, that they frequently boast
that they are sprung from those Greeks who are no less memorable in arts than
arms, and that they not only recapitulate the fears of their progenitors, but
actually point out the scenes of their glory.

Notwithstanding very unfavourable appearances, this is also the case with some
of the modern Romans. Among them, too, it must be remembered, first arose the
independent little Republics of Europe; and the seeds of early liberty have not
been entirely choked by the triple servitude of civil, religious, and foreign
domination. And the foundations of a new Republic have lately been laid in a
classic soil, and the names of Buonaparte, Massena, Cervoni, etc. may serve to
remind them, in some degree, of the Brutuses, the Catos, and the Scipios of
antiquity.

General Massena is now about 40 years of age. -- He was born in Nice, at a
period when it appertained to the House of Savoy into whose service he entered
early in life. The reproach is not peculiar to the Court of Turin, that,
without courtly protection, merit makes but flow progress. How many Officers of
talents have we beheld in obscurity, whilst the son of a King, or the bastard
son of a Lord, has been lifted to high command and rich emoluments? -- It was
well observed by an English subaltern, that, "in order to attain a rapid
promotion in the English army, he would rather be backed by a rotten borough
than possess the talents of a Turenne!"

Massena became an Ensign in the Sardinian army, and an Ensign he might have
remained to this day, had he continued in that service. But another destiny
awaited him; he threw up his commission, and entering into a French legion, his
talents soon began to be distinguished. -- It was at the capture of Sospello
that he first developed his military talents, and it was entirely owing to him,
that Saorgio, in the campaign of 1794, yielded to the French arms. For this
important service he was made a General of Division.

When Buonaparte was appointed Commander in Chief in Italy, the local
knowledge, the intrepidity, and military experience of Massena, pointed him out
as an Officer every way capable of adding success to his plans. Accordingly, we
find him, in the spring of 1796, acting a brilliant part under the command of
that wonderful General, at the battles of Monte Lezina and Monte Not^a, against
the Sardinian army, in which he had formerly served as an obscure individual.
-- He was also present at the battles of Dego, Millesimo, Mondovi, and
Cassaria, in which he distinguished himself by the skilful and impetuous valor
with which he attacked the armies under Proveyra and Beaulieu. He was no less
successful against the aged and experienced Count Worm^er, and contributed not
a little to the capture of the almost impregnable fortress of Mantua.

When the war recommenced at the infraction of the treaty of Campo Formio by
the Emperor, Massena was again called to the field; but, in the absence of
Baonaparte to command, and of Carnet to direct, the French armies, disorganized
and undisciplined, were no longer successful, and they lost Italy as rapidly as
they had gained it. But when Baonaparte returned from Egypt, and when Carnet
again directed the great and complicated machine of war, so powerful were their
genius and their influence, that the republican arms again appeared in triumph!
-- Massena was the first and only General that gave a blow to the warlike ^ame
of Suwarrow; he baffled his designs and checked his progress in Swisterland;
and the hoary Barbarian "Hoary barbarian" -- What other epithet can we bestow
on a man nursed in slavery, whose trade was the spilling of human blood, and
who slaughtered thousands at the command of a Tyrant! -- Witness his horrible
massacres at Ismail and Warsaw. His maxim was, "that the more men he killed in
battle, the sooner would the war be concluded" -- After a long career of
success, he at length became unfortunate; and, after all his butcheries, he
died in unmerited disgrace.
returned in chagrin and disappointment, to die in disgrace almost in the
presence of the capricious tyrant his master! -- Masses^a's defense of Genoa,
which he surrendered just a day too soon, and the surprising effects of the
decisive battle of Maringo, are events too recent to require here a repetition.

It has been lately said, that Massena has tarnished his laurels by an
excessive fondness of money, and it has been hinted, that he suffered, if not
shared, in peculation and unjust contributions -- Whatever may be the cause, he
has been removed, by the Chief Consul, from the command in Italy; nor does he,
at present, appear in any active capacity in the armies of the French Republic.

MR. JEFFERSON.
THOMAS JEFFERSON was born in the year 174^ Dr. Franklin was born in the year
1706 -- Genesis Washington 173^ -- r. ^^dams 1735 -- r. Jefferson 1743 -- and Mr.
Burr, according to the following account, in 1750.
in the county (...) in Virginia; his fa^^her was a reputable landholder, and
gave this, his eldest son, a college education at the University of William and
Mary. After passing his degrees, being designed for the Ra^, Mr. Jefferson
commenced a student at law under the guidance of Mr. With, he venerable Judge
and Chancellor of Virginia.

In 1766, Mr. Jefferson came to the bar of the Supreme Court, and continued to
practice with success and reputation until the commencement of the Revolution
in 1774, and the consequent conclusion of the Courts of Justice. During the
period of his practice, his industrious mind sound time to digest a volume of
Reports of adjudged Cases in the Supreme Courts of Virginia -- a book that is
admitted now to be a good authority, as it is an honorable evidence of his
early labors and useful talents.

In the year 1774, when all America was roused into action by the
unconstitutional claims of the British Government, Mr. Jefferson stepped
forward a bold and able champion of his country's rights, and published his
much admired pamphlet, entitled, "A summary View of the Rights of British
America, addressed to the King," which brought against the writer threats of
prosecution by Lord Dunmore, then Governor of Virginia -- threats which
produced no other effect on the independent mind of Mr. Jefferson, than
publicly to avow himself the author, prepared to meet every consequence.

About this time, Mr. Jefferson married the daughter of Mr. Wayles, an eminent
lawyer, and he enjoyed much domestic felicity in the society of one of the most
amiable of women, till the year 1780, when by her death he became the mourner
of her virtues, and the guardian of two daughters and only surviving issue, to
whose education and settlement in life, he has ever since faithfully devoted
himself, still remaining a widower.

In the year 1775, Mr. J. was elected a member of the Virginian Convention;
and, on the 4th of August in the same year, one of the members to represent the
state (then colony) of Virginia.

In the memorable year 1776, the natal year of American freedom and
independence, Mr. Jefferson was one of a Committee of Five, viz. Tho.
Jefferson, John Adams, Benj. Franklin, Roger Sherman, and R. Livingston,
appointed by Congress to draft the Declaration of Independence; and it was from
the able pen and enlightened mind of Mr. Jefferson, first named of the
Committee, that ever-memorable instrument proceeded, which was reported by the
Committee, and unanimously adopted by Congress.

In the same year, the ardent mind of Mr. Jefferson, eagerly pursuing the
glorious principles of the Revolution, and foreseeing that so long as the
corruptions of British systems existed, we were independent in name, but not in
fact, produced for the adoption of the Legislature, the following Acts, viz.

1. An Act to establish religious Freedom.

2. An Act to regulate descents, to prevent estates entail and the rights of
primogeniture.

3. An Act for the apportionment of crimes and punishments.

4. An Act to establish public Schools.

The influence of these Acts upon the relative principles they embrace, will be
seen and felt by all those who prize Civil Liberty as a primary blessing --
whilst systems of universal toleration in matters of religion; for an equal
distribution of property, and a subversion of the unjust, aristocratical
principle of of entail and primogeniture right; for ameliorating the sanguinary
code of criminal law; and for extending to the poorest of citizens the benefits
of education; must be viewed as the emanations of a great and good mind,
zealously endeavoring to promote the happiness of his fellow men.

Equally evincive of a watchful regard for the rights of his countrymen, was
his suggestion for the formation and adoption of the Constitution of Virginia,
in the same year, and for prefixing thereto "A Bill of Rights, declaratory of
the natural and unalienable Rights of Man" -- which was accordingly done.

In the year 1778, Mr. Jefferson being then a member of the Virginia
Legislature, presented to that body "An Act to prevent the importation of
Slaves" which was enacted into a law, and was shortly after followed by another
humane Act "to authorize Manumissions," being the commencement of a system of
gradual emancipation, also proposed by him.

In the year 1779, at the age of 36, Mr. Jefferson was chosen Governor of
Virginia, and continued in that office until June 1781, during which the State
suffered by three invasions, and was also brought into a critical condition
respecting its boundary lines with Pennsylvania and North Carolina. His conduct
in that station, amidst the jarring conflicts and trying difficulties of both
foreign invasion and domestic feuds, was such, as secured to him, six months
after he left the office, and upon the fullest enquiry, the unanimous thanks of
the Legislature, then consisting of 180 members, for "his attentive
administration of the powers of the Executive while in office."

During the year 1781, amidst the cares of government and scenes of private
affliction, Mr. Jefferson prepared his celebrated work, which he modestly
styled Notes on Virginia, Abo^t the year 1797 or 8, when the political fervor
of the country had been trepanned into a wrong bias by the arts of a certain
Faction, and WAR was loudly recommended by high authority, a rude and wanton
attack was made upon Mr. Jefferson, in Porcupine's British Gazette, by a Mr.
Martin of Maryland, alleging that the celebrated story of Logan was a
fabrication calculated to injure the reputation of Capt. Cressop, etc. -- r.
Jefferson, in an Appendix to his Notes, calmly investigates all the
circumstances, and authenticates the fact. The calumny now recoils on the heads
of these persons who rashly undertook the dirty work of a mischievous Faction,
in order to blacken the fair fame of Mr. Jefferson. -- See his Appendix.
In this work, so justly admired for its philosophical research, ingenious
theory, and able disquisition, the author, in a superior strain of eloquence,
boldly attacks and fully refutes the fallacious theories of Buffon and Raynal,
which tended to disparage both the man and the beast of America, and reduce
them to an inferior scale with those of Europe; and vindicating the equal
distribution of Nature's blessings to this continent both in the animal and
vegetable creation.

In the year 1783, Mr. Jefferson was again appointed to a seat in Congress from
his native state, and the the following year, on the 7th of May was nominated
by that hon. body Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States to the Court of
France, as the successor of our illustrious Franklin, whither he embarked early
in the same year, and remained absent from the United Sates, in the execution
of the duties of that important trust, until the month of October, 1789, when
he returned home by permission of the then President, Washington, who, upon
being elected to the chief magistracy of the Federal Government, immediately
destined Mr. Jefferson the next most honorable and confidential station in the
executive government, near his own person.

During his mission to France, Mr. Jefferson, with that peculiar address,
intelligence and attention to promote the essential interests of the United
States, which directs all his actions, obtained from the French King, an
arrette, highly beneficial to the American commerce, for the free admission,
exempt from the customary foreign duties, of oil, fish and whalebone, the
product of the American fisheries, into certain ports, and for the sale of
American built ships in all the ports of France -- benefits, which our Eastern
brethren continued to reap the peculiar advantage of, until the commencement of
the revolutionary convulsions which have, unhappily, too long agitated that
country.

About the same period Mr. Jefferson, in conjunction with our immortal
Franklin, negotiated with a Minister from the court of Prussia, then at Hague,
that celebrated treaty known by the name of "The Prussian Treaty," in which an
astonished world has, for the first time, seen a public avowal and positive
provision by treaty, between two sovereign and independent nations, for the
establishment of those two great and glorious principles, promotive of
universal peace, and happiness, to wit, 1st. "That free ships make free goods;"
and, 2d. "That privateering in the time of war be abolished;" principles which
it were to be wished could be rendered universal and eternal. Mr. Adams now
President of the United States, was one of the commission to negotiate this
treaty, and on its completion, it was sent over to London, where Mr. Adams then
resided as minister of the United States, for his signature. It is greatly to
be regretted that Mr. Adams could not be content to retain to himself a share
of the glory which reflects on the authors of this celebrated treaty. But,
unhappily for our country, since he became President of the United States we
have seen him nominate his son John Quincy Adams, as minister to the court of
Prussia, for the express purpose, as declared, of renewing the treaty with that
nation, which having been limited to continue in force for ten years only, had
expired. Accordingly another treaty has been made by his son with Prussia,
which has been approved by a majority of the Senate and ratified by the
President, but which, instead of renewing and continuing the old treaty, is in
itself a new one, expressly abandoning and renouncing the two inestimable
principles, 1st. "That free ships make free goods," and 2d. "That privateering
in time of war be abolished;" principles which, it appears, from the
correspondence accompanying the negotiation, laid before the Senate of the
United States by the President, the wife and enlightened ministers of the
Prussian Monarch were brought, with great difficulty and reluctance, to
abandon, on the earnest solicitation and reiterated demand of the American
negotiator, under the suggestion that the maritime powers, particularly Great
Britain, would never sanction or permit them. Of the allegations contained in
the above paragraph, we do not speak with absolute precision -- As in the
collision of party views, and in the confusion of selfish representations, it
is difficult to discover the truth (and which, in spite of the greatest
political sagacity, often depends on contingent circumstances) it becomes us to
be diffident. -- The new Treaty, which contains 37 Articles, and is to continue
another ten years, has lately been published, and is open to the impartial
investigation of the public. -- If the King of Prussia obtains possession of
that great commercial city, Hamburgh, the Treaty will be of more consequence to
America, than either Mr. Adams or his opponents at first imagined.


In the year 1789, Mr. Jefferson being returned to the United States, and
appointed by President Washington, Secretary to the department of State,
immediately entered on the arduous duties of that important station, having
previously stipulated with the President, that, on consideration of the many
years absence from his family and estate, he might be permitted at the
expiration of the constitutional term for which the President was elected, to
retire from the public service.

The first result of the labors of Mr. Jefferson in the department of state,
were exhibited to Congress in the following reports, -- to wit,

1. A report on the fisheries of the United States.

2. A report on coins, weights and measures.

3. A report on the waste and unappropriated land of the United States.

4. A report on privileges and restrictions on the commerce of the United
States in foreign countries.

Each of these reports displayed the usual accuracy, information, and
intelligence of the writer.

But it was reserved for a more critical and delicate period in the affairs of
the United States, that the pre-eminent talents of the American Secretary
should become most conspicuous, and interestingly useful to his country. The
non-execution of the treaty of peace with the United States, on the part of
Great Britain, her detention of our Western posts, and the attendant
spoliations on our commerce, both by Great Britain and France, then at war with
each other, added to the intrigues of the Minister of the latter, Genet, all
conduced to a situation difficult and perplexing. Besides which, Spain
continued to withhold from us the free navigation of the Mississippi, so
essential to all Western America. In this state of things, the just confidence,
which the discriminating mind of Washington, had reposed in Mr. Jefferson, was
amply repaid, by the promptness, zeal and ability, with which the American
Secretary, contributed, by his labors, to relieve the executive from
embarrassment. Through a service of masterly and unequalled diplomatique
correspondence, which he maintained, at the same time, with the respective
ministers of Great Britain and France, namely Hammond and Genet, he traversed
and rebutted their respective causes of charge and complaint against the United
States, and having fully proved the various aggressions and infractions of
treaty on the part of their respective governments, pointed to the means of
preserving the honor and maintaining the rights of his own country, whilst,
alike superior to the intrigues of Great Britain or of France, he fully
manifested that he held no particular attachment to any foreign nation, but was
equally prepared, with the decision, firmness and intelligence of a true
American, to oppose and resist the aggressions of all. The recall of Genet; and
appointment of his successor, with the subsequent proceedings between the
United States and France, the appointment of Mr. Jay, his treaty with Great
Britain, and the recall of Mr. Hummond, the appointment of Mr. Liston, and the
subsequent proceeding with Great Britain, are all well known.

In respect to Spain, the labors of Mr. Jefferson were more immediately
effective and complete. Having possessed the Commissioners of the United States
then at Madrid, negotiatng a treaty with the Court of Spain, with the most
ample and pointed instructions, and also of the form and provisions of a
treaty, predicated on the basis of the free navigation of the Mississippi, it
remained only for Mr. Thomas Pinckney, then Minister of the United States at
London, under special instruction from the President, and appointed Envoy for
that purpose, to repair to Madrid, and seizing the favorable moment for
effecting it, to accomplish this desirable work. This was accordingly done,
with equal promptness and decision on his part, and jointly to that, and the
labors of the American Secretary in the Cabinet, are the United States
indebted for the most liberal, honorable, and beneficial treaty, they have
ever yet entered into with a foreign nation.

About this time, having, at the pressing entreaty of the then President,
Washington, remained one year longer at the head of the department of state,
than he had before stipulated to do, he resigned his office, and retired with
the warmest thanks and regret of the President, Washington, to his estate at
Monticello, in Albemarle county, Virginia, where he continued for upwards of
two years uninterruptedly to enjoy the sweets of domestic ease, and a respite
from the fatigues of public life, following with avidity his favorite pursuits
of philosophical research and agricultural improvement, until the voice of his
Country again summoned him to the more active scenes of public duty, and placed
him in nomination for the presidential chair, as the successor of Washington.
The issue of that election is well known, and but for a false return in one
state, and the suppression of a return in another, Mr Jefferson would have been
declared President; as the returns however stood before Congress, it appears
that he had 68 votes, and Mr. Adams 71, consequently the latter was declared
President, and the former Vice President of the United States.

The tongue of Party malice, which is never at rest, and gives to every subject
a malignant hue, perceiving Mr. Jefferson's rising popularity, in order to
prejudice the public mind, and to disappoint his future election, brought
forward a charge, that he was indebted to the British, and took measures to
disappoint his creditors. This charge has been refuted in a manner highly
honorable to Mr. Jefferson's character, by certain gentlemen in Philadelphia,
who took particular pains to investigate the subject. Immediately after Mr.
Jefferson's arrival in Virginia, in the fall of 1789, he procured a meeting
with the Agent and the gentlemen interested, and an amicable settlement was
made in writing on the principles of his letter. Referring to a letter from Mr.
Jefferson, dated the 5th of January 1787, wherein he made amicable proposals of
settling and paying the demands against him, and which were accepted. -- We are
sorry we have not room for this letter, as it does much honor to his feelings
and principles, besides showing the distressed state of the country during the
revolutionary war.
Mr. Jefferson AGAIN ^^eaning, that he had before paid the amount of the debt
into the treasury of Virginia, agreeably to the then law of that State, which
first payment proved an entire loss to Mr. Jefferson!
sold property to the amount of the debt, and, in the course of the first and
second years, delivered over the obligations received for it to the Agent, who
took on himself the collection of the money -- so that it is now seven or eight
years since he paid the debt.

But there was another claim made by the Agent of the house of Farrel and Jones
against the executors of Mr. Wayles, and another for a cargo of about 4000l
value, to be sold on commission, on account of the consignees. Mr. Wayles
assisted in the sale, but died soon after, when the whole collection survived
to the other consignee, who received it, wasted it, and died a bankrupt. The
Agent thought he would try the chance of recovering the money from the
executors of Mr. Wayles, although he knew they had not received it; on the trial,
11 of the jury determined against the liability of the executors, but the 12th
dissenting, the case was laid over to the next Federal Court, when a second
jury unanimously concurred with the eleven of the first, and gave a verdict for
the executors, agreeably to the opinions of Judge Iredell who presided at one
hearing, and of Judge Patterson who presided at the other.

Perhaps there is no man in America better calculated to fill the chair of
state than Mr. Jefferson. -- Few men who have traveled at all, have traveled
with more advantage, and had a greater capacity of receiving improvement from
this mode of it, than him. The genius of each nation, its particular customs
and manners, and the great relative interests which regulated the policy of
Courts, were subjects with which he was acquainted; and eminently fitted him,
to fill a department, the peculiar organ of their communications. Controversy,
which so frequently betrays the fallibility of the understanding, because it
begets intemperance, never makes him a victim to the designs of his opponent.
He listens to his argument with scrupulous attention; draws new sources of
information from conflicting principles; and, if he is animated at all, it is
with the discovery of a new truth. There are, perhaps, few men better
calculated always to triumph, and always to leave upon the other's mind, at
least, the most favorable impressions, if not the most decisive conviction.
This is not difficult to account for, when applied to Mr. Jefferson; because
few men, like him, deserves the application. He never hazards an opinion
without the authority of experience, and the conviction of reason. Travel and
observation have matured the one, and extensive application and reflection,
have invigorated the other. His principles, therefore, convey the strongest
impressions, which he inforces by logical deduction and mathematical precision,
drawing from an expanded intellect, that separates, with infinite facility, the
purity of Truth from the grosser materials of Error.

Disdaining the character of the Courtier, where pusillanimity and flattery are
the steps by which the obsequious arise to distinction, Mr. Jefferson has
filled the highest offices of government, by his own intrinsic merit. The
simplicity of his manners, and the reservedness of his temper, are the
characteristics of a vigorous mind, which grasps at higher objects than the
mere arts of pleasing. Yet there is no man in private life, more amiable, none
more dignified, and none whose manners, possess, in a higher degree, the
incomparable felicity of inspiring the combined emotions of attachment and
respect. He has contemplated men and things in the different lights in which
they are, and in which they should be. His reflections on this subject, are the
sources of his humanity and forbearance; qualifications which travel, business,
and books, have matured into practice, and given to his mind a degree of
philosophical tranquillity -- But let not this placidity of temper, be mistaken
for coldness of apprehension. He possesses an understanding, capable of being
inspired with intrepidity, when great objects demand its energy. The American
Declaration of Independence, his negotiations in several of the most subtle
cabinets of Europe, and his communications with the intriguing Ministers of
France and England, while Secretary of Sat, will remain the durable memorials
of a great mind, at once capable of combining the various qualifications of
energy, penetration, and deliberate coolness.

It has been sneeringly said, "O, Mr. Jefferson is a Philosopher," -- meaning,
that from the habits of his life, he is unfit to be the Chief Magistrate of an
active, mixed, extended community. -- If Mr. J. had all his days been secluded
in a closet or a cloister, the insinuation might not be improper -- We have
shown the contrary; that, to the seize of a Scholar, and the
accomplishments of a Gentleman, he adds the necessary qualifications of a
Statesman, "one well acquainted with the world and its ways" -- But we do not
believe that Mr. J. himself ever said he was a Philosopher; he knows too well
the vast dignity of the character; he is too modest and too sensible a man, to
take upon himself a title which requires a rare assemblage of all the exalted
qualities of the human mind, united to all the possible seize of human
learning. -- We believe Mr. J. is not of the NEW Philosophy, the jargon of the
day, that vague, undefined jumble of words, which pulls down every system,
whether moral or religions, and sets up nothing in their place, leaving the
poor wanderer in a wilderness, and depriving society itself of a guide! -- Nor
of that old, cold-blooded, machiavelian Philosophy, which, under the semblance
of "political system," connects immorality, fraud, ambition, and tyranny,
sacrificing, on the altar of Despotism, the liberty of nations, and the
felicity of millions! Amongst many others, Louis XIV. of France, and Frederick
of Prussia, are notable instances of this sort of philosophy; perhaps the late
Catherine of Russia excelled both these kingly gentlemen. -- It is almost
needless to remark, that the French revolution has begotten a host of political
philosophers on both sides of the question -- Robespierre set out on the NEW
scheme, and a bloody use he made of it. Before he died, however, he meanly
skulked from one scheme to the other, and both of them failed him. -- Amongst
many others, poor Miss Wolstoncraft fell a victim to the deluding ideas of the
new Philosophy.


Our readers know the issue of the late election; that a decided majority of
the people of America has given their voice for Mr. Jefferson to be President
of the Federal Government of the 16 States. -- At the moment that this sheet is
going to press, the people of America are waiting in anxious, awful suspense,
to see whether the present Congress will coincide with or oppose their choice.

Philosophical Hall, Philadelphia, Jan. 1, 1801.
(...) a Meeting of the American Philosophical Society, the following Members
were duly elected Officers for the ensuing Year agreeable to Charter.

President, THOMAS JEFFERSON, Esquire.

Vice-Presidents, Casper Wistar,R. Patterson,A. Ellicot: Secretaries,John R.
^oxe,A. Seybert,J. Clay,B. Alison; Counselors for three years,Jon. B.
Smith,William Currie,Sam. Wheeler,P. S. Duponceau;Curators, C. W. Peele,J. R.
Smith,Rob. Leslie;Treasurer, John Vaughan.



[At the request of a Correspondent, we insert the following extract from Mr.
Jefferson's "Notes on Virginia." It is that part of them which has been the
subject of so much cavil and criticism; which has given so much offense to
tender consciences, and which has been so greedily snatched at by the disciples
of the new Philosophy -- We therefore deem it a necessary accompanyment to an
account of that Gentleman's life and character.

Whilst we believe that many of the remarks made upon this portion of Mr.
Jefferson's Notes have come from pious and well-meaning men, we must at the
same time observe, that the grossest and most illiberal strictures have been
made by others from political and selfish motives, as was fully evidenced
pending the late election. -- It is thus that true Religion is dishonored; the
spiritual affairs of the other world are dragged into the temporary concerns of
this -- it is thus that Religion is thrown out as a tub to the whale, in order
to deceive and mislead the unthinking multitude!

To that part of the extract which appears most objectionable, our
Correspondent has subjoined a note of observation, which we insert verbatim.]

EXTRACT from Mr. JEFFERSON'S Notes.
In answer to the question, What religion is in the state of Virginia? -- Mr.
Jefferson proceeds thus:

"The present state of our laws on the subject of Religion is this. The
Convention of May 1776, in their Declaration of Rights, declared it to be a
truth, and a natural right, that the exercise of Religion should be free; but
when they proceeded to form on that declaration the ordinance of government,
instead of taking up every principle declared in the Bill of Rights, and
guarding it by legislative sanction, they passed over that which asserted our
religious rights, leaving them as they found them. The same Convention,
however, when they met as a member of the general assembly in October 1776,
repealed all Acts of Parliment which had rendered criminal the maintaining any
opinions in matters of religion, the forbearing to repair to church, and the
exercising any mode of worship; and suspended the laws giving salaries to the
Clergy, which suspension was made perpetual in October 1779. Statutory
oppressions in religion being thus wiped away, we remain at present under those
only imposed by the common law, or by our own Acts of Assembly. At the common
law, Heresy was a capital offense, punishable by burning. Its definition was
left to the ecclesiastical judges, before whom the conviction was, till the
statute of the 1 Eliz. c. 1. circumscribed it, by declaring, "That nothing
should be deemed Heresy, but what had been so determined by authority of the
Canonical Scriptures, or by one of the four first General Councils, or by some
other Council having for the grounds of their declaration the express and plain
words of the Scriptures." Heresy, thus circumscribed, being an offense at the
common law, our act of assembly of 1777, c. 17, gives cognizance of it to the
General Court, by declaring, that the jurisdiction of that Court, shall be
general in all matters at the common law. The execution is by the writ De
Hoeretico comburendo. By our own act of Assembly of 1705, c. 30, if a person
brought up in the Christian religion denies the being of a God, or the Trinity,
or asserts there are more Gods than one, or denies the Christian religion to be
true, or the Scriptures to be of divine authority, he is punishable on the
first offense by incapacity to hold any office or employment ecclesiastical,
civil, or military; on the second by disability to sue, to take any gift or
legacy, to be guardian, executor, or administrator, and by three years
imprisonment, without bail. A father's right to the custody of his own children
being founded in law on his right of guardianship, this being taken away, they
may of course be severed from him, and put, by the authority of a court, into
more orthodox hands.

"This is a summary view of that Religious Slavery, under which a people have
been willing to remain who have lavished their lives and fortunes for the
establishment of their civil freedom. The error seems not sufficiently
eradicated, that the operations of the mind, as well as the acts of the body,
are subject to the coercion of the laws. But our rulers can have authority over
such natural rights only as we have submitted to them. The rights of conscience
we never submitted, we could not submit. We are answerable for them to our God.
The legitimate powers of Government extend to such acts only as are injurious
to others. But it does me no injury for my neighbor to say, there are twenty
Gods, or no God; It sometimes happens, that even the best Writers, in their
endeavors to establish a fact, or illustrate a principle, urge too much, and
overshoot their mark. -- With great deference to the highly respectable Author
of the Notes on Virginia, I think the above passage a proof of the remark --
nay more, it appears to me a very objectionable one; and I do not wonder at its
giving offense to pious minds, and of being made the groundwork of much
censure and misrepresentation. -- After the knowledge he now has of human
nature, does Mr. Jefferson really think, that the man who believes in no God,
is as good, or as useful a member of society, as he who believes in one, or
three, or twenty Gods? -- Mr J. is too dignified a character to make a needless
play upon words, of "picking pockets, or of breaking legs -- but it may easily
be imagined, and experience confirms the fact, that the man who disbelieves all
Leity, and who has divested himself of all moral and religious obligations,
would not only pick pocket^ and break legs, but also commit theft and
perpetrate murder, to gratify his greed or his revenge, if he could act with
impunity. -- What prudent man would entrust the honor of his wife, or his
daughter, or his sister, or the care of his goods or his money, to the keeping
of a professed Athiest who is disengaged from every sacred tie, who is afraid
of no law but the pistol or the gallows? --

I could say much more on this subject, Mr. Editor, if you would give me room
-- but the position is so very plain and demonstrative, that it requires no
ingenuity to support it -- I therefore conclude with only remarking, that in a
book which is so ably and laudably calculated to vindicate and illustrate the
noble principles of Civil and Religious Liberty, I am sorry to see such a
passage; and I cannot help thinking, that the cool judgment and mature
experience of the writer must now make him wish, that it never had appeared
among his Notes.


it neither picks my pocket nor breaks my leg. If it be said, his testimony in
a Court of Justice cannot be relied on, reject it then, and be the stigma on
him. Constraint may make him worse by making him a hypocrite, but it will never
make him a truer man. It may fix him obstinately in his errors, but will not
cure them. Reason and free enquiry are the only effectual agents against error.
Give a loose to them, they will support the true religion, by bringing every
false one to their tribunal, to the test of their investigation. They are the
natural enemies of error, and of error only. Had not the Roman government
permitted free enquiry, Christianity could never have been introduced. Had not
free enquiry been indulged, at the era of the Reformation, the corruptions of
Christianity could not have been purged away. If it be restrained now, the
present corruptions will be protected, and new ones encouraged. Was the
government to prescribe to us our medicine and diet, our bodies would be in
such keeping as our souls are now. Thus in France the emetic was once forbidden
as an article of medicine, and the potatoe as an article of food. Government is
just as infallible too when it fixes systems in physics. Galileo was sent to
the Inquisition for affirming that the earth was a sphere: the government had
declared it to be as flat as a trencher, and Galileo was obliged to abjure his
error. This error however at length prevailed, the earth became a globe, and
Descartes declared it was whirled round on its axis by a vortex. The government
in which he lived was wise enough to see that this was no question of civil
jurisdiction, or we should all have been involved by authority in vortices. In
fact, the vortices have been exploded, and the Newtonian principle of
gravitation is now more firmly established, on the basis of Reason, than it
would be were the government to step in, and to make it an article of necessary
faith. Reason and Experiment have been indulged, and Error has fled before them
-- It is Error alone which needs the support of Government -- Truth can stand
by itself." -- London edition, page 262.

COPY of a LETTER from Mr. JEFFERSON to a Gentleman in Berkley County, dated
Monticello, 4th Sept. 1800.
"SIR, -- Your favor of August 26th, has been duly received, and is entitled
to my thankfulness for the personal considerations you are pleased to express
in it. How far the measure proposed might have the expected effect, you can
best judge; however, in the great exercise of right in which the Citizens of
America are about to act, I have on mature consideration, seen, that it is my
duty to be passive. The interests which they have at slake are entitled to
their whole attention, unbiassed by personal esteem or local considerations;
and I am far from the presumption of considering myself equal to the awful
duties of the first magistracy of this country. That there should be
differences of opinion among our fellow-citizens, is to be expected always. Men
who think freely, and have the right of expressing their thoughts, will differ,
It is true that these differences have of late been artificially increased; but
they are now again subsiding to their natural level, and all will soon come
right if no acts of violence intervene. The great question which divides our
citizens is, whether it is safest that a preponderance of power should be
lodged with the monarchical, or the republican branch of our Government? --
Temporary panics may produce advocates for the former opinion, even in this
country; but the opinion will be as short-lived as the panic with the great
mass of our fellow-citizens. There is one circumstance which will always bring
them to rights: a preponderance of the executive over the legislative branch
cannot be maintained but by immense patronage, by multiplying offices, making
them very lucrative, by armies, navies, etc. which may enlist on the side of
the patron all those whom he can interest, and all their families and
connexions; but these expenses must be paid by the laboring citizen; he cannot
long continue, therefore, the advocate of opinions, which, to say only the
least of them, doom the laboring Citizen to toil and sweat for useless
pageants.

"I should be unfaithful to my own feelings were I not to lay, that it has been
the greatest of all human consolations to me, to be considered by the
republican portion of my fellow-citizens as the safe depositary of their
rights. The first wish of my heart is, to see them so guarded as to be safe in
any hands, and not to depend on the personal disposition of the depositary: and
I hope this to be practicable as long as the people retain the spirit of
freedom. When that is lost, all experience has shown, that no forms can keep
them free against their own will. But that corrupt state of mind must be very
distant in a country where, for ages to come, unoccupied soil will still offer
itself to those who wish to reap for themselves what themselves have sown.

"Our chief object at present should be, to reconcile the divisions which have
been artificially excited, and to restore Society to its wonted harmony.
Whenever this shall be done, it will be found, that there are few real
opponents to a Government elective at short intervals. Accept assurances of the
respect of,

Sir, yours, etc. THO. JEFFERSON."

Mr. BURR.
AARON BURR was born at Fairfield; he was educated at Princeton College, New
Jersey, of which seminary his father was President. In the year 1775, when he
was at the age of 25, he was made Aid de Camp to General Putnam, and
distinguished himself in so eminent a manner as an able Officer, that he was
selected by General Washington to be Lieu. ^Col. of one of the 12 additional
Regiments. Through the whole of the war, he was distinguished by the same
ardent devotion to the principles of Liberty, the same courage and judgment,
which mark his character at this day.

At the restoration of peace, having exhausted an ample patrimony in the
service of his Country, Mr. Burr found himself compelled to the profession of
the Law as the means of subsistence. Here, notwithstanding the competition of
Mr. Hamilton and other gentlemen of great talents in New York, he soon obtained
an high reputation; and the rapid fortune he acquired from an extensive
practice, declared the favorable opinion of his fellow citizens. Possessed
once more of an independent fortune, he forsook the troublesome occupation of
an Advocate, for one more suited to his inclination, and better adapted to the
display of his talents. He entered the Legislature of New York, then became a
Senator of the U. States, and in both places he was equally respectable and
always patriotic.

Endowed with a mind firm, liberal, and comprehensive, America can claim but
few citizens as fit as Mr. Burr to be placed as a second in the government of
the country. With an energy and decision of character peculiar to himself,
while other men are debating, he resolves; while they think, he acts. -- His
manners are amiable, his reputation unblemished. He has overthrown the
dangerous influence of Foreigners in the state of New York; and, in conjunction
with his highly respectable compeer Mr. Jefferson, it is hoped, that they will
banish it from the national councils altogether, leaving America to be governed
by its own Citizens. -- In short, Mr. Burr is an uniform, consistent, tried
Republican.

We conclude this short account of Mr. Burr, with giving a place to the
following extract of a letter written by him to a Member of Congress, when he
learned that it was probable the votes would be equal for Mr. Jefferson and
himself, in order to convince Congress in particular, and America in general,
that he disclaimed all idea of contesting the post of honor with that
Gentleman. -- The letter reflects much credit on Mr. Burr, and must raise him
still higher in the estimation of his fellow citizens.

Extract of a Letter from Colonel Burr to General Smith, dated New York, Dec.
16, 1800.
-- "I think it not probable that I shall have an equal number of votes with
Mr. Jefferson; but if such should be the result, every man who knows me ought
to know, that I should utterly disclaim all competition. Be assured, that the
Federal Party can entertain no wish for such an exchange. As to my friends,
they would dishonor my views, and insult my feelings, by a suspicion that I
could submit to be instrumental in counteracting the wishes and expectations of
the people of the United States. And I now constitute you my proxy, to declare
these sentiments if the occasion shall require." --


PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
The political storm, which lately raged with so much violence, has at length
happily subsided. -- The two Parties have tried their strength, and success has
crowned the efforts of the Republicans in the election of THOMAS JEFFERSON.

To Republicans it must be a cause of sincere felicitation, that their Country
has surmounted, without any other agitation than that of public sentiment, the
choice of their First Magistrate -- The example is auspicious to the destinies
of the world -- Whilst other nations, the victims of Monarchical power, or
Aristocratical ambition, on similar occasions, appeal to the sword, America
presents the august spectacle of a great people resorting only to argument, and
to republican principles.

On such a result as this, every friend to his country, every true American,
will reflect with high satisfaction -- Beholding in the system of
Representation, founded on the right of general suffrage, the source and
strength of his political freedom, he will rejoice to behold the confirmations
of experience imparting new stability to the republican structure. -- And while
he mourns over the tottering ruins of European systems and states, and over the
miseries of the nations of the old world, he will, with proud philanthrophy,
present his own system to them as a cure for all their evils.

On this great occasion, it is the duty of every friend to republican Liberty,
to support the cause with gentleness and equanimity -- Having the general
welfare at heart, and superior to the gratification of personal motives, whilst
his joy is animated, let it be rational and unalloyed with party resentment --
Let him hold out the hand of friendship to his neighbor, of whatever opinion
or country, and say, I respect virtue and talent wherever they are found; come,
let us live in fellowship; let every man strive to deserve well of the Country,
always remembering the important maxim, United we stand, divided we fall. -- In
Union and Harmony let us combine,
And kneel with devotion at LIBERTY'S shrine.


RETURN OF VOTES for President and Vice President of the UNITED STATES -- Dec.
1800.
Jeffer. Burr Adams. Pinch. New Hampshire 0 0 6 6 0 Massachussets 0 0 16 16 0
Rhode Island 0 0 4 3 1 Connecticut 0 0 9 9 0 Vermont 0 0 4 4 0 New York 12 12 0
0 0 New Jersey 0 0 7 7 0 Pensylvania 8 8 7 7 0 Delaware 0 0 3 3 0 Maryland 5 5
5 5 0 Virginia 21 21 0 0 0 North Carolina 8 8 4 4 0 South Carolina 8 8 0 0 0
Georgia 4 4 0 0 0 Kentucky 4 4 0 0 0 Tennessee 3 3 0 0 0 Total 73 73 65 64 1

PEACE BETWEEN FRANCE AND AMERICA.
FRANCE.
PARIS, Oct. 2, 1800. Yesterday a treaty of Amity and Commerce between the
French Republic and the United States of America, was signed by the three
French Ministers on one side, and by three American Commissioners on the other
-- restoring, we hope, a system of Concord between the two countries, which, as
Republics, ought never to be at variance.

Oct. 6. -- Citizen Joseph Buonaparte, President of the Committee of Ministers
Plenipotentiary charged to negociate with the Ministers Plenipotentiary of the
Un. States of America, gave a most splendid entertainment to these Ministers,
on the 3d inst. at Morfontaine, to celebrate the return of an amicable
understanding between the two Republics. There were present the three Consuls,
all the Ministers and members of the Corpse Diplomatique, the Counselors of
State. etc. and several gentlemen friends to America, among whom we observed
General La Fayette.

At 6 o'clock, the Minister for foreign affairs delivered to the First Consul,
a copy of the Convention, which was announced by a discharge of cannon. The
dinner consisted of 180 covers, served on three tables in three halls
communicating with each other. The first was the Hall of Union; the second and
third bore the names of Franklin and Washington, and were ornamented with the
busts of these illustrious characters. The first hall, however, was the most
brilliantly decorated, presenting emblamatic devices of all the most remarkable
events of the American Revolution.

After dinner, several toasts were drank. The First Consul gave, "To the manes
of the French and Americans who died in battle for the independence of the new
world."

The Consul Cambaceres gave, "To the successor of Washington."

The Consul Lebrun gave, "To the union of America with the Powers of the North,
to enforce respect to the Liberty of the Seas."

After dinner were fireworks emblematic of the occasion, which were succeeded
by a concert, and that was followed by a spectacle, which closed the business
of the night.

On the 12th, about midday, the American Ministers took leave of the Chief
Consul, to whom they were presented by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Mr.
Elsworth, in the name of his colleagues said, "that he hoped the Convention
would prove the basis of a lasting friendship between France and America;" and
Mr. Murray added, "that the American Ministers would neglect nothing to promote
this desirable object." The Chief Consul answered, "that the differences
between the two nations being adjusted, there should no longer remain any trace
of them; that the liberal principles, with regard to navigation, considered in
the Convention, ought to be the basis of a growing intimacy; and that, in the
present circumstances, it was more than ever the interest of the two nations
closely to adhere to them."

The Minister of war to the Maritime Prefects.

"I make haste to inform you, Citizens, that the Convention of Amity and
Commerce between the French and American Republics, has just been signed by the
Ministers Plenipotentiary of France and the American Commissioners. -- I pray
you to communicate this news immediately to the military Officers of the
Administration, as well as to the Commerce of your City.

(Signed) FORSAIT."

AMERICA.
NORFOLK, Dec. 5. Arrived, the Portsmouth ship of war, direct from France, on
board of which is Governor Davie, one of our Ambassadors to France, with the
Treaty of Amity and Commerce with the French Republic.

WASHINGTON (Federal City), Dec. 15. Mr. Davie, one of our Envoys to France,
has arrived in this city. He is the Messenger of Peace, being the bearer of the
Treaty with the French Reublic. -- Mr. Davie left Mess. Elsworth and Murray in
France.

OFFICIAL COPY. CONVENTION between the FRENCH REPUBLIC and the UNITED STATES of
AMERICA.
THE Premier Consul of the French Republic in the name of the People of France,
and the President of the United States of America, equally desirous to
terminate the differences which have arisen between the two States, have
respectively appointed their Plenipotentiaries, and given them full powers to
treat upon those differences, and to terminate the same; that is to say, the
Premier Consul of the French Republic, in the name of the people of France, has
appointed for the Plenipotentiaries of the said Republic, the Citizens Joseph
Buonaparte, ex-Ambassador at Rome and Counselor of State; C. P. Fleurieu,
member of the National Institute, etc. and Pierre L. Roederor, member of the
same, etc. -- and the President of the United States of America, by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate of the said States, has appointed for
their Plenipotentiaries, Oliver Elsworth, Chief Justice of the United States,
Wm. R. Davie, late Governor of North Carolina, and Wm. Vans Murray, resident
Minister of the U. States at the Hague -- who, after having exchanged their
powers, and after full and mature discussion of the respective interests, have
agreed on the following articles: --

ARTICLE I. There shall be a firm, inviolable, and universal peace, and a true
and sincere friendship between the French Republic and the United States of
America, and between their respective countries, territories, cities, towns,
and people, without exception of places and persons.

II. The Ministers Plenipotentiary of the two parties not being able to agree
at present respecting the Treaty of Alliance of Feb. 1778, the Treaty of Amity
and Commerce of the same date, and the Convention of Nov. 1788, nor upon the
indemnities mutually due or claimed; the parties will negociate further on
these subjects at a convenient time; and, until they may have agreed upon these
points, the said Treaties and Conventions shall have no operation, and the
relations of the two countries shall be regulated as follows:

III. The public ships which have been taken on one part and the other, or
which may be taken before the exchange of ratifications, shall be restored.

VI. Property captured, and not yet definitively condemned, or which may be
captured before the exchange of ratifications (contraband goods destined to an
enemy's port excepted) shall be mutually restored on the following proofs of
ownership, viz. the proof on both sides with respect to merchant ships, whether
armed or unarmed, shall be a Passport in the following form: --

"To all who shall see these Presents, Greeting:

"It is hereby made known, that leave and permission has been given to (...)
master and commander of the ship called (...) of the town of (...) burden
(...) tons, or thereabouts, lying at present in the part or haven of (...) and
laden with (...) after that his ship has been visited, and before sailing, he
shall make oath before the Officers who have the jurisdiction of maritime
affairs, that the said ship belongs to one or more of the subjects of (...) the
act whereof shall be put at the end of these presents, as likewise that he will
keep, and cause to be kept by his crew on board, the marine ordinances and
regulations, and enter in the proper office a list, signed and witnessed,
containing the names and surnames, the places of birth and abode of the crew of
his ship, and of all who shall embark on board her, whom he shall not take on
board without the knowledge and permission of the officers of the marine, and
in every port or haven where he shall enter with his ship, he shall show this
present leave to the officers and judges of the marine, and shall give a
faithful account to them of what passed and was done during his voyage; and he
shall carry the colors, arms, and ensigns of the French Republic, or the
United States, during his voyage. -- In witness whereof, we have signed these
presents, and put the seal of our arms thereunto, and caused the same to be
countersigned by (...) at (...) on the (...) day of (...) Anno Domini."

And this passport will be sufficient without any other paper, and ordinance to
the contrary notwithstanding; which passport shall not be deemed requisite to
have been renewed or recalled, whatever number of voyages the said ship may
have made, unless she shall have returned home within the space of a year.
Proof with respect to the cargo shall be certificates, containing the several
particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship sailed and whither she is
bound, so that the forbidden and contraband goods may be distinguished by the
certificates; which certificates shall have been made out by the officers of
the place whence the ship set sail, in the accustomed form of the country. And
if such passport or certificates, or both, shall have been destroyed by
accident, or taken away by force, their deficiency may be supplied by such
other proofs of ownership, as are admissible by the general usage of nations.
Proof with respect to other than merchant ships, shall be the commission they
bear.

This article shall take effect from the date of the signature of the present
Convention. And if, from the date of the said signature, any property shall be
condemned contrary to the intent of the said Convention, before the knowledge
of this stipulation shall be obtained, the property so condemned shall without
delay be restored or paid for.

V. The debts contracted by one of the two nations with individuals of the
other, or by the individuals of one with the individuals of the other, shall be
paid, or the payment may be prosecuted in the same manner as if there had been
no misunderstanding between the two States. But this clause shall not extend to
indemnities claimed on account of captures or confiscations.

VI. Commerce between the parties shall be free. The vessels of the two nations
and their privateers, as well as their prizes, shall be treated in the
respective ports as those of the nation the most favored; and, in general, the
two parties shall enjoy in the ports of each other, in regard to commerce and
navigation, the privileges of the most favored nation.

VII. The citizens and inhabitants of the United States shall be at liberty to
dispose, by testament, donation or otherwise, of their goods, movable and
immovable, holden in the territory of the French Republic in Europe, and the
citizens of the French Republic shall have the same liberty with regard to
goods, moveable and immovable, holden in the territory of the United States, in
favor of such persons as they shall think proper. The citizens and inhabitants
of either of the two countries, who shall be heirs of goods, moveable or
immovable, in the other, shall be able to succeed ab intesttao, without being
obliged to obtain letters of naturalization, and without having the effect of
this provision contested or impeded, under any pretext whatever; and the said
heirs, whether such by particular title, or ab intestato, shall be exempt from
every duty whatever in both countries. It is agreed that this article shall in
no manner derogate from the laws which either state may now have in force, or
may hereafter enact, to prevent emigration; and also that in case of the laws
of either of the two states should restrain strangers from the exercise of the
rights of property with respect to real estate, such real estate may be sold,
or otherwise disposed of, to citizens or inhabitants of the country where it
may be, and the other nation shall be at liberty to enact similar laws.

VIII. To favor commerce on both sides, it is agreed, that, in case a war
should break out between the two nations, which God forbid, the term of six
months after the declaration of war shall be allowed to the merchants and other
citizens and inhabitants, respectively, on one side and the other, during which
time they shall be at liberty to withdraw themselves with their effects and
movables, which they shall be at liberty to carry, send away or sell, as they
please, without the least obstruction; nor shall their effects, much less their
persons, be seized during such term of six months, on the contrary passports
which shall be valid for a time necessary for their return, shall be given to
them for their vessels, and the effects which they shall be willing to send
away, or carry with them; and such passports shall be a safe conduct against
all insults and prizes which privateers may attempt against their persons and
effects. And if any thing be taken from them, or any injury done to them or
their effects, by one of the parties, their citizens or inhabitants, within the
term above prescribed, full satisfaction shall be made to them on that account.

IX. Neither the debts due from individuals of the one nation to individuals of
the other, nor shares. nor moneys, which they may have in public funds, or in
the public or private banks, shall ever, in any event of war, or of national
difference, be sequestered or confiscated.

X. It shall be free for the two contracting parties to appoint commercial
agents for the protection of trade, to reside in France and the United States.
Either party may except such place as may be thought proper, from the residents
of these agents. Before any agent shall exercise his function, he shall be
accepted in the usual forms by the party to whom he is sent; and when he shall
have been accepted and furnished with his exequatur, he shall enjoy the rights
and prerogatives of the similar agents of the most favored nations.

XI. The citizens of the French Republic shall pay in the ports, havens, roads,
countries, islands, cities and towns of the United States, no other, or greater
duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be, or by what name soever
called than those which the nations most favoued are, or shall be obliged to
pay; and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties, privileges, immunities and
exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce, whether, in passing from one port
in the said states to another, or in going to and from the same from and to any
part of the world, which the said nations do or shall enjoy. And the citizens
of the United States shall reciprocally enjoy in the territory of French
Republic in Europe, the same privileges and immunities, as well for their
property and persons, as for what concerns trade, navigation and commerce.

XII. It shall be lawful for the citizens of either country to sail with their
ships and merchandise (contraband goods always excepted) from any port whatever
to any port of the enemy of the other, and to sail and trade with their ships
and merchandise, with perfect security and liberty, from the countries and
ports, and places of those who are enemies of both, or of either party, without
any opposition or disturbance whatsoever, and to pass not only directly from
the places and ports of the enemy aforementioned, to neutral ports and places,
but also from one place belonging to an enemy, whether they be under the
jurisdiction of the same power, or under several; unless such ports or places
shall be actually blockaded, besieged, or invested.

And whereas it frequently happens, that vessels sail for a port or place
bel^nging to an enemy, without knowing that the same is either besieged,
blockaded, or invested, it is agreed that every vessel, so circumstanced, may
be turned away from such port or place, but shall not be detained, nor any part
of her cargo, if not contraband, be confiscated, unless, after notice of such
blockade or investment, she shall again attempt to enter: but she shall be
permitted to go to any other port or place she shall think proper. Nor shall
any vessel of either, that may have entered into such port or place before the
same was actually besieged, blockaded, or invested by the other, be restrained
from quitting such place with her cargo, nor if found therein after the
reduction and surrender of such place, shall such vessel or her cargo be liable
to confiscation, but they shall be restored to the owners thereof.

XIII. In order to regulate what shall be deemed contraband of war, there shall
be comprised under that denomination gunpowder, saltpetre, petards; match,
ball, bombs, grenades, carcasses, pikes, swords, belts, pistols, holtsters,
cavalry saddles and furniture, cannon, mortars, their carriages and beds, and
generally all kinds of arms, ammunition of war, and instruments sit for the use
of troops; all the above articles, whenever they are destined to the port of an
enemy, are hereby declared to be contraband, and just objects of confiscation;
but the vessels in which they are laden, and the residue of the cargo shall be
considered free, and not in any manner infected by the prohibited goods,
whether belonging to the same, or a different owner.

XIV. It is hereby stipulated, that free ships shall give a freedom to goods,
and that every thing shall be deemed to be free and exempt, which shall be
found on board the ships belonging to the citizens of either of the contracting
parties, although the whole lading, or any part thereof, should appertain to
the enemies of either, contraband goods being always excepted. It is also
agreed, in like manner, that the same liberty be extended to persons who are on
board a free ship, with this effect, that although they be enemies to either
party, they are not to be taken out of that free ship, unless they are soldiers
and in actual service of the enemy.

XV. On the contrary, it is agreed, that whatever shall be found to be laden by
the citizens of either party on any ship belonging to the enemies of the other,
or their citizens, shall be confiscated without distinction of goods,
contraband or not contraband, in the same manner as if it belonged to the
enemy, except such goods and merchandise as were put on board such ship before
the declaration of war, or even after such declaration, if so be it were done
without knowledge of such declaration; so that the goods of the citizens of
either party whether they be of the nature of such as are prohibited, or
otherwise, as is aforesaid, were put on board any ship belonging to an enemy
before the war, or after the declaration without delay to the proprietors
demanding the same, but so as that if the said merchandises be contraband, it
shall not be any ways lawful to carry them afterward to any ports belonging to
the enemy.

The two contracting parties agree, that the term of two months being passed
after the declaration of war, their respective citizens, from whatever part of
the world they come, shall not plead the ignorance mentioned in this article.

XVI. The merchant ships belonging to the citizens of either of the contracting
parties, which shall be bound to a port of the enemy of one of the parties, and
concerning whose voyage, and the articles of their cargo, there shall be just
grounds of suspicion, shall be obliged to exhibit, as well upon the high seas
as in the ports or roads, not only their passports, but likewise their
certificates, showing that their goods are not of the quality of those which
are specified to be contrband in the thirteenth article of the present
Convention.

XVII. And that captures on light suspicions may be avoided and injuries thence
arising prevented, it is agreed that when one party shall be engaged in war,
and the other, party be neuter, the ships of the neutral party shall be
furnished with passports similar to that described in the fourth Article, that
it may appear thereby that the ships really belong to the citizens of the
neutral party; they shall be valid for any number of voyages, but shall be
renewed every year, that is, if the ship happens to return home in the space of
a year. If the ships are laden, they shall be provided not only with the
passports above mentioned, but also with certificates similar to those
described in the same article, so that it may be known whether they carry any
contraband goods. No other paper shall be required, any usage or ordinance to
the contrary notwithstanding. And if it shall appear from the said certificates
that there are contraband goods on board, the ships shall be permitted to
proceed on their voyage. If it shall appear from the certificates, that there
are contraband goods on board any such ship, and the commander of the same
shall offer to deliver them up, the offer shall be accepted, and the ship shall
be at liberty to pursue its voyage, unless the quantity of the contraband goods
be greater than can conveniently be received on board the ship of war or
privateer, in which case the ship may be carried into port for the delivery of
the same.

If any ship shall not be furnished with such passport or certificates as above
required for the same, such case may be examined by a proper judge or tribunal,
and if it shall appear from other documents or proofs, admissible by the usage
of nations, that the ship belongs to the citizens of the neutral party, it
shall not be confiscated, but shall be released with her cargo (contraband
goods excepted) and be permitted to proceed on her voyage.

If the master of a ship, named in the passport, should happen to die or be
removed by any other cause, and another put in his place, the ship and cargo
shall nevertheless be equally secure, and the passport remain in full force.

XVIII. If the ships of the citizens of either of the parties shall be met
with, either failing along the coasts, or on the high seas, by any ship of war
or privateer of the other; for the avoiding of any disorder, the said ships of
war or privateers shall remain out of cannon shot, and may send their boats on
board the ship which they shall so meet with, and may enter her to the number
of two or three men only, to whom the master or commander of such ship shall
exhibit his passport concerning the property of the ship, made out according to
the form prescribed in the fourth article. And it is expressly agreed that the
neutral party shall in no case be required to go on board the examining vessel
for the purpose of exhibiting his papers, or for any other examination whatever.

XIX. It is expressly agreed by the two contracting parties, that the
stipulations above mentioned, relative to the conduct to be observed on the sea
by the cruisers of the belligerent party toward the ships of the neutral
party, shall be applied only to ships sailing without convoy, and when the said
ships shall be convoyed, it being the intention of the parties to observe all
the regard due to the protection of the flag displayed by public ships, it
shall not be lawful to visit them, but the verbal declaration of the commander
of the convoy, that the ships he convoys belong to the nation whose flag he
carries, and that they have no contraband goods on board, shall be considered
by the respective cruisers as fully sufficient: the two parties reciprocally
engaging not to admit under the protection of their convoys, ships which shall
carry contraband goods destined to an enemy.

XX. In all cases where vessels shall be captured or detained under pretense of
carrying to the enemy contraband goods, the captor shall give a receipt for
such of the papers of the vessel as he shall retain, which receipt shall be
annexed to a descriptive list of the said papers: and it shall be unlawful to
break up or open the hatches, chests, trunks, casks, bales, or vessels found on
board, or remove the smallest part of the goods, unless the lading be brought
on shore in presence of the competent officers, and an inventory made by them
of the said goods. Nor shall it be lawful to sell, exchange or alienate the
same in any manner, unless there have been lawful process, and the competent
judge or judges shall have pronounced against such goods sentence of
confiscation, saving always the ship and the other goods which it contains.

XXI. And that proper care may be taken of the vessel and cargo, and
embezzlement prevented, it is agreed, that it shall not be lawful to remove the
master, commander or supercargo of any captured ship from on board thereof,
either during the time the ship may be at sea after her capture, or pending the
proceedings against her, or her cargo, or any thing relative thereto. And in
all cases where a vessel of the citizens of either party shall be captured, or
seized, and held for adjudication, her officers, passengers and crew shall be
hospitably treated. They shall not be imprisoned or deprived of any part of
their wearing apparel, nor of the possession and use of their money, not
exceeding for the captain, supercargo and mate five hundred dollars each, and
for the sailors and passengers, one hundred dollars each.

XXII. It is further agreed, that in all cases, the established courts for
prize causes, in the country to which the prizes may be conducted, shall alone
take cognizance of them. And whenever such tribunal of either of the parties
shall pronounce judgment against any vessel or goods, or property claimed by
the citizens of the other party, the sentence or decree shall mention the
reasons or motives on which the same shall have been founded, and an
authenticated copy of the sentence or decree, and of all the proceedings in the
case, shall, if demanded, be delivered to the commander or agent of the said
vessel, without any delay, he paying the legal fees for the same.

XXIII. And that more abundant care may be taken for the security of the
respective citizens of the contracting parties, and to prevent their suffering
injuries by the men of war or privateers of either party, all commanders of
ships of war and privateers, and all others the said citizens, shall forbear
doing any damage to those of the other party, or committing any outrage against
them, and if they act to the contrary they shall be punished, and shall also be
bound in persons and estates to make satisfaction and reparation for all
damages and the interest thereof, of whatever nature the said damages may be.

For this cause all commanders of privateers before they receive their
commissions, shall hereafter be obliged to give, before a competent judge,
sufficient security by at least two responsible sureties, who have no interest
in the said privateer, each of whom, together with the said commander, shall be
jointly and severally bound in the sum of 7000 dollars, or 36,820 francs, or if
such ships be provided with above 150 seamen or soldiers, in the sum of 14000
dollars, or 73,640 f. to satisfy all damages and injuries which the said
privateer, or her officers or men, or any of them may do or commit during their
cruise, contrary to the tenor of this Convention or to the laws and
instructions for regulating their conduct; and further, that in all cases of
aggressions, the said commission shall be revoked and annulled.

XXIV. When the ships of war of the two contracting parties, or those belonging
to their citizens which are armed in war, shall be admitted to enter with their
prizes the ports of either of the two parties, the said public or private
ships, as well as their prizes, shall not be obliged to pay any duty either to
the officers of the place, the judges, or any others; nor shall such prizes,
when they come to and enter the ports of either party, be arrested or seized,
nor shall the officers of the place make examination concerning the lawfulness
of such prizes, but they may hoist sail at any time, and depart and carry their
prizes to the places expressed in their commissions, which the commanders of
such ships of war shall be obliged to show. It is always understood, that the
stipulations of this Article shall not extend beyond the privileges of the most
favored nation.

XXV. It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers who have commissions
from any Prince or State in enmity with either nation, to fit their ships in
the ports of either nation, to sell their prizes, or in any manner to exchange
them; neither shall they be allowed to purchase provisions, except such as
shall be necessary for their going to the next port of that Prince or State
from which they have received their commissions.

XXVI. It is further agreed, that both the said contracting parties shall not
only refuse to receive any pirates into any of their ports, havens, or towns,
or permit any of their inhabitants to receive, protect, harbor, conceal, or
assist them in any manner, but will bring to condign punishment all such
inhabitants as shall be guilty of such offenses.

And all their ships, with the goods or merchandises taken by them and brought
into the port of either of the said parties, shall be seized as far as they can
be discovered, and shall be restored to the owners, or their factors or agents
duly authorized by them (proper evidence being first given before competent
judges for proving the property), even in case such effects should have passed
into other hands by sale, if it be proved that the buyers knew, or had good
reason to believe, or suspect, that they had been piratically taken.

XXVII. Neither party will intermeddle in the fisheries of the other on its
coasts, nor disturb the other in the exercise of the rights which it now holds,
or may acquire, on the coast of Newfoundland, in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, or
elsewhere on the American coast northward of the United States. But the whale
and seal fisheries shall be free to both in every quarter of the world.

This Convention shall be ratified on both sides in due form, and the
Ratifications exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner, if possible.

In faith whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the above
Articles both in the French and English languages, and they have thereto
affixed their seals; declaring nevertheless that the signing in the two
languages shall not be brought into precedent, nor in any way operate to the
prejudice of either party.

Done at Paris the 8th day of Vendemaire of the 9th year of the French Republic
-- the 13th day of Sept. 1800.

L.S. JO. BUONAPRTE, L.S. C. P. C. FLEUREIU, L.S. P. L. ROEDERER, L.S. O^.
ELSWORTH, L.S. W. R. DAVIE, L.S. WM. V. MURRAY.


CITY OF WASHINGTON.
THE close of the 18th Century will be a remarkable, and, we hope, an
auspicious period in the history of the New World -- In the month of November
1800, the Representatives of the People of the United States commenced their
deliberations for the public good in the CITY OF WASHINGTON, destined to be the
Capital of the confederated Republics of America. -- It has been said, that the
founding of this City was a symptom of vanity in the illustrious personage
whose name it bears -- May it be asked, is there neither envy nor peevishness
in the remark? -- We are inclined to ascribe its rise to a laudable motive; it
was the suggestion of a great and comprehensive mind, looking forward to the
prosperity and happiness of future generations; an honorable wish to
perpetuate his name to posterity by a useful, a durable, and a noble monument,
a great and flourishing City. -- The man who is the means of raising but one
blade of grass, is said to be praiseworthy -- the building of but one house
adds to the comfort of the community -- how much more praiseworthy is that
man, who is the founder of a City intended to be the elegant depositary of the
Arts and Sciences, the emporium of a Free People, and the capital of a great
Republic? -- Other great men, as they have been erroneously called, have
rendered their names famous by the destruction of Cities, and by the misery of
Nations -- Washington's fame rests on other principles; in having fought for
the liberties of his countrymen; in assisting to frame for them a free
Constitution; and in devising means for their future happiness and prosperity.

Let us consult both ancient and modern history -- The city of Alexandria long
stood a monument of propitiation for the destructive wars and mad ambition of
Alexander -- The new city of Petersburgh makes us forget, and almost forgive,
the coarse manners and cruel deeds of the first Peter -- What a superior
character is OUR Washington to these men? -- The even tenor of his conduct
subjects his fame to no such unpleasant drawbacks -- Shall we then attempt to
weigh all the circumstances of his life in the nice scales of scrupulosity, or
with a microscopic eye search for blemishes, and peevishly magnify defects from
which no human being is exempted? -- Is Republicanism of that harsh,
ungracious, uncharitable temper, as slightly to pass over the beauties, and
dwell with malicious pleasure on the imperfections of the picture? -- Forbid it
Generosity, forbid it Gratitude, forbid it Patriotism!

May the City of Washington, therefore, fulfill the intentions of its
illustrious founder -- May it be the seat of justice, learning, and science;
the fountain of good laws; and the rallying point of all the republican virtues.

V.

CONGRSSIONAL AFFAIRS.
CITY of WASHINGTON, Nov. 17, 1800.
The Legislature of the United States of America meet this day. As they are the
grand depository of national confidence, to whom are entrusted powers, on the
correct exercise of which the public felicity greatly depends, it is natural
that a general solicitude should accompany their deliberations. Possessing the
power of preserving peace or declaring war, of increasing or diminishing taxes,
the welfare of the community, on points of the deepest and most extensive
interest, cannot fail to be as much promoted by an enlightened, as it would be
injured by a contracted policy.

There is one circumstance which leads us to hope, that Congress commences its
proceedings in the new Capital at an auspicious period. -- The unfortunate
differences which have too long subsisted between the French and American
Republics, are, we trust, nearly terminated; and that the two countries, fitted
by their forms of government, to be on amicable terms, will henceforth be on
terms of concord and harmony. -- With respect to the nature of the Treaty, no
one will imagine, that the American Envoys, either from partiality or
prejudice, will have conferred any advantages on France, nor dictated by a
scrupulous adherence to the principles of a just reciprocity. The sentiments
they are known to possess, and their high respectability and integrity, are
sufficient pledges of their upright conduct.

The preservation of peace is so plainly and unequivocally the policy of
Republics, and so peculiarly the policy of this Country, that every true friend
to its prosperity will rejoice in an honorable termination of disputes, that
hazarded its tranquillity at home, and disturbed its relations abroad.

The American people are not averse to war, because they fear to try their
strength with any foe that menaces their rights -- but they deprecate war as
one of the greatest curses inflicted upon mankind. Knowing that it renders
nations depraved, and governments despotic, they view it as the instrument of
Tyranny and Oppression -- as such, they do well to be jealous of their Rulers,
and by an unsleeping vigilance, to restrain that spirit of encroachment and
domination which Ambition is perpetually prompting -- Nothing can be in is
clearly expressed by the late elections, from one end of the Union to the
other, than the marked hostility of the public mind to war with any nation,
unless forced upon the country by dire necessity.

Among the immediate benefits which may be expected to flow from the altered
state of our affairs, is a repeal of certain laws, whose only apology was
looked for in "the warlike attitude of the country." -- And may we not
entertain a sincere wish for the revocation of the Alien Law, whose existence
has, in all probability, withheld from our country many wealthy merchants,
ingenious mechanics, and industrious farmers, The Alien Law, and the general
complexion of the then American Government, did discourage several useful and
opulent men from coming to this country. -- As a proof of a hostile disposition
to emigrants, the following circumstance is related. -- A Gentleman whose moral
conduct would stand the strictest scrutiny, whose disposition is temperate and
religious, but whose principles were republican, obtained permission of the
government of Ireland to bring himself and his property (about 30,000l.) to the
United States; to his great surprise, obstacles were thrown in his way by the
American Minister in London; at length, after a tedious and disagreeable
process, he was permitted to come, but he was rudely given to understand, "that
he must behave himself!" -- as if the principles for which he was banished from
his native country were adverse to those of the people of these States -- Was
it natural to suppose, that a man of strict integrity and considerable
property, who had suffered every thing but death for supporting republicanism
in Ireland, would come to overthrow the republican Government of America? --
Or, are we to believe, that the American Rulers were cajoled into a disposition
to abet the selfish views of England to the manifest prejudice of their own
country?

Where was the consistency, where was the good policy of this act! -- If the
poor, afflicted people of Ireland, after ages of oppression and contumely, were
provoked to resistance, what a damnable deed did Messrs. Washington, Adams, and
Co. commit in their rebellion!

It is proper, however, to observe, that the above circumstance took place
during the delusion of 98 or 99, when Peter Porcupine was considered as the
Savior of America! -- Mr. A. was then deep in the trammels of the New York
faction -- We are inclined to believe, that he now entertains a very different
opinion of the political maneuvers of that memorable period in the history of
the United States.

P. S The unfortunate Gentlemen now languishing in a Scottish prison had also
obtained permission to come to America -- Whatever may be the real fact, the
pretext was, "that the American Government would not receive them." -- Upon
this ground, whether true or false, the Irish Rulers broke their compact -- If
it had been adhered to, these Gentlemen could have brought property with them
to the amount of more than 100,000l. -- The particulars of this transaction,
with several others concerning that ill-sated country, Ireland, we are obliged
to omit; perhaps they may come before us in a succeeding volume -- From an able
writer, they would make a most interesting and instructive history.


while it has proved no restraint upon idle and disorderly characters.

Taxes, under most governments, are a necessary evil; but, in a Republic, where
the Rulers are wise and honest, they cease to be a grievance. Imposed on
principles of justice and equality, and devoted only to objects of national
importance, they are not thought oppressive, and seldom become the objects of
popular discontent. And to the honor of the American people, the just wants of
their government have always been supplied with readiness and liberality.

It should, however, ever be impressed upon the minds of the Representatives of
the People, that the public impositions should never rise above the real wants
of the government -- For the same spirit that gives with cheerfulness whatever
is needed for national purposes, will resist every imposition that is unjust
and unnecessary.

The present crisis of human affairs is deeply awful and momentous. The
European world presents the almost uniform spectacle, of governments oppressing
their subjects, or of subjects rising in arms against their governments -- War,
destructive War, rages with all its calamities -- Human life, for the
protection of which governments were instituted, is there sacrificed to lawless
ambition, to the rod of power, or to the sword of the conqueror!

What an awful, what an instructive lesson is here for the American people and
governments!

Rising into national importance on the principles of Republicanism, our
Governors need only to be guided by those principles, to be beloved by their
country, and applauded by the world. Pursuing the plain path of justice with
respect to foreign nations, and diffusing among their Citizens the blessings of
equal rights and impartial laws, the spirit of candor, of harmony, and
conciliation will be diffused, calculated to heal the cancarous wounds made by
party violence, personal animosity, and political discord.

The following Resolutions were agreed to in the Senate of the United States:
Dec. 22, 1800. -- Resolved, That all confidential communitions, made by the
President of the United States to the Senate, shall be by the members thereof
kept inviolably secret; and that all treaties, which may hereafter be laid
before the Senate, shall also be kept secret, until the Senate shall, by their
resolution, take off the injunction of secrecy.

Jan. 6, 1801. -- Resolved, as a standing Rule, That whenever a Treaty shall be
laid before the Senate for ratification, it shall be read a first time for
information only; when no motion to reject, ratify, or modify, the whole or any
part shall be received

That its second reading shall be for consideration, and on a subsequent day,
when it shall be taken up as in a Committee of the whole, and every one shall
be free to move a question on any particular article in this form, "Will the
Senate advise and consent to the ratification of this article?" or to proposed
amendments thereto, either by inserting or by leaving out words, in which last
case the question shall be, "Shall the words stand part of the article?" And in
every of the said cases, the concurrence of two-thirds of the Senators present
shall be requisite to decide affirmatively. And when through the whole, the
proceedings shall be stated to the house, and questions be again severally put
thereon for confirmation, or new ones proposed, requiring in like manner a
concurrence of two-thirds for whatever is retained or inserted.

That the votes so confirmed shall, by the House, or a Commit thereof, be
reduced into the form of a ratification with or without modifications, as may
have been decided, and shall be proposed on a subsequent day, when every one
shall be free to move amendments, either by inserting or leaving out words; in
which last case the question shall be, "Shall the words stand part of the
resolution?" And in both cases the concurrence of two-thirds shall be requisite
to carry the affirmative; as well as on the final question to advise and
consent to the ratification in the form agreeed to.

The Committee of Ways and Means, who were instructed to enquire into the
expedincy of repealing the "Act to provide for the Valuation of Lands and
dwelling Houses, and the Enumeration of Slaves within the United States,"
Report, That the valuation of lands and dwelling houses has not yet been
completed in all the States; and to repeal the law before that object is
accomplished, would, in its effect, defeat the direct tax in those States where
the valuation remains incomplete.

That one great object contemplated at the time of passing the law, and which
it is presumed still exists, was to organize a system for laying direct taxes,
to which the legislature might resort if the exigencies of government should
require more revenue than could conveniently be drawn from indirect taxes; and
to relinquish this object, after the expense of accomplishing it has been
incurred, might be a proof of instability, but not of wisdom.

That the expense of procuring the distribution and transfer of real estates to
be recorded in the surveyor's office, incurred by individuals, is, in the
opinion of the Committee, an object of little importance when opposed to the
advantages arising from a public record of titles, and the more important
advantages which the government will derive from the system, if any event
should render a direct tax necessary.

Although it is to be hoped that no further direct taxes will become necessary,
yet, as it is impossible to pronounce, with certainty, that this will not be
the case, the Committee believe that it is highly expedient to pursue a system,
which, in cases of emergency, may be used to draw into the Treasury, with
certainty and expedition, any reasonable sums which the public necessities may
require

The Committee are therefore of opinion, that it is not expedient to repeal the
act providing for the valuation of lands and dwelling houses, and the
enumeration of slaves within the United States.

The following are the AMENDMENTS to the Constitution as proposed by Mr.
NICHOLAS.
Previously to reading them, Mr. Nicholas noticed the propositions submitted by
him during the last session, and the extraordinary provisions made in a bill
received from the Senate, and stated the improbability of his voting for his
own prepositions, in case they had been called up by the House.

Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the U. States, two
thirds of both Houses concurring, that the following Articles be proposed to
the Legislatures of the U. States, as Amendments to the Constitution of the
United States: --

I. That after the 3d day of March, in the year 1801, the choice of Electors of
President and Vice President, shall be made by dividing each state into a
number of districts, equal to the number of Electors, to be chosen in such
state, and by the persons in each of those districts who shall have the
qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the
legislature of such state ch^sing one elector in the manner which the
legislature thereof shall prescribe.

II. That the election of representatives to serve after the 3d day of March in
the year 1803, shall be by dividing each state into a number of districts equal
to the number of representatives to which such state shall be entitled, and by
the people in each of those districts who shall have the qualifications
requisite for the electors of the most numerous branch of the legislatue of
such state choosing one representative in the manner which the legislature
thereof shall prescribe.

REPORT of the Select Committee, to whom were referred Mr. NICHOLAS'S proposed
Amendment to the Constitution in relation to the made of electing a President
and Vice President, and Members of the House of Representatives.
The Committee to whom were referred the foregoing Resolutions, have had the
same under their consideration, and as the result of that consideration, beg
leave to make the following Report:

It is conceived that it may be assumed as one of the most indisputable maxims
of American policy, that no charge in the Constitution of the United States be
admitted, without a well grounded assurance of the attainment of some greater
good under the proposed change, than under the existing provisions of the
Constitution

In relation to the object of the first of the aforesaid Resolutions, the
existing provisions of the Constitution of the United States are in the
following terms: -- (The Committee here quote the Constitution, and then go on
to argue against the Resolution.)

A mode of electing the President and Vice President of the United States,
which might at once combine the expression of the public sentiments of the
people of the respective states, with a due appointment of the electors for
that important purpose, is a discovery greatly to be desired; that such mode
may be found, under the present provisions of the constitution of the United
States, and will be discovered by the good sense of the American people, when
aided by further experience, is confidently hoped* Under such circumstances, to
adopt exclusively the mode proposed by the first resolution referred to your
committee, might not only preclude the advantages of further experience and the
adoption of a more eligible made, but might tend to perpetuate, as well as to
render more frequent the occurrence of those exceptionable incidents which have
been before suggested, and for which it is difficult, if not impracticable, to
find adequate and convenient means of prevention or remedy.

These Considerations induce your Committee to prefer the existing provisions
of the Constitution of the United States, to the change proposed by the first
of the resolution, referred to them.

In relation to the second Resolution referred to your Committee, they report
that the objects directly contemplated therein, are already within the limits
of the legislative authority of the government of the United States. To convert
a constitutional provision for the exercise of legislative authority, to which
recurrence may be had at all times, and under which such modifications may be
introduced, from time to time, as the public good and convenience may require
in the ordinary forms of legislation, into a specific constitutional
prescription, seems to be both superfluous and inconvenient.

The adoption of the plan proposed in the second Resolution, would also, in the
opinion of your committee, indirectly tend to withdraw from the government of
the United States, its existing control over the appointment of one of its
most essential branches, and to vest that authority exclusively in the state
Governments. Such arrangement might produce consequences not contemplated, and
too unpleasant to be anticipated. Your Committee therefore conceive it to be
inexpedient to adopt the proposed change on this subject, and submit the
following resolutions to the consideration of the House

Resolved, That it is inexpedient to change the Constitution of the United
States, in the manner proposed by the first of the aforesaid resolutions, in
relation to the election of the President and Vice President of the United
States.

Resolved, That it is inexpedient to change the Constitution of the United
States, in the manner proposed by the second of the aforesaid resolutions, in
relation to the election of members of the House of Representatives of the
United States.

The following Resolutions were laid before Congress by Mr. Harper, and ordered
to be printed: --
Resolved, That for completing the public buildings already commenced at the
City of Washington, the sum of dollars to be paid in annual installments of
100,000 dollars each, ought to be advanced by the United States by way of Loan;
and that the public property in the said city, after discharging the
encumbrances incurred for former advances for the said city and buildings,
ought to be pledged and applied under the direction of Congress, as a fund for
the remibursment of the said loan.

Resolved, That the said sum and all other sums applicable to the same objects,
and hereafter to be received, or now on hand, ought to be applied under the
direction of the Secretaries of the State, Treasury, Navy and War departments,
with the approbation of the President of the United States; and that the said
Secretaries, ^r any three of them, ought to be empowered to employ a proper
clerk or clerks for keeping the accounts of the said expenditures, and all
suitable architects, agents and workmen, for carrying on and completing said
buildings.

Resolved, That a suitable apartment or apartments in that part of the Capitol
already finished, ought to be fitted up for the temporary accommodation of the
Courts of the United States, appointed, or hereafter to be appointed, to be
held in the said city, and of such Courts as may hereafter be appointed to be
held therein for the Territory of Columbia; and that in completing the
Capitol, permanent accommodations for the said Courts ought to be provided
therein.

Resolved, That the sum of (...) dollars annually ought to be appropriated
toward the establishment of a National Library, to be applied under the
direction of the Secretary of State, and that a suitable apartment in that part
of the Capitol which is now finished, ought to be fitted up for the reception
of the said Library; and that when the Capitol shall be completed, suitable
apartments for the reception and use of the said Library ought to be provided
therein.

Resolved, That the sum of (...) dollars ought to be appropriated for the
suitable furnishing of the President's house, to be applied under the direction
of the Secretaries of State, Treasury, War and Navy departments, with the
approbation of the President of the United States; and that the said
Secretaries, or any three of them, ought to be empowered to employ a suitable
agent for that purpose.

Resolved, That the board of commissioners for the City of Washington, ought to
be discontinued, and the public property in the said city to be placed under
the direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, with authority to appoint such
clerk or clerks for the particular management thereof, as he may judge
necessary, and that all powers, rights, duties, and trusts, now vested in, or
belonging to said board, ought to be transferred to the said Secretary.

AMOUNT of the PUBLIC DEBT, as stated by the Committee appointed to examine the
Accounts of the United States, and reported 8th May 1800.
Drs. Cts. Nominal Amount of the National Debt on the 1st of January 1790,
72,237,301 97 True Amount of Debt 1st Jan. 1791 74,185,596 82 Nominal Amount of
Debt 1st Jan. 1800 80,291,820 30 True Amount of Debt 1st Jan. 1800 70,212,718
16

"From whence it results (say the Committee) that if the amount of Debt in Jan.
1800 is compared with that 1791, the debt has diminished 3,972,878^drs, and 66
cents.

"The Committee (...) it important to add, that the extraordinary expense which
has arisen within a few years, has swallowed up large sums of the public
wealth, and diverted the application of those moneys which might otherwise have
gone to the extinguishment of the public debt, to objects connected with the
honor, and, in some cases, with the immediate existence of the Government

"In this class of expense will be included a large sum occasioned by the
Indian war -- one million two hundred and fifty thousand dollars, expended in
quelling two insurrections in the state of Pennsylvania -- more than one
million and an half expended in our transactions with Algiers and the other
Mediterranean powers, together with a much larger expense occasioned by the
unprovoked aggressions of France upon this country. Had it been possible,
steadily to have applied those various sums to the purchase of debt, it is
easily to conceive how rapidly the same might have been extinguished -- The
committee have likewise, noticed the large sums which have been necessarily
expended in the erection of lighthouses, repairing fortifications, in purchases
for replenishing our military and naval arsenals, and in the building,
purchase, and equipment of more than forty sail of ships and armed vessels,
together with a considerable loan of money to the commissioners of the City of
Washington. The money expended on th^se objects, it is well known, arises to a
very large amount, and the property thus acquired by the government, and which
is now on hand, cannot be estimated, on the most moderate calculations, at a
sum less than four millions of dollars. The value of this property might be
considered as composing another item in the credit of the general account of
debt, but the Committee have not thought it necessary to include it, and have
noticed it particularly at this time, for the purpose of exhibiting a more
general view of the extraordinary expense incurred by the government, and for
the purpose presenting all that information, in relation to the debt, which
will enable the House accurately to appreciate the great and increasing
resources of the country; and on this point the committee cannot forbear to
remark, that the progress of the government, in its financial operations, must
afford the most flattering presages of its future success, if the same system
is pursued which has hitherto proved so successful.

"It cannot certainly be unworthy of remark that ten years have not at this
time elapsed since the government fairly commenced its operations; that during
that period it has been necessary to liquidate, to fund and to provide for a
large capital of floating debt which has grown out of the disorders of the
Confederation; that during the same short period the government has been
compelled to contend with one expensive war on the frontier, with two
insurrections in the center of our country, and with depredation and hostility
from the nations of Europe; that these embarrassments have nevertheless been
faced by the government; most of the difficulties have been surmounted; the
debt has been liquidated and diminished, and the nation has still continued to
increase in wealth and population beyond all former example; and although the
contest in which we are now engaged, may, for a short period, retard the
further extinguishment of debt, or perhaps produce a small addition to that
which already exists, yet it cannot be doubted, that whilst we retain order at
home, no exterior circumstances can exhaust or greatly diminish the increasing
resources of the nation."

We have thus impartially stated, as far as our limits will allow, the
different sums at the different periods, as represented by the Committee. It is
probable some of our readers may be puzzled between the nominal and true
amounts; indeed the Report says, that "there was a difference of opinion in the
Committee,"* therefore the debt is stated both ways -- "When Doctors differ,
who shall decide?"

On this important subject, let us hear what Mr. Gallatin says -- His abilities
in Financial matters few men will venture to dispute -- If he has intentionally
misrepresented the subject in the face of the world, he must be both a bold and
a bad man. -- Those who wish to come at the truth, would do well to take Mr.
G's pamphlet in one hand, and the Committee's Report in the other, and judge
for themselves.

"The Secretary of the Treasury (says Mr. G.) in a letter to the Committee of
Ways and Means, dated Jan. 1800, gave it as his opinion, "that the principal of
the public debt had increased, since the establishment of the present
Government, in the sum of 1,516,338 dollars." A Committee of the House of
Representatives, Messrs. Griswold, Waln, Sewal, S. Smith, Sheaff, Nicholas, and
Gallatin, were the Committee, and the latter gentleman is accused of
"unblushing misrepresentation in his pamphlet" -- Certainly his being on the
Committee gave him an opportunity of being intimately acquainted with all the
items -- If he has misrepresented the public accounts, he deserves public
execration.
appointed in March, to examine the Accounts of the United States, reported, on
the 8th of May, a number of statements, and, as the result drawn from them,
that the Public Debt; instead of having increased, as stated by the Secretary,
had, on the 1st of Jan. 1800, diminished by a sum of 1,092,841 dollars, if
contrasted with the debt of Jan. 1790, and 3,972,878 dollars if compared with
the debt of 1791. -- The Report was printed by order of the House, but never
acted upon, nor any occasion offered to investigate its principles.

"The different results exhibited by the Secretary in January, and by the
Committee in May, show that the subject may be considered in different ways,
embracing not only matters of fact, but questions of opinion. Whether the view
taken by the Committee is correct or not, is to be decided by reasoning; and
their Report, not being confined, as seems to have been intended by the House,
to matters of fact, must be considered only as the opinion of a few
individuals. -- It is intended, in this Essay, to examine some of the facts
contained in the Treasury statements, to discuss the grounds of the opinion of
the Committee, and to add some observations on the financial operations of the
government of the United States." -- (Mr. G. then proceeds to examine the facts
in a variety of calculations, which are too lengthy for our book, but which we
recommend to the serious perusal of those who are desirous of being acquainted
with the financial affairs of the United States -- We therefore select from a
variety of tables what we think are his conclusive statements.)

"From those considerations it appears, that the Public Debt may, according to
the two different views of which the subject is susceptible, be correctly
stated as follows: I. Nominal Amount of Public Debt in January 1790. Amount
stated by the Sec. of the Treasury 72,237,301 97 Add, difference for interest
on domestic debt 17,670 40 72,254,972 43 Deduct, difference on the French debt
1,216 73 Premiums on Dutch debt 263,000 0 Difference on interest to for.
officers 11,616 53 Grant to Genesis Green's estate 71,453 36 Debts discharged
before 1790 15,927 13 By lands sold to Pennsylvania 151,392 41 Debt assumed for
debtor estates beyond their proportion 2,000,000 0 2,514,606 16 Amount of Debt
1st Jan. 1790 69,740,366 27 On the 1st of January 1800. Amount stated by the
Sec of the Treasury 79,403,820 30 Add, Outstanding debt due to foreign officers
100,184 18 79,504,004 48 Deduct, Six per cent. stock returned from Holland
20,373 33 Premiums on Dutch debt 59,000 0 Advance on Bank stock 222,000 0
301,373 33 Amount of Debt 1st Jan. 1800, 79,202,631 15 1st Jan. 1790,
69,740,366 27 Nominal increase of Debt from 1790 to 1800 9,462,264 88 II.
Comparative View formed by deducting, from the nominal Amount of Debt, the
funds actually acquired by Government. Jan. 1790 -- Nominal amount as above
69,740,366 27 Deduct, debts due under former government the U. States in cash
62,586 74 Do. received in stock 24,091 31 Cash in Holland, the Treasury, etc.
351,447 83 438,125 88 69,302,240 39 Jan. 1800 -- Nominal amount as above
79,202,631 15 Deduct, Cash in Treasury, etc. 2,694,115 48 Remittances said to
be made to Holland beyond the payments due in 1799, 548,955 84 3,243,071 32
Amount of Debt 1st Jan. 1800, 75,959,559 83 1st Jan. 1790, 69,302,240 39 Leaves
for increase of debt for those ten years, after deducting all the funds
actually acquired by Government, and which may possibly be applied toward a
reduction of the debt, 6,657,319 44

"And here it is proper to observe, that the amount of Custom-house bonds,
credited by the Committee, and excluded from the above statement, is, for Jan
1790, 590,468 dollars, and for Jan. 1800, 5,826,214 dollars; difference
5,235,745 dollars; which deducted from 6,657,319, still leave, even on the
inadmissible supposition that those bonds ought to be deducted, an increase of
debt, during those ten years, of 1,421, 574 dollars."

PUBLIC ESTIMATES.
The Secretary of the Treasury reported to the House of Representatives, that
the following Appropriations are necessary for the Year 1801. For the Civil
List, or, the support of Government, including the contingent expenses of the
several Departments and Offices, the sum of 594,701 37 For the payment of
Annuities and Grants 1,753 33 For the support of the Mint Establishment 13,300
For the expenses of intercourse with formations 85,000 For expenses incident to
the treaties with England, Spain, and the Mediterranean Powers 361,364 For the
expenses of supporting the claims of our Citizens to property captured in
foreign countries 64,000 For aid to distressed American seamen in f. countries
30,000 For defraying the expenses incident to the valuation of dwelling-houses,
lands, etc. 40,000 For the Military Department, including the pay of the Army,
rations, clothing, ordnance, etc. 1,400,000 For the payment of military
pensions 93,000 For the Navy Department, including the pay and subsistence of
the Officers, etc. marines; completing docks, navy-yards, etc. and for building
six 74 gun ships, agreeably to estimate, 2,342,352 95 For the fabrication of
cannon and small arms for the Army, Navy, Militia, etc. 400,000 For the support
of light-houses, beacons, etc. 38,622 70 For the 2d enumeration of the people
60,000 For satisfying miscellaneous Claims, including the expenses of returning
votes for President, etc. 5,600 Amounting to 5,529,695 35

The Funds out of which Appropriations may be made for the purposes
beforementioned, are

1. The sum of 600,000 dollars of the proceeds of duties on imports and tonnage
which accrue in the year 1801, which sum is by law annually reserved for
Government.

2. The surplus of the income of the United States which may accrue to the end
of the year 1801, after satisfying the objects for which appropriations have
been made.

After this general Statement, the Secretary descends to a more particular
specification, the principal of which are the following: --

To the President and Vice President 30,000 Senate and House of Representatives
200,470 Judiciary 78,900 Treasury Department 92,713 Loan Officers and Clerks
28,250 Department of State 24,800 Mint 23,600 War Department 36,766 Navy
Department 24,489 General Post Office 12,112 Surveyor General's Department
28,000 Territory North-west of the Ohio 5,500 -- Mississippi and Indiana 11,000
Annuities and Grants 1,753 Demands unprovided for 20,000 Indian Department
72,000 Ministers to England, Prussia, Spain, and Portugal, 9000 each, 36,000
Minister resident at the Batavian Republic 4,500 Consuls at Algiers, Tripoli,
Morocco, deficiencies, contingencies, etc. in all 85,000 Carrying into effect
the treaty with Great Britain, salaries to Commissioners, etc. in all 361,364
Prosecuting the claims of American Citizens for property captured by the
British, etc. 64,000 Relief of American seamen in foreign countries 30,000
Expenses incident to the valuation of Lands, etc. 40,000 Pay of the Army,
consisting of 1400 officers, artificers, musicians, and 4040 privates, etc.
1,167,091 Ordnance Department 100,000 Defensive protection of frontiers, etc.
30,000 Military pensions 90,300 Naval Establishment 2,447,352 The Secretary of
the Navy further estimates, For progressing with six 74 gun ships, and for
completing navy yards, docks, wharves, etc. 500,000 For erecting Marine
barracks 20,000 For the maintenance of French prisoners 30,000 Total Naval
Estimate 3,042,352 But the appropriations heretofore made for the different
objects relating to the Navy will not be exhausted at the end of the present
year by a sum equal to 700,000 dollars, so that it may not be necessary to
appropriate for the year 1801 for all the Navy purposes, exclusive of providing
timber to be laid up in store, more than 700,000 EXPENDITURES of the United
States from Oct. 1799 to Sept. 1800.
To the President, Senate, House of Representatives, Judges, Government
Officers, etc. 727,253 23 Military Department 2,654,281 59 Naval Department
3,143,047 98 Diplomatic Department, etc. the whole making a total sum of
15,262,161 75 By a Statement of Balances (signed John Nourse, Register) of
certain Appropriations, there were unexpended on the 30th Sept. last, the sum
of 8,370,766 PROGRESS of the REVENUES of the United States.
Annual Receipts.
1791 4,772,200 26 1792 8,771,600 93 1793 9,450,195 15 1794 9,439,855 65 1795
9,515,758 59 1796 8,740,329 65 1797 8,758,780 99 1798 8,179,179 80 1799
12,549,381 98 NAVY of the UNITED STATES.
Ships Guns Men Commanders. United States 44 400 Com. Barry Constitution 44 400
Capt. Talbot President 44 400 Capt. Truxton Chesapeak 44 400 Capt. Barron
Philadelphia 44 400 Capt. Decatur Constellation 36 340 Capt. Murray Congress 36
340 Capt. Sever New York 36 340 Capt. Morris Insurgent 36 340 Capt. Fletcher
Boston 32 260 Capt. Little Essex 32 260 Capt. Preble G. Washington 32 120 Genesis
Green 32 220 Capt. Perry John Adams 32 220 Capt. Cross Adams 32 220 Capt.
Robinson Ganges 26 180 Capt. Mullowny Connecticut 24 180 Capt. Tryon Maryland
20 180 Capt. Rogers Portsmouth 24 180 Capt. M'Neil Merrimack 24 180 Capt. Brown
Petapsco 20 180 Capt. Geddes. Delaware 20 180 Baltimore 20 180 Capt. Cowper
Herald 18 140 Capt. Russel Trumbull 18 140 Capt. Jewet Warren 18 140 Richmond
16 100 Augusta 16 100 Capt. M'Ilroy Eagle 14 70 Capt. Campbell Pickering 14 70
Capt. Hiller Scammel 14 70 Capt. Furnel Experiment 12 70 Capt. Maley Enterprise
12 70 Capt. Shaw

RECAPITULATION -- 5 Frigates of 44 guns -- 4 of 36 -- 2 of 32 -- 4 of 24 guns
on gun-deck, and 8 on the quarterdeck -- 8 of 20 to 24 guns -- 3 of 18 -- 2 of
16 -- 5 of 12 -- Total 33 -- and 7 galleys.

[The above List is taken from an authenticated Copy -- except the names of the
Captains, which we cannot vouch as being perfectly correct.]

The Secretary of the Navy makes the following Estimates of the Pay,
Subsistence, and other Expenses of the following Descriptions of Ships of War,
viz.
Vessels of 44 guns and 400 men 115,945 36 guns and 340 men 98,347 32 guns and
260 men 74,999 24 on gun-deck and 8 on qr. deck, 220 men, 66,785 20 to 26 guns,
and 180 men 57,269 18 guns and 140 men 45,780 16 to 18 guns and 100 men 35,737
12 to 14 guns and 70 men 24,213 Galley, 28 men 9,200 Marine Corpse, 1143 men,
including Officers, 166,903 5 Frigates of 44 guns 579,728 4 Do. 36 393,391 2
Do. 32 149,999 4 Do. 32 (smaller) 267,035 8 Ships of 20 to 26 guns 458,158 3
Sloops of 18 guns 137,341 2 Brigs of 16 to 18 guns 71,474 5 Brigs and Schooners
12 to 14 guns 121,069 7 Galleys 64,400 Contingent Expenses 37,850 Making a
Total of Dolls. 2,447,352 ESTIMATE of the Number of Persons composing the Crews
of the Navy of the United States.
5 Frigates of 44 guns, and 400 men, 2,000 4 Do. 36 340 1,360 2 Do. 32 260 520
4 Do. smaller, 32 220 880 8 Ships of 20 to 26 180 1,440 3 Sloops of War 18 140
420 2 Brigs 16 to 18 100 200 5 Do. and Schooners. 12 to 14 70 350 7 Galleys --
28 196 Total, including Marines, 7.366

Ships and Vessels taken from the French by the American Navy since the
Commencement of Sea hostilities:

^'Insurgent 44 guns, Le Berceau 26, Deux Anges 20, Sans Pareil 16, Le Croyable
14, La Jaloux 14, Magicienne 14, Jennesse 12, Italian Conquest 12, L'Active 12,
Marsain 10 La Voltigeuse 10 -- then follow the names of a number of smaller
vessels carrying so low as 2 guns, amounting in all to 74 Captures -- besides
80 Re-captures.

REPORT of the Secretary of the Treasury to the Commissioners of the Sinking
Fund.
THAT no purchases of the Debt of the United States have been made since the
date of the last report to Congress of the 11th day of December, 1799; and that
the sums of the Capitol Stock heretofore purchased and transferred, prior to
the present year, in trust for the United States the interest whereon is
appropriated by law toward the reduction of the public debt amount to
4,704,219 dollars 60 cents, as will more particularly appear from documents
hereto annexed, marked A.

That the following sums have been applied toward the discharge of the
principal debt of the United States since the date of the last report to
Congress of the 11th of December, 1799.

1. To the 5th instalment of the six per cent. stock, bearing a present
interest, which pursuant to the act, entitled "An act, making further provision
for the support of the public credit and for redemption of the public debt"
passed on the 3d of March, 1795, and the act in addition thereto passed on the
28th day of April 1796, became payable on the first day of January, 1800, the
sum of 716,894 36 2. To the payment of the eighth instalment of the
subscription loan for Bank Stock, due on the last day of December, 1799,
200,000 3. To the payment of the third instalment of a loan of one million of
Guilders obtained in Holland, which fell due the present year, pursuant to a
contract dated first of June 1787, estimated at 40 cents per Guilder. 80,000 4.
To the payment of the second instalment of loan of 1000,000 of Guilders
obtained in Holland, and which fell due in the present year, pursuant to a
contract dated the 13th of March, 1788, estimated at 40 cents per Guilder,
80,000 5. To the payment of the first instalment of a loan of 3000,000 of
Guilders obtained in Holland, and which fell due in the present year pursuant
to a contract dated the first of January, 1790, estimated at 40 cents per
Guilder, 240,000 Amounting in the whole to Dollars 1,316,894 36.

The payments before enumerated have been made out of the following funds: 1.
The interest fund, or the sums which accrued upon the stock purchased and
transferred to the Commissioners of the Sinking Fund, in trust for the United
States, as particularly stated in the document, marked B. 522,323 11 2. The
fund arising from the payment of debts which originated prior to the present
constitution of the United States as particularly stated in the document marked
C. 2,943 39 3. The fund arising from dividends on the capital stock belonging
to the United States, in the bank of the United States, from the 1st of July,
1798, to the 30th of June, 1799, after deducting the interest on the
subscription loan for the same period, as particularly stated in the document
hereto annexed, marked D. 29,040 4. The proceeds of the duties on goods, wares
and merchandise imported; on the tonnage of ships or vessels, and on spirits
distilled within the United States, and stills appropriated by the 8th section
of the act of March 3d, 1795, entitled "An act making further provisions for
the support of public credit, and for the redemption of the public debt," being
for the period and in the reference to the objects mentioned in this Report,
762,587 85 1,316,894 30

Making in the whole an equal amount to the reimbursements before mentioned.

There remained in the hands of the Treasurer of the United States, as agent of
the Board of Commissioners, off the 25th day of the present month, 169,087
dollars 4 cents, which with the growing produce of other appropriated funds,
will be sufficient for the reimbursement, at the close of the present year, of
the 6th instalment of the 6 per cent stock, bearing a present interest, and the
9th instalment for the bank of the United States; which reimbursements are
required to be made by the 11th section of the act of Congress, passed on the
3d of March, 1795, herein before mentioned.

By the National Accounts lately published, from Oct. 1799 to Sept. 1800, it
appears, that the total expenditure for that year amounts to 15,262,161 dollars
75 cents -- The receipts amount to exactly the same sum. -- In this account,
however, are included "the unexpended appropriations," as stated by Mr. ^ourse,
amounting to 8,370,766 dollars. -- See p. 134.

On the 14th of January last, a message was delivered from the President to
Congress, transmitting to that Hon. Body his annual account of "the application
of grants for contingent charges for the year 1800," by which it appears, that
out of the 20,000 dollars entrusted to his care, he had only granted 50 dollars
to a W^^mith Shaw "for his expenses on a mission from Philadelphia to Mount
Vernon on public business." -- Of course, 19,950 dollars revert to the public
purse.

In justice to Mr. Adams, with pleasure we give a place to this article. -- The
First Magistrate of a Republic, if ever entitled to the applause of the People
for discharging his duty, is on no occasion more entitled to their thanks, than
for a rigid devotion of the public moneys to national uses.

JUDICIARY BILL.
"The Bill to provide for the more convenient organization of the Courts of the
United States," as passed in the House of Representatives, directs,

1. That after the next session of the Supreme Court of U. S. the said Court
shall be held twice a year in the city of Washington, viz. On the first Monday
of June and December.

2. That after the next vacancy the court shall consist of five justices.

3. That the several states shall be divided into 22 districts.

4. That the said 22 districts shall be classed into six circuits, viz. 1.
Consisting of districts of Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts and
Rhode Island; 2. Consisting of Connecticut and Vermont; 3. Consisting of
districts of Jersey, East and West Pennsylvania and Delaware; 4. Consisting of
districts of Maryland, and East and West Virginia; 5. Consisting of districts
of North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia; 6. Consisting of districts of
East Tennessee, West Tennessee, Kentucky and Ohio.

5. That in each of these circuits there shall be three judges, two of whom
shall form a quorum, to hold two sessions annually at certain specified places,
and one of whom shall be commissioned as chief justice.

6. That the circuit courts shall have all the powers heretofore vested in the
courts of the United States.

7. That the said circuit courts respectively, shall have cognizance of all
crimes and offenses cognizable under the authority of the United States, and
committed within their respective districts, or upon the high seas; and also of
all cases in law or equity, arising under the constitution and laws of the
United States, and treaties made, or which shall be made under their authority;
and also of all actions, or suits of a civil nature, at common law, or in
equity, where the United States shall be plaintiffs or complainants; and also
of all actions, or suits, matters or things cognizable by the judicial
authority of the United States, under and by virtue of the constitution
thereof, where the matter in dispute shall amount to four hundred dollars, and
where original jurisdiction is not given by the constitution of the United
States to the supreme court thereof or exclusive jurisdiction by law to the
district courts of the United States: Provided always, that in all cases where
the title or bounds of land shall come into question, the jurisdiction of the
said circuit courts shall not be restrained by reason of the value of the land
in dispute.

8. "That all actions, suits, process, pleasings, and other proceedings of what
nature or kind soever, depending or existing in any of the present circuit
courts of the United States, or in any of the present district courts of the U.
States acting as circuit courts, shall be, and hereby are, continued over to
the circuit courts established by this act."

9. That each of the circuit judges shall be allowed 2,000 dollars per annum;
except the judges of the 6th circuit who shall be allowed 1,500 dollars.

10. In the 6th circuit there is to be an additional judge appointed, who, with
the two present district judges, are to compose the circuit court for that
circuit.

11. All the present powers with which the district courts are vested are
transferred to the circuit courts, excepting admiralty powers.

Mr. Elseworth having resigned the office of Chief Justice of the United
States, and Mr. Jay being nominated, he declined the office -- Mr. Marshall was
then nominated, and unanimously approved of by the Senate.

FEATURES of a BILL for the Government of the District of COLUMBIA.
1. A Legislature is to be established, to consist of a Senate and House of
Representatives.

2. The district shall be divided into two precincts, one on the west, the
other on the east side of the Potomak.

5. The House of Representatives shall consist of fourteen members, seven
resident in the Eastern, and seven in the Western precinct, chosen for two
years, by citizens of U. S. resident 12 months in the district and 1 month in
the precinct of the United States, who are freeholders.

The qualifications of a member of the House of Representatives are, being 25
years of age, being a citizen of the United States, resident in the district
for 12 months, and in the precinct for 1 month, and being a freeholder therein

4. The Senate shall consist of six members, three resident in the Eastern, and
three in the Western precinct, chosen for six years.

The qualifications of a Senator are, being thirty years of age, being a
citizen of the United States, resident in the district for twelve months, and
in the precinct for one month and being a freeholder therein.

The Senators are to be chosen by eight electors, four whereof to be elected by
the citizens of the Eastern, and four by the citizens of the Western precinct,
which electors shall have the same qualifications as members of the House of
Representatives, and who shall be elected by the same citizens who vote for
members of the House of Representatives.

The Senate to be divided, at the organization, into three classes, one of
which is to be replaced every second year.

5. The members of the legislature to be compensated by the district.

6. A Governor shall be appointed by the President of the United States for
three years, unless sooner removed.

The Governor shall be a citizen, and 35 years of age.

He shall appoint all officers erected by the legislature of the district.

He shall have a veto upon the passage of all laws; and if after his
disapproving a law it shall be repassed by two thirds of each house, he shall
lay the law before Congress to be acted upon by them.

7. The Governor, Members of the Legislature, and Electors shall be prohibited
from holding any office under the United States, or any state.

8. Taxes, excepting excises, imposts and tonnage duties, may be laid by the
legislature; but no law shall be passed for taxing the district for opening,
paving, repairing, improving, lighting or regulating the streets, in any town
or city within the district.

9. Two sheriffs shall be appointed annually by the Governor, one for the
Eastern, and one for the Western precinct, who besides the ordinary duties of
sheriffs, shall hold and be judges of all elections.

10. The judicial power of the district shall be vested in two superior and two
inferior Courts; the judges to be appointed by the President, to be paid by the
United States, and to hold their offices during good behavior.

11. The laws of Virginia and Maryland, as they now exist, shall remain in
force, so far as the same may be consistent with the motives of the cession by
said states.

12. The legislature may pass all laws needful for the government and police of
the district, repealable or alterable by Congress, who may make any law which
shall be supreme.

13. A governor shall be immediately appointed.

14. The election of the members of the legislature shall be held on the 1st
Monday of April, and the legislature shall convene at Washington on the 1st
Monday in June.

When Mr. S. Smith, the respectable and impartial Editor of The National
Intelligences, by a memorial, asked leave of the House of Representatives to
have a place within the the bar to note the debates, he was refused! -- The
following are the Yeas and Nays on the subject of his request, which are
supposed to describe, pretty clearly, the political sentiments of the two
Parties -- observe, that the Yeas are against the prayer of the Printer, the
Nays for him.

Yeas -- Baer, Bartlet, Bird, J. Brown, Champlin, Cooper, Craik, Dana, J
Davenport, F Davenport, Dennis, Edmond, Evans, Foster, Freeman, Glon, C.
Goodrich, E. Goodrich, Griswold, Grove, ^enderson, Huger, Imlay, Kittera, Lee,
S. Lee, Lynn, ^orris, Otis, Page, Parker, Platt, Powell, J. Reed, N Reed,
Rutledge, Smith, Tenney, Thatcher, J. C. Thomas, R. Thomas, Wadsworth, Waln,
Williams, Woods -- 45.

Nays -- Alston, Bailey, Bishop, R. Brown, Christic, Claiborne, Clay, Condit,
Davis, Dawson, Dent, Dickson, Eggleston, Elmondorf, Good, Gray, Gregg, Hanna,
Heister, Hill, Holmes, Jackson, Jones, Kitchell, Leib, Macon, Muhlenburg, New,
Nicholas, Nicholson, Randolph, Smilie, Sam, Smith, J Smith, Spaight, Stanford,
Stone, Sumpter, Talioferro, Thompson, A. Trigg, J. Trigg, Tazewell, Van
Cortlandt, Varnum -- 15.

The Speaker, Mr. Theodore Sedgewick, having given his casting vote against the
Memorial, the Printer, was of course, not permitted to come within the bar, as
had been the custom in Philadelphia -- The Speaker was pleased not to stop here
for he would not only not permit Mr. Smith to take notes outside of the bar,
but had him turned out of the gallery by the Sergeant at Arms!

IN the month of November 1800, the following, it is said, was the political
complexion of the different members of the then Congress -- As a change of men
is about to take place (Heaven grant that their measures may be good), will it
be Tempora mutantur, etc.?

New Hampshire -- Senators, John Langdon r. S. Livermore f. -- Representatives,
Foster, Freeman, Sheaf, Tinney f.

Massachusetts -- Senators, Mason, Foster f. -- Representatives, Sedgewick
(speaker), Otis, Lyman, N Reed, J. Reed, Lee, Bartlet, Shepard, Thatcher,
Wadsworth, Williams f. Bishop, Lincoln, Varnum r.

Rhode Island -- Senators, Foster, Green f. -- Representatives, Champlin, J.
Brown f.

Connecticut -- Senators, Hillhouse. Tracey f. -- Representatives, Dana,
Edmond, C. and E. Goodrich, Griswold, Davenport, J. C. Smith f.

Vermont -- Senators, Chipman, Pain f. -- Representatives, Morris f. Lion r.

New York -- Senators, Morris f. Armstrong r. -- Representatives, Bird, Cooper,
Glen, Platt f. Bailey, Elmendorf, Livingston, Thompson, Cortlandt, J. Smith r.

New Jersey -- Senators, Dayton, Schureman f. -- Representatives, Imlay, F.
Davenport f. Condit, Kitchell r. Linn d.

Pennsylvania -- Senators, Bingham, Ross f. -- Representatives, Hartley,
Kittera, Thomas, Waln, Woods f. Gallatin, Brown, Greg, Hana, Heister, Leib,
Muhlenburg, Smilie r.

Delaware -- Senators, Latimer, Wells f. -- Representative, J. A. Bayard f.

Maryland -- Senators, Howard, Loyd f. -- Representatives, Baer, Craik, Dennis,
Thomas f. Christie, Nicholson, S. Smith r. G. Dent d.

Virginia -- Senators, Mason, Nicholas r. -- Representatives, Evans, Lee, Good,
Gray, Powell, Page, Parker f. Cabel, Dawson, Clay, Eggleston, New, Nicholas,
Jackson, Randolph, A. and J. Trigg, Tazewell r.

North Carolina -- Senators, Bloodworth, Franklin r. -- Representatives, Grove,
Henderson, Hill, Dickson, Spaight f. Macon, Stanford, Stone, Williams r. Alston
d.

South Carolina -- Senators, Read f. Pinkney r. -- Representatives, Harper,
Huger, Not, T. Pinkney f. Sumpter r.

Georgia -- Senators, Gunn f. Baldwin r -- Representatives, Jones, Talioferro r.

Kentucky -- Senators, Brown r. Marshal d. -- Representatives, Davis, Fowler r.

Tennessee -- Senators, Anderson, Cock r. -- Representative, Claiborne r.

f. For Federalist -- r for Republican -- d for doubtful.

WASHINGTON'S MAUSOLEUM.
HOW happy he who sinks to rest,
By all regretted, loved, and blessed! --
For him the afflicted melts in woe,
For him the widow's tears shall flow;
For him the orphan's prayers shall rise,
And waft his spirit to the skies! --
To deck his grave shall Virtue bring
The earliest tribute of the spring;
And Friendship, weeping, shall repair
To plant her mournful cypress there;
Whilst in our hearts we'll raise a tomb,
Round which immortal wreaths shall bloom!

OUR readers, no doubt, have heard, that last session, a Bill passed the House
of Representatives, granting 70,000 dollars to erect a monument to Genesis
Washington, and that the Bill was rejected by the Senate -- This session, the
scheme was renewed upon a much more expensive plan, which, as might be
expected, occasioned much debate and difference of opinion -- Some of the
members were for no other memorial of the departed General's virtues, than what
could be fixed in the hearts of his fellow citizens It was a good idea,
suggested by one of the members in this debate, that a concise history of the
Revolution, and the life of Genesis Washington, should be made school-books --
Among the first rudiments of learning taught the young scholar should be a
knowledge of his own country.
-- others were for such a monument of him as was voted by the old Congress --
others again, and these the majority, 44 to 40, gave their voice for a
Mausoleum, on a grand and extensive scale -- On this subject, we think it
necessary to insert the following

Copy of a Letter from Mr. WEST, the celebrated American Artist in London, to
Mr. King the American Minister at the British Court, on the subject of a
Monument to be erected to the Memory of General Washington.
London, May 25, 1800. SIR,
OBSERVING the Resolutions passed by the United States of America, for removing
the body of GEORGE WASHINGTON from the family vault to the city bearing his
name, and their intention to raise an appropriate monument to his memory in
that city, I thought the following observations, with the plan for a monument
from me as an American and one not altogether obscure in the elegant ar^^,
might be acceptable to those in that country, who are desirous of paying the
last tribute to his memory, by a monumental record, placed in the Federal City.

The raising of monuments to departed virtue, has ever been an object of the
first attention in all civilized countries, and no people ever had so proud an
instance in doing this as the Americans, by raising one to true virtue and real
worth, as that which presents itself to them in the character of General
Washington, and that the placing of such records in public situations has ever
been considered true policy, by all wise governments, for which the highways,
squares and circuses for such records have been preferred, we have the highest
authority from the Egyptians, Grecians, and Romans. -- That the raising of a
monument to the memory of General Washington, I believe, is the wish of all the
civilized world. I do therefore recommend, that the most durable form for such
a monument be adopted, which is, that of the Triangle or Pyramid, and that its
situation be the most conspicuous in the Federal City; its height one hundred
and fifty feet, and its basis the same. The place or square, where it is
erected, to be planted with trees to give inviting shade, and to be opened to
the public: this will afford the parent or tutor an opportunity to inculcate
the virtues of that great man, in the juvenile mind of the rising offspring.
The inside of the pyramid has a conic cavity to save the expense in building,
and at the same time gives as much strength as though solid; within that is
built a rotundo, lighted from the top, in which is placed the pedestrian statue
of the General in bronze, to be in height not less than seven feet, and round
the rotundo eight basso-relievos in the same metal, four containing military,
and four civil subjects. In place of the frize and dado round the rotundo, a
grove to be cut, to a considerable depth, and in the same manner round the
eight basso-relievos. This will give a monumental simplicity, which belongs to
its character, and the whole of the apartment to be the natural color of the
stone with which it is built; one of the four entrances into the rotundo to be
closed, for the place where the remains of that great man should be deposited
in a stone coffin, which should be elevated, and under it a proper inscription.
The three entrances which lead into the rotundo, to have iron gates, to be
opened on fixed days, for seeing the sepulcher. Such a monument would be an
appropriate one to the exalted character of George Washington, and worthy the
United States of America to raise to his memory. It should stand pre-eminent in
magnitude, as the character it records stood pre-eminent in virtue, as well as
to give a taste to any monuments that may in future be erected -- it will both
adorn the City, and inspire the people with virtue from generation to
generation, for thousands of years.

The better to elucidate the construction of such a monument, I send you the
plan, section, and elevation; they are goemetrical, and laid down to a scale*
The estimate of such a monument in erecting, the workmen in America will be
able to ascertain, as the whole is to be of stone. The works of art, such as
the statue and basso-relievos, their expense will be ascertained in Europe,
agreeable to similar works.

I have the honor to be, etc. BEN. WEST.
Glory, bring thy fairest wreath,
Place it on the Hero's urn,
Mercy, in soft accents breathe,
" He never made fair Virtue mourn."
Every Virtue here attend;
Bending over his sacred earth;
Gratitude, thy influence lend,
Make us feel his mighty worth!



The following are the Yeas and Nays on the engrossing of Washington's
Mausoleum Bill: --

Yeas -- Messrs. Baer, Bartlet, Brown, Champlain, Cooper, Craik, Davenport,
Dennis, Dent, Dickson, Edmond, Evans, Foster, Freeman, Glen, Good; Goodrich, E.
Goodrich, Griswold, Grove, Harper, Henderson, Hill, Huger, Imlay, Kittera, H.
Lee, Morris, Not, Otis, Pinkney, Plat, Powell, Reed, N. Reed, Rutledge, Smith,
Tenney, Thatcher Thomas, R. Thomas, Wadsworth, Williams, Woods -- 44.

Nays -- Messrs, Alston, Bailey, Bird, Bishop, R. Brown, Clay, Christie,
Claiborne, Condit, J. Davenport, Davis, Dawson Eggleston, Elmondorf, Gray,
Gregg, Hanna, Heister, Lei^ Holmes, Jackson, Kitchell, Lion, Linn, Macon,
Muldenberg, Randolph, Shepard, Smilie, S. Smith, Spaight, Stanford, Sumpter,
Talioferro, Thompson, A. Trigg, J. Trigg; Tazewell, Van Cortlandt, Varnum -- 40.

This Bill, which granted 200,000 dollars to begin the work, was altered, in
the Senate, to 50,000 dollars to erect an equestrian statue, under the
direction of J. Marshal, Bush. Washington, (...). oward, and T. Lear.

SEDITION LAW.
The following are the Yeas and Nays on agreeing to the Report of the Committee
of revisal and unfinished business, recommending a continuance of the Sedition
Law.
Yeas -- Messrs Bartlet, Bayard, Bird, J. Brown, Champlin, Cooper, Craik, Dana,
F. Davenport, J. Davenport, Dennis, Dickson, Edmond, Evans, Foster, Freeman,
Goodrich, E. Goodrich, Glen, Grove, Griswold, Harper, Hill, Henderson, Imlay,
Kittera, H. Lee, S. Lee, Morris, Otis, Page, Pinkney, Plat, Powell, J. Read, N.
Read, Rutledge, Shepard, J. C. Smith, Sheaff, Tenney, Thatcher, J C. Thomas, R.
Thomas, Wadsworth, Waln, Williams, Woods -- 48.

Nays -- Messrs. Alston, Bailey, Bishop, R. Brown, Clay, Christie. Claiborne,
Condit, Davis, Dawson, Dent, Eggleston, Elmondorf, Gallatin, Good, Gray, Gregg,
Hanna, Heister, Holmes, Huger, Jackson, Kitchell, Leib, Lion, Linn, Macon,
Muhlenburg, New, Nicholas, Not, Parker, Randolph Smilie, J. Smith, S. Smith,
Spaight, Stanford, Stone, Sumter, Talioferro, Thompson, A. Trigg, J. Trigg, Van
Cortlandt, Varnum, R. Williams -- 48.

The numbers being thus equal, the Hon. Speaker, Mr. T. Sedgewick, after having
turned the Printer out of the House, very consistently gave his vote for a
continuance of the law.

We have read, with some attention, the debates on this contested point, which,
like many other questions, admits of strong arguments either way -- for, with
all our partiality to the Liberty of the Press, we must acknowledge, that a
slanderous, soul-mouth'd Printer should be as amenable to the rules of Truth
and Justice as any other member of the community. -- Mr. Bayard for the law,
and Mr. ^uger against it, appeared to take the lead as to force of reasoning.
The latter gentleman acknowledged the right of Congress to enact such a law,
but showed, by very cogent and conclusive arguments, its present unfitness and
inexpediency.

NATIONAL DEBT.
Although every one knows what a dollar is, yet, few, very few, comprehend the
sum of 80 millions of dollars, and therefore form very imperfect ideas of the
weight and magnitude of the National Debt. -- A dollar weighs 17 dwts one 3-4
grs. Troy weight; and 80 millions of dollars would weight 2090 tons 1125 lbs.
aver-du-poise weight. Now if wagons were employed to carry 80 millions of
dollars, at a ton a load, and the wagons four rods asunder, they would occupy
the space of 26 miles and 1-8th.

Pretty well for a Government not yet 21 years of age!

The National Debt of England is fully 500 millions (...), about 2000 millions
of dollars, but this debt began in King William's time.

AMERICAN COMMERCE.
SUMMARY VALUE of EXPORTS from the UNITED STATES.
In 1797. In 1798. In 1799. New Hampshire 275,840 361,453 361,789 Massachussets
7,502,047 8,639,252 11,421,591 Rhode Island 975,530 947,827 1,055,273
Connecticut 814,506 763,128 1,143,618 Vermont -- -- 20,480 New York 13,308,064
14,300,892 18,719,527 New Jersey 18,161 61,877 9,722 Pennsylvania 11,446,291
8,915,463 12,431,967 Delaware 98,929 183,729 297,065 Maryland 9,811,799
12,746,190 16,299,600 Virginia 4,908,713 6,113,451 6,292,986 North Carolina
540,900 338,124 485,921 South Carolina 949,622 6,994,179 8,729,615 Georgia
644,307 961,848 1,396,759 Total 51,294,710 61,327,411 78,665,521 VALUE and
DESTINATION of the EXPORTS.
In 1797. In 1798. In 1799. To Russia 3,450 60,732 46,230 Prussia -- -- 617,046
Sweden 898,315 733,462 617,046 Denmark and Norw. 2,533,224 2,900,511 951,577
Danish W. Indies -- -- 3,397,262 Netherlands 8,845,225 7,420,660 696,968 Dutch
W. Indies -- -- 5,154,535 Great Britain, etc. 8,569,748 17,086,189 20,263,733
British W. Indies -- -- 6,285,254 Imperial ports -- 70,730 105,647 Hamburgh,
etc. 9,589,858 14,4^2,613 17,144,400 France, etc. 11,664,090 6,941,485 --
French W. Indies -- -- 2,776,604 French African ports -- -- 3,900 Spain, etc.
5,596,253 8,740,553 7,400,009 Spanish W Indies -- -- 10,497,493 Portugal. etc.
463,320 729,089 857,731 Barbary States 15,000 19,188 48,000 Italian ports
767,064 1,334,036 1,157,212 E. Indies generally 387,310 261,595 595,249 W.
Indies generally 1,508,044 248,181 92,200 Africa generally 230,873 132,883
234,596 Europe generally 207,077 74,858 18,118 N. W. Coast Amer. 15,607 79,545
72,941 Total 51,294,710 61,327,411 78,665,521

MINISTERIAL and CONSULAR Appointments.
Rufus King, Minister Plenipo. at the Court of London; Christ, Gore and Wm.
Pinkney, Commissioners under the 7th Article of the Treaty of Amity, etc. Sam.
Williams and Sam. Cobet, Agents to Do. Tho Fitsimons and Sam. Sitgreaves,
Commissioners under the 5th Article of the Treaty of Amity, etc. John Read,
American Agent attached thereto; David Lenox, Agent for the relief of Seamen in
London; Sam. Williams, Consul, in Do. -- E. Vanderhorst, Do. Bristol; Rob. W.
Fox, Do. Falmouth; -- James Maury, Do. Liverpool; Tho, Aldjo, Vice Do. Poole;
-- Geo knox, Consul, Hull; Jos. Wilson, Consul, Dublin; -- Jas Holmes, Do.
Belfast: John Church, Do. Cork; -- Henry Grant, Do. Leith; John Gavino, Do.
Gibraltar; -- Turil Tufts, Do. Surrinam; Nicholas Rousselet, Do. Demarara and
Essequibo; John Elmslie, jun* Do. Cape of Good Hope; -- O^ Elsworth, Wm. R.
Davie, and Wm. V. Murray, Envoys Extraordinary to France: Isaac C. Barnet,
Agent, Bourdeaux; -- P. Debree, Agent. Nantz; Etienne Cathalan, jun. Do.
Marseilles; Edw. Stevens, Consul General for St Domingo; Rob. Ritchie, Consul
at Port a^ Prince; H. Hammond at Cape Francois; Jacob Lewis, Isle of France --
D. Humphreys, Minister Plenipo at the Court of Madrid; Moses Young, Consul at
Madrid; -- L. O.'Brien, at St. Ander^^; Jos. M. Yzardi, at Cadiz; -- Wm.
Kirkpatrick, at Malaga; Rob. Montgomery, at Alicant; -- Wm. Ellis, at
Barcelona; Evan Jones, New Orleans; -- W. Hulings, Vice Consul at Do. James
Blake, at St. Domingo; -- J. Blakely, at St. Jago de Cuba. -- Wm. Smith,
Minister Plenipo. At the Court of Portugal; Tho. Bulkely, Consul at Lisbon; --
John Street, at Fayall. -- W. V. Murray, Minister to the Batavian Republic;
Sylvanus Bourne, Consul General at Amsterdam; Ez. Furman, Consul at Rotterdam;
-- B. Williams, at Curracoa. -- HansSabye, Consul at Copenhagen; -- H. Cooper
at St. Croix. -- John Q. Adams, Minister Plenipo. at the Court of Berlin; Fred.
W. Lutee, Consul at Stettin. -- (...), Pitcairn, Consul at Hamburgh; -- ^.
Wikelhausen, at Brem. Eli. Backman, at Gottenburgh; -- Job Wall, at St.
Bartholomews Tho. Appleton, at Leghorn; -- John Mathieu, at Naples; John B.
Sartori, at Rome; -- F. G. Walloston, at Genoa. -- James Simpson, Consul to the
Empire of Morocco; Rich O'Brian, Consul General at Algiers. Wm. Eaton, Consul
at Tunis; -- J. L. Cathcart, at Tripoli Samuel Snow, Consul at Canton in China.
( We cannot say, that these lists are perfect; the present very unsettled
state of Europe makes it difficult to obtain a correct list. -- But any
information on this or any other subject, will be thankfully received and duly
attended to.)

MINISTERS and CONSULS from FOREIGN POWERS.
Rob. Liston, Esquire. Minister Plenipo. from the Court of London; Tho. Barclay,
Consul General to the Eastern States Phineas Bond (Philadelphia), Do. middle
and southern Do. Tho. M'Donagh, (Philadelphia), Do. to New Hampshire,
Massachusetts, etc. John Breese, Vice-Consul to Rhode Island; John Hamilton
(Norfolk) Virginia; -- Gao. Wood, Baltimore; Ben. Moodie, to North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia; John Wallace, Vice-Consul to Georgia. -- The
Chevalier de Yruj^, Minister Plenipo. from Spain; Joseph Ignatius de Viar,
Consul General; Antonio A. Villalobus, Consul to Virginia; Don Manuel Rengil,
Vice-Consul for Georgia; Diego Murphy, Consul to North and South Carolina. --
The Chevalier Friere, Minister from Portugal; Ignatius Polyart, Consul General;
J. Abram, Vice-C. to New York; -- J. Vernock, to S. Carolina. -- R. G. Van
Polan^n, Minister from the Batavian Republic; Adrian Valk, Consul to Maryland
and Virginia; Jan C. Graves Consul for South Carolina and Georgia. -- Charles
G. Paleski, Consul General from Prussia; Jan Ernest C. Schultz, Consul for
Baltimore. -- Rich. Soderstrom, Consul General from Sweden; Simon Lynch,
Vice-Consul for Virginia; Jon. Swift, Vice-Consul for the Ports on the Potomak;
John Boritz, Vice-Consul for North Carolina.
ARMY OF THE UNITED STATES.
CAVALRY. Captains, James Tailor, James V. Ball -- Lieutenants, John Webb,
Stephen G. Simmons, Wm. Tharp, Arch. Lee. First Regiment of ARTILLERISTS and
ENGINEERS. Henry Burbeck, Lieut. Col. Commandant -- Majors John Jac. W.
Rivardi, C. Freeman, Jun. Mah. Ford, Moses Porter. Second Regiment of
ARTILLERISTS and ENGINEERS. Lewis Tousard, Lieut. Col. Commandant -- Majors
Daniel Jackson, Decius Wadsworth, Wm. M'Rea. First Regiment of INFANTRY. John
F. Hamtramck, Lieut. Col. Commandant -- Majors, Tho. Hunt, Tho. H. Cushing,
Tho. Martin. Second Regiment of INFANTRY. David Strong, Lieut. Col. Commandant
-- Majors John H. Buell, Jacob Kinsbury. Third Regiment of INFANTRY. Henry
Gaither, Lieut. Col. Commandant -- Majors Jon. Cass, Zeb. Pike. Fourth Regiment
of INFANTRY. Tho. Butler, Lieut. Col. Commandant -- Majors Wm. Peter's, Dan.
Bradley.
[For a List of the Officers, Courts, etc. of the State of Virginia, see page
26 of the Almanac.]

SENATE.
RICHARD KENNON, Speaker;

CLASS I.
DISTRICT. MEMBERS. Amelia, Chesterfield, Nottaway, Cumberl. Creed Tailor;
Brunswick, Lunenburg, Mecklenb. Greensv. Rich. Kennon; Charles City, James
City, New Kent, Bur. Bassett; Henrico, Goochland, Louisa, Tho. Royster;
Augusta, Rockingham, Rockbridge, Shenando, Pendleton, Bath, And. Moore;
Lancaster, Richmond, Northumberland, John Tayloe. CLASS II.
Isle of Wight, Surry, Prince George, Nich. Faulcon; Charlotte, Halifax, Prince
Edward, Gid. Spencer; Gloucester, Middlesex, Mathews Hold. Hudgins;
Spotsylvania, Orange, Culpepper, Madison, Fr. Strother; London, Fauquier, Fra,
Peyton; Frederick, Berkley, Hampshire, Hardy, Cha. Magill. CLASS III.
Dinwiddie, Southampton, Sussex, Benj. Wyche; Botetourt, Washington,
Montgomery, Russel, Greenb. Kenhawa, With, Lee, Grayson, James Preston;
Hanover, Caroline, John Homes; Essex, K. William, King and Queen, Tho. Roane;
Prince William, Fairfax, Thomp. Mason; Monongahela, Ohio, Harrison, Randolph,
Tho. Wilson. CLASS IV.
P. Anne, Norfolk, Nanesemond, Tho. Newton; Buckingham, Albemarle, Amherst,
Fluvan. Nich. Cabell; Bedf Camp. Henry, Pitts. Patrick, Frankl. Geo. Penn;
Elizabeth City, Warwick, York, Rob. Saunders; Westmoreland, Stafford, K.
George, Dan. M'Carty; Accomack, Northampton, John Air.

Hum. Brook, Clerk; -- Arch. Denholm, Serjt. at Arms;

HOUSE of DELEGATES.
LARKIN SMITH, Speaker.
COUNTIES. MEMBERS. Accomack, Tho. M. Bailey, John Wise; Albemarle, Fra.
Walker, Edw. Garland; Amelia, Joshua Chaffin, Edm. Harrison; Amherst, David S.
Garland, Wm. B. Hare; Augusta, And. Anderson, Rob. Doak; Bath, Sam. Vance, Sam.
Blackburn; Bedford, Sam. Hancock, Isaac Otey; Berkely, Alex. White, James
Stephenson; Botetourt, James Brackenridge, Wm. M'Clenahan; Brook, John G.
Young, Fra. M'Guire; Brunswick, James Fletcher, Wm. Ruffin; Buckingham, Cha.
Yancy, Wm. Perkins; Campbell, Tho. West, Achilles ^oorman; Caroline, Dan.
Coleman, Rob. G. Robb; Charlotte, Wm. Price, Tho. Pettus; Charles City, Sam.
Tyler, Edw. Warren; Chesterfield, Matt. Cheatham, Tho. A. Tailor; Culpepper,
Moses Green, John Roberts; Cumberland, Wm. Daniel, jun. James Deane; Dinwiddie,
Peter. Goodwyn, John Pegram; Elizabeth City, Geo. Booker, Worlich Westwood;
Essex, John Daingerfield, Js. M. Garnet; Fairfax, Tho. Swan, Nich, Fitzburgh;
Fauquier, Gust. B. Horner, Aug^ennings; Fluvanna, James Pain, Jof. Haden;
Frederick, Arch. Magill, Geo. Eskridge; Franklin, Benj. Cook, Moses Greer;
Gloucester, John Page, Wm. Hall; Goochland, Jas Pleasants, jun. Jas. Carter;
Grayson, Philip Gains, Minitree Jones; Greenbrier, John Mathews, Jof. Hanna;
Greensville, Per. Williamson, Nath. Rives; Halifax, John B. Scott, Wm. Terry;
Hampshire, Osburn Sprig, John ^iggins; Hanover, Tho. Stark, Tho. White;
Harrison, John G. Jackson, John ^runty; Hardy, Jacob Fisher, Christ. Simon;
Henry, Jo. Martin, Geo. Waller; Henrico, Wm. Price, Gervas Stoors; Isle of
Wight, James Johnston, Miles Eley, James City, L. W. Tazewell, Wm. Lightroot;
King and Queen, Benj. Dabney, Larkin Smith; Kenawha, Tho. Lewis, Wm. Morris;
King George, John Taliofero, Jun. St. ^^ansford; King William, Rob. Pollard,
Nath. Burwell; Lancaster, Benj C. Spiller, Wm Eustace; Lee, Peter Fulkerson,
Sam. Ewing; Loudon, Jo. Lewis, jun. Wm. Noland; Louisa, Rob. Yancy, Gar.
Anderson; Lunenburg, Luw. Jones, W. Tailor; Mecklenburg, Wm. Munford, Wm.
Stone; Madison, Henry Hill, Paschar Early; Mathews, Zadock Litchfield, Jo.
Billups; Middlesex, Wm. Segar, ^h. Blakey; Monongalia, Benj. Reeder, Wm. John;
Monroe, Wm. Haynes, John Gray; Montgomery, Dan. How, James Craig; Nansemond,
Willis Riddick, Josiah Riddick; New Kent, John D. Watkins, Jas. Tailor;
Norfolk, James Callis, Tho. Shepard; Northampton, Nath. Darby, Major S. Pitts;
Northumberland, Hieram L. Opey, Wm. Ball; Nottoway, Free. Eppes, Tho. Eppes;
Ohio, Wm M'Kinley, Henry Smith; Orange Isaac Davis, Jas. Barbor, jun. Patrick
Cha. Foster, John ^ughes; Pendleton, Wm. M'koy. Jacob ^ull; Pittsylvania, Tho.
H. Wooding, Rob. Devin; Powhatan, Wm. Mosely, Fred, Woodson; Pri. Anne, James
Robinson, Wm. (...); Prince Edward, Peter Johnston, A. B. Venable; Pr George,
James Cureton, Benj^ ^arrison; Pr. William, Tho. Mason, Math. ^arrison;
Randolph Wm. Wilson, Adam ^ee; Richmond, Rich. Barnes, Wm. M'Carty; Rockbridge,
John Bowyer, And. Alexander; Rockingham, Benj. Harrison, Geo. ^uston; Russel,
James M'Farlane, Rich, Price; Shenando, James Allen, John Gatewood;
Southampton, Wm. Blow, Wm. Bailey; Spottsylvania, John Mercer, Lar. Stannard;
Stafford, Dan. C Brent, Not, Fox; Surry, Nich. Sebrell, Sam. Bailey; Sussex,
Benj Peete, John R. Mason; Tazewell, -- Warwick, Rich, Carry, John Burnham;
Washington, Sam. Meek, Rob, Craig, jun. Westmoreland, Geo. Garner, John P.
Hungerford; Wood, ^ugh Phelps, John G. ^enders^n; With, Daniel Sheffey, John
Evans; York, Samuel Shield, John Waller; City of Richmond, Charles Copeland;
Borough of Norfolk, Robert B. Tailor; City Williamsburg, Benjamin C. Waller.
Wm. Wirt, Clerk; -- -- Moss, Sergeant at Arms.

At the opening of the Assembly, the Governor sent a letter (along with other
communications) dated 1st Dec. 1800, of which the following is the substance:
-- His Excllency notices the state of the Penitentiary House, which he thinks
ought to be strengthened and surrounded with an external wall, etc. -- Mentions
the Marine Hospital at Norfolk, to be ceded to the United States on certain
conditions; also, a certain tract of land called Gosport, "as soon as he should
be satisfied the United States were willing to pay the amount, at which the
said tract should be valued by agents appointed by each party." -- He takes
notice of the contagious disease which lately afflicted Norfolk and Baltimore,
and the measures he took to enforce quarantine, etc. -- He recites the
proceedings taken in regard to the Act for appointing Electors to choose a
President and Vice President of the United States, and "the cheerfulness with
which said Law was received and executed by the patriotic Citizens of this
State." -- The paragraphs concerning the Alien and Sedition Laws, and that
touching the conduct of a certain Magistrate in Norfolk, we shall insert
verbatim, for the information of our Readers: --

"As soon as the requisite number of copies of the Report of the Select
Committee of the last session on the Answers of several of the states to the
Resolutions of the General Assembly, which passed at the preceding Session,
relative to the Alien and Sedition Laws of the United States, and the
Instructions to the Senators of this State in the Congress of the United States
were printed, the Executive hastened to distribute them among the several
Counties of the Commonwealth, in compliance with the Resolution of the 20th of
January last. It is believed, that no public documents illustrative of public
transactions, however interesting, were ever more generally read or thoroughly
approved, than these were; nor can it be doubted that the light which they
communicated on the very important subject to which they referred, tended to
increase in a high degree, the confidence of the good people of this
Commonwealth, in the wisdom and rectitude of the policy which governed the
General Assembly. In connection with that subject it is proper to add, that
since your last Session, the Sedition Law, one of the Acts complained of, has
been carried into effect in this Commonwealth, by the decision of a Federal
Court. -- I notice this event, not with a view of censuring, or even
criticizing it. The transaction has gone to the world, and the impartial, will
judge of it, as it deserves. I notice it for the purpose of remarking, that the
decision was executed with the same order and tranquil submission on the part
of the people, as could have been shown by them on a similar occasion to any
the most necessary, constitutional, and popular Acts of the Government. The
constitutional authorities and the good people of this Commonwealth, are
attached to the Union, and cherish it with their fondest wishes. The
colonization of their ancestors in this Western world, was generally from the
same country, at the same time, and produced by the same cause; they alike
groaned under an oppression which repressed their growth and checked their
prosperity: -- they fought and bled in the same battles, in defense of the same
rights, and have since experienced, with unexampled harmony and unanimity, a
variety of new and interesting occurrences which admonish them, they still are
and ought to remain forever united. The General Assembly, and the good people
of this Commonwealth, have acquitted themselves to their own consciences, and
to their brethren in America, in support of a cause, which they deemed a
national one, by the stand they made, and the sentiments they expressed of
those acts of the General Government; but they have looked for a change in that
respect, to a change in the public opinion which ought to be free, not to
measures of violence, discord and disunion, which they abhor." --

"Some time in April last I was advised by a respectable citizen in Norfolk,
that a Magistrate of that Borough had received from the Captain of the
Constellation, a frigate of the United States, a person said to be one of the
mutineers on board his Britannic Majesty's ship the Hermione; that he committed
the said person to jail^ with an order to the jailor to surrender him to the
British Consul, on his application; that he was surrendered accordingly to the
said consul, who sent him to a British Island where he was executed. A conduct
so extraordinary as that alleged, could not otherwise than excite the
astonishment of the Executive. Every man within the jurisdiction of the state,
is under certain exceptions, amenable to its laws and entitled to its
protection. If he commits an offense against the sovereignty, or other rights
of the United States; he is amenable to their government and laws for the
infraction. But the act which was denounced did not appear to proceed from, or
to be sanctioned by the authority of that government. To designate a man within
the jurisdiction of a state, as one not entitled to its protection, or that of
the United States, to divest him of such protection, and surrender him to a
foreign power, to be sent abroad, tried, condemned, and executed, by the
sentence of a foreign tribunal, are important acts of sovereignty, in which the
character and agency of the chief public functionaries should be seen and for
which they are highly responsible. But nothing of the kind appeared in the
present instance. No respectful, though strict analysis, by the competent
authority, of the respective claims to jurisdiction, between the state and the
United States, with respect to the fugitive, who sought an asylum here; no
circumspect examination of treaties between the United States and a foreign
power, which ought to precede an act derogating in some respects from the
national sovereignty, were heard of. The magistrate who acted was not even an
officer of the federal government, but of this state, in which light, he was in
a peculiar degree responsable to its authority. The act was stated to be
summary and peremptory, and strictly that of the magistrate himself. As however
this communication compromitted the character of a consul of a foreign power,
and an officer of the United States, as well as that of a magistrate of this
Commonwealth, the Executive was careful to observe in the part it took, the
utmost deference to the rights of those who were to be affected by it. The
information was given in writing by a respectable citizen, but yet that did not
seem to be an evidence sufficiently formal and authentic, to justify a prompt
proceeding under it. It was deemed more consistent with the principles of
justice, and becoming the character of a free State, to cause the verity of
these charges to be ascertained by affidavit, with due notice to the parties
before any step was taken. And as the Attorney General was necessarily engaged
in public business in one of the superior courts at the time, that trust was
committed to George Hay, a citizen of merit and talents, by whom it was
executed, with that degree of judgment and propriety its delicacy and
importance required. I am sorry to add that the result of the enquiry did not
diminish the presumption that the charges alleged were true. It was deemed of
sufficient force to impose on the Executive an obligation, to refer the subject
to the Attorney General, with a request that he would take such measures in
reference to the transaction as in his judgment might be suitable. I submit a
copy of all the papers necessary to give a full view of this interesting
occurrence to the General Assembly; with whose wisdom it will remain to
determine, whether any further provision ought to be made by law for similar
offenses in future."

Copy of Mr. LEE'S Letter, referred to in Governor Monroe's Address to the
Legislature:
SIR, -- Without apology for my not being personally known to you, I take the
liberty of addressing to you as chief magistrate of the Commonwealth of
Virginia, on a subject in my judgment highly interesting to the liberty and
happiness of my fellow-citizens.

Some time in the spring of last year, Captain Truxton, of the Constellation
frigate, sent to Doctor J. K. Read, one of the aldermen of the borough of
Norfolk, a man who HE said had acknowledged himself one of the mutineers on
board the Hermione frigate; the man was committed to jail, subject to the order
of the British consul, by him taken out, sent to Jamaica, and there executed.
This information is from Dr. Read himself, in the presence of Seth Foster, J.
Nivison, Otway Byrd, Dr. Barraud, the British Consul and several others; for on
being asked by capt. Traxton on Sunday last, what had become of the man he had
sent as one of the mutineers on board of the Hermione frigate, he replied that
he had delivered him to the British consul. Mr Hamilton, who was present,
observed, HE had sent him to Jamaica, where he was hanged. Although this
confession was made in the presence of staunch federalists and men of order,
yet the principle was alarming, and of course made some noise. As soon as I
heard of it I applied to the jailor. The result of my enquiry is, that there
was such a person committed by Doctor Read, subject to the order of the British
Consul; that he was taken out of jail, and put on board of a British vessel --
but what his fate was, he knows not. -- The mittimus he says is either lost or
mislaid. The jailor also informed me, that previous to this another man was
committed by Doctor Read for the same offense, but that he died in jail before
there was an opportunity to send him away; a copy of this mittimus I herewith
send you.

I shall forbear to remark on the dreadful consequences that may arise from a
conduct of this sort, and shall only observe, that if men clothed with
authority can be made instruments of oppression to gratify the views of a
British Consul, we may bid adieu to the liberty and happiness of our country,
and every thing dear and valuable to us in it. From conviction in my mind, that
doctor Read's conduct has been improper, I have thought it incumbent on me to
give you this information. I am very respectfully, yours etc.

RICH. E. LEE.

James Monroe, Esquire. etc.

Norfolk, Dec. 25, 1800. Mr. DAVIS,
THE subjoined letter was written by me to Governor Monroe, and went to the
hope, that his Excellency, sensible of the injury he must have done me, in his
letter of communication to the legislature, would have thought it right, to
request a suspension of the public opinion, until the event of that prosecution
which he has ordered against me, and which is depending and undetermined,
should be known. But, his Excellency has neither deigned to notice my letter,
or to take any measures for softening the severity of his denunciation.

Is it not novelty in the new philosophy? Is it not a phenomenon in the
Executive Department of any free country, to appoint an Inquisitor, for the
express purpose of inviting, soliciting, and culling such testimony exparte, as
shall suit the dark purposes of a malicious informer? Is it not new, that the
unguarded openness of private conversation, in domestic circles (like the
domiciliary visits of Robespierre) shall be betrayed, and tortured into matter
of information and impeachment? and that from such evidence, and the
hypothetical opinion of an Attorney General founded thereon, a Chief
Magistrate, shall think himself authorized to prejudge a case -- denounce an
individual, and consign him to the resentment and execution of his fellow
citizens -- untried, unheard?

Conscious that I have never have been governed by improper motives, in any act
of my official duty. I feel little apprehension for the consequences of this
prosecution -- the errors of judment may be imputed to me (for it is the portion
of human nature to err,) but the honors which surrounded his Excellency, with
a much better salary superadded, would be considerations insufficient to induce
me to commit an act, which the dictates of my own heart did not fully justify.

For these, and many other reasons, I think it necessary, through the medium of
your paper, to request a suspension of the public opinion, until the event of
the prosecution now depending, shall be known.

As to the illiberal, unjustifiable, unexampled and violent language, which has
been used by many members of Assembly, both within and without the house,
proceeding from the impressions which were made by the communications, I shall
forbear to make any other remark, than to leave the persons who are implicated,
to the unavoidable accusations of their own consciences, or to be more and more
exposed by their own obstinate stupidity.

J. K. READ.


LETTER to the GOVERNOR.
Norfolk, Dec. 10, 1800.
SIR, -- I shall be pardoned for asserting an inherent right of complaining
when an injury is done me, however elevated the station of him, by whom such
injury is meditated.

I complain, Sir, of an unjustifiable and wanton exercise of your powers, as
Chief Magistrate of this Commonwealth, in the exposition of documents, taken
exparte, and which you knew were not testimony, even in that Court, from whose
archives you have taken them, and in which the prosecution, by your order
instituted against me, is depending and undetermined, to the Legislature of
Virginia, in your letter of communication to that honorable body. I say
unjustifiable, because, I am at this moment a subject of legal prosecution
before another tribunal, and the law which made you a Governor, forbade your
prejudging a cause, or fixing a guilt of offense, on a man thus circumstanced,
ere that guilt had been proved by a legal and impartial trial!

The procedure complained of, was wanton, because, as no legislative
interference could possibly affect me, for a supposed offense heretofore
committed, and as you have honored me with executive, I can by no means become
the object of legislative attention; therefore, no valuable purpose, could
result, from consigning me, to the execration and resentment of my
fellow-citizens at large, by a communication thus highly sanctioned, unless
indeed, it was calculated to poison and influence the public mind, to the
dereliction of that impartiality, which should be the first feature in the
event of every legal process.

I forbear entering fully into this novel and extraordinary precedure, left
under the pressure of the injury you have done me, I should be tempted to lose
sight of that respect, which I have ever considered as due to the constituted
authorities of my country. I shall only take occasion further to ask your
Excellency, if in the event of this cause (doubtful, notwithstanding the
respectability of your Citizen informer, or the talents of your missionary) a
verdict should be given in my favor, what method will you adopt to eradicate
the poison, you have so successfully instilled into the minds of my fellow
citizens, to restore me to their confidence and esteem?

I am, etc. J. K. READ

His Excllency James Monroe, etc.

In the House of Delegates, Jan. 14, Mr. Edm. Harrison reported from the
committee appointed to investigate and report upon the conduct of John
Hamilton, the consul resident at Norfolk, in the transaction alluded to in the
Governor's communication relative to the alleged delivery of Hugh Jones, by
John K. Read, and at the request of the said consul, that the committee had,
according to order, had the said subject under their consideration, and are of
opinion, that John Hamilton, as consul, was not authorized under the laws of
the United States, or any existing treaties, between his Britannic Majesty and
the United States to demand the surrender of any person whatsoever, as he is
represented to have done.

They are also of opinion, that the delivery of the said Hugh Jones, if made as
represented, was done without any authority under the existing laws of this
state or of the United States, and that such delivery if so unlawfully made,
does in no degree extenuate or diminish the offense of the said John Hamilton.

And Whereas it is provided by the Constitution of the United States, that the
judicial power of the United States shall extend to all cases affecting
Ambassadors, or other public Ministers or Consuls.

Resolved, That the Governor be requested to transmit to the President of the
United States, a copy of the beforementioned communication, together with the
documents accompanying the same, with a request that he will cause the
transaction to be enquired into by the competent authority; and that such
redress may be given, as the laws of nations and the United States will warrant.

Resolved, That provision ought to be made by law, for punishing any like
offenses that may happen in future.

Then the first Resolution being twice read, was on the question being put
thereupon, agreed to by house.

The second Resolution being twice read, a motion was made to amend the same by
striking out the words "happen in future" at the end thereof, and inserting the
words "in future be committed by any person subject to the jurisdiction of this
State."

And the question being put, it passed in the affirmative.

And the question being put on the Resolution as amended, it passed in the
affirmative.

Ordered, That a Bill be brought in pursuant to the second Resolution, and that
the Committee who reported it do prepare and bring in a bill accordingly.

In the House of Delegates, Dec. 31, Mr. Edm. Harrison reported from the
Committee to whom was referred the Governor's letter on the subject of the late
conspiracy of slaves, and a petition of sundry citizens of this Commonwealth,
complaining of various grievances arising from the law for freeing negroes, and
praying a repeal thereof, that the committee had according to order, had the
same under their consideration, and had agreed upon the following resolutions:

1. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, that the Executive be requested
to distribute arms to the citizens of Norfolk, Portsmouth, Petersburg,
Manchester, Richmond, Fredericksburg and Alexandria, under such regulations and
restraints as will insure the safe keeping of said arms

2 Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, that a law ought to pass,
authorizing magistrates to call out patroles, and subjecting the military in
certain cases to the orders of the civil authority.

3. Resolved as the opinion of this committee, that a law ought to pass, to
prevent free negroes or mulattoes from residing within the limits of the towns
of Norfolk, Portsmouth, Petersburg, Manchester, Richmond, Fredericksburg or
Alexandria, unless authorized by the court of the town, or by the county court
in which such town may be where the town itself has no court, nor shall any
free negro or mulatto reside nearer than (...) miles from the said towns,
unless authorized by the court of the county in which such negro or mulatto
resides.

4. Resolved, as the opinion of this commitee, that the Governor be requested
to correspond with the President of the United States, on the subject of
purchasing lands without the limits of this state, whither persons obnoxious to
the laws, or dangerous to the peace of society may be removed.

5. Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Committee that a law ought to
pass, authorizing the raising of men to be stationed in Richmond.

6. Resolved, That it is the opinion of this committee, that a law ought to
pass, empowering the Governor to purchase and set free, in behalf of the
Commonwealth, Pharaoh a slave, the property of Philip Sheppard, and Tom a save,
the property of Elizabeth Sheppard, and that the said Pharaoh and Tom be
allowed a pension of (...) dollars each per annum.

7. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, that a law ought to pass,
authorizing the Executive to transport certain slaves, now under sentence of
death, for conspiracy, to be fold for the benefit of this Commonwealth.

The 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 6th and 7th resolutions being twice read, were on the
question put thereupon, agreed to by the house. The 5th resolution being read,
a motion was made to amend the same, by adding at the end thereof the following
words, "in addition to the present guard and artificers at the Point of Fork,
who, with the arms and ammunition there, shall be removed to the city of
Richmond."

And the question being put thereupon, it passed in the affirmative.

And then the question being put on the resolutions as amended, it passed in
the affirmative.

Ordered, That a bill or bills be brought in pursuant to the 1st, 2d, 3d, 5th,
6th and 7th resolutions, and that the Committee who reported the resolutions do
prepare and bring in the same.

Ordered, That the Clerk do carry the 4th resolution to the Senate for their
concurrence.

In the House of Delegates, Dec. 23, Mr. Booker reported from the Committee
appointed to meet a Committee from the Senate, and jointly with them to examine
the Treasurer's accounts, that the committee had, according to order, met a
Committee from the Senate, and jointly with them proceeded to examine the said
accounts, and had agreed upon a report as follows:

Your Committee find, that at the last annual settlement of the Treasurer's
accounts, viz. on the 30th of September, 1799, there remained a balance in the
treasury of 109,778 dollars and 1 cent, in specie. In crop to^bacco received
from Thomas Lee, Esquire. agent for the state for the rents of its lands in Prince
William, formerly the property of -- Bristoe, a British subject, 32,162 pounds
nett. Indents to the amount of 279 dollars and 94 cents.

Your Committee find that since the said settlement, there has been received
by William Berkeley, treasurer, on public accounts, the sums following, viz:

On account of arrearages of the revenue Tax of 1783, the sum of
3347 13 1784 4294 96 1786 2677 44 1787 206 99 1788 1469 66 1789 481 12 1791
156 93 1792 624 (...) 1794 971 78 1795 1199 43 1796 2554 58 1797 9227 53 1798
88,875 16 1799 142,131 19

Your Committee find also that the sum of 1527 dollars and 72 cents has been
received by him on account of the purchase of unappropriated land, 9230 dollars
and 77 cents from clerks, 19.517 dollars and 22 cents, from inspectors of
tobacco, and on account of tobacco saved at the burning of Robert Bolling's
warehouse, 255 dollars and 33 cents, for composition on surveys, 668 dollars
and 44 cents, from sundry persons for the redemption of their lands returned
for the non-payment of their taxes due thereon, 8765 dollars and 94 cents, from
sheriffs on account of militia fines, 1684. dollars and 6 cents, on account of
the arrearages of the certificate taxes, amounting in the whole (including the
balance (...) which remained due at the last settlement) to 416,958 dollars and
36 cents.

Your Committee find further, that the said Treasurer has disbursed and
admitted in discount agreeably to law to the amount of 216,247 dollars and 52
cents, as appears by the receipts to them produced; the corresponding warrants
after having been carefully examined and compared with the receipts, were burnt.

Your Committee find further, that the said Treasurer has admitted in discount
as the law directs for the arrearages of the certificate taxes, certificates to
the amount of 1669 dollars and 82 cents.

Your Committee find further, that the said Treasurer has admitted in discount
as the law directs for the arrearages of the revenue taxes, tobacco which at
the rates at which it was received in the treasury, amounts to 2543 dollars.

The credits being duly stated, there remained a balance in the treasury on the
30th of September, 1800, of 279 dollars and 94 cent in indents, and 96,218
dollars and 8 cents in specie, and 32,162 pounds nett tobacco: as will appear
by the general account hereto annexed. -- That the said balance and the said
tobacco were duly accounted for, the annexed certificate, signed by the members
of council duly authorized to examine the Treasurer's office, will show: to
which certificate and the account hereto annexed, your Committee beg leave to
refer

And the said Certificate of the Council is as follows:

THE Treasurer being enjoined to close the accounts of his office on the 30th
of September annually: We the undersigned (thereto appointed by the Executive
at the request of the Treasurer) repaired to the treasury on the morning of the
1st of October, in order to ascertain the amount of money, tobacco and other
facilities actually in the treasury received on public account, and
constituting the balance due therefrom the 30th of September, 1800.

Having examined and carefully counted and weighed the money, we find it amount
to 96,300 dollars.

We find also tobacco notes now in the treasury, received on public account,
viz. for 55 hogsheads, quantity, 56,815 lb. of crop tobacco, and 2491 lb.
transfer, which at the rates received by law, amounts to 2543 dollars.

We find also notes for thirty hogsheads of tobacco, quantity, 32,162 lb nett,
which was received by Thomas Lee, agent for the state for rents in the county
of Prince William: and indents to amount of 279 dollars and 94 cents

J. PENDLETON. JOHN GUERRANT.

Treasury, Oct. 2, 1800.
ESTIMATE of the EXPENSES of the Civil Government from Sept. 1800 to Oct. 1801,
and of the Debts payable in the said Period.
For the General Assembly -- 41,000 Officers of Government -- 60,000 Do.
Militia -- 4,500 Contingent expenses -- 12,000 Criminal charges -- 18,000
Slaves executed -- 6,000 Expenses of guards -- 6,000 Representation to Congress
-- 300 ^unatic Hospital -- 4,000 Commissioners of Revenue -- 15,000 Pensioners
-- 7,000 Dismal Swamp Canal Company -- 1,500 The Guard to be kept at Richmond
-- 12,000 Arsenal and manufactory of arms -- 33,000 Penitentiary -- 30,000
Public Buildings -- 1,000 Public Ware houses -- 5,000 Public services of Clerks
of District Courts -- 1,800 Interest on paper money funde^ 360 Do. on military
certificates 3,200 Do. on loans, including interest on certificates issued for
re-payment of money paid into the Treasury for British debts 29,721 33,281
Amount of warrants issued more than the revenue of last year produced -- 10,963
Amount of warrants drawn on the contingent fund since Oct. last on account of
the late insurrections -- 9,139 Moneys before appropriated for arms 199,000
Expended 39,085 Now subject to the disposition of the Executive 159,314 For
building storehouses for tobacco on James River and Appomatox Canals as
provided by law -- 8,000 478,798 Balance in favor of resources to meet this
Estimate 90,086 Dollars 568,884 RESOURCES to meet this ESTIMATE.
Nett amount of tax according to taxation for 1799 on lands, lots, and other
property 257,780 Surplus on tobacco exported 18,000 Tax on law process, etc.
7,500 Do. on Registers' fees 3,000 Cash in the Treasury 1st Oct. 1800 96,290
Arrears of taxes for the year 1799 138,649 Do. 1798 30,147 Sale of Gosport to
the United States 12,300 Amount due from James River Canal Company 5,517
Dollars 568,884

On comparing the Estimate of Expenses and Debts payable from Sept. 1800 to
Oct. 1801, with the statement of the amount of annual revenue, cash in the
Treasury, etc. and presuming that the present General Assembly will think it
just to continue the appropriation of the arrearages of taxes prior to 1796, to
the redemption of certificates of the debts of this State, it appears to the
Committee, that the sum of 90,086 dollars, which is found in favor of the
resources of the Commonwealth, gives ample security against any probable
deficit in the receipt of the revenue, and justifies the policy of making
appropriations according to the foregoing estimates.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Committee, that taxes ought to be
continued the same as heretofore.

N. B. By amendments made to the foregoing Estimate in the House of Delegates,
15,000 dollars were stricken from the appropriations for the Arsenal and
Penitentiary.

PUBLIC TAXES payable for the Year 1800.
On lands, for every 100 dollars value, agreeably to the equalizing law. 0 48
For every slave above the age of 12 years, except such as have been or shall be
exempted by reason of age or infirmity by the respective county or corporation
courts, 0 44 For every stud-horse or jack-ass, twice the price at which such
horse or ass covers a mare for the season. For all other horses, mules, mares,
and colts, each 0 12 For every ordinary license 12 50 For every 4-wheel riding
carriage, except phaetons and stage-waggons, per wheel 1 20 For all phaetons
and stage-waggons, per wheel 0 84 For every other riding carriage with two
wheels, each 0 43 And for all lots and houses in towns 1 dollar 56 cents on
every 100 dollars of the rent thereof, to be ascertained by the rent paid by
the tenant, and where such house or lot is in the occupation of the proprietor,
the yearly rent or value shall be ascertained by the Commissioners of the
Revenue, or either of them, by a comparison of its value with other houses and
lots actually rented. On merchants selling by wholesale 40 On do. selling by
retail ^5

The following Bill was presented in the House of Delegates of this state, by
Mr. Munford, and read the first time; and the farther consideration thereof was
postponed till the 23d of April next.

As the inconveniences attending the present system of Courts of Chancery, from
the delays attending the mode of proceeding and the vast accumulation of
business, have occasioned much complaint, several plans have been proposed as
remedies for the evil. A bill which was warmly advocated by many members, to
change the system of the High Court of Chancery, by dividing the State into 5
districts, underwent a long and elaborate discussion at this session. That bill
was printed at the public expense, and is now submitted to the consideration of
the people.

Actuated by a conviction that the best mode of obtaining the object desired,
is to enable the Courts of common law to give relief in all cases, to which
their powers can be extended, others were of opinion that the following bill
ought to be preferred. -- It is therefore here inserted, that the people may
give it due examination, and may, if they think proper, express their opinion
on the subject, by instructions to their Representatives, or petitions to the
next General Assembly.

A BILL to enable the Courts of Common Law to give Relief in certain Cases.
WHEREAS the delays incident to the present system of the High Court of
Chancery, and other Courts of similar jurisdiction are so great as often to
amount to a denial of justice, which delays arise from the number of cases in
which the Courts of Common Law are at present unable to give relief; for remedy
thereof, be it enacted by the General Assembly, that the defendant in any
action in a Court of Common Law, may plead in his defense all such matters of
the things as may be just and equitable; the plaintiff when required by the
defendant, shall reply on oath, and no demurrer to any plea shall be sustained,
unless such plea be had, not only in law, but in equity.

2. Whenever any legal or equitable cause of defense shall arise, or come to
the knowledge of the defendant after the trial or judgment, on affidavit
thereof by the defendant, the Court may on motion award a new trial, or permit
a new plea or pleas to be filed, and farther proceedings to be had in the cause
according to the justice and right of the case: Provided, that unnecessary
delay shall not have been practiced by the defendant after the ground of the
said application shall have arisen or come to his knowledge.

3. No objection shall hereafter be taken in point of form to the declaration
or pleadings in any action whatever, but objections to the substance only shall
be admitted.

4. Any person entitled to a legacy may recover the same in an action on the
case against the executor or administrator of the decedent, and in cases where
at present friendly bills and answers in chancery are resorted to for the
division of estates, the same shall and may be done on motion to the Court of
the District, county or corporation in which the estates to be divided exist.
-- And where the said estates are not all in one District, but in different
Districts, on motion to the General Court or High Court of Chancery, at the
discretion of the party applying for the same. The Court to which the said
motion shall be made shall appoint commissioners to make such division, and
report to the said Court for their final decision; Provided that all parties
interested shall be lawfully consenting to the said motion.

5. And be it further enacted, that special actions on the case may be
instituted for the foreclosure of mortgages to compel the rendition and
settlement of accounts, the specific performance of contracts, the perpetuation
of evidence, the discovery of facts within the private knowledge of defendants,
and relief against all kinds of fraud, in which action the pleas shall be on
oath, where the plaintiff in his declaration demands it, all facts controverted
between the parties shall be tried by jury, and the Courts shall enter such
interlocutory or final judgments as the nature of each may require, may
appoint commissioners to examine, state, and settle accounts, or to make sale
of mortgage property, and (...) issue any writ of execution, attachment or
distringas which may be necessary to carry the said judgments into effect. --
The writs in the said actions on the case shall and may be executed and
returned in the same manner as subpoenas in chancery, and if any of the
defendants are out of the commonwealth, the same proceedings shall be had
against the said absent defendants as are had in the Courts of equity in
similar cases.

6. Writs of ne exeat shall and may be granted and dissolved by any county or
corporation court in the same manner, and under the same regulations as the
same are granted and dissolved by the High Court of Chancery.

7. The High Court of Chancery and other Courts of Equity shall in no case have
jurisdiction when an adequate remedy can be had in the courts of common law,
but in other cases the powers of the said courts shall remain as heretofore.

8. All acts and parts of acts, which are contrary to this act, are hereby
repealed.

9. This act shall commence in force from the 1st day of March next.

An Act to empower the Governor of this Commonwealth to transport Slaves
condemned when it shall be deemed expedient. -- (Passed Jan. 6, 1801.)
BE it enacted by the General Assembly, That the Governor, with the advice of
Council, be, and he is hereby authorized, when it shall be deemed expedient, to
contract and agree with any person, or persons, for the sale and purchase of
all the slaves who now are, or hereafter may be, under sentence of death, for
conspiracy, insurrection, or any other crime. The person or persons, at the
time of making such purchase, shall enter into bond with sufficient security,
under the penalty of 500 dollars for each slave, payable to the Governor, or
his successors, for the use of the Commonwealth, with condition that he or they
will carry out of the United States all the slaves by him or them purchased who
are now, or may hereafter be under sentence of death; and the sale and disposal
of every such slave shall amount to a reprieve of him or them from such
sentence of death; and the sale of every such slave shall amount to a reprieve:
Provided always, That if any slave so sold pursuant to this act, shall return
into this State, he shall be apprehended and executed under the sentence of the
Court, as if no reprieve had taken place. And in all cases where any slave or
slaves shall be tried and convicted for any crime which may affect life, the
Court, before whom such trials shall be had, shall cause the testimony for and
against every such slave to be entered on record, and a copy of the whole
proceedings to be transmitted forthwith to the Executive. The owners of all
slaves so sold or transported, shall be paid in the same manner as for slaves
executed.

This Act shall commence and be in force from its passing.

An Act to amend the Act entitled "an Act to reduce into one the several Acts
concerning Slaves, free Negroes, and Mulattoes."
BE it enacted by the General Assembly, That if any person shall permit his or
her slave, or any slave hired by him or her, to go a^ large or hire him or
herself out, it shall be lawful for any person, and it shall be the duty of
every sheriff, deputy sheriff, coroner and sergeant of a corporation, to
apprehend and carry such slave before a magistrate of the county or corporation
where apprehended, and if it shall appear to the magistrate that such slave
comes within the purview of this act, he shall order him or her to the jail of
the county or corporation, there to be safely kept until the next court, when
if it shall appear to the court that the slave so ordered to jail has been
permitted or suffered to hire him or herself out contrary to the meaning of
this Act, it shall be lawful for said court, and they are hereby required to
order the sheriff or other officer, to sell every such slave for ready money at
the next court held for the said county or corporation, notice being given at
the courthouse door at least twenty days before such sale. Provided always,
that no sale pursuant to this act shall convey a greater interest in such slave
than the person himself or herself had who commits a breach of this law, unless
it shall appear to the court that the owner of such slave was privy to or
connived at such breach.

Any person who shall suffer a slave held by him or her as trustee, guardian,
executor or executrix, administrator or administratrix, to hire him or herself
out contrary to the meaning of this act, shall forfeit and pay forty dollars,
to be recovered by any person who will sue for the same, by action of debt or
information, in any court of record within this commonwealth.

One third of the amount of the sale of every such slave shall be applied by
the court ordering such sale toward lessening the county or corporation levy,
and the residue shall be paid by the sheriff or other officer, and deducting
six per centum on the whole amount for his trouble, and the jailor's fees, to
the person who shall inform thereof, and cause the fast to be established. And
where there shall be no informer, then the whole proceeds of the sale, after
deducting the commission of the sheriff and other officers, the jailor's fees,
as aforesaid, shall be applied toward lessening the county or corporation levy.

Any negro or mulatto bond or free shall be a good witness in pleas of the
commonwealth for or against negroes or mulattoes bond or free, or in civil
pleas where free negroes or mulattoes shall alone be parties. And whereas
experience has evinced that the fourth section of the act entitled an act to
prevent the migration of free negroes and mulattoes into this Commonwealth, is
detective -- for remedy whereof, Be it enacted, that if any slave shall
hereafter be brought or come into this state from any place without the limits
of the same, it shall be the duty of any magistrate of the county or
corporation where such slave shall be found, upon information to him given, to
cause such slave to be immediately apprehended and brought before him or some
other magistrate of the county or corporation, who upon satisfactory evidence
had shall commit such slave to the jail of his county or corporation; and the
magistrate so committing shall forthwith give notice to the Governor of his
proceedings, who with the advice of Council, shall take such steps for the
removal and transportation out of this Commonwealth, of the slave or slaves so
committed at the public expense, as they in their discretion may think proper.
And the expenses so incurred shall be paid by the person importing or holding
such slave so removed, and shall be recoverable against any such person as
aforesaid, his or her executors or administrators in the name of the Governor
of the Commonwealth for the time being, by motion or suit, in which every such
person may be held to bail in any court of record of this Commonwealth,
provided ten days previous notice be given of such motion to the persons to be
affected thereby; provided also that the Governor shall have power to order
such slave to be sold and transported without the limits of this Commonwealth,
if the person holding or importing said slave be unable to reimburse the
Commonwealth, the expense of commitment, removal and transportation -- Provided
also, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to repeal the fourth
section of the act entitled an Act to reduce into one the several acts
concerning slaves, free negroes and mulattoes.

And be it further enacted, That it shall be the duty of every Commissioner of
the Revenue annually to return to the court of his county, or corporation, at
the time of returning other lists of taxable property, a complete list of all
free negroes and mulattoes within his district, together with their names, sex,
places of abode, and particular trades, occupation, or calling; a copy of which
list shall be fixed by the Clerk of said county or corporation at the
Courthouse door, and the original be deposited for safe keeping in his office.
Every Commissioner of the Revenue, or Clerk of a Court, ^ailing in said duty,
shall forfeit and pay the sum of 20 dollars, to be recovered by motion or
information, one half to the use of the county or corporation, and the residue
to any person who shall ^ue for the same.

If any free negro or mulatto so registered shall remove into another county,
it shall and may be lawful for any magistrate of the county or corporation in
which he or she may reside, to issue a warrant to apprehend said free negro or
mulatto and if upon examination it be found that he or she has to honest
employment by which to maintain him or herself, such free negro or mulatto
shall be deemed and treated as a vagrant.

All the courts of law within this Commonwealth shall constantly give this act
in charge to the grand juries of their courts at the times when such grand
juries shall be sworn.

All acts and parts of acts contrary to this act, shall be, and the same are
hereby repealed.

This act shall commence in force from the 1st day of June next.

Jan. 23. 1801. -- This day both branches of the General Assembly of this
Commonwealth adjourned. -- During the Session, the following Bills were passed:

1. To amend the act, entitled, "An act to amend an act, entitled, an act for
appointing Electors, to choose a President and Vice President of the United
States."

2. Concerning the Dismal Swamp Canal Company.

3. To amend an act, entitled, "An act to reduce into one the several acts,
concerning mills, mill-dams, and other obstructions of water courses."

4. To amend the act, for incorporating the trustees of the Leesburg Academy,
in the county of London.

5. For establishing the town of Fairfield, in the county of Rockbridge.

6. To prevent obstructions to the navigation of the Little Kenawha.

7. To establish an inspection of flour at Mead Anderson's mill in the county
of Halifax.

8. To increase the salary of the inspectors of tobacco at Dixon's Warehouse.

9. To authorize the commissioners of the revenue to re-assess lands in certain
cases

10. For increasing the power of the trustees of the town of Franklin, in the
county of Pendleton.

11. To establish an inspection of tobacco on the land of John Brook, in the
county of Campbell.

12. To amend the act, to authorize the opening a turnpike road, over the south
mountain.

13. To regulate costs in certain cases.

14. Concerning the town of Watson, in the county of Hampshire.

15. To incorporate the Trustees of Jefferson College, in the county of Amelia.

16. To establish an inspection of flour on the lands of Thomas M. Randolph.

17. For adding part of the county of Kenawha, to the county of Wood.

18. Concerning the town of Lexington, in the county of Rockbridge.

19. To establish an inspection of tobacco on the lands of Thomas M. Randolph,
in the county of Albemarle.

20. To incorporate a company, for establishing a turnpike road, from the mouth
of Savage river, or George's creek, on the Potowmak, to the nearest Western
navigation.

21. To authorize Robert Watkins to build a toll bridge over Appamattox river.

22. To establish an Academy on the glebe land of Martin Brandon's parish, in
the county of Prince George.

23. For erecting warehouses on the James river and Appomattox canals.

24. To establish several new ferries.

25. To increase the salaries of the inspectors at Deane's and Spring
Warehouses.

26. To revive the inspection of tobacco at Totusky warehouses, in the county
of Richmond.

27. For altering the court days and quarterly sessions in certain counties.

28. Authorizing the trustees of the Charity School of Fredericksburg, to sell
and convey certain property therein mentioned.

29. To authorize William Calley, to build a toll bridge over Smith's creek,
near the Borough of Norfolk.

30. For dividing the county of Berkeley.

31. To establish several towns.

32. Giving further time to the owners of lots, in the town of Jonesville, in
the county of Lee, to build thereon.

33. To purchase Pharaoh and Tom.

34. To amend an act, entitled, "An act to authorize a lottery for the purpose
of opening and repairing certain roads."

35. To increase the rates of ferriage at certain places.

36. To empower the courts of certain counties to appoint persons to solemnize
marriages.

37. To empower the Governor to transport slaves when it shall be deemed
convenient.

38. Establishing an inspection of flour at Aylett's warehouse, in the county
of King William.

39. To extend the jurisdiction of justices of peace.

40. Releasing to Ambrose Cramer the right of the Commonwealth to a certain
tract or tracts of land.

41. Concerning patroles.

42. To prevent the killing of deer within certain periods annually.

43. Concerning the town of Charlottesville.

44. Concerning certain taxes in the county of Botetourt.

45. Appointing Commissioners to view and mark out a way for a road through the
counties of Culpeper, Fauquier, Prince William and Fairfax, to the turnpike
road leading to Alexandria.

46. Concerning the docks and wharves in the Borough of Norfolk.

47. To arm the militia of certain towns.

48. To enlarge the town of Woodville in Culpepper co.

49. Concerning the manufacture of tobacco.

50. Concerning the Bank of Alexandria.

51. Concerning the several acts of Assembly, respecting the turnpike roads
from Snigger's, Vestel's, and Ashby's gaps, on the Blue Ridge, to Alexandria.

52. To amend the act, entitled, an act to reduce into one the several acts,
concerning slaves, free negroes and mulattoes.

53. In addition to the act, entitled, "An act to amend the penal laws of this
commonwealth."

54. For paying the expense of removing criminals from the district jails, to
the penitentiary house, and for other purposes.

55. To increase the rates of pilotage at certain places.

56. Directing the allowance of witnesses in certain cases

57. To revive and amend an act, for opening a road through the counties of
Berkeley and Hampshire.

58. Laying taxes for the support of government.

59. To dispose of part of the ground whereon the court-h. stands, in the town
of Charlottsville and co. Albemarle.

60. To authorize the court of Cumberland county, to appoint a principal
surveyor over Wills' river

61. For paying the officers of the General Assembly for their services the
present session.

62. To amend the act, entitled, "An act to revive and amend the act, entitled,
an act for improving the navigation of Appomattox river, from Broadway to
Pocohonta's bridge."

63. To appropriate the public revenue.

64. To establish a guard at the city of Richmond.

65. Enabling Thomas Mountjoy, to discharge by instalments, certain public
claims against him.

66. Paying Joseph Jones, William Cole, and William Clark, for their services
under the act, entitled, "An act making compensation for the tobacco destroyed
by the burning of Robert Bolling's warehouse, and for other purposes."

67. For appropriating a further sum of money for completing a wagon road from
the state road to the mouth of Little Kenawha.

68. To amend the act, entitled, "An act directing what prisoners shall be left
to bail."

69. To prevent the Executive from remiting fines on amercements.

70. To explain in part an act, entitled, "An act to impose certain taxes on
law process, and for other purposes."

In the House of Delegates, Jan. 2, Mr. Venable reported from the Committee for
Courts of Justice, that the Committee had according to order, had under their
consideration a letter from the Governor with its enclosure, relative to the
preservation of the ancient records of this Commonwealth, to the said Committee
referred, and had come to the following resolutions thereupon:

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Committee, that the preservation of
the ancient records of this country, is an object which highly merits the
attention of the Legislature, since on them the rights of property, the
interests of society, and the means of historical information essentially
depend.

Resolved therefore, That an edition of all the laws passed by the Legislature
of this country, prior to the year 1782, which can now be found, be printed at
the public expense -- that the Governor and George With, Esquire. be requested to
superintend the collection and printing thereof; and that they be authorized to
employ a proper person or persons to aid in the completion of the work.

And the said resolutions being twice read, were, on the question put
thereupon, agreed to by the House.

Ordered, That a bill be brought in pursuant to the said Resolutions, and that
the Committee for Courts of Justice do prepare and bring in the same.

A Bill has passed the Legislature of Virginia, to incorporate a Company, for
establishing a turnpike road from the mouth of Savage river or George's creek
on the Potomack, to the nearest western navigation. It is proposed that this
turnpike should commence at the mouth of Savage river, which is 21 miles above
Fort Cumberland, and about 200 from Georgetown. A subscription is to be opened
for 50,000 dollars, in shares of 50 dollars each. The important benefits to be
derived from carrying this plan into effect, will more fully appear from the
following preamble to the bill:

Whereas it is conceived that great advantages would accrue to the trade of
Potomack and to this Commonwealth generally, by making easy the communication
between the head navigation of that river and the nearest western navigation,
which would cause the produce of a large extent of the western country to take
its course into this channel, instead of going 2,500 miles partly through the
dominion of a foreign nation to a market at New-Orleans. And whereas it is
represented to this General Assembly, that these navigations may be made to
communicate by a road of about 40 miles, and that an association of citizens
will be willing to undertake to make the road if proper legislative
encouragement be given by the states of Virginia and Maryland, through both of
which the road will have to pass about an equal distance, etc."

A work has been published at Berlin, professing to give secret anecdotes
relative to Russia: -- Among other things it is said, that "Madame Lebrun, no
less celebrated for her affairs of gallantry with Vandreuil and Calonne than
for her talents, intended to draw a Portrait of Catherine II. after her death.
The following advice was given her upon this occasion -- let the map of Russia
be your canvas, the darkness of ignorance your back-ground, the spoils of
Poland your drapery, human blood your coloring, your outline the monuments of
her reign, and your shade the first six months of the reign of her son." --
(See p. 12 of this book.)

RICHMOND, Dec. 5. The following gentlemen, Electors of a President and Vice
President of the United States, met at the Capitol, in this city, on Wednesday
last, and gave a unanimous vote for Tho. Jefferson and Aaron Burr -- viz.

TICKET FOR Mr. JEFFERSON.
George With, city of Richmond; Wm. Newsum, of Princess Anne; Dan. Coleman,
Caroline -- for Edm. Pendleton, absent: Wm. H. Cabell, Amherst; James Madison,
jun. Orange; John Page, Gloucester; Tho Newton, jun. Norfolk; Dr. Shore,
Petersburg -- for C B. Harrison, absent; General Joseph Jones, Dinwiddie; Wm.
B. Giles, Amelia; Creed Tailor, Cumberland; Tho. Read, sen. Charlotte; Geo.
Penn, Patrick; Walter Jones, Northumberland; Rich. Brent, Prince William; Wm.
Elzey, Loudon; John Bowyer, Rockbridge -- for And. Moore, absent; General John
Brown, Hardy; General John Preston, Montgomery; Hugh Holmes, Frederick; Arch.
Stewart, August^^.
TICKET FOR Mr. ADAMS.
John Blair, of the city of Williamsburg; John Wise, Accomack; Cha. Dabney,
Hanover; Wm. Cabell, Amherst; John Jamison, Culpepper; Car Braxton, K. William;
John Nevison, Norfolk; Geo. K. Tailor, Pr. George; Sterling. Edmunds, Brunswick;
Ber. Markham, Chesterfield; James Morton, of P. Edward; Wm. Morton, Charlotte;
Joel Leftwich, Campbell; Burdet As^ton, K. George; Bail. Washington, Fairfax;
John Blackwell, Fauquier; J. Brackenridge, Botecourt; Isaac Vanmeter, Hardy;
Rob. Crocket, With; Jof. Swearingen, Berkely; Alex. St. Clair, Augusta.
STRAW PAPER.
In England a mode has been discovered of manufacturing paper from straw It is
of strong consistence, and though it retains the color of the material from
which it is made, will serve for packing parcels, printing hand-bills, and such
other ordinary purposes. It is hoped thorefore, that this invention will reduce
the present advanced price of rags and paper, and destroy a monopoly.

The following is the most correct Return of the Votes in the different
Counties which we could procure.
Ad. Jef. Accomack 284 22 Albemarle 38 561 Amelia -- 243 Amherst 19 303 Augusta
463 237 Bath 5^ 112 Bedford 164 269 Berkely 371 417 Botetourt 96 144 Buckingham
-- 501 Brunswick 25 385 Brook 32 220 Campbell 69 211 Caroline 6 369 Charlote
26 342 Charles City 51 111 Chesterfield 6 460 Cumberland 11 289 Culpepper 100
372 Dinwiddie 10 318 Elizabeth City 20 82 Essex 46 209 Fairfax 218 240 Fauquier
131 308 Fluvanna 9 246 Franklin 29 531 Frederick 211 527 Gloucester 54 203
Goochland 8 298 Greenbrier 280 28 Greensville 6 194 Grayson -- 117 Halifax 15
764 Hampshire 200 180 Hardy 140 90 Hanover 45 201 Henry 31 184 Harrison 65 163
Henrico 43 217 Isle of Wight 26 254 James City 35 72 King and Queen 47 237 King
George 48 91 King William 86 128 Kenawha -- -- Lancaster 54 139 Loudon 205 132
Lee 2 33 Louisa 27 440 Lunenburg 26 243 Mecklenburg 109 292 Middlesex 32 118
Monongalia 185 254 Montgomery 17 212 Mathews 29 171 Madison 25 238 Monroe 42
155 Nansemond 26 181 New Kent 87 105 Norfolk County 30 241 Nottoway -- 190
Northampton 143 28 Northumberland 27 2^0 Ohio 61 164 Orange 7 337 Pittsylvania
46 584 Patrick -- 130 Powhatan 22 183 Pr. Edward 3 344 Pr. George 9 197 Pr.
William 42 168 Princess Anne 176 204 Pendleton 106 111 Richmond 28 123
Rockbridge 164 219 Rockingham 78 584 Russel -- 51 Randolph 21 31 Shenando 41
710 Southampton 94 214 Spotsylvania 13 277 Stafford 91 151 Surry 6 184 Sussex 5
379 Warwick 6 53 With 13 113 Westmoreland 89 73 Wood -- -- Washington 6 290
York 24 77 Williamsburg 24 25 Norfolk Borough 118 111 Richmond City 72 79 Total
6,024 21,311

AMOUNT of Warrants issued for Expenses incurred in carrying into Effect the
Acts of Assembly concerning the two last Elections of President and
Vice President of the United States.
Ds. Cs. Amount of Expenses for comparing the Poll in the year 1796 399 63
Amount of Expense of Electors traveling, etc. 299 90 Amount of Expense of
Clerk 16, Doorkeeper 4, 20 0 719 53 Amount of Expenses for printing circular
letters to Commissioners, etc. to superintend the election of Electors to choose
a President and Vice President in the year 1800 8 Do. for printing commissions
for do. 8 Do. for printing the Act concerning the Electors 20 Do. for printing
proclamation to meet in Richmond 2 50 Do. for conveying Commissions to
Commissioners 433 66 Do. for conveying the returns, etc. 717 62 Do. for
notifying the Electors, etc. 179 98 Do. for attendance and traveling of
Electors 274 31 Do. incurred in Gloucester conducting the election 8 50 Do.
incurred in Fairfax conducting the election 19 75 Do. incurred in Monongalia
conducting the election 6 34 Do. incurred in Norfolk Borough conducting the
election 5 58 Do. incurred in Monroe conducting the election 6 Do. incurred in
Henrico conducting the election 5 39 Do. incurred in Rockbridge conducting the
election 8 25 Do. Lynchburg news-paper for publishing the Names of the Electors
3 75 1707 63 1790 -- Number of inhabitants in Fredericksburg -- 1,485

By the late Census of the State of Pennsylvania we learn, that the city of
Philadelphia has decreased about 500 Taxables since the year 1793. Total
Taxables in the whole state 111,612, being an increase in 7 years of 20,462. --
New Counties erected in that time 14.

M. Achard, the Prussian chemist, has at length brought his discoveries, in the
article of sugar from vegetables, to such perfection, that he is enabled to
vend it at six sous per lb.

The largest Ox ever seen in America was raised in Morris county, New Jersey,
and was lately exhibited as a show in Philadelphia. It measured 17 feet 3
inches from the nose to the tail, exclusive of the brush; 6 feet 3 inches high,
and the girth 9 feet 4 inches. It weighed 2996 lbs. being larger than the
famous Blackwell Ox, at Dartmouth, the largest Ox ever seen in England.

CITY OF RICHMOND.
James M'Clurg, Mayor -- Geo. Nicholson, Recorder -- John Burnet, Wm.
Richardson, John Foster, Rob. Pollard, Geo. Picket, Sam. Myers, Aldermen --
Rob. Mitchell, Geo. W. Smith, Wm. Marshall, Jacob Cohen, David Halloway, Js.
Brown, John D. Blair, Edw. Carrington, Common Councilmen -- Adam Craig, Clerk
-- Js. Whillelaw, Sergeant -- Kier, High Constable.

CENSUS of the CITY of RICHMOND.
Census of the Year 1790, -- 3,761 1800 -- White Males under 10 years 351 -- of
10 and under 16 174 -- of 16 and under 26 512 -- of 26 and under 45 440 -- of
45 and upwards 150 1627 White Females under 10 337 -- of 10 and under 16 154 --
of 16 and under 26 337 -- of 26 and under 45 279 -- of 45 and upwards 103 1210
Total of White People of both Sexes 2837 -- of Free People of Color 607 -- of
Slaves 2293 2900 Total Inhabitants, except a few Indians, 5,737 Increase 1,971

TOBACCO inspected at Richmond in the Year ending 1st Oct. 1799, 10,278 Do. in
the Year ending Oct. 1800, At Byrd's 1543 Do. received from upper Inspects.
1175 Do. shipped 1460 4178 At Shockoe 368 Do. received from upper Insps. 5000
Do. shipped 5600 10968 At Rockets 1414 Do. received from upper Insps. 744 Do.
shipped 1172 3330 Total Hhds. 18,476 FLOUR inspected for the Year ending 31st
Aug. 1799, Total Bls. 76,754 Do. for the Year ending 31st Aug. 1800 63,672
Amount of TOLL received in the Year 1800 at James River Canal, L. 3781 11 4 Do.
in the Year 1799, 4262 4 10

Canal Company: -- Dr. Foushee, President; Geo. Pickett, Edw. Carrington, Rob.
Gamble, jas. Brown, Directors -- Rob. Pollard, Secretary, Treasurer, and Clerk.

TOBACCO inspected at MANCHESTER in 1800,
At Manchester Warehouse 1929 Johnson's 1816 Trent's 1202 4,947 FLOUR
inspected at Manchester in 1799, Bls. 8,278 Do. Do. 1800, 9,599

LIST of the practicing COUNCIL in the High Court of Chancery, Virginia.
Philip Narbone Nicholas, Esquire. Attorney General. Edm. Randolph, John Marshall,
John Warden, Wm. Duval, Thomas Nelson, Charles Copeland, Wm. C. Williams, John
Wickham, Dan. Call, Sam. M'Craw, George Hay, Henry Banks, Wm. Pope, W. W.
Henning, Tho. R. Roots, Geo. W. Smith, Alex. M'Rae, Arch. Campbell, James
Rind, Fra. T. Brook, Austin D. Leake, Nath. Pope, John Heath, Bennet Tailor,
Geo. K. Tailor, David Robertson, John Minor, James Pleasants, Cha. F. Bates,
Hugh Holmes, Rich. Gregory, John Hevenham, Edm. Jen. Lee, Benj. Botts, Wm.
Wirt.
LIST of LAWYERS who have qualified in the Court of Appeals.
Edm. Randolph, John Tailor o Bart. Williams o John Marshall, John F. Mercer o
Cha. Lee o Wm. Short o Wm. Duval, Tho Nelson, jun, James Monroe o John Wickham,
Dan. Call, Wm C. Williams, Cha. Copeland, Henry Banks, W. W. Henning, Geo. W.
Smith, John Heath, Sam. M'Craw, Ben. Tailor, Benj Botts, P N. Nicholas, Philip
Dodridge o Geo. K. Tailor, Geo. Hay, Alex. Stewart o David Robinson, Edm J.
Lee, Fra. T Brook, Cha. F. Bates, Nath. Pope, jun. Wm. Wirt.
Th^se marked thus o do not at present practice in either the Court of Appeals
or the High Court of Chancery.

Expense of the Manufactory of Arms from its commencement to Dec. 1800, Dols.
58,300 Do. Penitentiary House, 92,000

DOLLARS AND CENTS.
The Merchants and Brokers of Philadelphia have very properly declared, that
they know no money in these States but Dollars and Cents; there are no such
coins here as pounds shillings, and pence; and that in future they will buy and
sell only in the legal money of the country -- Indeed it is very strange, that
the people long before have not unanimously adopted the calculation of American
moneys by a mode so very clear, simple, and demonstrative.



The following Articles have been cleared at the Port of Richmond for different
Ports of the United States (exclusive of those within the State of Virginia);
the most considerable Quantities for Boston, New York, and Phila.
Year. Kegs The Kegs weigh on an average 150 with.
Md. Tob. Bushels Wheat Hhds. Tobacco Bls. Flour Bushels Coal 1798 2313 21280
610 38816 248142 1799 2188 7226 3467 27698 264733 1800 4110 8795 6798 27433
311989

This statement does not include all the produce that has been shipped from
Richmond during the last three years, as before the division of the District of
Bermuda Hundred and City Point, vessels frequently cleared at City Point with
articles taken on board at Richmond; and as the laws do not compel vessels with
articles of the above description and destined for Norfolk, to clear at
Richmond, consequently many vessels have landed such articles at Norfolk, from
whence they have been afterward shipped to the Northern ports.

Custom-house James Gibbon, Esquire. Collector. James Rowland, Surveyor.

CENSUS of the TOWN of ALEXANDRIA.
Census of the Year 1790, 2,748 1800 -- White Males under 10 years 590 -- of 10
and under 16 246 -- of 16 and under 26 415 -- of 26 and under 45 489 -- of 45
and upwards 192 1932 White Females under 10 551 -- of 10 and under 16 255 -- of
16 and under 26 406 -- of 26 and under 45 424 -- of 45 and upwards 162 1798
Total of White People of both Sexes 3730 -- of free Mulattoes and Negroes 365
-- of Slaves 905 1270 Total Inhabitants 5,000 Increase 2,252

A late Paris Paper informs us, "That the Chief Consul has ordered the Minister
of the Interior Department to erect, in the great gallery of the Thuilleries,
the statues of Demosthenes, Alexander, Hannibal, Scipio, Caesar, Cicero,
Brutus, Cato, Alfred, Gustavus Adolphus, Turenne, Conde, Marlborough, Eugene,
Frederick, Franklin, Washington, Jubert, Deffaix, etc." -- We wish to know
where is the similarity of character between Alexander and Caesar, and Franklin
and Washington? --



NAMES of the OFFICERS of the GRAND LODGE of VIRGINIA.
The Most Worshipful Wm. Austin, Grand Master; Right Worshipful Alex. M'Rae,
Dep. Grand Master; Worshipful Philip R. Thompson, Sen. G. Warden; Worshipful
James Byrne, Jun. G. Warden; W. H. Fitzwhyl^onn, G. Secretary; Jos. Darmstadt,
G. Treasurer; Rich. B. Good, Sen. G. Deacon; Eldridge Harris, Jun. G. Deacon;
Matthew. Moody, G. Stewards, Wm. Davidson, G. Stewards, And. Smith, G.
Pursuivant; Wm. Mann, G. Tyler.
The Grand Lodge meets on the 2d Monday in December in every year, at the
Mason's Hall in the City of Richmond.

LIST of the LODGES under the Jurisdiction of the GRAND LODGE of Virginia -- A.
L. 5801.
No. Name Where held. Time of Meeting. 1 Norfolk, Borough of Norfolk, 1st
Thursday. 2 Kilwinning Cross, P. Royal, Caroline Co. 3 Blandford, Blandford,
near Pg. 3d Wednesday genesis 4 Fredericksburg, Fredericksburg, 1st Friday. 5 St.
Taminy, (SUSPENDED) 6 Williamsburg, City of Williamsb. 7 Botetourt, Gloucester
County, 3d Saturday. 8 Cabin Point, (SUSP.) 9 York, (SUSP.) 10 Richmond, City
of Richmond, 2d Tuesday. 11 Northampton, Northampton Co. 12 Hempsville,
Princess Anne Co. 1st Friday. 13 Staunton, Augusta Co. Last Thursday. 14
Manchester, Chesterfield Co. 3d Tuesday. 15 Petersburg, Petersburg. 4th
Thursday. 16 Wisdom, Portsmouth, 1st Monday. 17 Charlotte, Charlotte Co. 4th
Friday. 18 Smithfield Union, Isle of Wight Co. 1st Thursday. 19 Richmond Rand.
City of Richmond, 1st Wednesday. 20 Scotsville, (EXTINCT) 21 Baltimore, (SUSP.)
22 Alexandria, Alexandria, Thursday after 3d Monday. 23 Dinwiddie, Dinwiddie
Co. 24 Pittsylvania, Pittsylvania Co. 2d Friday. 25 Lexington, Kentucky, 2d
Monday. 26 Washington, Botetourt Co. 27 Rockingham Un. Rockingham Co. 2d
Thursday. 28 Cumberland, (SUSP.) 29 30 Solomon's Nansemond Co. 31 Columbia
Fluvanna Co. 2d Saturday. 32 George, Amherst Co. 4th Saturday. 33 Warren,
Albemarle Co. 1st Saturday. 34 Benevolent, Southampton Co. 3d Monday. 35 Paris,
Bourbon Co. Kentucky. 36 St John's, City of Richmond, 1st Saturday. 37 Hicks's
Ford, Greensville Co. Wed. before 4th Th. 38 Buckingham Un. Buckingham Co. Sat.
before 2d Mon. 39 Marshall, Lynchburg Town, Wed. before 1st Th. 40
Stephensburg, Culpepper Co. 3d Saturday. 41 Lebanon, Goochland Co. 2d Thursday.
42 Bath Union, Bath Springs, 2d Thursday. 43 Fairfax, Culpepper Co. 1st Friday.
44 Door to Virtue, Charlottesville, Last Saturday. 45 Aberdeen, Campbell Co. 2d
Monday. 46 Georgetown, Scot Co. Kentucky, Tues. after 4th Mon. 47 Brook,
Alexandria, 1st Thursday. 48 Abingdon, Washington Co. 3d Tuesday. 49
Greenbrier, Greenbrier Co. Mon. before 1st. Tues. 50 Dumfries, Pr. William Co.
Wed. after 1st Mon. 51 Painesville Amelia Co. 2d Friday. 52 Brunswick,
Brunswick Co. 2d Friday. 53 Chuckat^ck, Nansemond Co. 2d Thursday. 54
Jerusalem, City of Richmond, 3d Tuesday. 55 Fraternal, With County, 2d Tuesday
generally 56 Naphtali, Norfolk Town, 1st Tuesday. 57 Frankfort Hiram,
Frankfort, Kentucky. 58 Day, Louisa Co. 59 Hiram, Westmoreland Co. 4th Monday.
60 Widow Sons, Milton, Albem. Co. 2d Saturday. 61 Chester, Front Royal, Fred.
Co. 2d Friday.

A person who is in the habit of taking notice of Newspaper accounts, says,
that in the last six months there have been 21 duels, in which six have been
killed, and eleven wounded.

NORFOLK.
CORPORATION of NORFOLK.
Seth Foster, Esquire. Mayor -- Tho. Newton, Recorder -- 8 Aldermen -- 16 Common
Councilmen -- Wm. Sharp, Clerk.

CUSTOM-HOUSE, NORFOLK.
Wm. Davis, Esquire. Collector -- Phil. Gatewood, Naval Officer -- Cope. Parker,
Surveyor -- Edw. Archer, Weigher and Guager -- Bay. Hill, Measurer -- Hill.
Mosely, J. George, -- Saunders, J. T. Smith, C. de Klauman, Inspectors -- J.
Leffingwell, Do. at Portsmouth -- J. Rogers, Do. at Gosport.

DIRECTORS of the BRANCH BANK, NORFOLK.
Rob. Tailor, Esquire. President; Moses Myers, Wm. Pennock, John Granbery, John
Cowper, Luke Wheeler, W. Ashley, Conway Whittle, Alex. M'Clure of Norfolk;
Rich. Blow of Portsmouth; James Young of Gosport; John Hopkins and Rob. Pollard
of Richmond, Directors -- Cha. Renshaw, Cashier -- Wm. Finnie, out-door Clerk.

Notaries Public, John Morrison, Rob. B. Tailor, and Tho. Newton, jun.

Norfolk, in the year 1790, contained only 2959 inhabitants; at present, we are
assured, its population is above 8000; a very rapid increase indeed, but not
more than might be expected from a place so advantageously situated for both
foreign and domestic commerce. -- On this occasion, we must resort to a late
publication, the Duke de Liancourt's Travels in America in the years 1795, 96,
and 97, wherein his Grace gives an account of the town and trade of Norfolk.

The Duke gives the following partial statement of the exports of Norfolk,
which we copy verbatim: -- QUANTITIES.
1791 1792 1793 1794 1795 Bals. Flour 35,071 45,909 52,836 78,981 66,527 Bls.
In. Corn 341,984 286,834 258,735 211,313 442,075 Cs. N. Stores 29,376 44,665
26,753 23,286 14,704 VALUE.
Flour, dols. 191,639 242,357 296,415 436,352 629,384 Indian Corn 120,733
104,977 154,264 105,661 172,499 Naval Stores 52,333 62,631 45,014 45,504 33,111
1798 Vessels from foreign Ports entered at Norfolk* 262 1799 Do. Do. Do. 326
1800 Do. Do. Do. 356 Coasters cleared out at Norfolk in 1800 738

(The article marked thus * we received from a very obliging Correspondent,
from whom, on another occasion, we shall be glad to receive a regular account
of the trade of Norfolk from the commencement of the Federal Government.)

"Thus we see (says the Duke) that a barrel of flour, whose medium value in
1791 was 5 dollars 55 cents -- in 1792, 5 drs. 3 cts. -- in 1793, 5 drs. 15
cts. -- in 1794, 5 drs. 56 cts. rose, in 1795, to 9 drs. 35 cts. -- and that
Indian Corn, an article but of secondary demand, was at 37 cents the bushel in
1791, at 54 in 1792, at 61 in 1793, at 51 in 1794, and at 66 in 1795.

"The exportations from Norfolk amounted, in the year 1791, to 1,028,789
dollars -- in 1792, to 1,147,414 -- in 1793, to 1,045,525 -- in 1794, to
1,687,194 -- in 1795, to 1,934,827 -- and already to 1,088,105 dollars for the
first quarter of 1796 -- When we consider the increase of the exports for some
years back, we must recollect that the difference is much more considerable in
the value than in the quantity. The necessities of Europe have more than
doubled the price; and although it be certainly a fact that the clearing of new
grounds augments the quantity of produce, that augmentation bears no
proporation to the difference of value presented by the tables for three years
back sent in from the different Customhouses."

The Duke, after giving a curious account of his unpleasant voyage from
Charlestown in a small, encumbered vessel, proceeds to describe Norfolk, etc.
--

"Norfolk is built on Elizabeth-River, at nine miles from the spot where it
discharges its waters into the bay. In the intervening space there are few
houses, and those few almost all present a wretched appearance. An almost
uninterrupted succession of pines are the only object which meets the voyagers
eye. Craney Island lies nearly in the middle of the river at a short distance
above its mouth. Two points of land, which approach within a quarter of a mile
of each other in front of Norfolk, are strengthened with forts which are
capable of successfully defending the entrance. That on the Norfolk side is in
better condition than the other, which, however, might be speedily repaired, at
no great expense.

"Portsmouth, a small assemblage of houses on the opposite side of the river,
did not share in the conflagration of Norfolk. From its situation it seemed
entitled to expect all the commerce of Elizabeth-River: at its quays the
greatest depth of water is found: at the highest tides, it is there 12 feet
deep, whereas it is only 6 at Norfolk; the pump-water at the former place is
not brackish, as at the latter; the soil on which the town is built is more
dry, and the air more salubrious. But, at the conclusion of the peace, the
inhabitants incensed against the English, refused to admit any merchant of that
nation, or any new-comer whose political principles were liable to suspicion.
To this rancorous disposition was attributed a political motive of a less
generous kind -- an apprehension on the part of the American merchants who had
remained at Portsmouth, left the new traders who came to settle among them,
should, by the advantage of bringing in greater capitals than they themselves
possessed, be enabled to outdo them in the line of commerce.

"However this may be, the consequences has been, that the inhabitants have
removed to the opposite side; that Norfolk has been rebuilt, and that its trade
is twenty times more considerable than that of Portsmouth; nay, the few
merchants who still reside in the latter town, purchase at Norfolk almost all
the articles that constitute their cargoes, and some of them even have their
compting-houses there.

"At the close of the year 1783, there were not 12 houses rebuilt in Norfolk;
at present (1796) there are between 7 and 800. It is one of the ugliest, most
irregular, and most filthy towns that can any where be found. The houses are
low and unsightly, almost all constructed of wood, and erected without any
attention to regularity; not 20 of them are built with brick^^. The streets are
unpaved; the town is surrounded by swamps; the hastiness and stench which
prevail are excessive, and add to the natural insalubrity of the situation, and
of the climate, which is extremely hot.

"From these concurrent sources of unhealthiness, it results, that diseases are
habitual at Norfolk in summer and autumn, and that malignant epidemics are
frequent. Last year the Yellow Fever is said to have carried off 500 persons
from a population of 4000; 300 died at the time the distemper prevailed, the
others fell victims to its consequences. -- The inhabitants of Norfolk, even
those among them who are the most opulent, fancy that the use of wine and
strong liquors furnishes them with a preservative against the insalubrity of
the climate, and they make a liberal use of the remedy. -- Previous to the war,
Norfolk is said to have contained 8000 inhabitants.

"Norfolk carries on a considerable trade with Europe, the Antilles, and the
northern States. Her exports are flour, wheat, Indian corn, timber of every
kind, particularly planks, staves, and shingles, salt meat and fish, iron,
lead, flax-seed, tobacco, tar, turpentine, and hemp. All these articles are the
produce of Virginia, or of North Carolina, which latter State, having no
seaports, or none that are good, makes her exportations chiefly through those of
Virginia.

"Norfolk is the only port for the southern part of this extensive State; for,
as no vessels above 120 tons can go up ^o Petersburg or Richmond Here the noble
Duke has been misinformed -- Any vessel drawing less than 17 feet water may
come up James River to City Point, the delivering-place for Petersburg; and
there is 12 feet water at Rockets, the landing-place for Richmond.
, the produce of the back country, which is brought to those places by land, is
for the most part sent down in lighters to Norfolk, from whence it is exported.
Thus, this port almost singly carries on all the commerce of that part of
Virginia which lies south of the Rappahannock, and of North Carolina far beyond
the Roanoke.

"Ten years ago, Norfolk could not reckon ten large vessels of her own; whereas
at present she possesses fifty of that description, exclusive of fifty others
of smaller size employed in the West India trade. Under the name Norfolk, are
to be understood Norfolk and Portsmouth, as they constitute but one port of
entry, and are both subject to the same Custom-house. -- The present tonnage of
Norfolk is 15,567 tons, exclusive of the vessels employed in the coasting trade.

"The exportation of Tobacco from Norfolk has, by the diminution of the culture
of that article in Virginia, been reduced above one third within the last five
years. In 1793, it amounted to 15,000 hhds. -- in 1794, to 11,054 -- and, in
1795, to 9,968 hhds. I have not been able to procure an accurate statement of
the quantities in 1791 and 92." --

(At present we must conclude our extracts from this work. -- It is not written
in that lively, vivacious style which generally distinguish French authors, but
this may be owing to the Translator; and, as may expected, the Duke sometimes
writes with the partiality of a Frenchman, particularly when he speaks of
England or English men. -- Upon the whole, however, we recommend this Book to
the perusal of all Americans, and among them the good people of Virginia; it
contains many articles worthy of their most serious attention. -- Do we wish to
know ourselves, will we consult only those who are partial to us? -- If we
desire to have a right knowledge of our own characters, and to know what really
are our faults and imperfections, let us consult strangers and those who are
not partial to us -- it is sometimes even necessary to listen to the remarks of
our enemies. -- We do not mean to intimate, that the Due de Liancourt is an
enemy to America; on the contrary, he speaks with esteem and gratitude of the
hospitable reception which he received in almost every part of the Union.)

THE PERPETUAL MOTION.
In the gaol of Goshen, in N. York, two men are confined on suspicion of
counterfeiting hard dollars. During their imprisonment, without any other
instrument than a penknife, they have fabricated a machine of cedar wood which
discovers the Perpetual Motion. The machine consists of about 30 cog and spur
wheels, of various dimensions, and is set in motion by weights. It can be
adapted to a clock, saw-mill, grist-mill, or any other piece of machinery that
moves by weights, water, or wind; and will continue them in motion so long as
the machinery will last.

NORTH CAROLINA.
STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA.
Governor, his Excellency Benjamin Williams; Secretary of State, Wm. White;
Private Secretary to the Governor, J. W. Grison; Treasurer, John Haywood; --
Comptroller, John Craven, Councilors to the Governor, John ^^inton, Bryan
Whitfield, Reu. Wood, Jas. Gillespie, Law. Smith, Joseph J. Alston, Rob.
Burton. Judges of the Superior Courts, John L. Tailor, Spr. Macay, Sam.
Johnston, John Hall. Attorney General Blake Baker -- Solicitor Genesis Ed. Jones.
Officers of the United States for North Carolina. John Sitgreaves, Judge --
Benj. Woods, Attorney -- J. S. West, Marshal -- Wm. Polk, Surveyor of the
Revenue -- Sherwood Haywood, Commissioner of Loans. Officers for the Collection
of the internal Revenue. Wm. Polk, Supervisor -- Tho. Averton, Inspector of
Survey, No. 1. -- Hardy Murfree, do. No. 2. -- Wm. Polk, No. 3. -- John
Whitaker, No. 4. -- Dan. M. Kissack, No. 5. Officers for the Collection of the
external Revenue. Grif. John M'Ree, Collector of the District of Wilmington --
Fra. Hawks, do. Newbern -- Wm. Keas, do, Washington -- Sam ^^redwell, do.
Edenton -- En. Sawyer, do. Camden.
MEMBERS of CONGRESS.
Senators, Jesse Franklin, David Stone. Representatives, Arch. Henderson, Wm.
B. Grove, N. Macon, Rob. Williams, Wm. H. ^ill, John W. Stanley, -- Stanford,
Willis Alston, Janu^ Holland, David Stone -- (elected Senator, no election
since.) Major Generals of Militia, Tho Bracon, Wm. Lenoir, Rob. Smith, Stephen
W. Carney, Reading Blount. Brigadiers, James Miller, Rob Irwin, Joseph ^'Dowel,
John ^amilton, Benj, Smith, John Willis, Sam. Beaton, Joseph Reddick, Wm.
Williams.
A Court of Conference is held at the city of Raleigh by the Judges of the
Superior Courts, in order to settle questions of Law or Equity which have
occurred in the Circuit, on the 10th of January and 10th of June in every year.
-- Dun. Cameron, Billsborough, Clerk.

There two new Counties erected in North Carolina, viz. Ash and Washington.

(For further particulars relative to the State of North Carolina, see page 27
of the Almanac.)

The Legislature of the territory North-West of the Ohio, convened at
Chillicothe, and on the 6th chose two Delegates to represent the Territory in
the U. States, viz. W. M'Millon in the room of W. H. Harrison, to serve till
4th of March; and Paul Fearin to serve for two years from that day.

LIST of the OFFICERS of the GRAND LODGE of NORTH CAROLINA.
William Polk, Grand Master; John Lewis Tailor, Deputy Grand Master; Montfort
Stokes, Grand Senior Warden; John Winslow, Grand Junior Warden; Wm. Duffy,
Grand Senior Deacon; Cargill Massenburg, Grand Junior Deacon; Stephen W.
Carney, Grand Marshall; Nath. Alexander, Grand Pursuivant; Peter Casso, Grand
Steward; Tho. Pound, Grand Tyler.
LIST of LODGES under the Jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of North Carolina.
1 St. John, Wilmington. 2 Royal White Heart, Halifax. 3 St. John, Newbern, 4
St. John, Kingston, 5 Royal Edwin, Windsor. 6 (DISSOLVED) 7 (...) 8 Phoenix,
Fayetteville. 9 Old Cone, Salisbury. 10 Johnston Caswell, Warrenton. 11 (DIS.)
12 (Do.) 13 St. John, Duplin County. 14 (DIS.) 15 Washington, Beaufort Co. 16
St. Taminy, Martin Co. 17 American George, Murfreesborough. 18 King Solomon,
Jones Co. 19 (DIS.) 20 (Do.) 21 (Do.) 22 (Do.) 23 (Do.) 24 Hiram, Williamsburg.
25 Pansophia, Moore Co. 26 Davie Glasgow, Green Co. 27 Mount Maria, Iredell Co.
28 Columbian, Wayne Co. 29 Harmony, Nashville, Tenessee^ 30 St. Taminy,
Wilmington. 31 Phalanx, Charlotte. 32 Stokes, Cabarras Co. 33 Free-land, Rowan
Co. 34 Unanimity, Rockford. 35 Jerusalem, Carteret Co. 36 Friendship, Fort
Barnwell. 37 Wm. R. Davie, Lexington. 38 Rising Sun, Moyanton. 39 Davie, Bertie
Co. 40 Hiram, Raleigh. 41 Tenessee, Knoxville. 42 Lincoln, Lincolnton.

MEDICAL SOCIETY.
RALEIGH, Dec. 9, 1800. The Medical Society of North Carolina met in this city
on Monday last, and closed their meeting on Wednesday.

Doctors Osborn, Mitchel, Sibley, Armstead and French, were admitted members.
An Essay on the causes, symptoms and treatment of Gout and Rheumatism, was
presented by Doctor J. Webb, of Hillsborough, which merited the warm
commendation of the Society. -- Doctor Webb also appeared as a writer on the
dysentery (the subject given at the last annual meeting for competition) with
conspicuous merit. The thanks of the Society were awarded him for the zeal and
talents displayed in his exertion for the advancement of the objects of the
institution.

Mr. Charles Smith presented himself as a candidate for admission, was examined
by the Censors in the presence of the Society, and admitted a member.

It was resolved, that the Medical Gentlemen of each district within this
State, be invited to form themselves into Associations, to meet at such time
and place in their respective districts, as they may think proper, to confer on
the means of promoting the objects of this society.

The following premiums are offered for the culture of the following Medicinal
Articles in this State; For the largest quantity not less than ten pounds, of
Foxglove, ten dollars; for the largest quantity, not less than five pounds, of
Opium, twenty-five dollars (to be exhibited at the next meeting of the Society)
for the largest quantity, not less than ten pounds, of Rhubarb, exhibited to
the Society in four years, thirty dollars; for the largest quantity of Castor
Oil, not less than five gallons, to be obtained without heat, ten dollars; and
for the largest quantity, not less than fifty pounds, of Senna, ten dollars.
Each of which is to be of as good quality as those articles usually are when
imported, and they must be exhibited to the Society accompanied with
certificates on oath, that it is the product of this State, and except Rhubarb,
the product of one year, and cultivated by one person. The premium will be paid
in money, and the articles will be purchased at twelve and a half per centum
advance of the usual selling prices in New York and Philadelphia.

The Society propose the Cholera Infantum as a subject for competition in the
ensuing year, and invite Medical Gentlemen to a communication of remarks on
that disease, at their meeting on the first day of December next. The
dissertation may be conveyed to the Corresponding Secretary, at any period
previous to the meeting of the Society, accompanied by a sealed letter,
containing the name and place of residence of the author, inscribed with a
motto, which shall be the same with that perfixed to the essay. The letter of
the successful candidate will be opened in the presence of the Society, and
those of the unsuccessful ones destroyed.

Doctors Pasteur, Wheaton, Loomis, and Hand, were appointed to deliver Essays
on some medical subject at the next annual meeting of the Society.

The following Gentlemen were elected Officers for the ensuing year: John C.
Osborn, President; Thomas Mitchell and Richard Fenner, Vice-Presidents; James
Webb and John Sibley, Censors; Sterling Wheaton, Rec. Secretary; Calvin Jones,
Corresponding Sec; C. Massenburg, Treasurer.


PREMIUMS.
To induce the culture of Medicinal Articles in this State, the Medical Society
offer the following Premiums:
For the largest Quantity, not less than five pounds of Opium, 25 For the
largest Quantity, not less than ten pounds, of Fox-glove, 10 For the largest
Quantity, not less than five Gallons (to be prepared without Heat) of Castor
Oil, 10 For the largest Quantity, not less than fifty pounds, of Senna, 10 To
be exhibited at the next annual meeting of the Society, which will be on the
first Monday in December next. For the largest Quantity of Rhubarb, not less
than ten pounds, 30

To be exhibited to the Society in four years.

The Articles are to be of as good quality as those usually are when imported,
and to be accompanied with sufficient proof that they are the product of this
State, and cultivated by one person, and (except the Rhubarb) are the product
of one year.

The Premiums will be paid in cash, and the articles purchased at twelve and a
half per cent. advance on the usual selling prices in Philadelphia and New York.

C. MASSENBURG, Treas.
Raleigh, Dec. 13, 1800. [ A Correspondent takes this opportunity of expressing
his hearty approbation of the foregoing Institution; it reflects credit on the
Gentlemen who have set it on foot, and he has no doubt it will be productive of
salutary advantages -- At the same time, he cannot help expressing his surprise
and regret, that no similar institution exists in Virginia -- Are our
Professors of Medicine so very skilful, that they require no further knowledge,
or are the lives of the Citizens of this State less valuable than those of N.
Carolina? -- As it has long been regretted, that there is no regular School of
Medicine established on the Continent, even the semblance of such institutions
would show, that our Doctors were willing to augment their knowledge; and, by
frequent associations of the kind, a School might at length be formed,
conducive, as in other countries, to the dignity of the Professors, and the
health of the People.] See Liancourt's Travels, vol. 2, page 423.




RALEIGH, Nov. 18. Yesterday the General Assembly of this State commenced its
session.

In the Senate, there were two candidates for the chair, viz. Mr. Reddick and
Mr. Carney. On a ballot, there appeared for the first gentleman 32, for the
second 17. -- Mess. Stokes and Williams were elected Clerks, and N. Murphy and
John Wison, door-keepers.

In the House of Commons there were three candidates for the chair, viz. Mess.
Cabarras, Moore, and Benton. On the second ballot the votes stood thus: For Mr.
Cabarras 64, for Mr. Moore 32, for Mr. Benton 13. -- Mess. John Hunt and P.
^enderson were chosen Clerks, and Tho. Pound and John Lumsden door-keepers.

Dec. 23. -- On Saturday evening, the General Assembly closed their session,
during which they passed 98 Bills.

Agreeably to the vote of the Senate, Duncan M'Farland, the member from
Richmond county, whose seat had been contested (on a charge of having sided
with the enemies of the Revolution) appeared with his witnesses; but the
session being so near a close, a motion was made by Mr. Caller, that the report
of the Committee on the memorial of Rob. Webb be said over till next Assembly,
which was carried.

SICILY WHEAT.
Two barrels of Sicily Wheat have lately been imported by Messrs. Rosier and
Rowlet, and by them presented to the Albany Society of Agriculture, etc.
felicitating themselves that it may one day be productive of advantages to the
United States. One of the species is very hard, transparent, and large; it is
called in that country, Granti dur di Termini; Termini is the name of the town
near which it grows in abandance; -- the other is called Ricelli di Termini,
which is a softer grain.

The following Gentlemen were chosen Electors for North Carolina for President
and Vice President of the U. States:
For Edenton District, John Hamilton; Newbern Bryan Whitfield Northampton,
Thomas Win; Halifax, Gideon Alston Raleigh, Joseph Tailor; Hillsborough,
Absalom Tatem; Rockingham, Joseph Winston Morgan, William Tate Edgecumbe,
Nathan Mayo; Wilmington, Thomas Brown; Fayetteville, William Martin; Salisbury,
Spruce Macay.

N. B. The first-named eight voted for Mr. Jefferson -- the last four for Mr.
Adams. -- See page 108.

PETERSBURG.
Sept. 1, 1800. -- This day the annual election for this Corporation took place
at the Courthouse. Upon the close of the poll, the following Gentlemen had the
greatest number of votes, viz..

John Wilder, David Maitland, Wm. Prentis, Joseph Harding, Geo Pegram, jun. Wm.
Durell, Dan. Dodson, Wm. Corling, Robert Moore, Eben Stott, Dan. Mackinzie,
Alex. Brown, Edw. Jeffers, John Morrison, James Knox, Greg. Johnson.
From them the following Officers were chosen: --

David Maitland, Esquire. Mayor -- Wm. Prentis, Recorder -- Rob. Moore, D.
Mackinzie, Dan Dodson, Wm. Durell, John Morrison, and Geo. Pegram, Aldermen --
Edward Jeffers, Chamberlain -- Rob. Lanier, Sergeant.

APPOMATTOX CANAL.
Trustees, Joseph Eggleston, Edm. Harrison, Edw. Mumford, Rich. W. Venable,
John Epperson, Nel. Patterson, John Wiley, John Royal, Peter F. Archer, John
Archer, Wm. Murray, Fra. Eppes, and Rob. Bolling -- Engineer, Wm. Booker; Tho.
Mumford, Clerk and Treasurer.

The five Gentlemen first named are Managers chosen to superintend the works.

Since the navigation was opened, about a year since, the following quantities
of produce have been brought down the river: -- Tobacco, 500 hds. Flour 1,500
bls. Wheat 4,000 bushs.

It is expected that the Canal will be finished in four years -- Half toll
commenced the 1st of October last.

Aggregate Statement of the corporation Accounts as they stood on the 14th of
July 1800, when Mr. C. Stimpson resigned the Chamberlainship to Mr. Edw.
Jeffers.

Corporation Fund 629 12 8 Court Do. 32 5 5 Watch Do. 311 19 9 973 17 10 Cash
171 15 6 1145 13 4 Advances of Cash to Watch and C^. Funds 138 12 0 1284 5 4
Due from the Town 122 11 8 Balance L. 1161 13 8

Messrs. Moore and Maitland examined these Accounts, and reported. "that they
found the same perfectly correct, leaving a balance to be transferred to the
new Chamberlain of 171l. ^5s. 6d." which was handed over to Mr. Jeffers
accordingly.

CENSUS of the TOWN of PETERSBURG.
Census of the Year 1790, 2,734 1800 -- White Males under 10 years 180 -- of 10
and under 16 83 -- of 16 and under 26 286 -- of 26 and under 45 304 -- of 45
and upwards 71 White Females under 10 years 188 -- of 10 and under 16 66 -- of
16 and under 26 173 -- of 26 and under 45 184 -- of 45 and upwards 66 Total
White People of both Sexes 1501 Free Persons of Color 428 Slaves 1491 Total
Inhabitants 3,520

COURTS.
A District Court is held in Petersburg for the Counties of Dinwiddie, Amelia,
Nottoway, Prince George, and Sussex; it sits twice a year, the 15th April and
15th Sept. and may continue 12 or 14 days. The Court is composed of two judges
from the General Court, who take their tour of duty by lot. -- Walker
C^utchfield, Clerk.

A ^ustings Court for the Town is held monthly, and by quarterly Sessions; same
jurisdiction as the county Courts between residents of the town. The Court
composed of the Mayor, Recorder, and six Aldermen, or any four of them. -- John
Gram^^ar, Clerk.

TOBACCO inspected at the Petersburg Warehouses in the two last Years ending
Sept. 1800
Boyd's Warehouse, in 1799, 2309 in 1800, 1414 hhds. Davis's 2363 1591
Blandford 2130 1798 B^llingbrook 1979 1408 Westbrook 2126 1478 Westhill 2599
2500 Cedar Point 1779 1526 Barksdale 2601 1478 High Street 2415 1803 Petersburg
2152 2146 J. Bolling's 1507 1065 R. Bolling's 1920 Burnt Total 25,880 18,207
FLOUR inspected by D. Moore from Sept. 1799 to Sept. 1800, Bls. 35,102
Different other Inspections, about 10,000 45,102 Inspected the preceding Year
49,633

Custom-house Wm. Heath, Esquire. Collector And. Torborn, Surveyor City Point.

E. B. Holloway, Edwin Fort, and Rob. Hines, Commissioners of Bankrupt in the
district included between James River and the North Carolina boundary, except
Norfolk, Portsmouth, and their adjacent counties.

Conrad Webb, Attorney at Law, Solicitor to said Commissioners. -- Sam. Davies,
Notary Public.

OBSERVATIONS. -- Our observations cannot differ much from those we had
occasion to make last year. We then said "that the town of Petersburg stood in
need of many improvements" -- it now stands in nearly the same condition; a
laudable exertion was indeed made last summer toward mending the main street;
it certainly is the better of it, and the side-paths, here and there, are
rather more passable. We then advised and do again advise, that the side paths
be completed, both for the convenience of social intercourse and the benefit of
trade; and let there be, on both sides of the street, a row of Poplars, not
only to cover houses not very handsome, but for the sake of shade and of
health, as the trees would act as powerful conductors to carry off disagreeable
vapors and impure air: The inhabitants would do well to attend to this
circumstance, of having more trees about their dwellings. -- An Act of Assembly
was obtained to bring water into the streets and houses, that most necessary of
all elements, particularly in a warm climate, and in a wooden town; but no
steps have yet been taken to carry this salutary law into effect.

On the subject of improvements, we have only to add, that there is nothing
about the town of Petersburg that so much requires to be improved, i. e. new
built, as Pocohunta bridge. -- Of all the bad bridges in the country, this
seems to be the wors^ -- Leading into a place of considerable commercial
consequence, and placed on the great southern road, its present condition is
both scandalous and dangerous. -- If the Princess could raise her head, her
Highness would be ashamed of the present possessors of her property, for the
very little respect paid to her memory, and the very little regard held for the
public convenience and prosperity.

It is said, we do not know upon what grounds, that the owners of property in
and about Petersburg, by a churlish, impolitic disposition, are very far from
being encouragers of improvement -- We can scarcely believe this report --
Besides the with of seeing a respectable and flourishing community rising
around them, the idea of being considered the promoters of public prosperity
and happiness, and the supreme pleasure of being esteemed and beloved by all
their fellow citizens -- they must know, that every improvement made by others,
augments the value of their property, and that they themselves, ultimately,
will be the greatest gainers.

There is one other observation which we think it not unfit to make -- Although
the inhabitants of Petersburg are made up from various nations, Americans,
English, Scotch, Irish, French, etc. and entertain very different opinions, yet
there is less political asperity displayed among them, than perhaps in any town
on the continent; "peace and good neighborhood" seems to be their favorite
maxim. Without attempting to search for the causes of this pleasing effect, we,
at once, ascribe it to the good sense of this people. -- Long may this amiable
suavity continue to be the distinguishing characteristic of the town of
Petersburg -- God knows we have enough of the real troubles of life, without
creating artificial ones -- let us not embitter the blessings we enjoy, by
unnecessary discussions, nor disturb the public harmony with foolish quarrels
about "the color of beards, or the length of noses."

THREE SUNS.
On the 12th of January last, about 8 in the morning, several persons in
Southern Prussia saw three Suns appear on a sudden. They rose majestically from
the horizon. At seven o'clock the sky was clear and serene; a few minutes after
it was covered with clouds; and at half past eight, there were seen in the East
three columns of fire, the middle one of which rose to the height of 45
degrees. The two others, formed by the other two suns, were only a third as big
as the middle one; they seemed to burn like a blazing fire, and as they rose
produced a very majestic and awful effect.

ABSTRACT of the DEGREES of the THERMOMETER for the Year 1800.
Not having room for the Monthly Tables at length, we are under the necessity
of only giving the following Abstract of the Year's Observations as taken at
Blandford. -- The first part contains the days of each month when the Mercury
was at the lowest; the second, when it was the highest.

Thermometer lowest. There. highest Month. Mo. Af. Wind. Mo. Af. Wind. Jan. 29
-- 22 32 N. Easterly -- 14 -- 50 65 Southl. Feb. 1 -- 28 40 Easterly -- 24 --
55 67 S. W. Mar. 7 -- 28 38 E. -- 17 -- 62 80 S. April 22 -- 45 63 E. -- 26 --
72 75 S. W. In this month, about the 12th or 13th, an uncommon circumstance
took place, viz. the fall of very considerable quantities of a yellow powder
resembling brimstone. In the walks of the garden where the writer of this
article saw it, it could be lifted up in tea-spoonfuls. On this subject, we
refer to a paragraph in the New York paper, describing the same phenomenon, and
which shows that the descent of this powder must have been very extensive
indeed.

NEW YORK, April 17, 1800. On Saturday evening, between 10 and 12, a severe
storm of rain was experienced in this city, accompanied with very vivid flashes
of lightening and some thunder. The wind was southerly, and the atmosphere was
remarked to be very thick and sultry, yielding a sulphurous smell. Yesterday
morning, after the storm had abated, an impalpable powder was perceived in the
streets, especially in those parts where the water had subsided, and in the
rainwater casks, resembling brimstone. Some ingenious gentlemen have made a
collection of this substance, for the purpose of experiment; by one of those
gentlemen we are assured, that he melted a small quantity of it, and found it
answer the purposes of common brimstone in the making of matches. This
circumstances is, perhaps, unprecedented; and we mention it with a hope, that
wherever it may have occurred, it will attract the notice of philosophy, as a
subject in every respect deserving a minute investigation.


May 10 -- 52 55 E. -- 15 -- 72 87 S. June 20 -- 62 77 Westerly -- 15 -- 80 89
S. July 2 -- 68 77 Northerly -- 26 -- 82 91 S. W. Aug. 7 -- 68 80 N. -- 28 --
78 88 S. Sept. 12 -- 62 77 N. W. -- 14 -- 75 80 S. W. Oct. 25 -- 45 63 W. -- 13
-- 70 83 S. Nov. 24 -- 30 39 W. -- 2 -- 60 66 S. W. Dec. 2 -- 28 44 N. W. -- 27
-- 65 67 S.

It need scarcely be mentioned, that there was much more rain this year than
usual, that it injured the wheat crop, and that the fall season was very
unhealthy.

[If there is any scientific Gentleman in the neighborhood furnished with the
proper instruments, who keeps a regular account of the weather, etc. we shall
be glad to profit by his remarks, being willing, as far as it may be in our
power, to encourage a spirit of investigation into whatever may tend to
elucidate the physical (as well as the moral) state of the country, and of
producing correct meteorological tables and observations.]

Before we conclude the articles relative to Virginia, we must mention, but
very briefly, that a conspiracy of the Negroes was discovered in the month of
August last. The discovery was first made at Petersburg, where little credit
was given to it -- it was shortly after more fully disclosed at Richmond, where
20 or 30 of these unfortunate wretches were tried, condemned, and executed.

This is one of those subjects in which "more must be meant than meets the
eye." -- We shall therefore only say, that a great evil exists in the southern
States, deeply affecting their character, their safety, and their prosperity --
The Virginians are men too sensible and too quick-sighted not to know, that the
transactions which have lately taken place in the West Indies, and what is
daily doing in the northern States, cannot be hidden from the people alluded
to. -- It is impossible to remove the evil all at once, but it is very possible
to do it by gradual measures -- Look to it in time, ye Lawmakers and
Proprietors, or the storm will one day burst upon ye in thunder. -- [Consult
Liancourt and other Travelers.]

LOMBARDY POPLAR.
A gentleman from Italy, who lately traveled through the United States, gives
the following account of this Tree: --

1. It moderates the heat of the summer sun in meadows, and protects and
increases the quantity of hay and pasture.

2. The body of the tree, when full grown, after its bark is taken off and it
is thoroughly dried, makes good rails.

3. Its branches, when cut down and dried, afford excellent firewood,
particularly for cooking in summer.

4. The leaves and small twigs of the tree, when plucked or out in the fall of
the year, and dried, make a wholesome fodder for cattle and sheep during the
winter.

It is hoped our Gentlemen farmers, where their native forest trees have become
scarce and dear, will attend to these facts, and hereafter cultivate the
Lombardy tree with more assiduity.

(Mr. Walpole says, a gentleman brought the first L. poplar to England in his
chaise -- but whether it came to America from England or Italy, we do not know.)

BRITISH NAVAL FORCE.
In port and fitting 73 7 94 132 306 Guard Ships 4 0 1 0 5 In the English and
Irish Channels 0 0 23 41 64 In the Downs and North Sea 2 0 11 31 44 West India
Islands, etc. 3 0 18 16 37 At Jamaica 7 1 17 17 42 America and Newfoundland 2 1
5 8 16 Cape of Good Hope, E. Indies, 8 6 10 16 40 Coast of Africa 0 0 3 2 5
Gibraltar, Portugal, Mediter. 12 2 27 7 68 Hospital and Prison Ships 30 3 0 0
33 Receiving Ships 7 1 6 0 14 Serviceable and repairing 5 0 1 0 6 In Ordinary
20 2 20 41 83 Building 21 2 9 0 32 Total 194 25 245 331 795 Ships taken from
France 51 1 131 125 308 Spain 8 0 12 19 39 Dutch 17 7 32 32 88 Total 76 8 175
176 435 Privateers of all Nations 0 0 0 0 757 Total British Naval Force 1192

Along with this astonishing naval force, England maintains above 300,000 men
in arms (besides her foreign subsidies); so that her Navy and Army alone cost
her 25 millions sterling -- Her expenditure for the year 1800, as stated by
(...) r. Tierney, and acceded to by Mr. Pit with not much difference, was 64
millions and a half! -- Her peace establishment, supposing peace to take place
this winter, will be at least 36 millions and a half! -- These few lines will
show the amazing power and resources of this wonderful nation!

Mr. Tierney says, that the odious and oppressive Income Tax must continue ten
years after peace is concluded -- Unfortunately, the latest accounts from
Europe state, that instead of peace taking place, as we had fondly hoped, the
war had been renewed with fresh vigor, and on a broader scale -- and, that the
Emperor of Russia, besides detaining all the English ships in his ports, had
entered into what is called an Armed Neutrality with the Northern Powers, in
order to check the exorbitant insolence of the British Navy.

From the first day of the present year, the King of England was to drop the
vain title of King of France, and is to be henceforth called King of the
British -- Is there any thing ominous in the change? -- Louis XVI. changed his
title, and then how short and unfortunate was his reign!

CONGRESSIONAL AFFAIRS.
FRENCH TREATY.
WASHINGTON, Jan. 24. -- Yesterday the Senate proceeded to consider the form of
ratification of the Treaty reported by a select Committee, which was
substantially that the Treaty be ratified with the exception of the 2nd, and
3rd Articles, and with the addition of two new Articles, one declaring that the
Treaty should not be construed in any of its proposions to affect any
pre-existing treaties formed with other nations, and the other limiting its
duration to eight years.

A division of the distinct questions contained in the form of ratification was
called for, when the following questions were taken: --

1st. Shall the 2nd article of the treaty be excepted? -- Two thirds of the
members not concurring, the question was lost, and of consequence the 2d
article was not excepted.

2. Shall the 3d article of the treaty be excepted? -- Two thirds of the
members not concurring the question was lost, and of consequence the 3d article
was not excepted.

3. Shall the article declaring that this Treaty shall not affect any
pre-existing Treaties be agreed to? -- Two thirds of the members not
concurring, the question was lost, and of consequence the new article was not
agreed to.

4. Shall the article, limiting the Treaty to eight years be agreed to? -- This
question was agreed to by nearly an unanimous vote.

The first three members of the form of Ratification being virtually disagreed
to, the Ratification remained unconditional, except as to the limitation of the
Treaty to eight years.

On agreeing to this form of ratification there were 16 Yeas, 14 Nays. -- The
ratification was therefore lost, there not being two thirds of the members in
favor of it.

The Yeas and Nays were as follow: --

Yeas -- Messrs. Langdon, Livermore, T. Foster, Green, Pain, Chipman,
Armstrong, S. T. Mason, Nicholas, Bloodworth, Franklin, Marshall, Brown,
Baldwin, Cock, Anderson, -- 16.

Nays -- Messrs. J. Mason, D. Foster, Tracy, Hillhouse, Morris, Dayton,
Schureman, Bingham, Ross, Latimer, Wells, Hindman, Howard, Read -- 14.

Feb. 3 -- This day was brought on in the Senate the reconsideration of the
treaty with the French Republic. The form of Ratification proposed an exception
of the 2d article, and a clause of limitation in point of time, to eight years'
and in this shape it was assented to, 22 for it, 10 against it' -- (See p. III)

On Tuesday, Feb. 10, Mr. S. Smith, chairman of the Committee of Commerce and
Manufactures, reported, according to order, "A bill to continue in force an act
further to suspend the commercial intercourse between the United States and
France and the dependances thereof."

The existing act is limited to continue in force till the 3d day of March
next, the bill now reported, re-enacts to continue it till the 3d day of March,
1802. It was once read, and on the question whether it should be read a second
time, a motion was made by Mr. Davis to reject the bill.

Yeas -- Messrs. Alston, Baer, Bird, Bishop, I. Brown, R. Brown, Cabell,
Christie, Clay, Claiborne, Condit, Craik, Davis, Dawson, Dennis, Dennis,
Dickson, Eggleston, Elmendorf, Fowler, Gallatin, Good, Gray, Gregg, Grove,
Hanna, Heister, Holmes, Hill, Jackson, Kitchell, H. Lee, Leib, Lincoln, Lion,
Livingston, Macon, Muhlenburg, New, Nicholas, Page, Powell, Randolph, Smilie,
J. Smith, S. Smith, Spaight, Stanford, Stone, Stewart, Taliaferro, J. C.
Thomas, Thompson, A. Trigg, J. Trigg, Van Cortlandt, Tazewell, Varnum, R.
Williams -- 59.

Nays -- Messrs. Bartlett, Bayard, Champlin, Cooper, J. Davenport, F.
Davenport, Edmond, Evans, Foster, Freeman, Glen, C. Goodrich, E. Coodrich,
Griswold, Harper, Henderson, Huger, Mattoon, Morris, Not, Otis, Parker,
Pinckney, Platt, Read, N. Read, Rutledge, Sheppard, J. C. Smith, Sheafe,
Tenney, Thatcher, R Thomas, Wadsworth, Waln, L. Williams, Woods -- 37.

SEDITION BILL.
Feb. 21. -- The House went into Committee of the whole, Mr. Morris in the
chair, on the Sedition Bill.

The Committee reported the Bill without amendment, and on the question of
engrossment for a third reading, it was decided in the negative, and of course
the bill was lost -- The yeas and nays were as follow:

Yeas -- Messrs. Baer, Bartlett, Bayard, J. Brown, Champlin, Cooper, Craik,
Dana, J. Davenport, Dennis, Dickson, Edmond, Evans, Foster, Freeman, Glen, C.
Goodrich, E. Goodrich, Griswold, Grove, Harper, Henderson, Hill, Imlay,
Kittera, H. Lee, S. Lee, Mattoon, Morris, Otis, Page, Pinckney, Platt, Powel, J
Read, N. Read, Rutledge, Sheppard, J. C. Smith, Sheaf, Tenney, Thatcher, J.
Thomas, R. Thomas, Wadsworth, Waln, L. Williams, Woods -- 49.

Nays -- Messrs. Alston, Bailey, Bishop, R. Brown, Cabell, Christie, Clay,
Claiborne, Condit, Davis, Dawson, Dent, Eggleston, Elmendorf, Fowler, Gallatin,
Good, Gray, Gregg, Hanna, Heister, Holmes, Huger, Jackson, Kitchell, Leib,
Lincoln, Lion, Linn, Livingston, Macon, Muhlenburg, New, Nicholas, Nicholson,
Parker, Randolph, Smilie, J. Smith, S. Smith, Spaight, Stanford, Stone,
Sumpter, Stewart, Taliaferro, Thompson, A. Trigg, J. Trigg, Tazewell, Van
Cortlandt, Varnum, R. Williams -- 53.

After which, Mr. Bayard made the following motion, and ordered to lie on the
table: --

Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to prepare and bring in a bill to
amend the Common Law, so as to define and limit the punishment upon
prosecutions for libels, and to enable a defendant, upon such prosecution, to
give the truth of the matter charged as a libel, in evidence, in his defense.

Thus, a Law has at length been got rid of, which never ought to have been
enacted, if, as its advocates allege, the Common Law was fully competent to
the evil complained of. -- As to Mr. Bayard's explanation, it has the
appearance of fairness, viz. to enable the Defendant to plead the truth of the
alleged libel. -- Mr. Cooper says, he was not permitted to prove the truth of
his assertions, as Judge Chase would not allow him to summon, Mr Adams as a
witness.

ELECTION of PRESIDENT.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 11, 1801.
This day at 11 o'clock, the House of Representatives repaired to the Senate
chamber, where the votes for President and Vice President were counted, when it
appeared, that Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr had an equal number of votes --
(See page 108.) -- The House then returned to its own chamber, and, with closed
doors, proceeded to ballot.

Upon the ballots being counted, they stood thus: -- For Mr. Jefferson 8
States. Mr. Burr 6 Divided 2 Maryl. and Vermont.

There being no election, the House immediately proceeded to a second ballot,
when the result was the same -- and thus they continued balloting till Thursday
morning at 9 o'clock; after the 27th ballots, the exhausted members agreed to
postpone business till 12 o'clock.

At 12, the 28th ballot was taken, and the result was the same -- After which,
all further balloting was suspended till next day, Friday.

At 12 o'clock on Friday, the 29th ballot, and at 1, the 30th ballot were
taken, and the result the same. It was then determined to adjourn till next day.

On Saturday, at 12 o'clock, the House went into the 31st ballot, and the
result, was the same.

After the 32d ballot, Mr. Dickson of North Carolina declared, that it was high
time to put an end to the contest, and that henceforth he should vote for Mr.
Jefferson.

At 2 o'clock, the 33d ballot was taken, and the result the same -- It was then
resolved, to postpone further balloting till Tuesday.

This day, Tuesday the 18th, at 1 o'clock, after an awful suspense which had
excited the fears of all America, and the malicious hopes of her enemies,
Republicanism was triumphant -- on the 36th ballot, it appeared, that Mr.
Jefferson had 10 States for him, 4 for Mr. Burr, and two were blank.

For Mr. Jefferson, Vermont, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland,
Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, Kentucky, and Tennessee.

For Mr. Burr, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Connecticut. --
Blank States, Delaware and S. Carolina.

For Vermont, Mr. Morris absented himself -- For South Carolina, Mr. Huger, who
had always voted for Mr. Jefferson, from a spirit of accommodation, also
withdrew, which enabled South Carolina to give a blank vote -- For Maryland,
there were four blank votes, and four for Mr. Jefferson.

That the People of the United States may know how their Representatives voted
upon this important occasion, we give the following statement: --

New Hampshire -- 4 for Mr. Burr, viz.. Messrs. Foster, Sheafe, Tenney, and
Freeman.

Massachusetts -- 11 for Burr viz. Messrs. S. Lee, Otis, N. Read, M. Shepard,
Thatcher, Wadsworth, L. Williams, Bartlett, Mattoon, J. Read, Sedgewick. -- 3
for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Messrs, Bishop, Varnum, Lincoln.

Rhode Island -- 2 for Burr, viz. Messrs, Champlin and Brown.

Connecticut -- 7 for Burr, viz. Messrs, Goodrich, E. Goodrich, Griswold, Dana,
J. Davenport, Edmond, J. C. Smith.

Vermont -- 1 for Jefferson, viz. Mr. Lion -- 1 for Burr, viz. Mr. Morris.

New York -- 6 for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Messrs Bailey, Thompson, Livingston,
Elmendorf, Van Cortland, J. Smith -- 4 for Mr. Burr, viz. Messrs. Bird, Glen,
Cooper, Platt.

New Jersey -- 3 for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Messrs. Kitchell, Condit, Linn -- 2
for Burr, viz. Messrs. Davenport, Imlay.

Pennsylvania -- 9 for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Messrs Gallatin, Gregg, Hanna, Leib,
Smilie, Muhlenberg, Heister, Stewart, R. Brown -- 4 for Burr, viz. Messrs.
Waln, Kittera, Thomas, Woods.

Delaware -- 1 for Mr. Burr, viz. Mr. Bayard.

Maryland -- 4 for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Messrs. S. Smith, Dent, Nicholson,
Christie -- 4 for Mr. Burr, viz. Messrs. J. C. Thomas, Craik, Dennis, and Baer.

Virginia -- 14 invariably for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Messrs. Nicholas, Clay,
Cabell, Dawson, Eggleston, Good, Gray, Holmes. Jackson, New, Randolph, A.
Trigg, J. Trigg, Tazewell -- 5 for Mr. Burr on some ballots, 2 of whom on the
first ballot voted for Mr. Jefferson,) viz. Messrs, Evans, (...) Lee, Page,
Parker, Powel.

North Carolina -- 6 invariably for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Messrs. Alston, Macon,
Stanford, Stone, R. Williams, Spaight -- 4 for Mr. Burr on some ballots, 3 of
whom on the first ballot voted for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Messrs Hill, Henderson,
Dickson, Grove.

So^th-Carolina -- Mr. Sumpter being sick has not attended, but will attend, at
every hazard, the moment his vote can be of any avail* The individual votes of
the representatives of this state are not accurately known, but it is generally
believed that Mr. Huger votes for Mr. Jefferson, and Mr. Rutledge Mr. Pinckney,
and Mr. Harper vote for Mr. Burr. Mr. Nott's vote is doubtful* He has gone home.

Georgia -- 1 for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Mr. Taliaferro -- Mr. Jones, who is dead,
would have voted the same way.

Kentucky -- 2 for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Messrs. Davis and Fowler.

Tennessee -- 1 for Mr. Jefferson, viz. Mr. Claiborne.

On the first ballot, the individual votes were, 55 for Mr. Jefferson, and 49
for Mr. Burr. -- Mr. Jones dead -- Mr. Sumter sick -- Mr. Nicholson was also
very sick, but he had himself carried on his bed and laid upon the floor of the
Hall, where he constantly ballotted for Mr. Jefferson.

Thus happily, terminated a contest which had excited so much alarm among the
people of these States -- May the great Disposer of all human actions, inspire
the person chosen to fulfill his important office with such purity, dignity,
and strength of understanding, as may insure to these countries peace, liberty,
and happiness -- The eyes of the oppressed of every nation in the world, are
anxiously cast upon the people of America -- if THEY are incapable of realizing
the blessings of a Republican Government, it is a vain pursuit, and there is no
political redemption for the human race!

Before we conclude this subject, we just remark, that, on this occasion, the
Federal party lost a noble opportunity of showing their magnanimity, by
unanimously voting, after the first or second ballot, for Mr. Jefferson --
Instead of which, they pertinaciously withstood the wish of the majority, and
peevishly continued to vote for a man they disliked, and whom, they well knew,
was only second in the public choice -- It had been well for their character,
if they had copied from the laudable example of Mr. Jay of New York, who
submitted at once to the general will, proving himself to be a good Citizen, a
Republican in the true sense of the word. -- (See his very sensible answer to
the address of the Federal party in New York.)

At the same time, however blameable the ill-timed obstinacy of the Federalists
in Congress have been in the opinion of many people, it is right to say, that
the most respectable of that party out of Congress decidedly disapproved of
their conduct, and quietly acceded to the general will.

The Committee (Messrs Pinkney, Tazewell, and Bayard) instructed to wait on the
President Elect, and notify him of his Election, -- Report, That they have,
according to order, performed that service, and addressed the President Elect
in the following words, to wit:

"The Committee beg leave to express their wishes for the prosperity of your
administration; and their sincere desire that it may promote your own happiness
and the welfare of your country."

To which the President Elect was pleased to make the following reply:

"I receive, gentlemen, with profound thankfulness, this testimony of
confidence from the great representative council of our nation. It fills up the
measure of that grateful satisfaction, which had already been derived from the
suffrages of my fellow-citizens themselves, designating me as one of those to
whom they were willing to commit this charge, the most important of all others
to them. In deciding between the candidates, whom their equal vote presented to
your choice, I am sensible that age has been respected, rather than more active
and useful qualifications. I know the difficulties of the station to which I am
called, and feel and acknowledge my incompetence to them. But whatsoever of
understanding, whatsoever of diligence, whatsoever of justice, or of
affectionate concern for the happiness of man, it has pleased Providence to
place within the compass of my faculties, shall be called forth for the
discharge of the duties confided to me; and for procuring to my fellow-citizens
all the benefits which our Constitution has placed under the guardianship of
the general Government. Guided by the wisdom and patriotism of those to whom it
belongs to express the legislative will of the nation, I will give to that will
a faithful execution. I pray you to convey to the honorable body from which
you are deputed the homage of my humble acknowledgements, and the sentiments of
zeal and fidelity, by which I shall endeavor to merit these proofs of
confidence from the nation and its representatives.

"Accept yourselves, gentlemen, my particular thanks for the obliging terms in
which you have been pleased to communicate their will.

THOMAS JEFFERSON."
February 20, 1801.
BRITISH SPOILATIONS.
Congress has passed a Resolution to the following effect: -- "That the
President of the United States be directed to have laid before this House, an
account of the depredations committed on the commerce of these States by
British ships of war, of which complaint has been made to Government" -- We are
sorry to hear, that these depredations are becoming more extensive and more
grievous every day.

EXPORTS, etc.
As our work was nearly brought to a close, the following Statement made its
appearance, and we thought it too important to be deferred till next volume. --
Our Readers will turn to page 147, and see the amount of American Exports for
the years 1797, 98, and 99.

SUMMARY VALUE of the EXPORTS for the Year 1800.
From N. Hampshire 431,836 Vermont 57,041 Massachusetts 11,326,876 Rhode Island
1,322,945 Connecticut 1,114,743 New York 14,045,079 New Jersey 2,289
Pennsylvania 11,949,679 From Delaware 418,695 Maryland 12,264,331 Virginia
4,430,689 North Carolina 769,799 South Carolina 10,663,510 Georgia 2,174,268
Total, Drs. 70,971,780 LIST of the most considerable EXPORTS to foreign Nations.
To England and her Dependencies 27,310,289 France (see the year 1797) 40,000
French West Indies 5,123,433 Spain and her Dependencies 15,660,606 Portugal and
her Dependencies 1,265,844 The Italian Ports 2,689,968 Netherlands and Dutch
West I. Islands 5,669,016 Hamburgh, Bremen, etc. 8,012,846 Sweden and her
Dependencies 562,685 China and the East Indies generally 1,047,385 North-west
Coast of America 946,153

STATE BALANCES.
The Committee appointed to inquire into the expediency of extinguishing
certain State balances,

Report, That the Commissioners reported there were yet due certain balances,
that is to say, from

New York Dols. 2,074,846 Pennsylvania 76,709 Delaware 612,428 Maryland 151,640
Virginia 100,879 North Carolina 501,082

MINT.
The Report on the Mint states, that its expenditures for the year 1800 amount
to ^0,686 dols. 29 cents; and, during that period, the following Coins have
been struck, viz.

Value. Ds. Cs 25,965 Eagles, and 11,622 half do. 317,760 220,920 Dollars,
21,760 Dimes, 24,000 half do. 224,296 2,822,175 Cents, 211,580 half do. 29,279
40 Total Dols. 571,335 40

During the same period, a gain has been made by the Mint on copper coined, of
5,050 dollars 68 cents 5 mills.

AMERICAN NAVY
A very important State Paper has just made its appearance, signed by the
Secretary of the Navy Department, which are the first fruits of our
accommodation with France, and gives a prospect of a reduction of our war
expenses in the naval line. -- Mr. Stoddart proposes to fell all the vessels of
war now belonging to the United States, except the following 13 frigates, viz.
the U. States, President, Constitution, Chesapeak, Philadelphia, New York,
Constellation, Congress, Essex, ^oston, Adams, John Adams, and Genesis Green.

He then recommends the building a number of 74 gun men of war, and the
erection of dock-yards at the following places, viz. at Portsmouth, New
Hampshire, Boston, Philadelphia, Washington, and Norfolk -- "and measures have
been taken to procure ground at New York for capacious dock-yards, etc.
contracts have been made for cannon, etc.

"When the United States (says Mr. Stoddart) shall own a number of 74 gun
ships, and a sufficient number of strong frigates, and that it is known they
have the means of increasing, with facility, their naval force, it is hoped we
may then avoid those wars in which we have no interest, and not suffer
ourselves to be plundered or insulted. An annual sum of only 117,387 dollars,
would, in a few years, raise us to this desirable state of security."

We are sorry we have not room for this letter, as it contains much
information. We recommend it to the perusal of the public, as in it will be
seen the dawnings of a Naval force, which is one day to lift the States of
America up to a dangerous and expensive, yet, perhaps, unavoidable rivalship
with the great Naval powers of Europe.

[ * We have at length brought our Work to a close, not without omitting very
many articles which we thought either useful or entertaining -- amongst others,
a Description of the Public Buildings, etc. at Richmond -- This omission was
occasioned by a very unforeseen and unpleasant accident (and which was one of
the causes of retarding an earlier publication), the loss of the whole
impression of a Copper (...) Representation of the Capital which had been
engraved at Philadelphia, and sent by we know not what conveyance, as they have
not (...) come to bund -- Perhaps they may come in time for this year's
Register.]]


