Masonry in its Glory

MASONRY IN ITS GLORY: OR SOLOMON's TEMPLE ILLUMINATED: Discerned through the
flashes of Prophetic Light, now darting through the region of the BLAZING STAR,
to lie at the threshold of the Temple of GOD, during the GLORY of the LATTER
DAY: -- waiting the rays of the SEVEN LAMPS, that the light of its existence
might break forth.

BY DAVID AUSTIN, Ju^^, Citizen of the World.

Published agreeably to Act of Congress.

PRINTED AT EAST WINDSOR, (CONNECTICUT,) BY LUTHER PRATT. 1799.

MASONRY IN ITS GLORY.
FOR EVERY HOUSE IS BUILDED BY SOME MAN; BUT HE THAT BUILT ALL THINGS IS GOD.

HEBREWS 3d, 4th.
THE subordination of events, and of things, for the purpose of illustrating
objects more noble, is acknowledged in the several branches of ethics and of
philosophy. Religion, of every name, in ancient and in modern times, has
chosen to illustrate her mysteries, through the medium of subordinate
relations. That revealed religion should have chosen this mode of communication
is no matter of surprise. It needed things visible and material, through which
to communicate, and by which to illustrate her hidden mysteries. The unfolding
of these mysteries has given honorable employment to the pen of the learned,
and poured unction upon the tongue of the eloquent, in every age.

BESIDES the accommodation of giving employment; the use of figures, as
subordinate expressions of immaterial realities, has been of high moment;
affording a mode of communication which, always kept the learner, at a distance
from the instructor. The use of figures, by men, in early days arose from as
imitation of the copy, given, in lessons of divine instruction.

BOTH natural and revealed religion acknowledge their indebtedness to figures.
The former draws its instruction, and maintains its propositions by an
immediate appeal to visible objects. It declares from the things that are made,
and from the events which revolve, that the invisible hand is seen. This
revealed religion does not deny. Giving, however, the preference to the written
word, it points to the works of creation and to the events of Providence, as
subordinate, yet confirming testimonials of the truths, it has, in the fairer
pages of inspiration, already received. And whilst this general doctrine is
received, the well instructed and philosophic christian, with great delight,
distributes wisdom, from the correspondency he discerns, between things seen by
the natural eye, and things taught in the sacred page. This correspondency seen
and illustrated, mightily confirms the duplex operation of the Creators hand.
Whilst he is teaching, to the sons of men, lessons of instruction, from a view
of things that are made; the believer is delighted to hear of the same truths,
delivered, with confirming, and all conquering evidence, at the feet of our
Gospel Gamaliel.

STILL the most strenuous, in defense of revealed religion, are by no means
deprived of the sources of inquiry, from which to obtain employment, and from
which to draw lessons of instruction which figurative objects give. These
figures are strowed, with a profuse hand, throughout the sacred page, as well
as through the works of GOD.

THE writer, from whose pen, fell the passage before us, was, at this moment,
busying himself with figurative language and figurative things. His design was
to illustrate the nature of the Mosaic economy as a figure. He insists on its
consummation; proves its subordination to the Gospel Temple which was now to be
set up, and before which, this building of Moses was to fade as the morning
star withdraws, as the day dawns, and the sun advances. This subordination is
argued from the inferiority of Moses the Builder, to the Son the Proprietor.
The fidelity of the greater in the higher order is insisted on, and illustrated
by the faithfulness of Moses, in the figure. -- "For this man was counted
worthy of more glory than Moses inasmuch, as he who has builded the house has
more honor than the house: For every house is builded by some man, but he that
built all things is GOD."

THESE general observations, on the SUBORDINATION of things material, to things
immaterial; of things visible to things invisible are designed to prepare the
mind to behold the wisdom of GOD, in marking out, and the perseverence of men
in going through with the subordinate labor of the MASONIC BUILDING, thus far

To a mind, acknowledging GOD in all parts of Creation's Temple, it is no more
difficult to discern that the order of FREE and ACCEPTED MASONS, holds a place
in conformity to the general plan, than that the economy of Moses maintained a
subordinate relation to good things, then to come. All the difficulty of such
application will arise from the limitation of Providence. The Christian, too
confined, in his views, is but too ready to exclude from the parental regard,
all things which fall not within the compass of Christian revelation. He
forgets that a mode of revelation is maintained, through all Creation's works
by figures, and by substances; by relations and correspondencies, so that
though to Adam and Eve only, the revelation, primarily be made, the
correspondency, of the several parts, will bring all their posterity within the
limits of the original and all-wise design.

To pursue the trackless path; to explore the deep things of GOD, in the
beauteous and majestic varieties, in which the proportions of beneficence are
measured out, on the one part, and with solemn and awful step to follow the
diversified courses of nightly shade, through the borders of Ishmael; calls for
strength of mind, and perseverance in labor, of which the ablest of the
philosophic christian, or Masonic fraternity might be happy to boast.

WHAT the tabernacle of Moses was to the Temple of Solomon: and what the Temple
of Solomon was to the Gospel Edifice; the same is the MASONIC TEMPLE to the
universal building of GOD. The former fell, more immediately, within the limits
of revealed religion; the latter illustrates the mysteries of GOD in a visible
figure; inviting christianity to come and reconcile her tabernacle, and her
book, and her whole service, through the blood of the cross. This masonry
declares, in the summit of her order, whilst she extends the mysterious figure
of the cross, and shows her seal upon the Miditerranean pass.

ALL the diversified edifices of natural, and of revealed religion, in these
united orders are founded upon one and the same plan, and tend to one and the
same end. I speak of christians and of masons who understand, and in
faithfulness, perform the duties of their order. -- Under this character, the
subordinate buildings in both relations are like the diversified synagogues of
Palestine; all built upon the plan of the Temple of GOD, at Jerusalem. -- The
Supreme Architect, through whose apartments, natural religion teaches us to
walk, is the same that walks amidst the Golden Candlesticks of the christian
and masonic building. And when the naturalist shall be called to behold, and
made to understand the correspondecy between these two buildings, whose
worshippers have not heretofore acknowledged each other, he shall be made to
own the hand of GOD, as well to be seen in our temple as in his own; and
falling down, shall own of a truth that the GOD, whom he has, ignorantly
worshipped, the same declare we unto him. -- He shall borrow a lamp from our
Golden Candlestick, with which to enlighten his own soul. to enlighten his
faternity, and to illuminate the whole building of GOD.

LET our subject, in your name, even now reach him this lamp! Let it tell him,
that whilst he raises his tube; and the philosophic eye glances at the sun, and
says; "see yonder the PROUD LUMINARY, from whose divine effulgence all creation
receives its life;" the eloquence of revelation, gently whispers, true is the
story which philosophy teaches, but see thou not, by the aid of the glass,
the spots in the face of yonder Sun? -- What can this express but the
imperfection of the creature, in comparison with GOD the creator. "The LORD GOD
is a Sun! -- in him there is Light, and in him there is no darkness at all!"
Suffer me to sprinkle thy optics with the pearly drops of Celestial dew; and
thou shall behold every object to shine, with sevenfold luster.

LOOK at the Moon! She borrows her rays from the fountain of lights, the Sun:
thus shines our IMMANUEL in the mediatorial firmanent. He sheds his milder rays
upon the benighted family of mankind; and still maintains a benign dominion
whilst the Fathers glory is withdrawn.

BEHOLD, the Stars! assisting reflections, aiding to display in their sparkling
luster, the milder influences of redeeming love! To whom are these subordinate
Luminaries indebted, but to him that "walks in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks, and who holds the stars in his right hand!"

LOOK at yonder blaizing star, or firey meteor; heated by its late approach to
the FOUNTAIN of LIGHT, now stretches its way across the firmament, as though
designing to enliven the frozen regions of the North! What is this but a
visible, though subordinate illustration of those ministers of GOD, who like
John the baptist, and other burning and shining lights, labor to strike "fresh
fire into the frozen hearts of the obdurate; or like the ANGEL that "flies
through the Heavens, having the everlasting Gospel to preach," commands the
sons of men, at the downfall of mystical Babylon, "to fear GOD, and to give
glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come!"

THE air we breathe, is the spiritual breath of the living soul; the clouds
which intercept our sight; the clouds of darkness which frequently, pass over,
and render obscure the vision of the phylosophic, or spiritual mind! -- and and
the diversity and impetuosity of the winds, the inscrutible operations of GOD,
both the natural, intellectual, and moral world!

THE genial aspect of a delightful day, express the benignity of GOD; and the
delights of the soul walking in the lights of his reconciled countenance. "In
thy name shall they rejoice all the day long, and in thy right. cousness shall
they be exalted!

Omitting the thousand ^ouches of nature's beauties, which still untouched,
stand, in modest silence, expressing the hidden glories of the Mediator's
realms; waiting till the keen research of the philosophic eye shall unfold more
perfectly the universal volume; it may be presumed that these hints will
suffice to display to the intelligent, that the volume of creation presents, in
its material pages, a sacred transcript of what, in fairer lines, is written in
Revelation's sacred page.

THIS point granted; the brethren of the ancient and honorable society of Free
and Accepted Masons will not think it derogating from the rank due to their
order, if it be said, that what Melchezideck of old, that king of Salem was, in
relation to our gospel Melchezideck; the same is the Temple of Solomon, in
relation to the Temple in which a greater than Solomon remains to be sealed.
And if Abraham, returning from the slaughter of the kings, paid tithes to this
man, and received blessings from him; will you be backward to lay the
implements of your labor at the threshold of the Heavenly Melchezidick, that
you may receive the blessings of his hand? -- If the tabernacle of Moses was
taken down, that the Temple of Solomon might be set up; and eventually, the
Temple of Solomon removed to give place to the intellectual, yet imperfect
edifice of the present gospel building, may it not be expected, that the
unfinished building, in which, now, you labor, may be removed, perhaps
perfected in the light of the more perfect edifice of the latter day? If so, as
of the temple of the believing soul, so may not ye say? "we know that if the
earthly house of our tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building with GOD; an
house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens!" The succeeding temple will
display the GOLDEN AGE of ancient fable: the "new Heavens and the new Earth" of
the Revelations of St. John: and the CELESTIAL LODGE which your craft has long
been laboring to find!

SUCH confidence is placed in your wisdom, that it is presumed little more need
be said, to obtain your confidence, than to express the evidence which the
flashings of light are capable to afford.

LET it, then, be understood that whilst in the divine mind, the plan of the
Great Architect existed, and was continually opening itself; from the
beginning, to the experience of an astoinshed world, it was GOD's good pleasure
to illustrate this design, and to exemplify this work, in the visible and
perpetual modification, which, at your hands he has ordained to be preserved.
Your order has been, and still exists, as a living history of the invisible
agency of GOD, in mortal things. -- You have been long laboring; but have
never, as yet, arrived at perfection in your arts; nor have you been able to
finish the building whose foundation was laid nearly six thousand years ago! --
nor will the building ever be finished, or the key-stone placed, until you see
that in its present stage, the building on which you labor is an imperfect
thing; and can have its consummation, only, in the advancing grade of the
mighty design. One step further, and you shall behold the sun in its full
effulgence! you shall find the haven where you may with safety, cast your
anohor; the port where your ark in safety shall ride!

To illustrate this doctrine, as far as the obligations of mystery will admit;
be it known, that on board of your ship are fragments of the antideluvian, of
the patriarchal, of the Mosaic, and the christian world. All these you have to
empty forth, at the door of the all-perfect economy of the milennial estate.
The truth of this position, as matter of fact is seen, whilst, in the order of
your edifice, you glance at the BOW, whose pillars rest in flying clouds;
denoting the transfer of the covenant to ages, then unborn; or the extention of
its influence far as the clouds do fly! Confirmed by an appeal to the altar of
sacrifice of Noah, descending, with his charge from the ark -- to the rod of
Moses upon the Egyptian host -- and to the resurrection of him of whom Moses
and the prophets did write; and finally to the station of him who blows the
JUBILEE TRUMP: that the scriptures may be fulfilled, at the consummation of
your order saying, throughout the prophetic Heavens, "now is come salvation and
glory and honor, and the kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our
Lord and of his CHRIST.

WHEN to this scene, you shall have surrendered the sacred symbols committed to
your charge; the sun shall be in its full radiance -- the moon shall wax and
wane no more -- the LYON's GRIP shall bind the work in one settled decree; and
the trump of the Almighty shall open the graves of them that rest, and the
verdant branch, we have long strown upon the bosom of our sleeping brethren,
shall vegitate, and flourish in everlasting bloom.

BESIDES these treasures, peculiar to the volume and spirit of revelation; your
mysteries receive additional grandeur, from the class of instruction in which
the mixed objects of natural and of reveraled religion are combined. It seemeng
to have pleased the high Admiral, that to the custody of your mysteries both
nature and grace should not only in their SEPARATE, but in their united order,
an emblem of fraternity, have committed their mysteries. See a demonstration of
this in the mixed character of your brotherhood. At the threshold of nature's
God some bow; whilst, at the door of the christian altar, alone, another will
pay his homage!

UNDER this mixed character on the earth, and under the untied auspics of him
who sends his rain on the just and on the unjust, has your order made its
way until now. Receive more clearly this doctrine!

BEGIN with creation! -- you call yourselves "FILU LUCIS" -- "Sons of Light" --
and so you are! -- FIRST, belonging to an order, which got its birth when GOD
said; "let there be light, and there was light!" -- Then said the decree; "let
this event be had in long record, in the annals of this progressive building!
let it be inscribed on the pages of that book, whose mysteries are maintained
by the flaming sword!" -- When the sons of GOD in the invisible world, sing, at
the recollection of the irresistible fiat which deffused wisdom, beauty, and
strength, on the face of old chaos; which gave light to the world; and comely
proportion to all creation's works; then do you "Sons of Light," join the choir
and celebrate the mighty deed, here below!"

HAVE you the resplended SUN, in the full blaze of its strength, displayed upon
the field of your labor; behold the same, in the field of the firmament, and
together adore the invisible light, which you both represent!

DOES the ark, floating on the mighty deep add to the beauty and variety of
your records, behold an ingraving of our faithful witness in the heavens, and
of the ark of Noah, which, according to the written word saved him and his
house, in the figure! -- Behold, in this invisible record, demonstration of the
fact and learn to follow the pointings of wisdom to the orignal design! -- Here
you will see the ark of the covenant, through the grace that is in our
spiritual Noah, bringing all true believers, from the dispensation of Adam the
first, and safely landing them upon the rock of our spiritual Arrarat!

HAVE you, over this ark, the New Moon, embracing the face of a man, behold the
new man, the second Adam, overshadowed with the glory that is borrowed: "that
he being crowned with glory and honor might taste death for every man!"

HAVE you the ANCHOR, pendent: recollect, that the hope of the soul is found in
the mysteries which stand above it! --

DOES the Carpet present us, with the figure of the BE HIVE: in this, behold!
FIRST -- The hive of the universe; in which all creation labor, in
subordination to one wise design; SECONDLY: The gospel Hive; in which, unity in
design; fellowship in labor, in joy and in sorrow; are marked and indispensable
properties! -- THIRDLY -- the unity and harmony; the extent, and enterprise of
our masonic fraternity! FOURTHLY -- a figure of the unity and harmony which in
our hope and expectation; is soon to fill the whole earth, and LASTLY -- of the
most perfect harmony and unruffled serenity, which in the world of glory, shall
consummate the subordinate buildings of GOD. In view of acceptance; through a
worthy possession of the celestial pass-words, at the Heavenly gates; how
instructive a lesson may be drawn from the diligence and activity of the be?

DOES this little annimal draw her nourishment from bitter flowers; how lively
a picture of the sorrows of human life; from whence our sweetest joys, even the
blessings of redemption and grace, are drawn!

IN the strength of the Hive, for their own protection, behold the strength of
him, who weighs the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance; in
defense of those who put their trust in him!

UNDER the Blazing Sun; does the Naked Sword point to the Naked Heart: see the
Spirit of that word of truth; even the word of GOD; which is said to be "quick
and powerful; sharper than any two edged sword: piercing, even to the dividing
asunder of the soul and of the body; of the joints and of the marrow; and is a
discerner of the thoughts and of the intents of the heart!

Does the Trowel, present the duty of labor, and express the occupation of a
Real Mason; how pressing the call to diligence in our business; that we may not
sit quiet in our apprenticeships: -- not remain content with the title of
finished workmen; when we scarcely, understand the first rudiments of our
calling! -- How contemptible the quack in physic! petty fogger in law; and
hypocrite in religion!

DOES the Pot of Incense; the unction of the faternity, cause its offerings to
arise, in sweet perfumes, toward the Blazing Sun; that the labor of the trowel
may be accepted; and the edge of the sword be turned from piercing the Heart;
how significant of the acceptable sacrifice of him, whose incense ascends in
grateful perfume, in behalf of the universal fraternity of all true believers!

LOOK, in this place, into the tabernacle of Moses; or into the temple of
Solomon! -- Draw aside the veil, and enter into the most holy place! There you
see, conformable to your own mysteries; the mystery of the golden censer -- of
the ark -- of the two tables -- of the rod that buded; and shall I say of Him
who sits under the arch; chief in grade in the order of your hidden
mysteries.

IN these august symbols, GOD, in ancient time, spoke unto his people, as he
now speaks unto you, and as, in the use of these figures, he allows you to
speak to one another!

Do you present us with the SQUARE, the PLUMB, and the LEVEL! with the same
propriety that these are used in the progress of the masonic art, with equal
energy might the use of them be enforced in all the labor of our hands, in
carrying on the universal, and permanent building of our GOD!

Do you teach that the path to the KEY, which keeps knowledge is progressive;
that the learner is to advance, step by step; and is this to soften the too
aspiring mind; or to spur to diligence the slotful! how excellent the rule when
applied to the purpose of regulating the course of those, who are pressing for
"the mark of the prize of the high calling of GOD which is CHRIST JESUS!"

Do you ascend to this KEY, by a sevenfold progression; know then, that in the
number seven, you have the perfect grade of ascent; and when you have come to
the key which this discourse and its connection shall give, you have attained
to all the elevation of thought, which the masonic art, in this building can
give? the grade is finished! -- The imperfect strokes you have struck receive
their crown: the men may be called off for refreshment; not to return to this
work again; but to obtain the full accomplishment of their hopes in the
mansions of a more noble edifice; whose foundation is now laying, whose walls,
are soon to go up!

"THAT faith of Cyrus, he is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure,
even saying to Jerusalem; thou shall be built, and to the temple, thy
foundation shall be laid!"

WHAT expressions more becoming the pillars which support your lamps; than
WISDOM BEAUTY, and STRENGTH! By the tripple light, thus enjoyed, in your
building; behold the tripple light, reflected in a greater temple than yours,
by the united, yet distinct resplendency of the FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST! --
Do these lights, in the figure, reflect light upon the open volume, on which
the square and compass lie: by what other means, can true believers receive
instruction than from these sources of light, in substance to them expressed!
-- By the rays of this light upon the written word; and the engraving wrought
by a spiritual glance, upon the human heart, the man is taught how to draw the
lines of his faith, hope and charity; through all the grades of childhood, youth,
and old age!

BEHOLD, my brethren! the correspondence between the labors of your temple, and
of ours! Behold and acknowledge, that whilst the Deity, through his diffusive
agency has condescended to give the believer light in the written word we
enjoy; he has caused his goodness more to abound toward you, by adding to the
same, a visible confirmation, in the material and visible symbols of your
ancient order.

THUS is he to be proclaimed, as well GOD of the material and visible, as of
the intellectual and spiritual building. Of your labor, and of ours, in
connection with all that philosophy, in its abstract tenets, can teach, it may
be said as in the text, "for every house is builded by some man, but he that
built all things is GOD.

WHAT shall be said of the Mosaic pavement! Can brethren walk here, and not
stumble? Yes my brethren! -- this is the true ground on which we must all
proceed, the ground, on which we may, in safety, travel together: Safe as on
the pavement which GOD'S own right hand has laid, and which his perpetual
decree supports! It is like the fixed decree which lays the foundation of the
everlasting covenant; and the brazen sinews, which bind the work of the Great
Architect together.

WHAT does the Mysterious Volume, protected at the point of the sword,
overshadowed by the Seven Stars denote, but a sacred deposit, where dwell the
secrets of the fraternity! How animating a figure this, of the Ark, in which
were deposited symbols of the Mosaic Law! and a more lively picture of him, who
as the Savior of men preserves the secrets of that salvation; the manna of
that redemption we enjoy in the bosom of his own heart, and commits it only to
them that love and obey him! in him dwell all the treasures of wisdom and of
knowledge. "If any man" then "lack wisdom, let him ask it of GOD."

WHAT can be said of the inexplicable Problem? of the two distinct bodies,
resting, in a falling position, upon the more permanent surface of a third!
Does not the flashings of prophetic light, surely designate that in this figure
is to be seen the Jewish and the Gentile, falling into the bosom of the
millenial world!

SEE the proof of this, in the equal quantities of the two falling, with the
one permanent body! -- see this hitherto mysterious, yet long expected union
illustrated, in the mysterious ligament by which these bodies are bound
together. This is the union for which all have been looking -- the event toward
which all things are now tending. This problem being solved, in fact and in
experience, the Jubilee the long expected Jubilee is our own.

IN the center of the field is beheld the Glory sparkling, in five blazes of
resplendent light. The real purport of this figure shall be opened at the
moment when the necessity of the millenial administration shall call forth the
fullness of that glory, which shall perfectly illumine the temple of GOD in that
day, as the present glory fills the house in which the brethren worship!

THE all-seeing eye pervades the temple, and under its superintendancy the
whole work advances, whether at the hand of mortal builders here below, or
through the ministration of Angels and of spirits, in Heaven!

THE Arch, which supports the Key-stone, uniting the two pillars, forming of
the whole a perfect body, and a perfect work, stands a fixed monument of the
perfect fraternity, in which all mankind shall be united, when the objects of
this building. are accomplished. May GOD hasten the period! -- quicken us in
our work, that when the Master of the house shall come to view his temple he
may find us so doing. Then shall the wages of the laborer be sure, and his
reward appear from on high!

IF the Hourglass and the Scythe impress our minds with the fleeting moments
of time, and the readiness of death to bring the glory of man to the dust; with
what activity of heart and hand may we all be found to double our diligence, in
all the work our hands may find to do!

AT the foot of this masonic edifice is placed the attire of death. Here is the
Coffin, and here, the Spade. Is the coffin the narrow dwelling in which we are
to be laid; and the grave, the house appointed for all living, surely, the
order cannot be charged with neglect, in the omission of the most cogent
arguments to prepare for that solemn event! Let the sign of the Cross supported
by the Bridge, point to you the way of crossing in safety, the Jordan of death!

IS there hope in death? -- Behold the spade used, indeed, for the purpose of
planting our bodies in the dust, and so it is, to promote the objects of
vegitation in the garden of nature. Our bodies shall vegitate! shall the seed
sown spring up and afford increase, some thirty, some sixty, and some an
hundred fold; what shall hinder the Savior's decree, that that which is sown
in corruption, should not be raised, in incorruption? -- that that which is
sown in weakness should not be raised in power? -- sown a mortal body that it
should not be raised immortal? -- sown in dishonor that it should not be raised
in glory? such hope every worthy laborer, every true brother has. Of this he
gives the world evidence when upon the body of his deposited brother he casts a
sprig of evergreen; expressive of the hope that the body, thus sown, only dies,
that it may live again: that it may live in splendour, be raised in glory and on
the principle of all vegetative plants, or corn that is sown, in its time,
spring up, and live and flourish in the resplendent glory of eternal day. For
"them that sleep in JESUS will GOD bring with him. Thou shall have a desire to
the work of thy hands: thou shall call," says Job, "and I will answer thee."

IN this place it might not be improper to relieve your patience, were it not
that more fully, to confirm the christian doctrine, from a view of its
correspondency with masonic emblems, and the more powerfully to illustrate the
analogy of the works of GOD in general; and thereby to gain increasing
reverence to his holy name; a little indulgence (...) craved, that the
correspondence between the masonic and the christian temple may be a little
farther maintained. This correspondence is demonstrable:

1. FROM the antiquity of the masonic origin. It claims to be as old as
creation. -- I doubt it not! it has with it the great lights, which GOD, at
first created: and the Redeemer, himself, in point of antiquity, says, before
Abraham was, I AM!

2. The foundation of this edifice was laid, with much labor and toil. A
conspiracy against its founder existed, and he fell a prey to the fury of the
conspirators! -- What labor did the LORD of Life, undergo; what difficulties
overcome, and what a cruel death sustain; that the foundation of our hope might
be laid in the shedding of his own blood!

IN this conspiracy, how evident the analogy, between the Lucifer who conspired
against the throne of GOD! the Devil who tempted our first parents, and marred
the beauteous order of our moral frame! the Judas, who betrayed his master, and
the conspirators who died without mercy, and were buried in the ruins of that
temple; against whose founder they had conspired! -- Thus let thine enemies
perish, O LORD! -- Let the thunderbolts which drove Lucifer from Heaven,
follow his successors, in traitorous opposition to the blessed will of GOD,
until Heaven and Earth shall be cleared of them that defy his holy name! may
death receive them and Hell swallow them up quick!

3. HAS this order of builders been supported; handed down, and to this day,
are its mysteries preserved in the hands of men of renown -- have kings,
emperors, statesmen, and historians enrolled their names in the annals of this
record, so has the christian doctrine received support from the efforts of
genius, of literature, and of the Holy Spirit of GOD, moving upon the pavement
of our gospel building!

4. HAS this order, avowedly, preserved certain secrets, peculiar to the
brotherhood: so in the gospel building, "the secret of the LORD is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his covenant." Into the mysteries of the
most holy place none can look, but those who approach by the blood of JESUS.

5. ARE the duties of fellowship, of fraternity, and of universal benevolence
insisted on by the rules of this society: how correspondent to the duties
inculcated, by the principles of our holy religion!

6. ARE the arms of this order, open to all nations, people, tongues, and
languages: how wide does gospel benevolence expand its arms, and with ardency
of desire, invite all the nations of the earth to come and take repose under
the vine and fig tree, which yield so delightful a shade to all the real
worshipers of GOD. May the incense of praise, even a pure offering shortly
arise, from the altar of every nation, that "the knowledge of the LORD might
fill the whole earth, even as the waters cover the sea!"

7. DOES this fraternity acknowledge imperfection in the knowledge of its
mysteries, and in the conduct of its members; with how great justice, may the
christian fold make humble confession of the same!

HAVE the enemies of the former taken occasion, to blast their name, from this
circumstance; so have the enemies of the latter! we shall not, in this place,
in behalf of either, make apologies to any!

LET, however, a few shafts of repellant truth smite with contempt, a certain
combination of men to render contemptible that which they understand not, and
to overturn that which they never helped to build!

FIRST; of those who would say, there are no valuable facts, no hidden
mysteries, in the chambers of the masonic building worthy of knowledge or of
general attention!

LET such take rank, with those who ignorantly belch forth, that there is no
truth in the bible, nor reality in the mysteries of vital religion! -- Do the
fraternity hold such belchings in sovereign contempt; so do we!

ARE there any who say that the masonic temple is a nursery of infidelity, and
of irreligion! How can it be? -- As well might Moses when he saw the burning
bush; or the flashes of Sinai's mount, or the glory which overshadowed the
temple have been accounted exposed to infidel principles, or to an irreligious
practice! -- When all the symbols of the divine presence, and administration
are looking a man full in the face, how can he be chargeable with being a
learner or promoter of irreligion! -- let such an one be bid, GOD speed; with
his ignorance and presumption!

ARE there any, who say, that the masonic lodges are work-shops, in which are
forged shafts, favorable to the principles of the Illuminati? -- of such it may
be demanded, "what are the principles of the Illuminati?" Infidel principles!
it will be answered! -- But in what part of the lodge; in what part of its
instruction, or, on which of its mysteries can infidel principles find a place
to set their foot; much more to gain nourishment from what they behold?

THE answer must be, no where sir! But we understand there are Occult lodges;
Hidden, Stolen, Runaway, Bastardized lodges, in which things have been done,
not favorable to the present systems of religion and of government, in the
European world! what then, sirs! -- will you agree to the anathematizing of the
christian religion, because popery, with its horns, and the recesses of monks,
Occult lodges, have taken occasion to sprout out of it? on such principles, you
ought long ago, to have entered your protest against the worship of GOD, in
Jerusalem; because there were Calves, Occult lodges, at Dan and at Bethel! you
ought to have struck down the temple of Solomon; because a mongrel race, built
a counterfeit one on mount Gerizim! -- In a word our gospel temples, blasphemed
by the proud infidel, long ago, ought to have been taken down, as Occult
lodges, because, the the pulpit has been used for other purposes, than the
propagation of the principles of the peaceful kingdom of the prince of peace!

THESE complainers, had better swell a gentle note, than to class the many
respectable characters which compose this honorable society, into one body of
common infidels; to cry out, pointing to them all, or even to any in this
country -- Infidels! -- illuminati! -- occult lodges! -- etc. etc. -- This
clamor has been heard, with patience, thus far; but the noise continued, the
indignation may burst forth!

STILL, in a word, to repel with softness, the fire of the ignorant and
contemptuous foe; let it be said that the abetting of Infidel, or Occult
principles by the Grand Master or ^^y in subordination, would be an contrary to
the principles of real masonry; as for the stars in the firmament to deny the
creator's power -- for creation to deny its relation to the moral world -- or
for the tabernacle of Moses to deny its relation to the temple of Solomon -- or
for the whole of these subordinate buildings to deny their relation to, or
consummation in the present, and future empire of the all glorious builder, the
Melchezideck of GOD! Let opposition fall before the mighty weight of
irresistible truth!

8. Is this temple, intellectual workshop, raising its tubes, increasing in its
numbers, and in its exertions in the prospect of a brighter day; of a more
perfect illumination; so, it is with the present imperfect economy of the
gospel building. -- Greater light, both societies, yea, all creation is looking
for, and greater light all shall receive. -- Toward the consummation of all
things, the principals, of both our buildings, as well as the order of events
teach us to look. When the mason shall have become perfect in his order: and
uniting the christian in his faith, shall have passed through the several
grades of experience, until he shall have arived to the most noble order of
knighthood; a templar of St. John of Jerusalam; a true and faithful soldier of
JESUS CHRIST, and shall, with due honor and fortitude, have supported the
amazing trials and dangerous vicisitudes of this noble order! -- when he shall
have attained to the farther degrees of the Red Cross and of the Mediterranean
Pass; Ne plus ultra! -- then shall he be capable to pass the Gibralter straits,
and bid defiance to the Barbary Coast! The ensign of the cross, and the seal
upon his pass, shall enable him to strike down his foes, and to bar the gates
of the impassable gulf: for Death and Hell are conquered in his behalf, by the
Great Master of the House!

END.

