Mr. BENTLEY's ADDRESS TO THE ESSEX LODGE.

AN ADDRESS, DELIVERED IN THE ESSEX LODGE, UPON THE Festival of St. John the
Evangelist, AT THE INDUCTION OF THE OFFICERS BY BROTHER JOSEPH HILLER, PAST
MASTER, AND BROTHER BENJAMIN HODGES, MASTER ELECT. DECEMBER 27, 1798.

BY WILLIAM BENTLEY, MEMBER OF ESSEX LODGE.

"To receive guests with honor, is the sacrament of men."

INSTITUTES OF ^^NU. "If, in the instructions we give to others, we inquire not
into the experience and institutions of past ages, how can we profit mankind?"

CHOU-KING. PRINTED AT SALEM, BY JOSHUA CUSHING. 1799.

In Essex Lodge, 27th December, 5798.
VOTED,

That the Rt. Worshipful BENJAMIN HODGES, Master, ABEL LAWRENCE and EDWARD
LANG, Brethren, be a Committee to wait on the Rev. Brother WILLIAM BENTLEY,
with the thanks of this Lodge, for his Address delivered in the Lodge this day,
and to request a copy for the press.

Attest. EDWARD LANG, See'ry.

MASONIC ADDRESS.
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL MASTER, WARDENS, AND BRETHREN, OF ESSEX LODGE,
PERMIT me to salute you upon our, joyful anniversary. Since our last
commemoration, Masonry has been placed before the world in unusual, but
important, attitudes. In an age of revolutions, when jealousy has all its
power, and can violate what creates its fears, we could not expect that any
association, much less a secret one, should be heard of without anxious
apprehensions. Jealousy, led by faction, will cut the knot it cannot untie.
When it is the guardian of the public rights, it will claim to hold what may
fall into the hands of a public enemy. It always may be prompted by envy, which
always hates success. And thus the best institutions have been sacrificed, in
all ages, to the jealousy and the folly of mankind.

MASONRY could not be forgotten. Allied to the whole social character, it would
be seen by every eye, which inquired for man. It would appear in every attitude
in which man could be placed, ready to give him the counsels of its wisdom. It
is not then to be wondered, that it has been the subject of angry contention,
and of vile misrepresentation. Beauty, while it transports innocence into love,
fills the envious with misery and death.

BUT this has been remarkable in the present state of Masonry in this country.
At the time, in which it would willingly have disappeared from the jealous eyes
of the world, every cause has contributed to force it upon the public notice.
Success gave an anxious solicitude to possess its secrets. They who have not
hated it from prejudice, have therefore become friends from their curiosity.
Its rapid progress has therefore rather asked a check from its friends, than
given any just fears from its pretended enemies. The suspicions are, of
themselves, a powerful cause of the prosperity. In vain then do they impute to
the worst causes, what is the simple and natural effect of their own
apprehensions. The Brethren are tempted to view themselves in a new light, from
their great acquisition of strength. They are tempted to defy those, whom it
will always be dangerous to despise. In such a novel situation, Masons have
condescended to vindicate themselves before the public, a tribunal at which
they ought never to have been challenged. They have plead their innocence, and
even promised to obey the laws. Their duty, and their love, has now become
their public oath. By these measures, they make flow advances to the public
favor. The world want not our promise; they wish to hold us in their power.
They know not the means we possess to attain the worst ends, or the best. It is
then upon our public character we must at last depend; and upon this, in some
circumstances, the world would depend, with greater confidence, if we should
say nothing in our own vindication.

BUT what is wise and safe in some, is not in all circumstances. To express a
gratitude to our administration, in common with our fellow citizens, was our
right; and the form, in which we could most innocently express our allegiance
to the government, was in the public addresses, which public favor had
patronised. The replies we have received are before the public; and how much
they have contributed to the reputation of the Craft, must be determined by
those who read them. The address to General WASHINGTON, as a Brother, must have
the best effect, because he gives us his own testimony, that he is a stranger
to any ill designs of our institution. But the replies of President ADAMS, such
as he was indeed obliged to offer, have only left us where he found us, if in
so happy condition. His answers are candid, but he could know nothing. His
answer to Massachusetts Grand Lodge insinuates his hopes. To Maryland, he seems
to express even his fears. To Vermont, he says, he believes the institution has
been useful. But while he expresses a confidence in the American Lodges, he
consents to hold our Lodges capable of corruption. His words are, Masons "will
best know whether any dangers are possible in other countries, as well as
this." The present state of France has afforded the plea for these
insinuations, especially at a time, when that nation is held up to the world in
the darkest colors. We have no concern with the true national character; but
there is a very important distinction to be made, in our favor, between the
state of France before the revolution, and after that event. We express the
greatest affection to our own government unequivocally, now we are its lawful
subjects: as Masons and citizens we ought to do it, and we must do it. Why then
should not the French do the same to their own? If there were any error, it
must be in commencing the revolution in the Lodges; and that was never proved
upon the Lodges in France, more than upon the Lodges in America, and never will
be proved. They will never take the praise, or the blame. It is from the
neglect of this distinction, that our common cause is suffering. This is the
proof we ought to demand. It is of the greatest consequence to deny the last
fact, but to the highest honor of Masonry to learn that the Masons in France
had early the spirit of their own government, whatever it might be. It would be
a sad complaint from the people, as well as from the king, that they were
opposed by the Lodges. It is evident they were not enemies to the king, or to
the people.

THIS truth makes a well informed Brother to view with concern, that so many
are thoughtless of the design of our enemies. If they can only persuade the
people of our guilt in any place, their great point is gained. It is a common
cause, and it must suffer. It is for this reason that a late Scotch professor
has thrown out his charges in an artful confusion, so as to prove nothing, and
yet imply every thing; to engage the public suspicions, and yet not to suffer
every man to see that his design was ungenerous, and political, and his work
destitute of truth. If, in any country, Masons are detected, their common cause
is desperate. And it is to this presumption the President, in all his answers,
justly directs our attention. A reply then to the Scotchman, is our salvation.
It was so perceived in the English Lodges, as their numerous printed
vindications will discover. And the exceptions made in favor of England and
America, are only so many subterfuges to make us insensible of our common
danger; to substantiate a general charge in the public mind, and then to stab
the vitals of our institution; when we, by a careless consent with the Scotch
professor, had already signed our own death warrant.

OF another artifice, the Brethren have not been sufficiently aware. The simple
Lodges, who are the soul of Masonry, are to be involved in all the consequences
of the higher orders, when these are not under the jurisdiction of the simple
Lodges, and cannot possibly originate in them, or be known by them. Legislators
are such, only when together. We should confine our defense to the simple
Lodges. The example which has given the public alarm is directly to our
purpose. Where begins the error in the French Lodges? It was imported from the
interior parts of Germany, from a German Lodge. What was that German Lodge? No
Lodge at all. For when the founder of it was questioned, he has proved, says
even his enemy, demonstratively, that he was not a Mason when what is called
his Lodge was instituted. It was no more a Mason's Lodge, than our Marine
Society, or the Phi Beta Kappa of the lads of Cambridge. The founder says, "I
knew nothing of Masonry, till years afterward." We should take the precise
object, and make our defense upon the real institution, and its eternal
principles.

PERMIT me then briefly to point out to you the important end of our
institution, considered as distinct from the national religion. Let me show you
the real expediency of secret societies, from the nature of man; and then let
me expose to you briefly the want of internal evidence in the late attempts to
fasten the charge of a conspiracy upon our order. We may then pass to the
duties of this joyful anniversary.

ON the present occasion we should not have troubled ourselves with so needless
a comparison, as of the different ends of Masonry and Religion, and yet of the
advantages of both, had not a popular objection been formed from it. We might
as soon have thought that there was no need of an account book, because there
was a bible; or no need of laws, the Congress, or President, because there was
a religion, a Savior, and a God. But when trifles can seize the public
attention, they can become important things in their consequences. The answers
must then be adapted to those, upon whom prejudice can have any power. And did
Paul reap no benefit from Roman liberty, after he became a christian? Can a man
have no relief, but from a christian? If a man can prove himself a professed
christian, need he no other claim upon charity? A Christian is of a sect, and
of a separate communion, every where, and from necessity. It is one family
which he chooses, prefers, and enters. It is a union with opinions, not with
the world. Paul tells the christians, that they are not of the world; but not
that therefore they ought to go out of the world. There are friendships and
social duties with all mankind. Whatsoever things are lovely, and of good
reputation; wherever there is virtue and praise, christians are so practice
such things. We have our intercourse of business, and our morality of life, as
well as of religion. We engage in the commerce of the world, and are obliged to
see man, when we are to forget the prejudices of his heart and of his head.
There is then no better reason that the same man should not be a Mason, and a
Christian, than that he should not be clothed, because he is fed; or that he
should not have an uncle, a benefactor, or a friend, while his father was
living. The object of Christianity and Masonry never can be the same, because
christianity has, as its immediate object, the advancement of personal virtue
always above the state of society in common life. It proposes its highest
rewards in a future existence, and directs all its associations to this end.
Our institution provides immediately for the friendship of life and manners
through the the world, when we overlook all the opinions in it, and regard only
safety, confidence, and our social interest.

FEW men, who think, and observe the different ends of life, will be content to
dwell upon this objection. Another more specious is ready. What need can there
be for any secret societies? Why may not every thing be open, common, and
universal? This is language adapted to the unthinking. It seems social,
generous, and even great, while it is disorganizing. It is what is to be
wished, but cannot readily be obtained. But let us consult the nature of man.
What is the social spring? Is it the knowledge or love of all men? Does man
begin to act from himself, or from the whole? Is not the social spring,
preservation, which he learns to employ? He then first looks to things near to
him. As he rises and surveys, he looks further on. But still the prospect is
bounded, and distant objects are not distinct. Must he delay till all men
agree? He might as well stop the tide of life, call the infant into man, and
convert man into an angel. What would be his fate, if he regarded not any, till
he could enjoy all? What world is provided to render him happy? The principle
of private associations is then universal, and always employed. Tradition
betrays it among savages. It is the privilege of every profession, and of every
art. The mysteries of Greece are in name immortal. They survived, at Rome, the
glory of Greece. They were indulged in the forms of the primitive Church. They
belong to the usual confidence of life. They assist in the nature of
friendship, and form the exclusive right which makes of twain one flesh. The
disciples of Jesus dared not to blame the lovely confidence, which the
character of John inspired. It is then a privilege by birth right from heaven.
It is the choice boon of friendship. It is the right of common nature through
the globe, and possessed by common law, and the consent of nations, in some
degree, through the world. It can be abridged only in the loss of rational
liberty, and can be surrendered to no government, but as the last price to be
paid for a miserable existence. This ark of God has been touched, when the
salutary arts by which man conveys himself to man have been denied; when
reading, writing and speaking have been prohibited; when traveling abroad has
been prevented; when the visits of foreigners have been restrained; when a
change of condition has been refused to industry, to genius and to virtue. All
these things have been the subjects of many laws, and have been taken from
mankind, upon the plausible pretenses of public over private right. But laws
should have justice; and the greatest good of public and private character is
that justice. We stand then in the liberty in which God has made us free.

BUT no right can license any abuse. To prove this abuse to be real, is the
last effort of political stratagem. It is that by which the most innocent
orders have been punished with the guilty. The superstitious are taught, that
Masonry is against Christianity; the ignorant, that we are unsocial and narrow
in our foundation. But the politician affirms, that our right cannot be safe to
civil society, and therefore cannot exist as a civil privilege. The abuse in
fact is necessary to support the attempt to refuse the privilege. It has been
pretended. But we ought to be guarded against a sword, which, when drawn, is
against Masonry throughout the world. We are first to be made hateful, and then
we shall be abandoned to oppression.

BUT let us examine the internal evidence of the books which contain the proofs
of the most dangerous abuse; a conspiracy against society, law, and even of man
against himself. Where was it discovered? In Germany. Where did it act? In
France. France then was revolutionized by Germany. This is news, certainly. Who
began it? A man who says, what he did, he did when he knew nothing of Masonry;
and his enemies acknowledged it. Why then should Masonry suffer for it? But how
did the French get it? They found it. When? After the Germans dropped it. So
futile is the whole history. But who believes it? Not one good writer among the
forty millions of Germans, who knew the whole pretense. What say men abroad?
That it is a pernicious work, without proper documents, and just evidence. Who
published it? Men, who have taken up an evil report, who do not agree together.
But who were the principal agents in the pretended mischief? Of the chief, his
many works speak genius, love of order, and love of truth; and he is as quiet a
man, and as useful, as society has in it. The most active, has published works
before and since this accusation, which prove him a zealous Christian. Of the
last, a man of the greatest address, and the greatest traveller, and to whom is
charged the most mischief, it is affirmed by himself, that he knew nothing of
Illuminatism but from the public prints. What kind of conspiracy is this? But
how do the accusers agree? They were not on the ground, and do not agree in
their own documents, and misrepresentations have been proved upon them all. But
how have these accused men been punished? The leading characters publish their
works with applause, and have the public confidence. Were their designs ever
made known? Yes, and patronised by the Emperor. Their meetings were at first
encouraged, and the Protestants had the benefit; and the salutary measures were
reported in America. Whence then arose the trouble? The government changed its
measures; till at length, from the freest political inquiries, the Emperor
proceeded to the extreme of prohibiting the printing of any such books, of a
size that a poor man could purchase. Were there any charges of rebellion, or of
public discontents, against these men? No; of speculative opinions only. Who
then were these men of speculation? Men of letters, living in and maintained by
the state; not disaffected men. What were their speculations? Any thing which
slander and suspicion could suggest. Was there no pretended evidence? Yes, from
writings never signed, and absolutely denied. Their worst discourses were
confessedly filled with the purest morality; and all the papers of their
proceedings were offered to government, and they offered to stand trial upon
them. Who were the men? Chiefly clergymen; four fifths of them were either of
this order, or professors in universities; and they had no livings from the
people, but from the government. What end had they? The accusation proposes no
end but wanton mischief, in which they had every thing to lose, and nothing to
gain. Did the clergy of France or America desert their establishments in this
manner? It is well known that no men in public livings ever did. How did they
conduct in their associations? Professed good principles, and were said to be
open in their opinions, even when charged with conspiracy. The dissolution of
the order was from a controversy with particular members. The charges were
brought, not against all, but a few of supposed higher grades. The accusers
before the public were convicted of ignorance, and as not belonging to orders
they accused. And it is confessed, that ejected religious orders were busy with
their resentments in all the transactions. The characters are so grouped, that
every man may see the absurdity of their pretended concurrence. Such is
ingenuously the substance of the whole evidence to prove the abuse of Masonry,
and then to degrade the whole institution. It has but one apology, and that
arises from the distress of the world. Alarm was every where. Phantoms and
specter became every where real beings. Men suspected every thing. And this
was the opportunity to accomplish the purposes of a false zeal, of private
resentment, or of the most daring ambition of power. But it is too late. Free
Masons have long been in the quiet possession of their ancient privileges.
These, from long indulgence, they consider as their just liberty; and, as they
have never forfeited it, they will continue to hold and to enjoy it.

THE best purposes of life in civil society have led men to such associations.
The mysteries of Greece gave freedom to the spirit even of a Philosopher in the
days of ancient liberty. Rome consented to accept the gift. Roman citizenship
gave a rich value to association in civil society; and the religious orders
supported the cause of the church, by extending the same idea to the christian
religion. The Jesuits made the bold experiment of its power, with unexampled
success, and might have continued in glory, had they not been perverted by
private ambition. Masons have not made a bolder, but safer experiment. Without
regard to forms of government, or private opinions, it embraces every where
what is happy for man, upon the laws of his own constitution. It puts that as a
law, which is found convenient. It takes up so much of the character of man, as
agrees with his first duties. It was thus the old Abbe ST. PIERRE gave the
elements of his project for a perpetual peace. It is thus KANT, in the same
design, proposes to restore confidence among mankind. Our principles are the
sober theory of human nature, which must bless the world.

HAPPY then must we be in our ancient institution. Its object is to find an
home, wherever man is to be found. It bids every brother to take the lessons of
his duty from his heart. There is no obligation of gratitude, but go, and do
likewife. It is man it loves, and with God it unites to bless him in every
clime.

ON the present anniversary, the ESSEX LODGE is not without the most pleasing
recollections. The same faithful Master, who first blessed our Lodge, and whose
name is in all the Lodges, is yet with us, and contributed largely to adorn the
new building we have raised. How indefatigable, persevering, and benevolent,
have been his labors! Who, that tastes the joy of this day, and is grateful
for its preservation, does not love the name of HILLER? JOSEPH HILLER, Esquire
Collector of the Port of Salem.
Let him rest from his labors, in the glory of the temple he has raised. The
happiness of the Lodge was sincere, when our late Master, EDWARD PULLING, Esquire
Attorney at Law.
in whom united our ut most confidence and affection, accepted the emblems of
his equal government, and generous prudence. We have preserved the harmony,
which he gave to the Brethren. Often shall we lament the sad indisposition,
which obliges his absence, and which gives a twofold bereavement to his
spirits, when he thinks of the separation. Infirmity may impair our own memory,
but we may live in the memory of our friends. Time has never made the bold
design of a palace rude, like the native quarry, by effacing the grandeur from
the venerable ruins. But blessed be the power of good example. Our succession
is happy, though so often renewed. There are ready master builders for our
noblest designs. The unanimity in our election of the present Master, Captain
DENJAMIN HODOIS.
is an honorable testimony to him, and a sure proof that he has the richest
materials in his hands. There is harmony in the work, industry in the task, and
zeal for perfection. It is no common honor to unite in ourselves the
afrections of the faithful. And the considence of Brethren exacts the highest
sense of duty. Happy are we in the belief, that our own obligations will
increase, and that we shall owe every duty to our cause, as the just and
highest reward of a generous benefactor, who is consecrated to our service. Our
pillars stand strong. The same eye continues to watch over our treasure, and
the same hand engraves our deeds on the tables we have prepared. We descend to
the world by easy steps, and the door is shut in peace.

THE character of human life usually requires, while we recount the greatest
blessings, that we should with friendly circumspection admonish of growing
evils; for, as the weeds, they will grow in the garden of God. While jealousy
stands ready to mark the least errors, and while sad experience may prove,
that errors may every where exist; while we have artful men around us to
misrepresent, and weak men to misconceive, this is the time when such
admonitions are just. But it is a lovely reflection on the present occasion,
that they were never less necessary; and it is the purest ambition of my soul,
for the honor of the Craft, that we may remain with the same glory which now
distinguishes us. Humanity has not higher hopes. The exalted charity; the
undissembled consent of soul; the ready service in our common interest; the
just reputation of the members; and the real virtues of their lives, are
subjects of the purest congratulations. Their industry, success, and hopes,
inspire the highest praise.

LET us venerate our ancient institution. Our consent in this simple form,
unites us with all nations. Our hearts are here prepared for the noblest
duties. We can assist the world in its best hopes, and certainly concur in the
best ends of civil society. Association we learn from God.

LET US RISE.
THE PRAYER.
GREAT Light of Life! whom all beings love, because they enjoy thee! In every
thing thou art, and in us. We live in the light of thy countenance. We exist by
thy strength, and are harmony in thee. Bless us, even us, O our Father! Give us
one soul. Influence us by the same zeal. Purify us by the same light of truth.
In the joy of this day we praise thee. Joy makes our praise sublime! Bless the
Brethren, one in name and in heart. Bless the Elect, who stand near thee to
represent thy power. May they proclaim also thy wildom and love. May the Master
be glorious and farm, like the arch of heaven, in which all the revolutions of
nature are performed. May the Wardens be sure as the poles of our globe. May
the Deacons be constant as the hours. May the Treasurer keep what time cannot
corrupt; and the Secretary record what eternal truth shall approve. May the
Stewards be faithful, as the earth in its rich increase; and the Tyler be like
the eye of a kind providence, which watches unseen. All in thee, and each in
all. To the great Light of Life be glory.


