AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT DIGHTON, (MASSACHUSETTS) July 4th, 1799. IN
COMMEMORATION OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY THOMAS ANDROS.

NEWBEDFORD, (MASSACHUSETTS) PRINTED BY JOHN SPOONER.

1799.

AN ORATION, etc.
FROM time immemorial, it has been the custom of nations publicly to
commemorate some distinguished ERAS in their political existence; or renovate
the memory of transactions and events, that make the most illustrious figure in
their national annals.

THIS affords a strong presumption, that some marked advantage is to be derived
from such a practice: Especially, if we reflect that this custom forms a
striking feature in the character of ancient Israel, whose Lawgiver was
inspired with wisdom from above, and whose public rejoicings and festivals,
were instituted by the direction of the Most High. -- " But are not such public
occasions by many abused to licentiousness?" -- and so is even the grace of
God. Is every thing, fit and proper in itself, to be condemned, because often
perverted and degraded by unprincipled men?

WHERE is the people, whose history presents a subject so worthy of
commemoration, as that of the origin of our NATIONAL EXISTENCE?

THIS day reminds us of the commencement of an Epoch, the recollection of which
must animate our bosoms with the same noble sentiments, which glowed in the
hearts of those American patriots, who have immortalized their names, by daring
to say "America shall be independent and free." Look back my fellow citizens,
to this eventful period, and behold a spectacle highly interesting and
instructive. Mark the noble energies with which the spirit of freedom inspired
our Country. See her acquainted with her rights, and accurately distinguishing
the point where rightful authority ends, and lawless domination begins. See her
confident of the justice of her cause, and sure of the aid of that almighty God
who glories in appearing the friend of the oppressed. See her under this Aegis,
(which can better defend than walls of brass) determined, at every hazard to
oppose the lawless invasion of her liberties.

TRACE on the page of history, her many reverses. See her fields often moistened
with the blood of her bravest, and most virtuous sons! See her, at times, on
the brink of despair! then, heaven interposing, see her rising again with fresh
vigor to the combat!

CONTEMPLATE her, at last, as triumphing over every obstacle; humbling the
pride of her oppressor, and gaining an exalted rank among the nations of the
earth; and it must awaken in your breasts emotions too refined and lively to be
described.

HOW can you forbear to catch from the sons of '75, the same exalted flame of
Liberty, confidence in heaven, and courage to dare every thing, (but what is
wrong) to promote our national dignity and prosperity?

HOW will you, my generous youth, whose unripened age robbed you of
participating in the glory of your fathers, wish you could have fought by their
sides? With what a lively gratitude will you look up to that Divine Almighty
Being, who spread over them his shield, who so often bowed his heavens, came
down, protected them from the shafts of battle, and ultimately gave them to
triumph over their foes! In this view, the fourth of July may be to our
country, for ages to come, the most auspicious day; a day for awakening with
fresh vigor in the aged, and implanting and cherishing in our youth, those
political and moral principles, and those elevated sentiments, those active
energies of soul, which, under heaven, will constitute the firmest bulwark of
our country's freedom and glory.

WHAT pleasing emotions are excited in every benevolent mind to reflect, that
the blessings we are assembled to commemorate, are not the monopoly of a few,
but the property of the people at large. What interest have the community in
general in the events, which in the calender of most nations, are marked for
public rejoicings? Often are they called, to celebrate transactions, which, tho
auspicious to a few exalted characters, are, as to the nation at large, sources
of deep regret, and shame.

"THE fluctuations and revolutions in governments (as one very justly observes)
have generally been the struggles of contending factions for ascendency:
contests for the scepter of power, in which the people have occasionally been
used as machines, without sharing in the glory or advantages of success; or
meeting with sympathy and compassion in defeat. The result to them has been a
change of rulers, without any addition to their happiness. Individual ambition,
and not public good, being the purpose to be answered, the flush of victory has
rather served to exasperate resentments, than moderate the passions; and the
people, deceived with the hope of better days, have not unfrequently found
their burdens increased, and their miseries enlarged. Little consolation has it
been to them, that after the tumultuous storms of internal convulsions, the
returning sun of peace and order, has only exhibited a new race succeeding to
the throne of departed Masters. Little cause have they had to mark these
Epochs, as the returning seasons of national festivity and joy."

BUT to us the American Revolution has not had such an unhappy result. Where is
the citizen, who shares not in its blessings? What individual, faction, or
order of men, are, by this event, secured in the enjoyment of any exclusive
advantages? It was for no such ignoble object, as the exaltation of a few to
the depression of the many, that our fathers contended: the happy fruits of
their toils belong alike to every American citizen. This day opens to us all,
the same sources of congratulation. When we, my brethren, cast our eyes around
upon the multitude of our citizens, we enjoy a satisfaction which we could not
enjoy in any other civilized nation on earth. We behold not one citizen who has
the ignoble feelings, the servile cringe of a slave: not one bending under the
^rowns of a tyrant. ALL, even from the greatest to the least, know they are
free. In their looks, words, actions, manners, mein, etc. you see nothing, but
what accords with the high character of men, born to independence and freedom.

TWO important ideas we could wish to see impressed, in indelible characters,
upon every mind.

THE grand object for which our fathers contended in the revolution, was
actually obtained; and we are now blessed with the full possession and
enjoyment of this object.

WHAT was the grand point in dispute? It was not to break a yoke of oppression,
that had long been actually fixed and galling our necks: It was not to rive
asunder chains literally imposed: No: America never yet knew what tyranny was,
from the actual experiment of its horrors. It was despotism at a distance we
feared: It was oppression in the inevitable consequences of that theory of
colonial administration, adopted by the British parliament. Long had
Greatbritain looked on the colonies as her property, and considered us as
children incapable of managing for ourselves: But we had now become of age: It
was too humiliating an idea for three millions of people, nurtured in the arms
of freedom, to admit the right of an assembly of foreigners, 3000 miles
distant, to make laws to bind us in all cases whatsoever, without our being
represented in that assembly. We knew, (and well did we appeal to heaven for
the justice of our cause) that we had a right to a voice in the framing of
those laws by which we were to be governed: laws affecting life, religion,
liberty, property, and every thing dear to man.

WE deemed ourselves at least, as capable of framing laws adapted to our
circumstances, as a body of men separated from us by an immense ocean, and
whose knowledge of the manners, customs, habits, and real interests of the
American people, must necessarily be very imperfect. It was then a government
for which we contended: A government founded on the indefeasible rights of man:
A government of our own choice, in which we might be properly represented:
adapted to secure the liberty, and promote the prosperity of our country. In a
word, a government, free, wise, and efficient; which might be a terror to evil
doers, but a praise to them that do well. The infernal scheme of WEISHAUPT was
unknown to us; the liberty and equality taught by the Atheists of France, would
then, as now, have been viewed in America with the deepest horror, as the most
pestilential fume ever exhaled from the bottomless pit! We did not, like them,
consider the existence of property, of political society, of government, social
order, and religion, as infringements on the natural equality and liberty of
man. We did not resist the power of Greatbritain, in hopes of being exempted
from all rules of political order and moral obligation. It was not the liberty
enjoyed, when there was no king in Israel, and every one did that which was
right in his own eyes, that we sought. This is not liberty, it is anarchy: It
is despotism in its most frightful form.

NOR did we regard the necessary expenses of Government; we were perfectly
willing to contribute our proportion to the national finances, had it been
called for in a way consistent with the rights of freemen. We knew very well,
that if we were to form a government for ourselves, it could not be maintained,
without a constant, cheerful, and liberal contribution to this purpose. First
it was only to maintain our rights, but at last to become a free and
independent nation, enjoying a government of our own framing, adapted to our
genius as a people, interests, customs, and habits. This was the prize for
which we dared to unsheath the sword; and by the smiles of heaven on the wisdom
of our counsels, and the prowess of our arms, we have obtained it.

THE federal constitution, in regard to which only we now speak, is a
stupendous monument of human wisdom. It needs only to be thoroughly canvassed,
to be approved and admired by every true American: it was not enforced upon us
at the point of the bayonet.

AFTER the most minute examination of its principles, and the fullest
discussion of its merits, it was, in assemblies, free to deliberate, chosen by
the people, pronounced congenial to the rights of man; suited to the interests
of United America, and adopted by the collected wisdom of every state. By the
grand convention, and by all the state conventions, it was judged to be just
such a government as we wanted.

IT has now been the subject of the most critical scrutiny, for more than ten
years, and yet, no material, and much less any radical defect, has been
discovered. But what avails the best constitution without an able, wise, and
just administration?

"For forms of government let fools contest,
That which is best administered is best."
THERE is indeed but too much truth in this observation. By a weak, rapacious,
unjust and ambitious administration, we may be deprived of the inestimable
benefits, that might otherwise result from a good constitutional code. If our
administration had not been such, as to deserve the character of wise, just,
prudent, firm and efficient, we might this day have had occasion to lament the
loss of the grand object attained by the revolution.

BUT is not the wisdom of our political fathers, the policy, prudence and
justice of their governmental proceedings, as conspicuous as the excellency of
the constitution itself?

TO judge of the goodness of a cause, or of the adaptedness of any institution
to its end, from the effects produced by its operation, is, certainly, a just,
and conclusive mode of reasoning. Let us apply it in the present argument. It
is a very good proof of the wisdom of our administration, that it obtains the
approbation of the majority of the people. Those very men who have framed, or
given their suffrage for the institution of such laws as might be thought most
likely to be called in question, as to their expediency, or constitutionality,
have been in most instances, re-elected as members of the national legislature.
In many instances, those gentlemen who opposed the passing of these laws, have
been dropped, and men of different political sentiments, promoted in their
places. All this was done by the free suffrage of the people, and is a strong
proof of the wisdom of our governmental operations. Does not the astonishing
increase of the population, and wealth of the United States, since the adoption
of the federal constitution, almost exceed the bounds of calculation? What has
not industry, the arts and sciences, commerce, agriculture and manufactures
achieved? In the space of a few years, a vast wilderness on our frontier has
been converted into a cultivated garden. Where nothing was heard but the
prowling wolf; nothing seen but the naked savage, there rises the cheerful
village; there is seen the lofty spire; and there are heard the solemn chimes
of Jehovah's worship.

HAS not the tonage of our shipping been nearly doubled, in the last seven
years, previous to the commencement of 1798? In 1790, it was 486,890 tons: at
the close of 1797, it arose to 876,911 tons. And how rapid has been the
increase of our exports! To produce only one example, the exports from Newyork,
in 1792, amounted to 5,500,000 dollars: In 1798, they arose to 13,000,000
dollars.

HAS not the vigilance, and sagacity of our young, and inexperienced
government, baffled all the arts and intrigues of the most subtle European
nations, to induce us to renounce the blessings of peace, and to plunge with
them into the crimes and horrors of an unnecessary war? Here the hand of Deity
ought, in a particular manner, to be acknowledged: for whence could such
political prudence and foresight come, but from the great fountain of light?
even from him, who stands in the midst of the congregation of the mighty, and
judges among the Gods.

WHAT evident marks, do our laws bear, of regard and tenderness to the poor?
This class of people, are as much as possible, exempted from the burdens and
expenses of Government. This is the spirit of all our fiscal laws. We shall
instance only in the Stamp Act; this affects only men of business and wealth;
of the vast sums collected from this source of Revenue, the indigent pay, not a
shilling.

HOW must humanity glory in the lenity of the application of our penal code?
There has, I am sorry to say, been two formidable insurrections against the
federal government. And there can ordinarily be no doubt of the justice of the
poetic maxim:

When proud rebellions would unhinge a state,
And wild disorders in a land create,
It Is requisite the first promoters should
Put out the flames, they kindled, with their blood.
BUT I do not recollect, that there has been a single execution under the laws
of the United States.

HOW great is that political wisdom, which can unite with dignity and energy,
such unexampled lenity?

THERE is also no want of proofs, of the firm spirit and energetic tone of our
Government. How has insurrection and faction been humbled at her frowns, and
fled dismayed and confounded, as soon as public authority drew her sword, to
make herself respected?

HOW have our rulers supported the honor of our nation abroad? The courage and
firmness with which they have resisted the insults and aggressions of foreign
powers, have rescued us from the brink, of the most shameful degradation of
national character, and convinced the world, that we are neither to be wheedled
out of our liberty and independence, by the cant of pretended friendship, nor
the terror of open war and violence.

OUR infant navy has already achieved wonders. It has become the protection of
our trade, and the glory of our land. It has already so far lessened the price
of insurance, as to save to our merchants, more than the expense of its whole
equipment; and fully to vindicate the wisdom of that policy which suggested and
adopted the measure. As to ability and fidelity in the fulfillment of all its
contracts, does not the federal government command the perfect confidence of
all ranks? Never have I heard the idea suggested, that it was unsafe to trust
her. Nor can the man be produced, who has her promise, or has been employed in
her service, and yet sues in vain for the stipulated reward. In a word, the
system of our present administration, arose like the sun in the morning,
obscured with the mists of ignorance, prejudice, and mistake; but like that
glorious luminary, in ascending to the meridian, it dissipates these clouds,
breaks out, and shines with a splendour, that convinces, or dazzles and
confounds every beholder. It is then a thought, which ought to fill every heart
with exultation, on this glorious anniversary, that we have not lost, but still
enjoy the grand object for which we dared engage in the perils of the
Revolution.

LET us, however, remember, that no blessing, which heaven bestows in this
life, can be perpetuated to us, but by proper management. Health is destroyed
by intemperance: Wealth is dissipated by extravagance: So if we cease to
exercise the virtues essential to the preservation of political freedom, we
shall soon have occasion to lament the loss of this inestimable treasure.

LET every man then consider the important duties devolved on him, from his
being a member of a free community. He has an important part to act. Let him
consider a free, wise, and efficient government, as his own chief, individual,
earthly good; and every attempt to impede its operation, or to subject it to
reproach, as an attempt to rob him of all that is dear to him on earth: For if
government falls, all the hopes of individuals are frustrated with it.

LET us encourage the hearts and strengthen the hands of a virtuous and wise
administration, by every manly and generous testimony of esteem and
approbation. Let us be no less ready to aid the magistrate, in the discharge of
his official duty, than to assist the subject in the defense of his rights. Tho
watchful as to the utility and constitutionality of public measures, yet let us
not be meanly jealous, and invidious in our remarks upon them. The miser is
poor in the midst of wealth; so it is with some men in a free government. They
are slaves, tho blessed with freedom. They have liberty, but as Solomon says in
another case, God has given them no heart to enjoy it. Fear of oppression and
tyranny in their rulers, embitters all the sweets of political freedom. Their
imaginations are continually harrassed with the frightful images of bastiles,
inquisitions, etc. They are looking out for chains and slavery in every law
which government frames. Often, with them, is the country on the brink of ruin,
through the usurpation of our rulers; all sense and love of liberty is
extinguished in the Nation, and they are the only patriots that are left:
strangers are they to all those grateful, generous, and pleasing emotions,
which animates the heart of the enlightened and benevolent citizen, who knows
his country to be blessed with the best government, that the world ever knew.
Far be this unreasonable and tormenting jealousy from our bosoms. As a free,
independent, and prosperous people, may we realize the happiness of our
situation, and persevere in measures adapted to preserve it. May we be just and
wise for ourselves; then may we hope our peace will continue to be as a river,
and our prosperity know no bounds; then may we expect the smiles of that
beneficent Being, that God of order, by whom kings reign, and princes decree
justice: then may we hope he will delight to pour out his blessings upon us,
and to make our land a name and a praise in the whole earth.

FINIS.

