WILLIAM C. BRADLEY, ORATION TO THE CITIZENS OF WESTMINSTER, ON THE FOURTH OF
JULY, 1799, BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

-- Non minus nobis jucundi atque illustres sunt ii dies, quibus conservamur,
quam illi, quibus nascimur; quod salutis certa laetitia est, nascendi incerta
conditio; et quod sine sensu nascimur, cum voluptate conservamur.

M. T. CICERO. WALPOLE: Printed, by DAVID CARLISLE, for THOMAS and THOMAS.

1799.

AN ORATION.
WHEN I rise in presence of so esteemed an Audience, and on so important an
occasion, I am struck with diffidence and fear; with diffidence of my own
abilities to perform the task I have undertaken, and fear, lest, by an
unsuccessful attempt, I may lessen myself in your esteem. But I am comforted by
the reflection, that you, MY RESPECTED AUDIENCE, are generous and candid; that
you, in your judgment, will consider my youth and inexperience, and, in your
hearts, will feel for the delicacy of my situation; a situation I would
willingly have declined, were I not convinced, that, to suffer this our
political birth day to pass uncelebrated, would indicate ingratitude for our
national existence, and the dearest rights we enjoy: for we have heretofore
been too negligent of this GREAT ANNIVERSARY; and, while our neighbors have
been testifying their gratitude with the greatest exultation and joy, careless
of our duty, we have sitten tamely idle, nor joined in the general festivity.
But, this day, I trust, you come with hearts prepared to enter into the
ceremonies of celebration, and that every attempt, however small, to render the
day more solemn, will meet your approbation. I may then expect your indulgence,
when I come forward to address you upon an interesting subject; nor am I
discouraged for that it has been frequently handled before, since I know the
topic must always be pleasing: for, to the ears of freemen, nothing is more
peculiarly grateful than to hear of the blessings, which flow from their
Liberty and Independence. And my wishes will be fully answered, if, in treating
these sublime points, I can bring to your minds sentiments, which will be
pleasing and useful in the review.

LET me lead you to consider the situation of our ancestors. They ever were the
enemies of Tyranny and Persecution; and when, to shun the devouring jaws of
those monsters, they left their native country, they sought an asylum in the
forests of America. Those forests, by their labors and those of their
posterity, have been changed to cultivated fields; and, instead of being the
haunts of savages, are now the residence of a great and civilized people. But,
even here, Oppression pursued them, and the same power, which attempted to rule
their consciences, was desirous to possess an absolute sway over their lives
and properties; while the same spirit, which dictated resistance to the one
usurpation, excited resolution to oppose the other. The ties, which connected
them, were broken by the unworthy treatment of the mother country, who
continued to oppress her children, and, by every means, to excite their
resentment, till the burden grew too heavy to be borne, and the sons of
Columbia, by their united efforts, strove to evade the load. It was three and
twenty years ago this day, that they, inspired with the energies of freedom,
came forward; and, while they avowed the wrongs and injuries they had received,
declared their rights and privileges to the world. Force was used against them;
they prepared for resistance; and, as the slaves of despotism must always
shrink before the animated exertions of freemen, they were crowned with
success. Yet the contest was long and bloody, and Liberty was not established,
till many of her dearest sons had fallen in the field of battle. I need not
mention to you a WARREN or MONTGOMERY, they "have received their fame," and
will be sure of a place in the memory of every American. And their claim to our
gratitude is just, since every one feels the beneficial effects, which have
resulted from their generous endeavors, and is cheered by the presence of
FREEDOM, that was purchased with their blood. Nor, in such a contest, and such
a cause, were the children of Vermont idle. Though few, they were hardy, and
the boldness of their enterprises drew from the enemy himself a confession of
their valor. As the transition from the hunter to the warrior is small, they
were alike successful, in chasing the deer on their native mountains, and
facing the enemy in the open field. They shared the dangers, and have
participated in the fruits of victory. Let me then meet your attention, while I
endeavor to lay these fruits before you.

THE first, then, my esteemed Audience, was our existence as sovereign States.
Before, we were in the humble situation of Colonies, dependant on a foreign
power, the slaves of a foreign master, and governed by his mercenary tools, who
were ever ready to depress us and aggrandize themselves; while we were
approaching fast to taxation and servitude. But now, the scene is changed. We
have risen to be respectable on the list of nations; our ancient masters are
desirous of our friendship; and the powers of the world are courting the
commerce and alliance of America. She is independent of external assistance,
and rich in resources. Her children are bound by their own authority and laws
only; and will ever contribute with cheerfulness to the public support. The
rulers, who govern them, so far from being arbitrary and infallible dictators,
are the servants of the people, and to them responsible. They are bound to walk
in the path of duty; and, so well are we convinced of the ambition and lust of
power, inherent in human nature that, we may be allowed to watch with eagle
eyes over their conduct, and to notice their intentions. Nor is it repugnant to
the confidence, we place in their abilities and integrity, consistent with the
natural weakness of humanity. Let not the world, then, judge too harshly nor
stigmatize with opprobrious names men, whose only anxiety is for the good of
their country, and the welfare and peace of their posterity. The late long and
sanguinary struggle is still fresh upon their minds; and, as love and jealousy
are coupled, they dread the loss of a blessing, which cost so much blood, and
which tends so peculiarly to the prosperity and happiness of society.

THIS blessing is no less than LIBERTY, who descended from heaven to cheer the
spirits of our drooping countrymen. She has since continued to bless them with
her influence; and, under her auspices, this will still be a great and
Independent nation. While she is cherished, no tyrant can enslave, no
misfortunes subdue, and life with bondage will be a bitter portion. Without her
all is dark and cheerless; the tears of misery fill up the measure of the day,
and Death alone can discharge the draught. She only can make us happy. It is
she, that warms every heart with generous ardour, and increases the natural
love of one's country into the most sublime patriotism. It is she, that smiles
on the labors of the husbandman, while she protects him from the oppression of
the powerful. Nor does she neglect the poor; for he, who eats his morsel of
bread in freedom, is more truly happy, than the courtier, who feeds on dainties
and riots in luxury; but whose fate hangs suspended by a thread. The Goddess
has been justly adored in every age and nation; and Genius, wherever it has
been found, has made an offering at her shrine, while she was fondly
acknowledged the parent of political felicity. She is nurse of the most noble
sentiments, and inspires genius with the most generous emulation; while, in her
presence, "subjection grows more light and poverty looks cheerful:" her altars
are the hearts of freemen, from which her offerings are the true and genuine
feelings of patriotism.

ANOTHER, and not the least happy, consequence of our important revolution, was
the excellent government, under which we now live. Framed by our wisest heads,
when improved by the experience of tyranny, and the dread of anarchy, it rose
to birth, admirable in its composition, and beneficial in its effects. As it
participates in the chief virtues of all governments, while it rejects their
errors, like gold purified from the dross, it becomes more beautiful to view.
For, while it imbibes the firmness of a monarchy, the wisdom of an aristocracy,
and the freedom of a democracy, it equally guards against the tyranny of the
one, the divided oppression of the other, and the licentious fury of the last.
The viper of rebellion had begun to rear its head, and to disturb our ears with
its hissings, when UNION was found necessary to crush the serpent. The FEDERAL
SISTERS, convinced of the necessity of concord for their mutual safety and
defense, joined their hands, and pledged to each other their lives, their
fortunes, and their sacred honor, to maintain the common cause, and defend
their rights from violation. The chain, which connects them, has been
strengthened by Time and brightened by Friendship. Their number and its links
have been increased; and we may say, without pride, that the accessions have
been to the glory and interest of all. On the one hand, the United States, by
an increase of population, have acquired strength and respectability; and, by
their unity, are freed from the horrors of division and domestic war. Their
authority is now respected and obeyed* on the mountains of Vermont, and the
fertile banks of the Ohio; while their territory extends from Canada to
Georgia, and from the Atlantic Ocean to the Lakes. On the other hand, this
individual State, by her admission into their sacred society, has procured the
friendship of the powers around her, who are now ready to assist her against
foreign intruders, or those, who would disturb her domestic peace. Hemmed
around by her neighbors, she is benefited by their commerce, and shares the
blessings, which indulgent Heaven has divided equally between them; and, while
protected by the talons of the American Eagle, she will continue to increase
and flourish, nor shall her growth be checked, save by the corroding hand of
time.

To detail every particular benefit, you have received from this grateful
change, would be too tedious and minute. But we can safely say, that no land on
the globe is more marked by harmony and happiness, than that of Columbia. Her
sons are hardy and rugged, unacquainted with destructive idleness and
dissipation. Their arms are braced by Industry, and their hearts are warmed by
Patriotism. Her riches are increased by their labors; and, in times of
difficulty, they will fly with alacrity to her defense. Yes, they are
industrious, brave, and animated with the spirits of their fathers. Her
daughters are blooming and modest, the pride and boast of their country.
Unspoiled by the refinements of luxury, the dignity of their charms is
heightened by the simplicity of their manners: and, till folly and extravagance
shall take place of prudence, neatness, and sense, the AMERICAN FAIR will
continue to be respected and admired by every heart of feeling and taste.

THESE, with many others, are the blessings you enjoy, in consequence of your
happy situation. They are the gifts, the inestimable gifts of Heaven, bestowed
upon you to make you happy and content. And it is your duty, your indispensable
duty, to cherish them in your hearts, and to transmit them pure and
undiminished to your posterity; and, while you defend them from invasion from
abroad, it is necessary you should seek the means of preserving them from decay
at home. I shall now proceed to demonstrate these means of preservation.

IN the first place, let Education be considered, not only with a view of
present interest and superiority, but with an eye to your future felicity: for,
one of the surest means of preserving and enjoying the advantages, I have laid
before you, is, to instill into your offspring those sentiments, that will make
them good and brave; that will teach them the value of the rights of man, and
inspire them with sufficient resolution to defend them from encroachment. The
general increase of information, opens and expands the mind, enlarges its
views, generates independence, and promotes happiness; while a bigoted and
sordid disposition cramps the growth of freedom, "which can flourish only in a
soil tilled and cultivated with incessant care." Ignorance can never encourage
the spirit of Liberty, for she knows it not. She cannot enjoy its pleasures,
for she feels them not. She is numb to every patriotic sensation, dead to every
generous feeling; and, careless of her real interest, would suffer the dearest
rights of humanity to be snatched away without a single effort. But Knowledge
fires every heart with ardour, to cherish and preserve the genial principle.
And, let it not be thought repugnant to Morality, that these sentiments
prevail. Liberty and Religion, may both be perverted, and the one change to
Anarchy and the other to Superstition, in which situations they can never
unite. But pure Republicanism and Virtue, go hand in hand; and should
Corruption or Immorality frighten away the one, the other will surely follow.
Since, then, they are not to be separated, and both are equally desirable, as
tending to the good of mankind, let it be inculcated, as a fundamental maxim,
that to seek virtue, and to promote liberty, should be the greatest objects of
our pursuit. Nor let it discourage us, that both have been used as masks of
hypocrisy, and cloaks to the villainy of designing men. The man, who can boldly
use their sacred names for wicked purposes, cannot escape unpunished; nor will
you be in danger from his designs, as long as you continue to approve of
measures rather than of men. For he, who judges of measures by the unerring
rule of right and wrong, will promote the spirit of Freedom, and the good of
his country; but he, who lists himself under the standard of party, and
determines to support his leader, will introduce, in its stead, the spirit of
Faction, and bring down upon us ruin and destruction. We may earnestly wish
that these pests may be averted; but every lover of his country will view with
sorrow and concern, the discordance of opinion that tears her bosom.

MILITARY affairs must also be attended to. And it is an object of surprise,
that men of spirit should consider it as a burdensome, rather than an
honorable duty. It is an unlucky omen, that freemen are unwilling to acquire
the art, by which only their freedom can be maintained. You gained your
Independence by arms, and by arms alone can you defend it. Should foreign
enemies invade, or domestic ones seek to oppress, Virtue and Religion cannot
save you, nor can Public Spirit alone save you; but a knowledge of tactics must
be acquired, and that too by yourselves. Hirelings and mercenaries can never
protect you. They are ever open to corruption, and standing armies may be the
tools of oppressors, but should never be placed as the defenders of freemen.
They fight for pay and that only, while every inhabitant contends, with energy,
for his property, his friends, his family, and himself. Let every one,
therefore, attain the proper skill, and be ready to come forward. When occasion
calls, he will then do his duty, and his Country will be safe.

LASTLY, let public spirit always prevail among you, and the prosperity of your
land be your greatest boast. You may tread in the steps of your fathers, and
preserve the principle they have transmitted down to you, as a rich
inheritance. They first kindled in their bosoms the sacred fire of Liberty,
which has since blazed over Europe, entered Asia, and spread even to the
borders of the Nile. But with them, a happy simplicity of manners prevailed;
and, if you imitate them, like them, your efforts will be crowned with success.
Thus, while in early youth, you imbibe the principles of freedom and virtue,
while you attend to the defense of your Country, nor suffer public spirit, nor
purity of manners to decay, you will enjoy your Independence, feel the
influence of Liberty, and preserve the springs of your excellent Government.
But, when you grow careless of these great concerns, and Vice and Luxury are
introduced, Corruption will come upon the stage, and Slavery will close the
scene.

FINIS.

