HEMP.
THE extensive usefulness of Hemp, the little interference of its culture with
the other work of farmers in America; and when water-rotted, the ease with
which it is produced and prepared for rope, as well as the general certainty of
the crop with a good price, led me to admire it in preference to other uncommon
articles of crop. My Hemp Harvests at Wye in Maryland, were always after those
of wheat, and before seeding winter grain. In England they interfere with the
grain harvests. Between waterrotting, daily as it is pulled, and the spreading
it in fields to rot, (...) the d^^^^ence in the world: the former is (...)
dispatched in a few days: the latter requires careful turning once or twice a
week, for a number of weeks; and then is found straggling or tangled: but with
attention it is gathered up and the stems are placed in order. In America, Hemp
and Flax are commonly dry before they are spead to be dew rotted. If spread
before the last of September, they become sunburned, red, harsh, and dead.


Much is said of the cultivation of Hemp; and the^e appears a considerable
variety in the modes of management^ My practice was simple. Ground, level and
rather low, not wet, and a mellow loam, whether of the sandy or clayey sorts,
was preferred. These soils are not cold; and when well cleaned and prepared by
(...) plowings and a due quantity of manure, (...) are in condition to yield
many repeated crops of Hemp; a little manure being now and then added. Mr.
Young speaks of a piece of ground at Hoxne in Suffolk, England, which has been
under crops of Hemp for seventy sucessive years.


Farmers without experience, if not also without thought on the subject, say
their lands will not bring Hemp. Most kinds of soil will yield good crops of
it, if not wet. If poor, manure them. Every husbandman can manu^^ and cultivate
land enough for giving him rich ^^ops of Hemp. The plowings for reducing ground
to a mellow garden-like state should be many, preceding the first sowing. Every
time that young weeds appear, plow them in repeatedly. When the ground is thus
well cleared of the seeds of weeds, then sow Hemp Seed, and repeat it year
after year on the same ground; giving it a little manure and two autumnal
plowings; and the like plowings with harrowings in the next spring, immediately
before sowing. If to cultivate an acre thus highly should deter the farmer, let
him at first try a fourth of it; which would give him more than he would want
of traces, leading lines and other rope. The spinning and working of it up
would be mere play: but, as is seen below, making as much Hemp as he can for
market, would yield him a good income. The (...) planter thinks nothing of
cultivating twenty acres in tobacco, and erecting, four or five large framed
houses for curing it. But he would start at a proposal that instead of Tobacco
he should cultivate the 20 acres in Hemp, although it would require but one such
house, not an eighth of the labor and attentions, and is without any of the
uncertainty. It is a common mistake that Hemp requires low ground or rich
bottom (...). Almost any (...) land that is not wet, may be made to yield good
crops.


April, when the ground is moist, clean and mellow, in garden-like condition
from plowings and harrowings is the time for sowing (...) The plants then soon
appear, and rapidly cover and shelter the whole surface of the ground; whereby
we^ds are kept under, and exhalation is greatly prevented My Hemp never
suffered materially from drought but once, and that of a sowing in May. It was
never found necessary to weed what was sowed for a crop: but only such as was
sown thin for producing seed. Sometimes seed was saved from the margin of the
field, where the plants had room to branch and were coarse.

When the male or impregnating plants showed maturity by some change in the
color, and by the farina or dust flying off from the blossoms, all was pulled
up, both male and female: and the pulling of every day was put into a salt
water cove, in the evening of the same day, bound up in small bundles, and sunk
4 feet in the water, in a thick square bed. On the third day it was inspected;
and from the third to the fifth it was enough rotted, as it is called. In
examining it, with finger and thumb some of the roots were broke. If they bent
or were tough, it was not enough: when they snapt off short like glass, it was
enough: but the bark also was tried. The Hemp was then taken out of the water,
and the heads laid sloping down to drain 'till morning; for it was usually
taken out in the evening. In the morning it was spread, and whilst drying once
turned. In a few fair days it was dry, and then carted to an old tobacco house,
where it was bulked up 'till the hurry of se^^^^^ (...) ^ops was over. It was
broke and swingled in the next winter. Some of it was made into ropes for my
farms; the rest sold to rope-makers, from the swingle. The rope was bright and
strong, and said to ^e of a quality enti^ling it to the bounty then offered for
water-^^ed Hemp.

A small part of one of my crops of Hemp was dea rotted: which was sufficiently
disguisting to forbid a repetition or that mode. It was a redious while on the
ground. Winds blew it about and entangled it. It rotted partially: not the
whole of the same fiber alike. Here it was strong: there weak.

Where there is only a stream of water, it might be proper not to place the
Hemp in the stream; but, digging a deep oblong receptacle, let a sufficiency of
the (...) pass through it, when full, on one side of the natural current. There
rot the Hemp in clean water; which should constantly be coming into and passing
through the pit, in a degree of plenty for preserving the water from corrupting
or being stagnant: but not so rapidly as to fret off its bark. The operation
(...) called rotting of Hemp, ought to avoid every tendency to r^t or forment
the plant. Water when pate and lively does not rot, but it disselves a viscous
gummy substance which had bound the fibers of the bark together and ^e the body
of the plant. The pur^st water is the best disselvent of such viscous
substances. I have seen Hemp which had been rotted in stagnant dirty water; the
appearance whereof was bad. The Hemp I rotted in clear tide-water, had a light
^^raw color.


After pulling the Hemp, weeds grew up: which were reduced, and the ground was
left in clean condition 'till the spring, by plowings.

^aving no minute of the quantity of seed sown, I can only recommend what seems
best. But, it greatly depends on the slate of the ground, and the purposes for
which the crop is intended. A little experience will ascertain the proper
quantity. Two bushels of seed to an acre, I believe are a full portion for
rope. A little less might be about the quantity I sowed. It is said in a
publication by the Boston Committee of Agriculture, that in the common method
of sowing by broad cast, "not less than three bushels are usually sowed, and
sometimes more, according to the richness of the soil." They sow a great deal
in New England for making linens, especially sail-cloth, as well as for ropes.

If the ground be good and well prepared, no crop is more certain than Hemp
sowed in time and when the soil is moist. But, how uncertain is the tobacco
crop! Failure of plants from frost, drought, or fly; want of seasonable weather
for planting; web-worm, (...), horn-worm; buttening low, for want of rain:
curling or frenching, from too much rain; house-burning or sunking whilst
curing; frost before housed; heating in bulk or in the hogshead; inspection,
culling, etc. Cultivating tobacco cleans, but exposes (...) soil to exhalation
and washing away. It is only about a month that it shelters the ground: but
Hemp shades it from May 'till about the first of August; and from early August
it would be advantageously sheltered with a growth of buckwheat, 'till this
blossoms; and then during a temperate (...) of heat, (...) plowed in as a
manure. Buckwheat must not run to seed on ground to be sown with Hemp. I have
had it spireing up and contending with growing Hemp, 'till the buck has been
five feet high.

The heaviest work in procuring Hemp, is the breaking and scutching or
swingling it. But as it is the work of leisure winter, and every person who
strips Tobacco can break and swingle Hemp: and moreover as hirelings, if
necessary, are in that season easily obtained, this bugbear part of the
business can assuredly be accomplished, and the Hemp got rid of at market in
the spring.

A (...) planter gaining 20 hogsheads of tobacco from 20 acres of ground, value
800 dollars, might expect 12000 or 16000 lbs. of Hemp from the same ground,
value 1000 or 1200 dollars. But, if the income from the Hemp should be a fourth
less than from the tobacco crop, yet I would, on several accounts, prefer the
hemp culture.

For the country house-wife who (...) information, the following is inserted as
what I have read of a method of softning and preparing Hemp, for naking it into
linen. The Hemp is laid at full length in a kettle. If the kettle is too small
to admit it at full length, the Hemp may be doubled, but without twisting it;
only the small end of every hand is twisted a little, to ^eep the hands whole,
and from tangling. Smooth sticks are laid in the bottom of the kettle, across
and across three or four layers, according to the size and depth of the kettle;
which is for keeping the Hemp from touching the liquor. Then pour lie of
middling strength, half the strength of that for soap, gently into the ke^^^^
'till it ^^es nearly to the tops of the sticks. The Hemp is then laid in, layer
crossing layer, so that the steam may pass through the whole body of the Hemp.
The kettle is now covered close as can be, and hung over a very gentle fire to
stew or simmer, but not boil, so as to raise a good steam for 6 or 8 hours. It
is then taken off, and let stand covered 'till the Hemp is cool enough to be
handled. It is now taken out, and wrung very carefully, 'till dry as can be:
then hang it up out of the way of the wind, in a garret or ba^n with all the
doors shut. Here it remains, now and then turning it, 'till perfectly dry. Then
pack it up in a close, dry place, 'till it is to be used. Yet at times it is to
be visited, and examined if any part has become damp. At leisure, twist up as
many hands of Hemp as are intended for present use, hard as you can; and with a
smart, round, smooth hand-beetle, on a smooth stone beat and pound each hand by
itself, all over very well, turning it round till all is well bruised. Then
untwist and hackle it through a coarse, and after it through a fine hackle.
Hackling is performed in the same manner as if combing a fine head of hair;
beginning at the ends below as these are entangled, rising higher and higher:
at last the top of the head is reached. The first tow makes country rope; the
second, oznabrigs, sheeting and bagging; and the pure Hemp excellent linen.

B.
January, 1799.

