HISTORY OF THE PESTILENCE, COMMONLY CALLED Yellow Fever, WHICH ALMOST
DESOLATED PHILADELPHIA, IN THE MONTHS OF AUGUST, SEPTEMBER and OCTOBER, 1798.

BY THOMAS CONDIE and RICHARD FOLWELL.

Philadelphia FROM THE PRESS OF R. FOLWELL.

CONTENTS.
Sketch of the situation of Philadelphia 5 Population, trade, etc. of ditto 8
Observations on the climate of ditto 9 Account of the weather in spring and
summer, 1798, 12 Remarkable phenomenon 13 Diseases of domestic animals 14
Diseases prevalent in July 17 Meteorological register for August 1793 19 Ditto
ditto for ditto 1797 20 Ditto ditto for June, July, August, September, October
and November 1798 21 Summary of opinions respecting the nature of the
pestilence 27 Proceedings of the Board of Health, etc. previous to the
appearance of the fever 29 Case of Mr. Mark Miller and Benjamin Jones 35
Importation of the contagion 36 Proceedings of the College of Physicians, Board
of Health, and Academy of Medicine, on the first appearance of the contagion 47
Chronological arrangement of the occurrences and cases previous to the 9th of
August 52 Flight of the citizens 54 The disease increases -- various
arrangements in consequence thereof 56 Want of success at the City-Hospital 58
Evidence that the disease is contagious 61 List of physicians who remained in
town 62 List of the Board of Health who remained at their posts 63 Address of
the Board of Health of September 1st ib. Proceedings of the opulent citizens,
in consequence thereof 66 Medical advice by Drs. Rush and Griffiths 67
Directions how to escape the disease 70 Proceedings at Baltimore for the relief
of the Philadelphians 73 The contagion appears in the jail 75 Comparison of the
mortality in the city and that in the Hospital 76 Establishment of a committee
to relieve the poor in the city 77 Friends hold their yearly meeting 78 The
disease abates 79 Inhabitants invited to return home 81 Summary of the
proceedings at the City Hospital 82 Ditto at the City Hospital burying-ground
84 Ditto at the Schuylkill Tents 85 Ditto at the Tents at Masters's-Place 87
Account of the association of citizens for the protection of the city 89 Ditto
of the robbery of the Bank of Pennsylvania 90 Proceedings in the jail during
the fever 93 Sketch of the disease at Boston, New York, Portsmouth, New London,
Portland, Wilmington, Germantown, etc. etc. 95 Individual distresses,
anecdotes, desultory remarks, etc. 99 Tables of daily returns 105 Table of the
number interred in each burying-ground 108
APPENDIX.
Letter to the Editors, signed S. W. I Ditto ditto ditto E O. P. XII Letter to
the Governor of Pennsylvania, by the Academy of Medicine XIX Letter from the
Governor to the Board of Health XXIV Reply to ditto XXV Alphabetical
arrangement of the names of the persons who died.
HISTORY OF THE YELLOW FEVER.
Sketch of the situation of Philadelphia -- State of the city -- Remarks upon
the weather and diseases of man and other animals previous to the appearance of
the Yellow Fever, in 1798.

PHILADELPHIA, the metropolis of the United States of America, is situated in
39 degrees 56 minutes of North latitude, and 75 degrees 9 minutes of longitude,
West from London; is upon the West bank of the river Delaware, and about 120
miles, by the course of the river, from the Atlantic Ocean, and is 6 miles
above the junction of the Schuylkill with the Delaware.

Agreeable to its original plan, it extends from the Delaware, which is on the
East, to the Schuylkill, on the West, making a plot of about two miles in
length, and about one mile in breadth, North and South. The ground is level,
and generally moist; its medium height, above the level of the two waters, is
thirty-four to forty feet. -- The principal part of the surrounding country is
level, generally cleared of woods, and under cultivation: a considerable
portion of that between the city and confluence of the rivers, commonly called
the Neck, is meadow ground, low and consequently moist; in the vicinity of the
rivers, it is frequently overflowed, and subjects the inhabitants to
fever-and-ague. But, toward the North and North-West, the situation is much
higher. The river Delaware, opposite the city, is about one mile broad; the
tide rises six feet perpendicular, and flows at the rate of four miles an hour;
its opposite shore, in the state of Jersey, is level; the soil dry and sandy.

The buildings do not at present extend over half the ground designated in the
original plan; as the inhabitants, from obvious commercial advantages, have
preferred the Delaware front rather than the Schuylkill: hence, at present, the
houses extend nearly three miles North and South along the Delaware, and about
three-quarters of a mile due West toward the Schuylkill. They are chiefly built
with bricks, from two to five stories high; the streets are regular, wide and
airy, except Water-street, which occupies the space between the bank upon which
Front-street is built, and the river, which was originally designed for stores.
It is the narrowest, yet one of the most populous in the city: the street is
only thirty feet wide, and but a little above the surface of the tide: the
houses are high, and the greater part of them have no yards, particularly those
situated on the West or bank side; an inconvenience which tends much to render
the street more nauseous. It is much confined, ill-aired, and, in every
respect, is a disagreeable street. There are several alleys in the city, which
are also narrow, confined and filthy.

The river, for nearly the whole extent of the city, is indented with forced
wharves, made, as is usual, of square casements, with logs, and filled with
earth, vessels-ballast, stones, etc.

Where Dock-street is now built, in former years, was a swamp or canal, with a
small stream of water running through it, extending from the river to
Third-street, which became a general nuisance, and a common reservoir for the
filth of a large part of the city. It now forms a handsome, airy, serpentine
street, having an arch underneath, covered with earth, and paved. This concave
sewer begins beyond Sixth-street, in Potter's-Field, and is carried under
ground below the jail to Walnut-street, and down Walnut street to Dock-street,
between Second and Third-streets, and from thence down Dock-street to the
river. At necessary distances, there are apertures left to receive the water
from the gutters of the adjacent streets: these openings, in the intense heat
of summer, emit a very disagreeable stench. There are several sinks dug, to
receive the water from the gutters, in those parts of the city, where there is
no other declivity to carry it off. Two of these, which are the most
remarkable, are situated in Market-street, at the corner of Fourth-street.
They, like the apertures to the Dock-street sewer, exhale the most noxious
effluvia; for, dead animals and every kind of nausea, are thrown into them, and
there remain till they become putrified. During the sickness in summer 1797,
Dr. Pascalis mentions, that being frequently called out during the night, he
could strongly perceive the smell issuing from these sinks in Market-street as
far as Mulberry-street on the one side, and Chesnut-street on the other.

A few years ago, there were numbers of marshes and ponds of stagnant water, in
the out-lots of the city, which periodically subjected the inhabitants
surrounding them to fever-and-ague. These public nuisances are now either
drained, filled up, or built upon; since which, but few are troubled with this
complaint. There are, still, some remaining in Southwark and the Northern
Liberties: there are also many vacancies on the bank of the river, which are
covered with a thick bed of miery filth; the wharves, likewise, at times,
become filled up with impure substances from the adjoining streets; and, during
the summer, emit, at low water, a very offensive smell. A small stream of
water, called Pegg's Run, passes through Spring-Garden and the Northern
Liberties, the bottom of which is wide and miery; its banks are unimproved, and
rendered offensive by the offals which are thrown upon them from the
slaughter-houses, tan-yards, etc. adjoining. Beyond this, upon the Delaware,
the improvements called Kensington, are situated. A great part of which, at
high water, is nearly surrounded by the tide, which, when low, leaves a broad,
muddy marsh, more than a quarter of a mile round its south and west parts. --
Upon this, the heat in summer, as might be expected, produces similar effects.
One other source of putrid animal exhalation, which very forcibly attracts the
notice of strangers, is most sensibly discovered in thickly inhabited places
during the summer months. Most every dwelling of the city has a privy-house,
situated generally at the farthest end of the yard; but the houses on the bank
side of Front-street, have them in their cellars: many of the sinks, over which
they stand, are dug to the depth of between twenty to thirty feet, and built
round with bricks: They are not cleaned till nearly full, which is once in ten
or twelve years, and then, in many cases, it is considered easier to cover them
over, and dig others. After many years fermentation, these sinks exhale a very
putrid and offensive effluvia, which is abundantly emitted when the air is
moist, calm or sultry, particularly toward the end of summer, or after the
action of severe heat has excited the putrefactive fermentation. -- The
inhabitants are still so well apprised of its consequence, and knowing that the
depth of their wells is not a sufficient preventative against this offensive
exhalation, that they generally provide their necessaries with an air-pipe,
rising a few feet from the top; but still, under particular circumstances of
the atmosphere, the ascending effluvia is frequently diffused round the houses,
alleys, etc. where it is highly nauseous. Some idea of the noxious quality of
this gas may be formed from the effects which it produces upon combustion. If a
lighted candle is let down one of these sinks, it will frequently be
extinguished.

There are many grave yards in the city, and perhaps some other sources of
putrid exhalation, which are in a manner incident to all large cities. It is
not supplied with running water or fountains; but with pump-wells, in
distributive number, through the city and suburbs; many of which, perhaps, from
a communication with the adjacent necessaries, have already become unfit even
to wash the houses.

The foregoing description is chiefly confined to those circumstances which are
more particularly connecte^ with the object of our undertaking; for,
notwithstanding these inconveniences, still there are few cities that can vie
with Philadelphia in point of elegance or even cleanliness: the streets
intersect each other at right angles, and are open to the winds from all
points; which, together with their width, regular pavement, convenience of
foot-ways, and the practice of the inhabitants of frequently washing the
outsides of their houses, give to the city a singular appearance of regularity
and neatness, highly admired by foreigners.

The City and Liberties are estimated to contain about ten thousand houses, and
the number of inhabitants is not overrated when we estimate the total between
fifty-five and sixty thousand souls. But, notwithstanding this increase of
population, the prosperity of the city has not equalled that of former years.
The European wars, at an early period, produced considerable changes on the
trade, property and necessaries of life in Philadelphia. The first influx of
foreigners from Europe and the West Indies raised the markets, house-rents,
etc. and gave to the city, in general, a flourishing appearance; property rose
above its accustomed value. But the same cause has, of late years, been
productive of very different effects; and our once flourishing trade has
suffered very considerable diminution: Citizens overreaching their capitals,
the general failure of land speculation, the depredations committed upon our
commerce, together with the general stagnation of trade in almost every
department, has of late been followed by an increased number of bankrupt^^es,
that at least equal any period since the revolution. Such a combination of
untoward circumstances could hardly fail of producing numberless distresses.
But evils of a more serious nature followed: That malignant scourge of mankind,
the Yellow Fever, again appeared in the city, marking its path with
unprecedented horror and devastation. Scarcely recovered from the baleful
effects which it produced, last year, in the months of August, September and
October, which dispersed more than two-thirds of the inhabitants; cut off near
thirteen hundred of those that remained, and added to the already general
distress a number of helpless widows and orphans, formerly in affluence, but
then reduced to want and poverty, in a severe and inclement winter,
Philadelphia was this year again doomed to experience a repetition of these
baneful consequences, in a degree far beyond any former period, when mediocrity
of circumstances enabled citizens, by a timely flight, to escape from a
premature Death. Before, however, we enter upon the detail of these melancholy
events, we shall state a few primary observations on the state of the weather
and the antecedent diseases.

Our climate is supposed, within the few last years, to have undergone very
considerable changes: the winters are experienced to be less cold, and the
summers less warm than they were 40 or 50 years ago. It is also said, that the
climate has become more favorable to the generation of epidemic diseases,
particularly fevers of the bilious type; and that the late recurrence of the
Yellow Fever, is, in part, to be ascribed to this cause. The Academy of
Medicine, in their observations, last year, upon the origin of this pestilence,
addressed to the Governor of Pennsylvania, mention, that "at present a
constitution of the atmosphere prevails in the United States, which disposes to
fevers of a highly inflammatory character, and that it began in the year 1793."
Dr. Ruth's works, vol. 4, P. 47.
The want of meteorological observations during former years, renders it
difficult to decide upon the first opinion; but, there is reason to believe,
that the changes observed in the temperature of the atmosphere are not so
considerable as is imagined: The cutting down of woods and the partial
cultivation of the soil may have somewhat contributed more to equalize it. --
But we do not discover that the change produced, even in consequence of
cultivation, is in any respect equal to what has been produced from the same
cause in other countries. History informs us "that when Germany and Scythia
abounded in forests, the Romans often transported their armies across the
frozen Danube; but, since the cultivation of these regions, the Danube rarely
freezes." Nor have we reason to believe that the climate is, in any degree,
more favorable to the generation of bilious or epidemic diseases; for, if it is
gradually becoming more temperate and equal, and a great proportion of the
stagnant marshes in the neighborhood of the cities are drained and cultivated,
the cause, which produced these diseases are, of course, every day decreasing,
and the climate becoming more healthy than in former years.

There are but few climates more changeable or irregular than that of
Pennsylvania; scarcely two successive years, or even days, are alike.

The heat in summer and the cold in winter are intense. The mercury, in
Fahrenheit's thermometer, has been known to rise to 96 in summer, and to fall 5
below 0 in winter. There is not, however, more than one month in summer or
winter in which the mercury rises above 80 in the one, or falls below 30 in the
other. The barometer is but little affected by the changes of the atmosphere in
this climate; its medium height is 30 inches. The warmest weather is generally
about the end of July and beginning of August; although intensely warm days are
frequently felt in May, June and September. "The warmest part of the day in
summer is at two, in ordinary, and at three o'clock in the afternoon in
extremely warm weather. From these hours, the heat gradually diminishes till
the ensuing morning. The coolest part of the four-and-twenty hours is at the
break of day. After the warmest days, the evenings are generally agreeable, and
often delightful. The higher the mercury rises in the day time, the lower it
falls the succeeding night. The mercury at 80 generally falls to 68 while it
descends, when at 60 only to 56. This disproportion between the temperature of
the day and night in summer, is always greatest in the month of August. The
dews at this time are heavy in proportion to the coolness of the evening; they
are sometimes so considerable as to wet the clothes." It is seldom that two or
three successive warm days occur without being succeeded with showers of rain,
accompanied sometimes by thunder and lightning, and afterward by a North-West
wind, which produces a coolness in the air, that is highly invigorating and
agreeable. The transitions from heat to cold are often sudden and considerable.
After a day in which the mercury has stood at 86 and even 90, it sometimes
falls in the course of a single night to the 65th, and even the 60th degree.
The frost generally begins to show itself about the end of October or beginning
of November; but the intense cold seldom sets in till about the middle of
December, and the coldest weather is commonly in January. The mean temperature
of the air in Philadelphia during the whole year is 52, which is the
temperature of the deepest wells, and of common spring water. The wind in
winter generally blows from the N. W. in fair, and from the N. E. in wet
weather. The N. W. winds are uncommonly cold and dry. S. W. and W. N. W. winds
generally prevail during the dry warm weather in summer, while the wind from N.
E. is frequently accompanied by rain. Thunder and lightning are less frequent
than in former years.

To the preceding observations, we may add that May and June are usually the
healthiest months in the year. The excessive heat in summer has frequently been
known to prove fatal to persons who are much exposed to it. Its morbid effects
discover themselves by a difficulty in breathing, a general languor, and, in
some instances, by a numbness and an immobility of the extremities. The
excessive cold likewise proves fatal to many, particularly old persons. The
night air is always unwholesome in the summer and fall months, particularly
during the state of sleep. The frequent and sudden changes of the air from heat
to cold, renders it unsafe at any time to sleep with open windows.

Notwithstanding what has been said of the variable nature of the climate of
Pennsylvania, it does not necessarily result that it is unhealthy; perhaps no
climate is unhealthy where the inhabitants acquire, from experience, the arts
of accommodating themselves to it.

We are indebted to Dr. Rush's ingenious and elaborate essay, upon the climate
of Pennsylvania, for many of the above general remarks. In addition to which,
we are induced to make a few observations upon the state of the weather
previous to the last appearance of the yellow fever; for, an opinion prevails
with many, that it and other pestilential diseases in general, are connected
with a particular state of atmosphere, and may be prognosticated prior to their
appearance. A similarity observed to exist between the constitution of man and
many of the domestic animals, has also led some to suppose that certain
pestilential fluids, acting upon the system, produce particular and nearly
similar effects upon both. They likewise trace a similarity between animal life
and vegetation, from having observed, that the seasons in which mortal sickness
has prevailed among men and animals, has also proved unfavourable to vegetables.

Spring set in this year with very promising appearances; the ice broke up
early, and it being followed by plentiful rains, soon dissolved. Vegetation
commenced: but this premature aspect was not of long duration. It was succeeded
by cold weather, North-West winds, frequent showers of hail and slight frosts
in the night, which were dissolved by the heat of the sun on the succeeding
day. During the whole spring, the sudden changes of the weather, from heat to
cold, were more frequent and extreme than have been known for many years past.
Even after the season was so far advanced that the fruit trees had put forth
their blossoms, there was a smart shower of hail. A few days preceding it, the
weather was warm and sultry, inasmuch, that many persons put off their winter
clothing, and afterward caught cold by the sudden change of weather. The
flower buds, blossoms, and young fruit, in many places, received considerable
injury. -- During the months of May and June, white frost, more than once,
occurred; and, in the neighborhood of Philadelphia, in the afternoon of the
14th July, there was a shower of hail, and upon the morning of the 19th, there
was a slight frost.

The weather, during the months of July and August, merits particular
attention; for, if a state of atmosphere favorable to the generation of the
Yellow Fever ever prevails, it must be during those months; as the first cases
occurred in July; and, toward the end of August, it was general over the whole
city. In the years 1793 and 1797, as well as this year, the fever made its
appearance nearly about the same period, viz. the end of July and beginning of
August, although, by comparing the meteorological registers for each of those
years, we do not find that the weather during this period has been in any two
years alike. See Journal of the state of the weather, annexed hereto.
The month of July, this year, commenced with remarkable hot weather. The
middle of the month was cold, and the weather in the end, like the beginning,
was warm. On the 2d, 3d, 27th, 28th and 29th days, Fahrenheit's thermometer, in
the shade, stood from 88 to 92 degrees, and in many places it stood at 95 and
even at 96. A number of other phenomenon have occurred this year, which
attracted the attention of the curious observer; and, as these appearances are
supposed, by many, to be connected with that state of weather, which they
suppose produces the disease, it may be proper to notice them. Thunder and
lightning appeared earlier this year, and less frequent than usual. The middle
of spring and of summer was remarkably dry: the grass meadows produced but a
scanty crop of hay and, toward the end of summer, whole fields of grass were,
in many places, entirely withered up. Many tribes of insects were uncommonly
numerous; as musquitoes, ants, crickets, cockroaches, etc. The grasshoppers
were scarcely ever known to appear in such vast quantities. In the
neighborhood of Philadelphia, they ate up all the grass, even to the roots,
scarcely any kind of herbage escaped them; whole fields of cabbage and potatoes
were almost entirely devoured. They were succeeded by myriads of black
crickets; the different species of caterpillars were also uncommonly numerous
this season; the trees, in many places, lost their foliage by them; but in
September they put forth a second crop of leaves. Instances have likewise
occurred of fruit trees blossoming a second time, and producing fruit late in
the fall. The different classes of mushrooms were found in great abundance
during their season. Purslane, during the dry hot weather, continued to grow
without putting forth leaves, while the jamison weed flourished luxuriantly.
The crop of apples was greatly injured by worms; this was so general all over
the country that the cider this year is tainted with their acrid taste. These,
and other similar phenomenon, have occurred in former years when this disorder
was unknown, without attracting any particular notice; but, since the
appearance of it in the United States, every uncommon occurrence in nature has
been observed with an anxious wish to discover in it a connection with the
cause of this fatal evil.

A short time previous to the appearance of the fever, a remarkable disease
occurred among the cats and rats in Philadelphia, which carried off many
hundreds of them. After the commencement of the sickness, the dogs also were
affected. The disease which raged among the cats was similar to that which
attacked these animals previous to the appearance of the yellow fever in
Philadelphia last year, and in New York in 1796. Little attention has been paid
to ascertain the precise symptoms of this disease, so far as we know. In
general, the animal was without appetite, but thirsty; and, at first, much
inclined to sleep; of a dull, melancholy turn, and soon began to look weak and
thin. Many died in a numb and torpid state, while others, in the last stage of
the disease, were seized with a delirium, puking, and an uncommon flow of
frothy saliva from the mouth. A moaning or groaning noise was also very common
-- These are the general symptoms, so far as we have observed them. In former
periods, very little attention was paid to the study of the diseases incident
to the brute creation. But, of late years, and particularly since the repeated
appearance of the yellow fever in different parts of the United States, it has
produced more observation; and, it is to be hoped, that a further and more
minute examination of the nature of the epidemic diseases of the brute animals,
will add much new and useful information to the healing art, particularly so
far as it relates to epidemic diseases among mankind.

As distempers among domestic animals have more than once been observed to
precede the yellow fever among the human species, and, by many, are now looked
upon as their sure harbinger, it is made, use of as an argument to corroborate
the idea of domestic origin, and to strengthen the theory of the prevalence of
certain pestilential fluids.

In order, therefore, to prevent the adoption of any wrong or hasty conclusions
upon this interesting subject, in the present imperfect state of our knowledge
of its cause, or circumstances attending these diseases, we shall state what
information we have been able to collect, in hopes, that it may be of use in
some future period, to direct us to more just and certain conclusions.

During the months of March and April 1797, a remarkable disease occurred among
the cats in London, and extended over several other parts of England. In three
parishes in London, upwards of 5,000 cats were computed to have been destroyed
by it within a fortnight. The common period of the disorder is said to have
been six or seven days. -- The following is extracted from the "Account of the
diseases in London, for the months of March and April, 1797," published in the
Monthly Magazine, on this subject:

"After the abatement of the epidemic catarrh, a violent disease fell among the
cats, by which many hundreds of those domestic animals perished: the particular
symptoms of their malady, I had not sufficient opportunity of ascertaining:
but, from dissections, it appears, that the bowels had been drawn together by a
violent cramp or spasmodic constriction, involving likewise the omentum, and
preventing any passage. In some, the intestines were partially red, or
blackish; but, in the greater number of instances, the contraction and
extraordinary twisting of the bowels, had taken place, without any marks of
inflammation."

This is probably the same disease which has appeared among the cats, in
various parts of the United States. It made its appearance in Philadelphia in
the latter end of May or beginning of June, 1797, when it was computed to have
destroyed four or five thousand cats. In New York it was first observed in
August, 1797. During its continuance there, a number of the cats, as was said,
left the city, and took refuge in the neighboring country houses. The number
that died, was supposed to be three or four thousand. In two instances, it was
observed that lap-dogs, which were wont to play with the cats in the houses to
which they belonged, were affected with a similar complaint. A distemper
appeared among the cats in Hartford (Connecticut) about the end of July or
beginning of August, 1797, where it carried off the greater part of these
animals. It appeared in Portsmouth (N. H.) about the same period; at Boston in
September; at Albany in October, and at Poughkeepsie, state of New York,
toward the end of November. The same year it was also observed in many of the
other towns in the United States. We do not know of any instance of its being
observed in any of the country places; but it was chiefly confined to the large
cities. From a Bourdeaux newspaper of October, 1797, it appears that France has
been visited by a similar epidemic amongst the cats. One of the health officers
had opened the body of a cat to discover the cause, and found in it a knot of
worms. The name of the place is not mentioned, nor is there any other important
information added to the account.

Many other animals, besides the cats, have of late been subject to the
influence of similar epidemics: Hydrophobia, or ca^ine madness, has prevailed
in many parts of the country, particularly in the states of New England. It
prevailed in the town (...) Hartford, Connecticut, in October, 1797, to such an
alarming degree, that the magistrates of the town were induced to exert the
authority vested in them by a law of the state, for the confinement of all the
dogs. Several other places were visited about the same period with this
dreadful disease. In Rhode Island, several persons and cattle were bitten by
mad dogs and died. The same circumstance took place in Berkshire,
Massachusetts, and in many of the towns in the state of Connecticut. The
Rabies, another dreadful distemper, prevailed among the dogs, in the same
districts and about the same period. It first appeared in the town of Berlin,
about 12 miles from Hartford, (Con.) in the beginning of March, 1797. Shortly
after, the same disease appeared at Hartford, New Haven, Salem, Springfield;
and, in many neighboring parts in the state of Massachusetts, where it proved
fatal to some children, who were bitten by infected dogs. Numbers of cattle
also died from the same cause. A peculiar distemper prevailed among the dogs in
Philadelphia, this summer, at the beginning of the sickness; perhaps it was
produced from a want of sustenance among those who were left by their owners in
the city. It is not in our power to state the precise symptoms, nor even the
period of the disease. In the generality of cases, the animal appeared pensive
and dejected; did not refuse food; but made no exertions to procure it;
gradually became lean, and, in the last stage, would run to distant places, as
if seized with canine madness; but, fortunately, when in this state, they never
attempted to bite any person or to do harm; nor would they even enter the
house; but, when exhausted, laid down in the fields and died. At a farm house,
about six miles from Philadelphia, we are informed, that three or four dogs
came sick from the city, in one day, and expired in the farm yard.

A very violent pestilential disorder prevailed among the cattle in many parts
of Germany in the year 1796. Professor Reich, of the university of Erlangen,
has wrote a small tract upon the subject; and, we understand, he accounts for
it upon the doctrine of pestilential fluids, as laid down by Dr. Mitchell, of
New York. A disease of a very singular nature has prevailed among the cattle in
many parts of the state of Connecticut, for ten or twelve years past; an
account of which is inserted in the Medical Repository, published at New York,
vol. 1, page 335.

In some parts of Massachusetts and New Hampshire, the foxes, during the winter
of 1797-8, have been affected with a disorder which rendered them an easy prey
to the hunters. Of the particular symptoms, we have not been able to obtain any
correct accounts. We are also informed, that geese, in some of the eastern
states, have been affected in a singular manner. Many have been known to seize
some living objects with their bills, and adhere to them till they died.

Nor are the land animals, alone, the objects of these diseases. In the
beginning of August 1797, a great mortality prevailed among the fish in James
river, Virginia; the dead fish were seen floating down the river in astonishing
quantities. In the summer of 1795, a similar mortality occurred among the fish
in Saratoga lake; and, some years ago, a disease is said to have destroyed
great numbers of fish in a pond near the town of Brookfield, in the state of
Massachusetts.

What references are to be deduced from these circumstances, we leave for the
medical Philosopher to determine. But it does not appear very probable, that
they are in any measure connected with the cause which produced the yellow
fever among the human species; as they do not always appear in those seasons or
places when and where that prevails, but generally in the most remote parts of
the country, which is free from this human scourge.

We shall close this part of our subject with an account of the diseases which
prevailed in Philadelphia previous to its general calamity, as appeared in the
Philadelphia Monthly Magazine for July, 1798.

"July commenced with uncommonly hot weather; the city being pretty free from
sickness. The cholera infantum prevailed and carried off many children. On the
8th of the month, much rain fell, and the air became suddenly moist and cool.
Many cases of cholera and several of dysentery occurred immediately afterward.
The subduction of heat from the skin, the torpor of its vessels, and the
accumulation of blood in the internal parts, in consequence of the application
of cold to the body, might have been circumstances favorable to the production
of these diseases.

"A number of days, about the middle of the month, were extremely cool;
especially in the morning and evening: some of them very much resembled
autumnal weather. Toward the close of the month, some cases of bilious fever,
of a malignant nature, appeared; the weather was showery and became warmer.

"In treating the cholera infantum, bleeding, calomel, and blisters, were used
with advantage. Sometimes any one of these remedies would cure the disease. At
other times, the whole of them would prove ineffectual, when it was very
violent, or when medical assistance was delayed. The cold bath cured some
slight cases, and was employed with advantage in the convalescent state of this
disease.

"In the dysentery which occurred, the usual remedies were successful; such as
salts, castor-oil, laudanum, etc. The laudanum, combined with antimonial wine,
and given in the first and latter part of the night, proved most serviceable.
In a violent case of the complaint, bleeding, blisters and salivation were used
with success."

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN PHILADELPHIA BY DAVID RITTENHOUSE,
Esquire.
AUGUST. 1793.
Barometer. Thermometer Wind. Weather. A. M. 3 P. M 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 6 A. M. 3
P. M. 6 A. M. 3 P. M. 1 29 95 30 0 65 77 WNW NW. cloudy, fair, 2 30 1 30 1 63
81 NW SW. fair, fair, 3 30 5 29 95 68 82 N NNE. fair, fair, 4 29 97 30 0 65 87
S SW. fair, fair, 5 30 5 30 1 73 90 SSW SW. fair, fair, 6 30 2 30 0 77 87 SW W.
cloudy, fair, 7 30 12 30 1 68 83 NW W. fair, fair, 8 30 1 29 95 69 86 SSE SSE.
fair, rain, 9 29 8 29 75 75 85 SSW SW. cloudy, fair, 10 29 9 29 9 67 82 W SW.
fair, fair, 11 30 0 30 0 70 84 SW WSW cloudy, cloudy, 12 30 0 30 0 70 87 W W.
fair, fair, 13 30 5 30 0 71 89 SW W. fair, fair, 14 30 0 29 95 75 82 SW SW.
fair, rain, 15 30 0 30 1 72 75 NNE NE. rain, cloudy, 16 30 1 30 1 70 83 NNE NE.
fair, fair, 17 30 1 30 0 71 86 SW SW. fair, fair, 18 30 1 30 0 73 89 calm SW.
fair, fair, 19 30 1 30 1 72 82 N N. fair, cloudy, 20 30 1 30 12 69 82 NNE NNE.
fair, fair, 21 30 15 30 25 62 83 N NNE. fair, fair, 22 30 3 30 35 63 86 NE SE.
fair, fair, 23 30 25 30 15 63 85 calm S. fair, fair, 24 30 1 30 1 73 81 calm
calm. cloudy, rain, 25 30 1 30 1 71 66 NE NE. rain, great rain 26 30 15 30 2 59
69 NE NE. cloudy, cloudy, 27 30 2 30 2 65 73 NE NE. cloudy, cloudy. 28 30 2 30
15 67 80 S calm. cloudy, clearing, 29 30 16 30 15 72 86 calm SW. cloudy, fair,
30 30 1 30 1 74 87 calm SW. rain, fair, 31 30 0 30 0 74 84 SW NW. rain, fair,

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, MADE IN PHILADELPHIA, BY MR. THOMAS PRYOR,
AUGUST, 1797.
Thermometer Barometer. WINDS and WEATHER. 1 73 to 75 30 0 E. S. E. Rain in the
forenoon and afternoon. 2 72 to 76 30 0 N. E. by E. Cloudy with rain in the
afternoon and night. Wind E. by N. 3 72 to 78 30 6 E. N. Rain in the morning,
and all day and night. 4 72 to 78 30 4 E. Rained hard all day and at night. 5
74 to 79 29 84 Wind light -- S. W. Cloudy. Rain this morning. The air extremely
damp; wind shifted to N. W. This evening heavy showers, with thunder. 6 73 to
76 30 86 W. N. W. Cloudy. 7 70 to 76 30 4 N. W. Close day. Rain in the evening
and all night. Wind to E. 8 72 to 76 29 95 E. Rain this morning 9 72 to 76 29
86 S. W. Cloudy morning. 10 69 to 73 30 16 N. W. Clear. 11 70 to 73 30 25 N. W.
Clear. Rain all night. 12 71 to 74 30 5 S. W. Cloudy. Rain in the morning. --
Cloudy all day. -- Rain at night. 13 73 to 75 29 87 S. W. Cloudy. Rain all day.
14 70 to 74 29 9 N. W. Clear fine morning. 15 56 to 60 30 15 N. W. Clear fine
morning. 16 60 to 64 30 24 S. W. Clear fine morning. 17 60 to 65 30 24 N. W.
Air Damp. 18 68 to 75 30 4 S. W. Cloudy. Rain, with thunder, at night a fine
shower. 19 72 to 78 29 7 N. W. Clear. Cloudy in the evening, with thunder. 20
70 to 77 29 8 W. N. W. Fine clear morning. 21 74 to 76 29 9 N. W. Clear. to E.
22 68 to 76 29 9 E. Small shower this morning. -- Hard shower at 11. A M. Wind
N. E. 23 71 to 76 29 92 E. Cloudy. At noon calm. 24 71 to 75 29 95 Calm morning
and clear. 25 70 to 75 30 5 N. E. Clear. Rain in the aftrnoon, with thunder. 26
70 to 75 30 5 S. E. Rain in the morning. Rained hard in the night, with
thunder. N. W. 27 68 to 76 29 9 N. W. Fine clear morning. 28 64 to 75 29 96 N.
W. Clear. 29 59 to 70 30 0 E. Clear 30 70 to 76 30 1 E. by S. Rain in the
morning. 31 68 to 74 30 14 S E. Cloudy. Damp air and sultry.

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS; MADE IN PHILADELPHIA, BY MR. THOMAS PRYOR.
JUNE, 1798. [Fahrenheit's Thermometer in the shade.]
Thermometer. Barometer. WINDS and WEATHER. 1 62 to 68 29 9 S. W. clear morn.
all day clear. 2 62 to 70 29 85 S. W. clear all day 3 66 to 75 29 87 S. W. fine
morning 4 70 to 80 29 87 S. E. cloudy, rain in afternoon 5 70 to 80 29 83 S. E.
to W. S. W. cloudy, rainy morn: 6 72 to 81 29 83 S. E cl. m. E. N. E. to N. E.
af. rain, and thunder 7 72 to 80 29 9 Cloudy, N. E. light to S. E. 8 68 to 78
30 0 W. clear day. 9 64 to 78 30 0 E. light. clear all day. 10 62 to 74 30 2 E.
by N. fresh, clear all day 11 62 to 67 30 8 E. freshrain in morn. 12 60 to 78
30 0 N. E. in morn. 13 60 to 69 30 8 N. E. cl. to S. E. rain aft. N. W. in eve.
14 60 to 76 30 22 E. S. E. foggy morn. clear aft. 15 68 to 78 30 1 E. light,
clear. 16 70 to 80 29 98 W. N. W. cl. N. E. to E S. E. cold eve. 17 61 to 68 30
2 E. N. E. fresh, clouds flying in morn. 18 61 to 75 30 2 N. E. cloudy. 19 62
to 76 30 21 S. by E. rain at night. 20 70 to 78 29 96 S. E. rainy morn. 21 70
to 78 29 92 S. E. clear all day 22 72 to 84 29 94 S. by W. clear day, W. N. W.
aft. 23 72 to 84 29 97 S. W. cloudy morn. clear aft. 24 72 to 82 30 5 S. W.
clear morn. rainy afternoon 25 74 to 82 30 6 S. W. rainy morn. 26 68 to 76 30 6
W. N. W. cloudy. 27 65 to 75 30 6 N. by E. cloudy morn. to W. N. W. eve. 28 65
to 76 30 1 S. W. clear morn. 29 68 to 78 29 9 S. W. cloudy. 30 66 to 81 30 6 W.
N. W. clear morn. JULY, 1798.
Thermometer. Barometer. WINDS and WEATHER. 1 70 to 86 30 7 Wind S. W. clear. 2
72 to 88 30 6 Wind S. W. clear. 3 74 to 91 29 97 Wind W. N. W. clear, in the
morning S. W. rain in aft. 4 74 to 84 29 88 Wind N. W. clear, A. M. N. N. E.
clear P. M. 5 72 to 81 29 85 Wind N. E. and S. E. with rain at noon. 6 66 to 80
29 92 Wind N. W. clear, A. M. N. N. E. clear, P. M. 7 62 to 78 30 1 Wind N. W.
N. E. and S. E. clear. Fresh at S. E. P. M. 8 64 to 80 30 to 298 Wind S W.
fresh in the morning, rain with thunder, P. M. 9 64 to 76 29 97 Wind N. W.
clear all day. 10 62 to 78 30 8 Wind N. W. clear, S. W. 11 64 to 74 29 98 Wind
S. W. rain, clear in the evening. 12 67 to 78 29 96 Wind N. W. clear. 13 64 to
70 30 0 Wind N. E. cloudy, rain A. M. clear P. M. new 10h. 51m. A. M. 14 58 to
70 30 0 Wind W. N. W. clear, N. E. with a little rain, P. M. at Germantown a
shower of hail. 15 54 to 72 30 1 Wind N. E. clear. 16 66 to 76 30 5 Wind S. E.
cloudy. 17 70 to 76 29 96 Wind S. W. cloudy, rain in the evening and at night.
18 70 to 78 29 98 Wind S. W. rain in the morning. 19 62 to 72 30 0 Wind N. W.
clear morning, very cold. 20 60 to 72 30 6 Wind W. clear A. M. E. P. M. dog
days began. 21 60 to 76 30 1 Wind N. W. morn. clear, even. calm. 22 64 to 77 30
25 Wind S. W. clear. 23 64 to 81 30 1 Wind S. W. clear all day. 24 68 to 83 30
1 Wind S. W. clear, at 10h. 25m. P. M. rain with thunder. 25 70 to 82 30 12
Wind W. N. W. clear A. M. cloudy P. M. 26 70 to 82 30 7 Wind S. W. light rain,
A. M. cloudy, calm and sultry, P. M. air damp. 27 74 to 90 30 6 Wind light at
S. W. air damp, 1h. 35m. P. M. 28 84 to 91 30 0 Wind light, and air damp,
sultry P. M. The warmest weather we have had since the battle of Monmoth.
29 83 to 90 30 0 Wind S. W. sultry, air damp, P. M. rain. 30 79 to 82 30 0
Wind S. S. W. cloudy A. M. rain with thunder, P. M. 31 67 to 79 30 0 Wind W. S.
W. to N. W. cloudy. AUGUST, 1798.
Thermometer. Barometer. WINDS and WEATHER. 1 68 to 81 30 8 Wind N. W. clear,
fine morn. variable in the afternoon. 2 70 to 80 30 18 Morning calm and foggy.
The wind in the afternoon S. 3 72 to 82 30 25 Morn. foggy. Wind S. afternoon. 4
74 to 82 30 2 Morn. foggy, wind light S. shower afternoon. Rain all night. 5 74
to 83 30 7 Wind W. clear morn. Rain afternoon with thunder. Wind S. W. 6 74 to
82 30 0 Wind N. by W. clear all day. 7 70 to 83 30 1 Wind N. E. clear, fine
morn. to N. W 8 68 to 86 30 14 Wind S. W. clear morn. eve sultry. 9 78 to 90 30
0 Wind W. S. W. clear, air damp in the evening, calm and sultry. 10 80 to 93 29
85 Wind S. W. clear, sultry morning, air damp, warme^ day. 11 86 to 89 29 78
Wind light at S. W. sultry morning, air damp, rain in the afternoon and night,
with thunder. New moon at 6 28m afternoon. 12 76 to 82 29 96 Wind W. N. W.
clear morn. cloudy at noon, wind at N. 13 74 to 83 30 17 Wind W. N. W. cloudy,
to S. E. 14 76 to 83 30 17 Wind E. S. E. cloudy, sultry. Rain at night. 15 76
to 81 30 17 Wind light at S. much rain in the morning early, cloudy in
afternoon. 16 76 to 82 30 2 Wind W. N. W. cloudy at S. E. a little rain in the
afternoon with thunder. 17 76 to 85 30 1 Wind W. N. W. cloudy, sultry. 18 79 to
87 30 4 Wind S. W. clear and sultry. 19 76 to 86 30 6 Wind N. E. clear, air
damp, sultry. 20 76 to 82 30 15 Wind E. foggy morn. dry, sultry. 21 78 to 84 30
1 Wind S. W. cloudy, sultry, air damp. 22 76 to 86 30 7 Wind N. N. W. clear and
sultry. 23 69 to 76 30 3 E. N. E. fresh. 24 69 to 77 30 15 Wind S. W. clear,
thunder at night, sultry. 25 76 to 87 30 7 Wind S. W. clear and sultry. 26 81
to 91 30 0 Wind S. W. clear and sultry, full moon at 4 28m A. M. 27 80 to 86 30
4 Wind W. N. W. clear in the morning, to N. E. in the evening, with rain in the
night. 28 70 to 78 29 9 Wind S. W. rain in the morning, cloudy all the latter
part of the day. 29 67 to 78 30 0 Wind N. W. clear. 30 62 to 77 30 0 Wind E. to
S. W. clear, to S. fine day and night. 31 64 to 78 30 0 Wind W. N. W. clear,
sultry evening. SEPTEMBER, 1798.
Thermometer. Barometer. WINDS and WEATHER. 1 62 to 81 30 17 Wind N. N. E.
clear fine morning. 2 62 to 78 30 2 Wind N. E. clear fine morning. Wind E. S.
E. fresh in the afternoon, clear. 3 60 to 76 30 2 Wind N. E. clear fine
morning, cloudy in the afternoon, rain at night, with thunder. 4 62 to 76 30 0
E. S. E. heavy rain from 12 to 5 o'clock, A. M. with thunder and rain in eve. 5
62 to 73 29 78 Wind W. N. W. clear, air damp. 6 60 to 74 29 78 Wind N. in the
morning, air damp. 7 60 to 74 29 97 Wind N. E. morn. air damp. to S. W. 8 56 to
72 30 3 Wind W. clear fine day. 9 ^6 to 72 30 7 Wind W. N. W. clear fine
morning. Dog days end. 10 59 to 72 30 8 Wind W. N. W. clear, new at 2 A. M. 11
64 to 78 30 1 Wind W. N. W. clear to E. by S. 12 60 to 74 30 33 Wind E. S E.
cloudy. 13 56 to 68 30 26 Wind in the morn. N. W. clear to S. E. 14 58 to 73
Wind S. by W. clear. 15 60 to 78 30 12 Wind S. by W. cloudy. 16 62 to 80 30 1
Wind S. by W. clear. 17 66 to 80 30 1 Wind N. E. clear. 18 70 to 81 30 1 Wind
light at E. by N. foggy morning rain in the afternoon and night. 19 72 to 82 30
1 Wind variable, rained hard at 10 A. M. heavy showers all day, air damp. 20 72
to 78 30 1 Wind N. E. to S. E. foggy morn: cloudy in the afternoon, air damp.
21 74 to 72 30 0 Cloudy and calm. 22 57 to 70 30 1 Clear fine morn. Wind N. W.
sun crossed the line at 2h. 57m. P. M. 23 60 to 72 30 0 Wind S. W. clear and
dry air. 24 62 to 74 30 0 Wind N. W. clear in the morn. cloudy at night. Full
at 9h. 4m. P. M. 25 54 to 65 30 0 Wind fresh, N. N. W. and cold. 26 49 to 58 30
29 Wind W. N. W. clear and dry air. 27 61 to 71 29 9 Wind fresh, S. W. clear
fine morn. rain in the evening and night. 28 50 to 61 30 0 Wind W. N. W. clear
and dry air. 29 40 to 56 30 25 Wind N. W. clear fine morning, air dry. 30 39 to
54 30 3 Wind W. N. W. clear morn. dry air.

OCTOBER, 1798.
Thermometer. Barometer. WINDS and WEATHER. 1 44 to 61 30 45 Wind S. W. air
dry. 2 50 to 65 30 44 Calm and foggy morning, clear aftern. 3 55 to 70 30 35
Calm and foggy. 4 53 to 68 30 2 Calm and clear. Wind in the eve E S. E. 5 50 to
65 30 8 Wind variable from N. W. to N. E. to E. by S. 6 54 to 68 30 0 Wind
variable. 7 58 to 68 29 94 Wind N. W. in the morn. light rain, and at night. 8
54 to 62 29 8 Wind W. N. W. rain in the morn. wind continued all day at W. N.
W. with intervals of rain. 9 49 to 66 30 1 Wind S. W. clear fine morning. 10 52
to 66 30 19 Calm and clear morning. 11 54 to 66 30 2 Foggy morning, clear in
the afternoon. 12 52 to 65 30 4 Cloudy morn. wind E. S. E. 13 50 to 60 30 5
Wind N. E. fresh, cloudy. 14 50 to 60 30 46 Wind E. N. E. cloudy all day. 15 51
to 60 30 45 Wind S. W. clear fine day. 16 45 to 60 30 45 Calm and clear all
day. 17 50 to 62 30 4 Calm all day. 18 49 to 61 30 18 Wind fresh in the morning
at N. by W. clear to N. E. fresh of wind at night. 19 50 to 60 30 28 Wind fresh
at N. E. cloudy. 20 50 to 60 30 1 Wind N. E. cloudy. 21 50 to 61 30 0 Wind N.
W. clear, little rain at night. 22 52 to 62 29 9 Wind S. W. clear. 23 60 to 61
29 6 Wind S. W. a little rain in the morn. to N. W. fresh in the afternoon. 24
44 to 57 29 6 Wind W. S. W. clear. Full at 2h. 32m. afternoon. 25 45 to 60 30 0
Wind S. W. clear. 26 48 to 62 30 0 Wind S. clear, fine day. 27 49 to 58 29 9
Wind in the morn. S. W. to N. W. to N. E. with rain in the afternoon. 28 46 to
57 29 83 Wind W. S. W. cloudy, fresh at N. W. at night. 29 32 to 47 30 0 Wind
W. N. W. fresh. Ice this morn. 30 26 to 41 30 0 Wind fresh W. N. W. snow in the
night. Ice half inch thick in morn. 31 28 to 40 28 82 Wind W. N. W. clear and
cold morn. Ice. NOVEMBER, 1798.
Thermometer. Barometer. WINDS and WEATHER. 1 28 to 33 30 13 E. with snow,
froze in shade 2 32 to 43 29 85 N. W. cloudy 3 35 to 42 30 0 W. N. W. cloudy 4
33 to 42 30 0 N. W. clear day 5 26 to 42 30 13 N. W. clear morn. 6 26 to 43 30
36 W. by S. clear morn. 7 26 to 44 30 45 W. clear, new 9 in eve. 8 26 to 44 30
4 S. E. cloudy. 9 28 to 42 30 4 W. clear. 10 24 to 40 30 45 Wind N. E. fresh
and clear. 11 22 to 40 30 5 E. clear and cold 12 34 to 42 30 28 W. cloudy 13 34
to 42 30 48 S. W. clear, rain at night 14 36 to 48 30 25 S. W. to W. N. W.
cloudy, rainy morn. 15 34 to 54 29 93 W. to S. W. thunder and rain 16 36 to 55
30 7 S. W. fresh 17 24 to 48 30 16 E. S. fresh, cloudy 18 34 to 50 26 92 E.
foggy, rain at night 19 38 to 46 29 98 N. E. cloudy, rain, thunder; rain at eve
20 30 to 34 29 9 N. W. fresh; snow, deep snow 21 26 to 33 29 7 W. N. W. clear
22 20 to 35 29 95 W. N. W. clear 23 24 to 42 29 9 N. W. clear day, full 7h.
44m. A. M. 24 26 to 41 30 13 N. W. clear day 25 26 to 33 30 46 N. N. E. clear
26 26 to 34 30 65 N. W. clear morn. 27 26 to 36 30 65 S. W. clear 28 32 to 40
30 (...) S. W. hazey 29 38 to 48 30 0 W. hazey 30 36 to 46 30 0 S. W. hazey
morn.

CHAPTER II.
First appearance of the Disease -- General alarm -- Flight of the inhabitants,
etc.

WE now proceed to the task of recording the rise, progress and attendant
circumstances of the late Yellow Fever, the most tremendous scourge, perhaps,
ever experienced in the United States.

Its origin is still as much a subject of controversy as in 1793. Those who
support the idea of its domestic growth, insist much on the long duration of
moist, sultry weather, the filth and stagnant water collected in our streets,
inattention of scavengers, foul air discharged from the holds of vessels, with
their cargoes, ballast, etc. The disciples of this system are, the Academy of
Medicine and their adherents. The arguments brought forward in support of the
above doctrine, are strongly opposed by the College of Physicians, and their
adherents. They insist that it has been, most unequivocally, imported; that the
weather has not been more sultry this season than in many other years, in which
not even a sporadic case of the disorder was met with; that the police of our
streets is vastly better than formerly, especially during the period that the
British troops were here, and immediately subsequent to their abandonment of
the city. With respect to the construction of a city, very few are equal,
hardly any superior, to Philadelphia; the ventilation of which, is completely
secured, let the wind blow in whatever direction it may, by its streets
intersecting each other at right angles.

Independent of these general arguments, it is contended, that the disease can
be as satisfactorily traced to the vessel or vessels that introduced it, as the
nature of the case will admit. For, it has been observed, that it is one of
those cases, which will hardly admit of positive or judicial proof.

The examination of the nature and origin of the disease, we shall treat, at
large, in another part of this work; and, at present, confine our inquiry only
to the narration of those circumstances which occurred, and excited general
alarm in the city during the period of its prevalence; but, it is necessary to
remark, that a difference of opinion also exists respecting the nature of the
yellow fever: Those in favor of its importation, assert that it is a distinct
and specific disease, of itself, and highly contagious. Those in favor of its
domestic origin, affirm, that it is only a higher grade of the common bilious
fever of this country, and that it is seldom or never contagious.

Some cases of highly bilious fever occurred so early as the month of June;
and, perhaps, some even of yellow fever may have occurred during the months of
June and July. The Academy of Medicine, in a letter to the Governor of
Pennsylvania, dated December 3, 1798, mention eight cases of the fever, which
occurred between June 2d and July 12th; but, it does not appear, that the
disease was communicated by infection from any of the cases they mention; nor
was any alarm excited till after that period.

Many of the inhabitants suspected, that, in certain places, the poison might
remain during the winter, in the houses, beds and apparel of those who died
with, or who had, the fever the preceding year, and that the heat of the sun
might again bring it into action this summer, perhaps from a suspicion, founded
upon a reference to the transient recurrence of a few cases of the yellow
fever, in the fall which succeeded 1793. Upon which account, it was natural to
expect, that the inhabitants would be upon their guard, and use every means in
their power to prevent the return of so dreadful a calamity; and, if it should
be found impossible to prevent it, that they would, upon its first appearance,
sound the alarm.

The legislature of Pennsylvania, having found, by experience, that the
existing "laws, for preventing the importation of infectious or contagious
diseases into the port of Philadelphia, and the Health-Office system thereby
established, were defective and inadequate," in April, 1798, passed "an Act to
alter and amend the same, and to extend the powers of the Board of Health."
Agreeable to the tenor of this law, a Board of Health was instituted. They
entered upon the important and arduous duties of their office in the beginning
of May last; and, although they were convinced that the new one was still
defective, and inadequate to the purposes contemplated by its framers, they
were determined to make up for its deficiency, if possible, by their own
vigilance.

On the 1st of May, the following extract from An act to alter and amend the
health laws of Pennsylvania, passed the 4th of April, was published by order of
the Board of Health, viz. "Sec. 8. And be it further enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that every housekeeper within the city of Philadelphia, the
townships of the Northern Liberties and Moyamensing, and district of Southwark,
within one mile of the limits of the city, taking in boarders, arriving by sea
or by land, from any foreign port or place, and having any boarder in his or
her family, who shall be taken sick of any disease whatsoever, between the
first day of May and the first day of November, in any year, within twenty days
next after such boarder shall come to lodge in his or her house, shall, within
twenty-four hours next after the knowledge of such sickness, make report at the
Health-Office of the name of such sick person, the time of his or her arrival
at the house, and of his or her being taken sick, and of the name and place of
abode of such housekeeper; whereupon the Physician of the Health-Office shall
forthwith visit the patient, and report to the Office his opinion of the nature
of such disease, that measures may be taken to prevent the spreading of
infection; and if any housekeeper shall neglect to give information in the
manner and within the time aforesaid, and shall be thereof convicted, in any
court of criminal jurisdiction within this commonwealth, upon indictment or
confession, he or she shall forfeit and pay a fine to the use of the said
hospital, not less than twenty dollars, nor more than one hundred dollars, to
be imposed at the discretion of the court, according to the circumstances of
greater or less aggravation attending each particular case."

The 5th section of the same law enacted, "That all vessels arriving at the
port of Philadelphia, during the months of May, June, July, August, September,
October and November, from any port in the Mediterranean, or waters connected
therewith to the eastward of the Straits of Gibraltar, or from the coast of
Africa without the Straits, other than the Cape of Good Hope, and from the main
land of North or South-America, or the West India Islands, between the latitude
of the river St. Mary in Georgia, and the beginning of the latitude of thirty
degrees south of the equator, shall be subjected to ride quarantine before the
Marine Hospital on State-Island (about five miles below the city) for a term
not exceeding ten, nor more than twenty days." In consequence of which, it was
the uniform practice of the Board of Managers to subject all unsuspected
vessels to a quarantine of ten days only.

At a meeting of the Board, on the 28th of the same month, it was represented
that the health laws had been frequently violated and evaded, by persons
landing from vessels under quarantine, and that the resident physician and
other officers of the institution, had been obstructed and grossly insulted in
the legal exercise of their duties, in open and avowed contempt of the laws,
and to the great danger of the health of the city. The board, therefore,
"resolved, "That the resident physician, or health-officer of the marine
hospital, inform all persons under quarantine, that the 2d Section of the act
to alter and amend the health laws, passed April 4th, 1798, will be strictly
enforced, and that no person under quarantine be permitted to land, except in
ease of imminent distress, or absolute necessity, agreeably to the said
Section." This resolution, together with the section alluded to, was published
for the benefit of all concerned. The following is a copy, viz.

"Sec. 2. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That every ship
or vessel, coming from any foreign port or place, bound to the port of
Philadelphia, between the last day of April and the first day of December, in
every year, shall come to anchor in the river Delaware, as near to the Marine
Hospital as her draft of water and the state of the tide and weather will
reasonably admit, before any part of the cargo or baggage be landed, or any
person who came in such ship or vessel, shall leave her; and shall submit to
the examinations, and obtain the certificate hereafter specified: And if any
master, commander, or pilot, shall leave his station before the said hospital,
or if any master or commander shall permit or suffer any part of the cargo or
baggage, or any person or persons arriving in such ship or vessel, from any
port beyond the limits of the United States, to be landed on either shore of
Delaware Bay or river, before such examination be duly had, and certificate
obtained, the person or persons so permitting, and the person or persons so
landing, except in case of imminent distress, or absolute necessity, being
thereof convicted upon indictment, under this act, by verdict, confession, or
standing mute, in any court having criminal jurisdiction within this
commonwealth, shall be sentenced to, and suffer confinement in the gaol of the
county of Philadelphia, for any space not less than one, nor more than three
years."

The board, likewise, directed the Health-Officer residing at the Marine
Hospital, to visit every vessel, riding quarantine, at least once every
twenty-four hours, at irregular times, to call the roll of the crew and
passengers, and to satisfy himself that they were all on board; and, if any
others should be found on board, to subject them to remain until the
termination of the period of the vessel's quarantine. But, notwithstanding
these precautions, on the 12th of June, the Board received information that two
persons had been on board one of the vessel's then under quarantine; which
persons were accordingly prosecuted. The law was also evaded by a mode still
more dangerous to the health of the city and its neighborhood: both persons
and goods were landed in the state of Delaware, previous to the vessel's
reaching State-Island; which persons, together with their goods, proceeded to
the city. Information of this nature was communicated to the Board on the 16th
of July; and, on the same day, representations of another nature, drew, from
the Health-Office, the following advertisement: "Whereas, representations have
been made to the Managers of the Marine and City-Hospitals, that frequent
communication is had between citizens of Philadelphia and elsewhere, and
persons on board of vessels under quarantine, by means of boats going along
side, to the great danger of the health of the city: Therefore, resolved, that
every vessel with which such communication has been permitted, shall perform an
additional quarantine of five days."

There is great reason for supposing that communications between the city and
the vessels under quarantine were carried on to a very great extent. It is
said, that persons from these vessels frequently came to the city in the night,
and returned again next morning. We are more particular in mentioning these
circumstances; for, it is possible that some of the earlier cases of the fever
were thus introduced.

About the end of June, a very great influx of foreigners from the West Indies
took place, which created the alarm of government, from a representation, that
their views were hostile to the peace of our country; but this proved to be
premature. It was caused by the evacuation of Port-au-Prince by the British
troops. Eight vessels arrived at the port of Philadelphia on the 5th of July,
from the ports of Cape-Nichola-Mole, Jeremic and Port-au-Prince, bringing two
hundred and twenty-seven passengers, and one hundred and sixteen seamen. The
sudden death of the Marquis de Rouvray, shortly after his arrival in one of
these vessels, gave ground for suspicion, that the seeds of the disease might
have been thus early imported.

The period of quarantine, prescribed by law, was generally supposed to be
insufficient. The Board of Health, in order to obviate bad consequences from
this defect, on the 2d July, procured six of Wynkoop's ventilators; the use of
which had been strenuously recommended, in 1797, to the governor and
legislature of Pennsylvania, by the Academy of Medicine, as being admirably
adapted for expelling the foul air from the holds of vessels, and preserving
the cargo and timbers from putrefaction. These ventilators, the Board directed
the resident physician to use in all vessels that he suspected might require
them.

While the Board of Health were thus employing every means, which they could
devise, to prevent a return of the fever by importation, the select and common
councils, and many other citizens, were equally vigilant, both by private
example and public authority, to guard against its domestic generation. The
streets and alleys were kept clean; the police-officers were enjoined to be
vigilant in their duty, and the inhabitants cheerfully gave them aid. The
following paragraphs, from the newspapers, will convey a more perfect idea how
far these precautions were respected, viz.

From the Philadelphia Gazette.
The present very warm weather, naturally reminds many citizens of the watering
carts, which are deposited in the large wooden-building at the corner of Walnut
and Sixth-streets.

There can be no season of the year in which they might be used to greater
advantage; and it is the earnest wish, I believe, of all Philadelphia, that
they were immediately applied to the purposes for which they were made. As to
difficulties, expense, etc. surely these are no objects in a city, which has
too often experienced the fatal effects of dry, heated air.

As the great danger is from a collection of dirt, and consequent putrefaction
in our gutters, I would further propose, that the persons appointed to clean
the streets, instead of sweeping off the loose, dry dirt, which had much better
be left where it is, should be employed in pumping the water into the gutters,
and giving them, at least, a daily cleansing. Besides the public pumps, there
are a great number of private ones, whose owners would be glad to have them
used in this manner, not only for the general good, but for their own sakes; as
it is well known nothing contributes more to mending the water, than frequent
pumping.

July 2. A CITIZEN.

Advice to the inhabitants of Philadelphia and other cities in the United
States.
The summer season is the season of fevers, and of those inflammatory diseases
which attack man. It is principally large cities that are subject to these
misfortunes.

The effervescence of the bile is one of the most common causes of those
diseases in the warm weather. I think it will be rendering humanity service to
point out some means of preservation against the destroying pestilence.

One of the general causes of epidemical diseases, is the noxious quality of
air, which becomes vitiated by a variety of circumstances to which the
magistrates should pay the closest attention:

1. The streets often strewed, for days together, with the putrefying carcases
of dead animals, should be cleansed. -- These streets should be daily watered,
and the gutters swept.

2. A watchful superintendance should take place over several kinds of
manufacturies, particularly breweries, sugarhouses, and others liable to have
heaps of fermenting materials.

3. A severe penalty should be inflicted on keeping putrid substances in the
city.

I will mention an instance: A few days ago, several barrels of putrid beef
were buried a very few inches under ground, and on the outskirts of the city.
Putrid substances should be thrown into the river, at a considerable distance
below the city.

It would also be very advisable to bury the dead, at least during the hot
weather, at a distance from the city, and a considerable depth.

A stop put to the abuses I have been speaking of, would certainly contribute
to the preservation of the cities of the United States from that dreadful
disease, known by the name of the yellow fever.

As a preservation for individuals, I would recommend the use of acids and
vomits to those who have the stomach loaded with bile. The disuse of animal
food, and of spirituous liquors, a vegetable and plain diet; in a word,
whatever can cool down the heat of the blood and the effervescence of the bile,
are recommended.

July 5. AN EUROPEAN.

In the Select and Common Councils, July 19, 1798:
Resolved, That the city commissioners be enjoined and required forthwith to
employ a sufficient number of suitable persons, and to cause them, at least
three times in every week, during the present and the two succeeding months, to
cleanse and wash the gutters of the streets, lanes and alleys, within the paved
parts of the city; and that they be strictly enjoined to a most vigilant and
scrupulous attention in keeping the streets, lanes, alleys and gutters of the
city constantly free and clear of all noxious matter and filth of every kind.

From Porcupine's Gazette.
It gave me pleasure in observing in this morning's paper that the Select and
Common Councils had enjoined and required the city commissioners to have the
streets, lanes, alleys and gutters kept free and clear of all noxious matter
and filth; but I am sorry they did not see the necessity of paying some
attention to the different docks, and having them cleaned and kept so; as I am
of opinion there is as much danger to be apprehended to the health of the city
from the putrid filth and noxious matter that lays, for several hours in the
day, exposed to the sun, in many of the docks, and particularly at
Market-street, as from any other source. If the commissioners were to give
themselves the trouble of examining the docks at low water, I am persuaded they
would see the necessity of having them cleared, without a request from the
councils to do what is their duty, as I am informed the power already lays with
them.

August 1st, 1798. A CITIZEN.

In consequence of the extraordinary vigilance of the city commissioners, in
junction with the inhabitants, the streets, lanes and alleys, within the city,
were never known, in any former period, to be kept cleaner, or in better order.
The board of health, the resident and consulting physicians of the port, and
the other physicians of the city, were equally watchful and vigilant in their
departments.

On the 2d July, Drs. Wistar and Duffield communicated to the board of health,
the death of Mr. Mark Miller (one of the eight cases formerly mentioned,) with
the yellow fever, at the house of Mr. Mark Reeve, merchant, Callowhill-street,
between Front and Second-streets; whereupon, the board ordered the house in
which he died to be cleansed and white-washed; his bedding and apparel to be
taken to the city-hospital, and buried, for purification; and that Mr. Reeve's
family, and those who attended Mr. Miller, be recommended to remove from the
city. All this was punctually complied with, and no person was afterward known
to have taken the fever from Mr. Miller. There was not a doubt, among the
physicians, respecting the nature of the disease of which Mr. Miller died. Drs.
Hodge and Wistar, who attended him, declared it to have been a true case of
yellow fever: the black vomit, one of its most sure and violent
characteristics, appeared previous to death. This being one of the earliest
cases which created alarm, or apprehension in the city, this summer, we shall
be particular to ascertain the precise circumstances of the case. Dr. Currie,
in his Memoirs of the Yellow Fever of 1798, states the particulars thus: "June
27th, cool, thermometer only 76 at two P. M. Mark Miller died today under the
care of Drs. Wistar and Hodge, with symptoms of the yellow fever, at Mrs.
Reeves's, in Callowhill-street. He had been much fatigued and debilitated, from
loading a vessel at Almond-street wharf, a mile from his lodgings, in the heat
of the day, to which he had walked daily for sometime. He had, also, according
to the account of Mrs. Reeves, slept on the bed in which her son had died of
the fever the preceding autumn." By comparing Dr. Currie's statement with our
narration, it will appear evident, that he has been misinformed respecting some
of the particulars of this case. Mr. Reeve informs us, that last fall, after
the fever had so far subsided, that the citizens were returning to the city, a
boy in his employ was taken ill with what was supposed to be the yellow fever.
He had a mild attack, and recovered. During his illness, a thick bed-quilt was
constantly kept between the bed-linen and the bed, and that, after his
recovery, the bed was, according to advice of the physician, laid in an open
field amongst the grass, and there suffered to remain for a week or ten days
exposed to the cold air and white frost. The bed was afterward brought home,
and, from that period, was in constant use in the family. Mr. Miller slept upon
it for many months previous to his death. On the night of June 5th, Mr. Miller
sat up to watch the corpse of Benjamin Jones, tailor, in Fromberger's court.
Mr. Jones had been but six or seven weeks resident in Philadelphia. About seven
or eight months previous, he had been bit by a dog supposed to be mad. He was
delirious and attempted to bite his attendants. These circumstances produced
suspicion that he had the hydrophobia; but his physician, Dr. Physic, who
opened his body after death, asserted it to be the yellow fever. Mr. Miller was
taken sick on the night of June 20, some days previous to which, he had
fatigued himself in shipping some goods at Almond-street wharf, upwards of a
mile from his lodgings: to which he walked daily. Whether he caught the
infection from Benjamin Jones, whose body had been opened, or from any
remaining contagion in the bed, or any other local cause, it will be difficult
to determine; the probability is, that he had imbibed the infection from one or
the other of these firstmentioned causes, and that it was excited into action
by overfatiguing himself in the heat of the day.

It is said that two other persons, who were taken sick after they went to the
country, suppose that they caught the infection from the abovementioned Mr.
Jones. They were attended in the country by Dr. Isaac Huddleston, of
Norristown. They, however, recovered.

On the evening of the 8th July, the armed ship Deborah, captain Edward Yard,
arrived at the fort from Jeremie. By the following answers to the official
questions, prescribed by law, it appears that she buried eight persons during
her stay there and passage home, and that the harbor of Jeremie was sickly.

Q. 1. What is the name of this vessel?

A. Ship Deborah.

Q. 2. What is the name of the captain?

A. Edward Yard.

Q. 3. Where does your vessel belong to?

A. Philadelphia.

Q. 4. How many men belong to this vessel?

A. Thirty-seven.

Q. 5. How many passengers have you brought with you? Are they now all on
board? And if not, where were they landed?

A. Fifty-eight, on board, landed none.

Q. 6. When did the vessel enter on her voyage?

A. February 7th.

Q. 7. At what port have you taken in the cargo, which you have now on board?
And when did you sail from the same?

A. Port-au-Prince and Jeremie; left Jeremie 24th of June.

Q. 8. What does your present cargo consist of?

A. Sugar, coffee and cocoa.

Q. 9. What ports or places have you touched at since you have taken your last
cargo? And when did you leave them?

A. None.

Q. 10. Have you touched at any sickly ports, places or islands, during your
voyage?

A. None.

Q. 11. How were the inhabitants and the people belonging to the shipping of
the port you have left or touched at, during your voyage? Were they healthy, or
not?

A. Healthy on shore, but sickly in the harbor.

Q. 12. Have you brought with you all the crew, which you have taken out? If
not, what has become of them?

A. Brought all the crew back but 13, Eight left me.

Q. 13. Have you lost any persons by diseases during your voyage? If so, when,
in what place, and what was his or their complaint?

A. Lost 5 with the dysentery: the first at Jeremie and the last 24th June,
seamen and three passengers.

Q. 14. Have you any wearing apparel or bedding belonging to deceased persons
on board?

A. Part of the wearing apparel of the abovementioned 5 persons, the rest was
sunk at sea.

Q. 15. What vessels have you met at sea, during your last passage? What port
were they from? Have you sent your boat on board of them, or did they send
their boats on board of your vessel? Had they any sick on board?

A. Boarded the sloop Friendship: all well.

Q. 16. Yourself, your people and passengers, are they all now in good health?

A. All well on board, but one Negro woman, with a fever and lax.

EDWARD YARD.
July 8th, 1798, 6 o'clock, P. M. SWORN. James Hall, Residt. Phyn. Port. Two
ventilators were used on board the ship Deborah for (...) days.

JAMES HALL.



Mr. William Allen, Health-Officer, No. 32, Walnut-street.
While the ship Deborah rode quarantine, the following sick persons were landed
from her at the Marine Hospital, viz.

A French black girl, admitted July 8th, died July 14. John Lincoln, a seaman,
admitted July 9th, died Aug. 2. Robert Stone, do. admitted July 9th, discharged
July 12. Wm. Wallworth, do. admitted July 10th, do. July 19. Jonathan Farnham,
do. admitted July 11, do. July 20. Robert Price, do. admitted July 11th, do.
July 12.
On the 16th of July, the Board of Health directed the resident and consulting
physicians, to examine the ship Deborah, and report to them their opinion
respecting her condition previous to the expiration of her quarantine, and to
cause the bedding and apparel of those who had died, to be landed at the marine
hospital for purification; accordingly, on the 17th of the same month, Dr.
Samuel Duffield, the consulting physician, and Dr. James Hall, the resident
physician, reported, that they had visited and carefully examined the state of
the ship Deborah, captain Yard, from Jeremie; and had found the same remarkably
clean, and the people on board, in perfect health: Captain Yard informed them,
that he lost three of his people in Hispaniola, and two on his passage home;
the last on the 24th of June, besides three passengers; one was a lady just
from Europe: she died on the 2d of July, of a fever, which terminated in
constant purging, but without vomiting, or any uncommon yellowness of the skin.
A white child died on the 26th of June, and a Negro child died on the 7th of
July. The latter supposed to be occasioned by a wound which it had received on
the head, by running against one of the pikes. That the captain was of opinion,
that all his people who died, brought on their diseases by intemperance, and by
exposing themselves, when in that state, to the rain and night air. That he
further declared to them, that none of the people who died, either of his crew
or the passengers, had any thing like black vomiting, extraordinary yellowness
of the skin, or, as far as he was able to judge, with any of the striking
symptoms of the yellow fever; and that their diseases were not communicated to
any other persons from any of those that died. That upon considering the report
of captain Yard, and comparing it with the present very healthy appearance of
the people on board, none of whom appeared to them to have been affected by the
diseases of those who died, and the number of persons now on board
(ninety-five) they were of opinion, that the diseases of which the
beforementioned persons died, were not of a contagious nature: That they were
more confirmed in this opinion, from the state of the four persons belonging to
that ship, who were then in the marine hospital, none of whom exhibited any
symptoms whatever of a contagious or malignant nature: That they were also of
opinion, that the ship was now in a perfect and wholesome state; that the
people were free from every appearance of contagion: that the bedding and
clothing of all the persons who died in the vessel, had either been thrown
overboard, or landed at the hospital.

In consequence of this report, the Deborah was permitted to proceed to the
city; where she arrived on the 18th of July, and discharged her cargo near
Race-street wharf.

Many circumstances have occurred to excite strong suspicion that the contagion
was imported in the ship Deborah. In consequence of which, we have endeavored,
as far as is in our power, to acquire a just knowledge of the most important
facts relative thereto; and to state them with all possible precision, that the
public may be the better enabled to form a correct judgment upon this important
question.

The Deborah sailed from Philadelphia in February, 1798, for Cape Nichola-Mole;
where she arrived in March; in April she sailed from thence to Port-au-Prince,
from Portau-Prince to Jeremie, and from thence back to Philadelphia.

These places, which are in the island of Hispaniola or St. Domingo, had long
been garrisoned by British troops. In consequence of which, they were more
peculiarly adapted to the generation of pestilential diseases.

Dr. Curric was informed by Mr. Lewis, the mate, that previous to the Deborah's
taking in her cargo, at Jeremie, she was employed as a transport in the British
service. That the yellow fever prevailed in those places to which the Deborah
went is ascertained by captain Yard's answer to the official question, No. 11.
He also acknowledged in conversation with a gentleman shortly after his arrival
in Philadelphia, that while he lay at Jeremie, a very mortal disease was
prevalent there, which the natives called the Malady de Slam (a name by which
the yellow fever is known in many parts of the West Indies, particularly the
French Islands) of which the captain and the chief part of the crew of an
English ship, from Liverpool, died. Currie's Memoirs, p. 132.


The prevalence of the yellow fever in St. Domingo, at that period, is further
confirmed by the following letter to Dr. Griffitts, from Dr. Edward Stevens,
who was there shortly after; and who is well acquainted with the disease, viz.

Sir,
During my residence at Santo-Domingo and the Cape, I received frequent
information that the yellow fever prevailed in almost all the seaport towns in
the French part of Hispaniola, particularly at Cape Nichola-Mole. It raged so
violently at this latter place, and the mortality was so great, that it obliged
the British to abandon the post sooner than they intended. About the same time
this disease made its appearance in the harbor of St. Thomas, and was so
destructive to foreigners, that it obtained the name of the plague from all
those who spoke of it. At Santo Domingo I saw several cases of it, during the
months of August and September. These were entirely confined to American
seamen, while the native inhabitants of the city were altogether exempt from
it. The privateers which frequented this port lost also several of their crew
by this fever, while they remained at anchor.

I mentioned to you that a similar disease had broke out on board of the
schooner Swift, at Porto-Rico. The following are the facts respecting that
vessel, viz. On the 11th of last March, she sailed from the Delaware, and,
after touching at Tortola and St. Thomas, arrived at the city of Santo Domingo
on the 13th of April, where she continued until the 26th of June, when, she
went to the Cape, and returned again on the 1st of August, without touching at
any other port. She remained at Santo Domingo until the 28th of October, and
then sailed for Porto-Rico, where she arrived on the 5th of November. She
anchored at the entrance of the harbor, at a considerable distance from any
other vessel. A short time before she left the city of Santo Domingo, she took
on board, from a French privateer that had been dismantled, a quantity of
rigging, sails, guns and ammunition. From the time that she left Philadelphia
until her arrival at Porto-Rico, the crew were healthy, except two of the
sailors, who were affected with venereal complaints. The second day after she
anchored at this latter port, the mate and one of the sailors began to
complain; and the greatest part of the crew, together with the captain, were
successively attacked. The two first died after a short illness, and one of the
others during her passage to America. The captain escaped, in consequence of
being brought on shore and carefully attended, at the commencement of the
disorder. When she arrived at Porto-Rico, and during her stay there, both the
harbor and city were remarkably healthy, and her crew had little or no
communication with either the shore or the shipping. These are all the facts
which have come to my knowledge respecting the existence of this disease in the
West Indies, during the last summer and fall.

EDWARD STEPHENS.
Walnut-street, December 26, 1798.
Deposition of Mr. John Boden, carpenter of the ship Deborah: State of
New Jersey, city of Burlington, ss.
On the 27th August, 1798, before Joseph Bloomfield, mayor of the city of
Burlington, appeared John Boden, of said city, ship-carpenter and freeholder
in the same; and being duly sworn, deposes and says, that on the 1st Dec.
1797, this deponent shipped himself as carpenter on board the Deborah, Edward
Yard, commander: that said ship sailed from Philadelphia in February last, for
Cape Nichola-Mole, and arrived at said Cape about the middle of March; from
whence the said ship, in April last, went to Port-au-Prince; while at
Port-au-Prince, Henry Philips, one of the sailors of said ship, was taken very
ill with what is called the yellow fever: that, during his illness, the said
Henry Philips told this deponent (and often times since) that he had taken the
yellow fever, in attendance upon a man of his acquaintance, who had the yellow
fever, and died on board an English brig at Port-au-Prince, while the said
Philips was on board said brig, and with his said acquaintance. This deponent
further says, that said Henry Philips has a wise in Philadelphia; but is now
on a voyage to Europe. That this deponent ass^^ted in nursing said Philips,
while in the yellow fever, as aforesaid, at Port-au-Prince, until this deponent
was seized (on the voyage of the Deborah to Jeremie) with the same yellow
fever, which this deponent believes he caught of Philips: That, while at
Jeremie, several of the crew of the Deborah had the yellow fever; that Esdell,
Ross and several others of the crew died: That in June the Deborah left
Jeremie; that on her passage to Philadelphia, Miller, the boatswain, Brown,
Smith and one other sailor, with three passengers, died, as was generally
believed, of the same fever: That while said ship was under quarantine at
Fort-Mifflin, no person of her crew died, to this deponent's knowledge; nor was
any person permitted to go on board, or on shore, to this deponent's knowledge,
while riding quarantine, except the Health-Officers and bargemen of the yawl,
which brought said Health-Officers on board: That while the said ship was
discharging her cargo, at Smith's wharf, in Philadelphia, George Streeton,
ship-carpenter, visited this deponent, and was about half an hour on board said
ship: That said George Streton has lately lost a son, as this deponent has been
informed, of the present prevailing sickness in Philadelphia: That the said
George Streeton has removed from Philadelphia with his family, and now resides
in the Falls' township, in Bucks county; and further this deponent says not.

JOHN BODEN.
Sworn, as aforesaid, before JOSEPH BLOOMFIELD, Mayor of Burlington.



The Deborah remained ten days at Smith's wharf, near Race-street, discharging
her cargo; and, on the 25th of July, she was removed to Mr. Eyre's wharf, in
Kensington, to be repaired. It was currently reported, and is generally
believed, that Alexander Philips, late of Water-street, tailor, with some other
persons, from pecuniary motives, went down in a boat, while the Deborah was
riding quarantine, and brought one or two sick persons from her to Philips's
house Currie's Memoirs of the Yellow Fever, page 130 and 132.
. But, after a candid and judicial enquiry, we are of opinion, that the
assertion is unfounded, as will appear by the following documents, viz.

Declaration of Thomas Town, as published by the College of Physicians.
Mr. Thomas Town, citizen of the Northern Liberties, Philadelphia, related to
Dr. Wistar, that on the 1st of August, 1798, he saw Alexander Philips, late of
Water-street, tailor, in Second street, and inquired of him, whether it was
true (as reported) that he had brought up privately some sick men from the ship
Deborah, soon after her arrival in the river, and had received ten dollars for
so doing; and, that Philips replied, that he had brought up two or three in one
or two boats. Mr. Town believes he said that he had gone down as low as Marcus
Hook. Philips said he had taken some of them to his own house, and that one was
dead. He added, that he was sorry it had been done; that he was sick himself,
but hoped his complaint would turn out a cold.

He stated that he had done it as an act of friendship, in return for favors
received.

On the Sunday morning following, Mr. Town was invited to Philips's funeral.

THOSE. TOWN, CASPER WISTAR, Jun.

Nov. 16th, 1798.
The following paper was given to Doctor William Currie, by Mr. John Purdon,
and published by the College of Physicians.
Mr. Purdon says, that, on the afternoon of the 1st or 2d day of August, being
at the house of Mr. Alexander Philips, in Water-street, he was informed, in the
course of conversation, by Mr. Philips, that he himself had gone down to a ship
at the fort, and brought from thence one of his old lodgers, then sick, to his
own house in Water-street. Mr. Purdon observed to him, with horror and
astonishment, that he had acted very wrong, and immediately departed from his
house. Mr. Philips, on that day, was apparently in perfect health; on the
Saturday night following he was a corpse. Mr. Purdon was not informed by Mr.
Philips from what ship he had conveyed the sick man, but by Mr. Isaac Milnor, a
few weeks after, that it was from the ship Deborah, and on the ninth night of
her quarantine.

A letter from Mr. Edward Yard, late master of the ship Deborah, to a member of
the Academy of Medicine, published by the Academy.
Philadelphia, January 11, 1799. SIR,
In answer to your request, I can assure you, that no person, sick or well,
were landed from the ship Deborah, on her passage to this port, until her
arrival off the marine hospital, when those who were indisposed were taken on
shore by the resident physician.

I arrived in the bay of the Delaware on the 7th of July, in the afternoon; and
anchored near the buoy of the brown. I got under way from that place at four
o'clock, on the morning of the 8th, with a ^ine breeze at S. S. E. and did not
anchor in the Delaware until half past five o'clock, P. M. of the same day,
nearly abreast of the marine hospital. No boat was along side of the ship, nor
did any boys come on board during that time; nor did any boys or men ever come
inside my ship during my quarantine, or since that time.

I am, Sir, etc. EDWARD YARD.

Deposition of Abraham Snell, published by the Academy of Medicine, viz.
Philadelphia, ss.
Personally before me, John Jennings, one of the aldermen of the said city,
appeared Abraham Snell; who being duly sworn, does depose and say, that on or
about the 10th day of July last, he went down the river in a boat, in the
company of the late Alexander Philips, with a view of taking some articles to
John Linkin, on board the ship Deborah, then performing quarantine: when
arrived within hailing distance, we were informed that Linkin had been taken on
shore to the marine hospital. That neither he nor Mr. Philips went on board the
ship; nor did they bring up any persons out of her. Further, that he boarded
with Mr. Philips from the 8th to the 18th of July, during which time he knew of
no sick persons having been brought to the house.

ABRAHAM SNELL.
Sworn and subscribed before me, the 27th day of Dec. 1798.

JOHN JENNINGS, ALDERMAN.



Deposition of Jane M'Farlin.
Jane M'Farlin, being sworn as aforesaid, does depose and say, that she lived
with A. Philips, from 8th November, 1797, to 5th August, 1798, and knew of no
sick persons being brought into the house, during that time.

JANE M'FARLIN. X her mark.
Sworn and subscribed before me, the 27th day of Dec. 1798.

JOHN JENNINGS, ALDERMAN.



Deposition of Mary Philips.
Mary Philips, widow of the late Alexander, being also sworn, does depose and
say, that no sick persons were brought into her house by her husband, or any
other person, during the last summer. Farther, that no person from the Deborah
boarded in her house, except Jonathan Farthingham, who had been sick and
discharged (cured) from the Marine Hospital, after the ship arrived in the city.

MARY PHILIPS.
Sworn and subscribbed before me, the 27th day of Dec. 1798.

JOHN JENNINGS, ALDERMAN.



Extract from Dr. Currie's defense of the opinions of the College of Physicians.
To weaken, and, as far as in their power, to invalidate the opinion of the
College respecting the origin of the disease in Philadelphia last year, the
Academy have brought forward the testimony of several persons in some degree
interested in disguising, or at least withholding some part of the truth. These
go to prove that the declaration of Alexander Philips, who told Messrs. Town
and Purdon, severally, and at different times, that he had brought sick persons
to his house, was false. Mr. Purdon had called on Philips to request payment of
an account he owed him -- Philips assured him that he would pay him in a few
days, as he had been down the river and brought up an old lodger, whom he had
occasion for as a witness, but that he was then sick.

That Philips had a man, belonging to the Deborah, sick in his house, at the
time he was sick himself, is certain from the testimony of Dr. Griffitts, who
prescribed for him.

There was no instance of the fever being in Kensington until the Deborah went
there, nor was it in any case known to be contagious before her arrival. The
people belonging to her, laborers who assisted to unload her, carpenters who
repaired her, and others who visited her, were the first who were attacked with
the disease; indeed, a very considerable proportion of the first cases have
been traced to this vessel. [ See the recapitulation at the end of this
chapter.]

It is probable that the contagion was imported from the West Indies in other
vessels besides the Deborah. On the 21st of July, the schooner Aurora, with
eleven passengers, and fourteen seamen, and the Ariel, with twenty-two
passengers, and twelve seamen, arrived at the fort from Cape-Nichola-Mole. Two
passengers died on board the Aurora, during her passage. She was boarded in the
bay of Delaware, on the 16th of July, by James Nagglee, pilot. Then it rained.
He got wet, and in that state, he slept upon the deck. He also slept upon the
deck on the 19th, exposed to the sun; and on the 22d, he complained of pains in
his legs and feet. He was taken to the Marine Hospital, on State-Island, on the
23d, and died (July 28th) -- the fifth day after his admission. Previous to his
death, he became delirious, vomited blood, and bled at the nose.

The mate of the Aurora also died at the Marine Hospital. When he was admitted,
he had a swelling in his groin, accompanied with sores in sundry other parts of
his body -- particularly his head; but, upon examination, he denied that it was
lues venera. When landed, he walked up to the hospital, and did not appear to
have a high fever; but, the day after, he was suddenly taken with a convulsion
fit, and died delirious on the sixth day after his admission.

The Ariel was boarded by James Roland, pilot, on the 16th of July; he slept in
the mate's birth, and was not exposed to the bad weather. He was a very
temperate, sober man. On the 25th, he complained of a severe pain in the head,
and was sent to the Marine Hospital on the 26th. When admitted, he had a slow
fever, and complained of great weakness. He died on the third day after his
admission. Previous to death, he was affected with the hickup, oppression of
the breast, and heavy breathing. He bled once at the mouth, and his skin was
yellow.

These circumstances induced the Board of Health, to prolong the quarantine of
the Aurora and Ariel to twenty days; during which, they were well cleansed,
washed with vinegar, white-washed, and had two of Wynkoop's ventilators working
on board. They came to the city on the 10th of August.

On the 19th of July, the brig Mary arrived at the fort from Kingston, Jamaica,
with six passengers and twenty-two seamen. After ten days quarantine, she came
up to the city, (July 29) and began to discharge her cargo, consisting of
coffee and cocoa, at Ross and Simpson's wharf, below Walnut-street. Part of the
cargo was much damaged, and in a putrid state. Several sudden deaths occurred
about this time in the neighborhood, and the inhabitants were alarmed. In
consequence, information was lodged at the health-office, purporting that the
coffee and cocoa, landed from said brig, and stored at Ross and Simpson's, was
in a putrid state, and extremely offensive. Likewise, that a store in the same
block of buildings, belonging to Mr. Dawson, contained a quantity of hides, in
a putrid and offensive condition. That Mr. Dawson had died that morning of a
fever, which had excited great alarm in that neighborhood, and that his
daughter was ill of the same fever. In consequence of this report, the mayor,
by request of the board, caused all the coffee to be returned on board the
brig; and ordered, that she should be removed from the wharf opposite to the
Windmill island; from whence she was, together with all the hands who worked
on board, removed to State-island, where the articles were landed for
purification, and the vessel carefully cleansed.

The Academy of Medicine, in their communication to the Board of Health, of the
8th of August, say, that they derive the rapid progress of the fever, during
the first week of August, to the foul air of several ships lately arrived in
the port, and from the damaged coffee of the above vessel. But, as the disease
had made some progress before the arrival of the bring Mary, it could not,
therefore, have proceeded from her alone.

The consulting physician, on the 25th of July, intimated to the Board of
Health, that two strangers, who had arrived at a tavern in Front-street, were
lying sick; and, on the 30th of the same month, Christopher Holmes, from
Penn-street, was sent to the Marine hospital; that the house was ordered to be
cleansed, and the bedding and apparel removed to the City Hospital for
purification. The same day, a report was made to the board, by Mr. James Yard
and Dr. Samuel Duffield, stating, that George Ralston, who had labored on
board the Deborah, died that day, after a short illness. A letter from Dr.
Hall, the same day, mentioned the death of a person, who was taken to the
Marine Hospital from the ship Nestor.

The number of deaths and new cases of the fever, which daily increased from
the 28th of July to the 6th of August, alarmed the citizens, and became a
general topic of conversation. The college of Physicians met on the sixth of
August: at which time about 26 cases of the fever were known to exist in the
city. After conferring together, they unanimously agreed to the following
resolutions; which were immediately communicated to the Board of Health:

Resolved, That the College inform the Board of Health, that a malignant
contagious fever has made its appearance in Water-street, between Walnut and
Spruce-streets, and in the vicinity thereof: and

That the College recommend to the Board of Health to procure the removal of
all the families that are situated between Walnut and Spruce-streets, and the
east side of Front street and the river; and to have all the shipping, lying
between Walnut and Spruce-streets removed to a proper distance from the city.

In consequence of this communication from the College, the Board of Health
met, and on the 7th, they published the following recommendation, viz.

Health-Office, 7 th August, 1798.
Whereas, the Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals of the port
and city of Philadelphia, having received information from the College of
Physicians, "that a malignant contagious fever has made its appearance in
Water-street, between Walnut and Spruce-streets, and in the vicinity thereof;"
-- and the reports of Dr. Samuel Duffield and Dr. Park, appointed particularly
to examine that part of the city, specifying the particular cases found therein
-- Therefore, resolved, that in order to prevent, as much as possible, all
communication with that part of the city, that the health-officer cause the
vessels now lying at the wharves between Tun-alley and Jesse and Robert Waln's
wharf, including the said wharf, to be removed, and that no vessel of any
description whatever be suffered to come to the said wharves until the further
order of the board.

The board also earnestly recommend to the inhabitants of that part of the
city, included between Walnut and Spruce-streets, and the east side of
Front-street and the river, and also those immediately in the vicinity thereof,
to remove without the bounds of the city and Liberties as speedily as possible.

By order of the Board of Managers, WILLIAM JONES, President. ATTEST, TIMOTHY
PAXSON, Clerk.

The vessels were accordingly removed from the wharves above specified. But,
instead of being "removed to a proper distance from the city," as recommended
by the College, they were distributed to the other wharves. Most of them were
sent to the upper parts of the city. The brig Mary, who brought the damaged
coffee, etc. was the only vessel which was removed from the city. Perhaps from
this cause it was, that the disease, soon afterward, so rapidly spread, and
produced such a general depopulation. Another circumstance which may have aided
its spreading, ought not to pass unnoticed: a quantity of the damaged coffee,
before mentioned, was scattered on the wharf, which the itinerant poor
unfortunately gathered up; and thus, probably, carried home the instrument of
their destruction!

The removal of the inhabitants, from the city, was earnestly recommended in
the daily papers; nor was any time lost in communicating the cause for alarm.
The following communication, recommending provision for the removal of the
poor, is extracted from Porcupine's Gazette, of August 7th, viz.

The yellow fever is in this city. It is now come out, that it made its
appearance about a week ago. Several persons are dead with it, and, according
to all the accounts I have heard, it spreads with greater rapidity than it did
last year.

A number of stories, with regard to its origin, are, as usual, on foot; but, I
believe, the best way would be to lay aside all vain disputes on this subject,
and prepare, as quick as possible, to make provision for removing those who
have not the means of removing themselves, to situations more healthy.

The Philadelphia Gazette, on the same day, contained the following

Communication -- An immediate attention to the advice of the board of health,
in evacuating the infected quarter is, perhaps, the only measure by which our
unfortunate city can be rescued from increasing affliction. Individual interest
should yield to a temporary sacrifice, in order to avert the public calamity.
It is a duty every citizen owes to the community, as well as to himself, to be
vigilant in removing the objects, and thereby impeding the progress of
contagion.

To those who necessarily remain in the city, it is almost superfluous to
intimate the necessity of avoiding those parts where the contagion prevails. A
sentiment of self-preservation, if not of duty to society, will be a sufficient
restraint. -- Under the favor of heaven, and our own precaution, we may then
hope to be soon restored to health, prosperity, and happiness.

The Academy of Medicine met on the 8th of August, to communicate their
sentiments to the Board of Health: they presented the following document, which
was published for the information of the public, viz.

THE Academy of Medicine of Philadelphia, having taken into consideration the
existence of a malignant bilious fever in this city, have conceived it to be
their duty to lay before the managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, the
following facts respecting its origin, and the means of checking its progress.

We have, upon inquiry, discovered that a case of this fever existed in the
city on the 6th of June, and that several cases of it existed in July, in parts
of the city remote from the river, and wholly unconnected with each other. They
appeared to originate from the putrid exhalations of alleys and gutters, and
docks, and from the stagnating water in the neighborhood of the city. We
derive the late rapid increase of the ^ever from the foul air of several ships
lately arrived in the port, and from some damaged coffee which arrived in a
brig from Jamaica on the 29th of July. In the course of our inquiries into the
origin of the fever, we did not meet with a single fact that could support the
opinion of contagion being imported in the bodies or clothes of sick people in
the ships or vessels which lie between Walnut and Spruce streets, where the
disease has prevailed most. Many respectable modern authorities assert that the
yellow fever is not contagious in the West Indies, and repeated observations
satisfy us, that it is rarely so during the warm weather in the United States.
None of the cases we have as yet seen, have propagated it, and we conceive it
to be an error as absurd, in its nature, as it has been fatal in its operation
upon the city of Philadelphia, that the contagion of a disease should adhere to
the timber of a ship after a sea voyage, and should spread from the timber of
the ship without contact through an extensive neighborhood, and cease to
communicate itself afterward by long and close connection of the sick with
their families and attendants. We lament that this fact, together with many
others upon the nature and origin of the yellow fever, which were stated in our
letter to the Governor, on the 1st of December, 1797, and by him laid before
the legislature of the state, have been treated with total neglect in the
present health law: the distress we felt upon seeing that law is, however, much
alleviated by the reflection, that we have not contributed, in any degree, by
supporting an erroneous opinion, to reproduce the present alarming calamity of
our city.

We beg leave to recommend for the purpose of checking the progress of the
fever, an attention to the following directions:

1st. The removal of all the families from those parts of the city where the
disease, from the contamination of the atmosphere, appears chiefly to exist,
and the preventing those parts being visited by the citizens.

2dly. The removal of all ships and putrid articles of commerce from the
wharves and stores of the city.

3dly. The cleaning of the docks, wharves, yards and cellars; also the washing
of the gutters every day, and of the streets and alleys three times a week, by
means of pumps and fire engines.

4thly. The appointment of a sufficient number of physicians to take care of
such of the poor as may be affected with the fever.

5thly. Publicly to advise the citizens to avoid all the usual exciting causes
of fever, such as intemperance, fatigue, excessive heat, the night air, all
violent and debilitating passions of the mind.

6thly. To advise them, in every case of indisposition, however slight in
appearance, to apply immediately for medical aid.

Signed by order of the Academy of Medicine of Philadelphia, PHILIP SING
PHYSIC, President. FRANCIS BOWS SAYRE, Sec'ry.


The City Hospital was now opened for the reception of the sick, and, on the
9th, the board of health gave public intimation, "that on a certificate being
presented to the Health-officer, from any regular practicing physician, stating
any person to be afflicted with a contagious disorder, he is directed to grant
an order, and have them removed to the City Hospital."

From the 1st to the 8th of August, the total number of deaths in the City and
Liberties, was fifty-three: four sick persons were admitted into the
City-Hospital on the 8th; nine persons on the 9th, and eleven on the 10th. The
deaths and new cases daily became more numerous; the alarm increased, and the
flight of the inhabitants was now general.

Recapitulation of the principal occurrences previous to the 9th of August, and
dates of the first cases.
1798.
April 4. Health Law enacted. May 1. Board of Health elected -- the law
commences. 28. The Board are informed that persons and goods are landed from
the vessels under quarantine, in violation of the law. June 5. Benjamin Jones
died -- See page 36. 6. Mary Wrigglesworth has the sever -- See appendix, page
xx. 11. Rebecca Trested has the fever -- See append. p. xx. 12. Two persons
violate the Health law, by going on board a vessel under quarantine. 16. The
Board are informed that persons and goods had been landed from vessels, in the
state of Delaware, previous to reaching the place of quarantine, and from
thence brought to the city. 27. Eliza Curran has the fever -- See appendix, p.
xx. July 2. Mark Miller died of the yellow fever. See p. 35. Molly Zeller has
the fever -- See appendix, p. xx. 5. Three hundred and forty-three persons
arrive in the city, from places in the West Indies, where the yellow fever
raged -- See pages 31 and 39. 8. Ship Deborah arrived at the fort. 11. Miss
Byrne has the fever -- See appendix, p. xx. 12. Mr. Vannost has the fever --
See appendix, p. xx. 18. The Deborah arrives at Race-street wharf. 25. George
Ralston, a labourer on board the Deborah, attacked with the fever -- died. 26.
A ship carpenter, who worked on the Deborah, and lodged at A. Thompson's,
Water-street, dies of the yellow fever. 28. Another of A. Thompson's lodgers
dies of the yellow fever -- The fever was not in any instance known to be
infectious previous to this date -- The Deborah removes to Kensington. 31. Mr.
David Jamie, another of A. Thompson's lodgers, takes the fever -- and on the
5th of August A. Thompson's child was attacked. Aug. 1. A. Philips, next house
to A. Thompson, attacked -- died the 4th -- James Porter, next door to George
Streeton, attacked -- died. Aug. 2. John Butcher, who worked on board the
Deborah, attacked -- James Ashmore, apprentice to Mr. Yard, worked on board the
Deborah, attacked -- died. -- James Kerr, George Adams, and -- Simons, also
apprentices to Mr. Yard, were all attacked a few days after Ashmore. 3. Two
laborers from the Deborah, named Sutton, attacked -- one died. -- Samuel
Baker, Daniel de Benneville, Catherine Pecky, Mrs. Benneville, Joshua Baker,
and Jacob Miller, were attacked previous to the 9th August, and had either been
by the Deborah, or nigh some persons sick of the fever -- three of them died.
-- John Saunders, near where the brig Mary was unloading the damaged coffee,
attacked. 6. The College of Physicians meet, and report 26 cases of the yellow
fever. 7. The Board of Health make public, the existence of the yellow fever in
the city -- City Hospital opened. 8. The Academy of Medicine present their
opinion to the Board of Health, see page 50 -- four persons admitted into the
City Hospital. 9. Nine persons admitted into the City-Hospital.
CHAPTER III.
The disease increases -- City deserted -- Arrangements for the removal of the
sick to the City Hospital -- Burial of the dead -- Care of the sick poor in the
City -- Want of success at the City Hospital -- Removal of the poor to tents --
Prospect of the City at the crisis of the disease -- Decline of the disease,
etc. -- State of the City from the commencement to the decline of the calamity.

ABOUT the beginning of August, the newspapers announced the uncommon
healthiness of the city; a circumstance which has occurred toward the
beginning of that pestilence in almost every city of the United States, where
it has appeared. It was the case with Philadelphia, New York, and Baltimore, in
1797; and with Philadelphia, Beston, New York, and some other towns, this year.
Even, on the first appearance of the disease, we have been congratulated for
the uncommon health of the city. Declarations of uncommon health, at this
season, will, perhaps, hereafter, be looked upon as an omen of disease.

The publications of the College of Physicians, the Board of Health, and the
Academy of Medicine, on the sixth, seventh, and eighth days of August, produced
the most serious alarm amongst all classes of citizens. Numbers fled, and
crowded into the surrounding towns and country, to the distance of twenty,
thirty, and even fifty miles from the city, to provide refuge for their
families and friends. The removals from the city were much more general and
more rapid than in 1793. It is probable, that at least twice, if not three
times the number of persons fled this year, as at any former period. Many who
had been witnesses to the distresses of 1793 and 1797, and appeared then the
most undaunted, were now the first to remove from danger. For the first three
weeks after the alarm, the streets were crowded with wagons and carts, loaded
with goods and furniture. Forty or fifty wagons, besides carts, have been seen
in their route to the country, in one direction. One square, in the center of
the city, where, in 1793, there removed only about twenty-five persons, in
1798, there were above one hundred and forty. The dispersion began about the
sixth and eighth of August, and, although most numerous in the two succeeding
weeks, they continued partially until the middle of September. Many, who at the
beginning, when the disease was confined to particular parts of the city, had
adopted the resolution of staying, and confining themselves to their houses,
were afterward induced to remove; because, the disease approached either their
doors or neighborhood. The number who fled from the city have been estimated
at three-fourths to five-sixths of the whole inhabitants: the total number of
inhabitants have been estimated at fifty to seventy thousand. We have estimated
them Page 8.
at fifty-five to sixty thousand; and we think it probable, that about forty
thousand may have removed from the city.

In 1793, our citizens complained of inhospitality in the country, arising
principally from the terror created by the novelty of the disorder. Then it was
believed to be as contagious in the country as in the unfortunate city, which
poured forth its fugitives in every direction. It was not, therefore, to be
wondered, that our citizens were shunned, as if even their approach carried
inevitable destruction. To repel supposed dangers, guards were stationed, with
arms, to stop the flight of the wanderers. They were then refused the
necessaries of life; and, in many instances, they died for want. Many could not
always procure a comfortable lodging. The case was rather different this year.
An idea, now prevailed, grounded upon the experience of 1793 and 1797, that the
disorder was not communicable in the country; in consequence of which, there
was less difficulty made to the reception of our citizens. Throughout the
country, the houses were generally open for them: accommodations were furnished
at reasonable rates: the extortions practiced were few. There were some
however, signalized by avarice.

Although accommodations were generally afforded reasonable still the sufferings
of our citizens were very considerable. Many persons, accustomed to spacious
houses, and all the comforts and luxuries which Philadelphia could furnish,
were obliged to content themselves with, perhaps, one small room, wherein two,
three or four beds were crowded together; besides this, in some situations
remote from markets, the fare was very coarse; and, in some places, not
abundant. Instances have occurred, of women, in a state of parturition, in
bleak, desolate rooms, almost without assistance.

The Health Office was removed from Walnut street to the City Hall, where it
was kept open, night and day. The City-Tavern was shut up, and the different
public offices, banks, etc. were removed, either to the remoter parts of the
city, to Germantown, Trenton, Chester, etc. etc.

Meantime, the disease continued to increase, and appeared in parts of the
city, remote from where it first was discovered. The number of deaths in the
city and suburbs was collected for the newspapers, and published daily. The
returns of the City-Hospital were also regularly reported; and, after the 15th
of August, a daily report of the new cases was published, collected from the
different physicians, by Mr. JOHN JARVIS, who was employed by the Board of
Health for that purpose. These reports were a index by which the citizens were
enabled, with some degree of certainty, to judge of its progress, extension and
decline. The arrangements of the Board of Health, for the removal of the sick,
interment of the dead, etc. were judicious and early. They empowered all the
regular practicing physicians to grant orders for admission into the City
Hospital, and coachees were provided by the Board for that purpose. -- At the
Hospital burying-ground, graves were always ready: the grave diggers remained
day and night in the yard. -- When a person died, it was only necessary to make
application at the Health-Office, where hearses and coffins were in readiness
to convey the corpse to the grave. The patients in the City-Hospital were
placed under the management of Dr. Philip Sing Physic, and Dr. Samuel Cooper.
They resided there constantly, and were furnished with two assistants; -- a
competant number of nurses and attendants, with medicine, and every thing
necessary for the comfort and relief of the sick; -- nor were the poor, who
were sick in the city, neglected: skilful physicians were appointed to attend
them, and medicines provided for their use, at the expense of the public. The
north part of the city, and the Northern-Liberties, were placed under the care
of Dr. Francis Bows Sayre, Dr. James Mease, and Dr. Kinlaid: Southwark, and
the south part of the city, were attended by Dr. John Church and Dr. Benjamin
Duffield; and the ^^or of the city were attended by Dr. Samuel Duffield:

In the early period of the calamity, the disease assumed a more malignant
form, than it did in '93 or '97, and very great mortality took place: not one
in six cases now recovered. Several of the physicians announced their intention
of leaving the city -- perhaps, urged by the recollection of the great
mortality among physicians the year previous. -- An idea that it was the
plague, and incurable, was generally propagated and believed: Nurses were with
difficulty procured, perhaps from the experience of '97, which proved, that the
native blacks were not more exempt from the disease than the whites. -- An
almost universal antipathy to the City Hospital prevailed. The terror of being
forceably sent there, prevented many from acknowledging their sickness, until
they were unable to conceal it; and scarcely one patient in ten would
acknowledge that his disease was the prevailing fever. This operated in
producing a delay in calling for medical assistance, until that period, when it
was difficult to overcome it by the power of medicine. A want of confidence
likewise prevented many from applying to a physician for advice. They were
convinced, from experience, that in jarring opinions, humanity is often lost
sight of, by an obstinate adherence to error: in the former years, the medical
pen was, in many instances, dipped in gall. "The several combatants took their
peculiar grounds, and disdained, in too many cases, to save the life of a human
being, by following any other suggestions than their own. They distracted the
public mind, and shook all confidence in medical assistance."

But, the reverse of this was exhibited this season; and it was truly
agreeable, to observe the harmony that prevailed among the physicians in this
period of sickness and distress. They all agreed in advising their friends to
leave the city; although they " derived" the disease from different causes. The
practice of the one, therefore, became more assimilated to that of the other.

The Board of Health, impressed with a sense of the consequences of delaying to
apply for medical aid, on the 13th of August, published the following
recommendation:

Health-Office. The Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals have
observed, with deep regret, the fatal consequences of delay in the applications
for medical aid, to persons afflicted with the prevailing malignant fever, and
that the removal of patients to the City Hospital, in many cases, is
procrastinated until they are literally sent there to die.

They recommend, in the most earnest manner, the early removal of patients to
the City Hospital, -- where, the public may be assured, that every possible
comfort and accommodation will be afforded. -- The public are informed, that
the care of the patients, and management of the City-Hospital, is committed to
Doctor Physic and Doctor Cooper, who reside constantly there, and whose
professional eminence, it is presumed, will ensure a just confidence.

An apothecary also resides at the Hospital, with an ample store of the best
medicines.

The Board consider this recommendation as of the highest importance, and
entreat the attention of their fellow-citizens.

By order of the Board of managers: Wm. Jones, President.

Notwithstanding this recommendation, the fatal effects of delay in calling in
the aid of medicine, daily became more numerous; in consequence, the Board, on
the 18th of August, repeated their admonition in the following publication:

The malignity of the prevailing fever, and its insidious approaches, are such,
as to resist the power of medicine, unless application is made in the first
instance of complaint. -- The Board lament that their recommendation has not
been attended to; as, in most instances, the patients have been ill three or
four days previous to application for medical aid; to which, in a great degree,
is to be attributed, the deaths of many valuable members of society. The Board
reiterate their call to their fellow-citizens, and earnestly request, that not
a moment may be delayed in obtaining medical assistance.

The unparalleled mortality which occurred in the City Hospital, the first five
days after it was opened, alarmed Doctors Physic and Cooper, the resident
physicians. Thirty-one patients had been admitted, of which ten died, and none
had as yet recovered; in consequence of which, they addressed the following
letter to doctor Rush:

City Hospital, August 12, 1798. DEAR DOCTOR,
Our want of success in treating the prevailing disease, makes us anxious to
hear from you, in hopes you may have added some new and useful remedy to those
heretofore in use. It is true, all our patients have been sick, at least two,
and some of them nine days previously to their admission. Is there any mode of
relieving these unfortunate people, which you can suppose we are unacquainted
with? We recollect your observing, that an emetic had been useful, after the
disease appeared to be mitigated by bleeding. If you can spare a few minutes to
write to us, on these subjects, you will much oblige your sincere friends, etc.

PHILIP SING PHYSIC. SAMUEL COOPER.


Dr. Benjamin Rush.
THE ANSWER.
My dear and worthy Friends,
I am sorry to discover, by your letter, your want of success in the treatment
of our malignant fever, at the City Hospital. I do not wonder at it: you seldom
see the disease in is first stage; and, when you do, you meet it in an
aggravated state, by the motion your patients undergo in being conveyed to the
Hospital.

In answer to your request, I have sat down to inform you of the practice which
I have adopted in our present epidemic. In the treatment of the yellow fever of
last year, I have occasionally lamented the loss of patients after reducing the
pulse by bleeding, and by the liberal use of purging medicines. I have
suspected that death occurred in those cases, from the stagnation of acrid bile
in the gallbladder, or its close adherence to the upper bowels, in the manner
described by Dr. Mitchell, in his account of the yellow fever-in Virgina, in
the year 1741. The slow pulse which occurs about the 4th day, I suspect further
to be the effect of this bile. Its effects in a much less morbid state in the
jaundice, in reducing the pulse, is well known. Mr. John Hunter says, he once
met with an instance in which it fell to thirty-two strokes in a minute in that
disease. Revolving these facts in my mind, I resolved to try to remove this
bile, by exciting an artificial cholera morbus, about the 4th day of the fever.
I was the more disposed to attempt this method of cure, from believing, as I
have done for several years, that a Cholera Morbus is nothing but the first
grade of billious fever thrown in upon the bowels, just as the Dysentery and
Diarrhoea are the internal forms of a common billious or intermitting fever.

I began this mode of treating the fever eights day ago. My solicitude for the
issue of it was very great. Thank God, it has succeeded to my wishes; and
thereby lessoned, in a great degree, the anxiety and distress which accompany
our attendance upon this ferocious disease. The medicines I use for shaking the
gallbladder and bowels, and discharging the contents are, tartar-emetic,
gamboge, jalap and calomel, combined, or given separately, and in small or
large doses, according to circumstances. Perhaps Turpeth mineral might be added
to this list of vomiting and purging medicines with advantage. In one case, I
gave four grains of tartar-emetic, and twenty of calomel. It operated freely
upwards and downwards, and brought away a large quantity of green and black
bile, but without exciting the least cramp or pain in the stomach or bowels. At
the time I gave it, death appeared to be creeping upon the patient. The next
day he was out of danger. The person thus rescued from the grave, was the son
of Mr. Richard Renshaw. Indeed, I have not, as yet, lost a sing^e patient to
whom I have given this powerful remedy. In one instance I fear it will fail. It
is in a boy of sixteen years of age, to whom I have given near thirty grains of
tartar-emetic in the course of a few hours, without producing the least
evacuation from his stomach or bowels. I have observed the same increase of
strength after its operation, that we observe after bleeding and purging in the
beginning of the fever.

Vomits are old remedies in the yellow fever of the West Indies. I gave them on
the first day of the disease in the year 1793, and always without success. They
uniformly did harm, when given in the beginning of the fever, in its worst
grade, in 1797. The reason of this failure in their efficacy, I now perceive
was, because they were given before the violent morbid action in the system was
reduced or moderated by bleeding and purging. After this change is induced in
the disease, they are perfectly safe. The time for exhibiting them should be
regulated by the pulse, and other symptoms. In moderate cases of the fever,
they are as proper in its first stage, as on the fourth day. As there is a
blistering point in all fevers, so there appears to be an emetic point in the
yellow fever. It may occur on the second, and it may be protracted to the sixth
or seventh day of the disease. I have not given the medicine I have mentioned
in any case where the patient complained of pain or burning in the stomach;
but, I have considered a nausea, and a moderate degree of puking, as no
obstacle to its use; for, Dr. Physic has taught me by his dissections, that
these symptoms may exist without the least inflammation in the stomach, and that
they have been absent where the stomach has appeared after death to have been
highly inflamed.

The cure of the fever should not rest upon a single dose of the medicine. I
have given two doses of it in a day in several cases, and have given it in one
case, every day for three successive days.

It has often been remarked, that no two epidemics are exactly alike. They vary
not only in different climates, but in the same climate in different years.
They even vary with the changes of the weather in the same season. The fever of
1797 differed in several particulars from the fever of 1793, and the present
epidemic differs materially from both. In many of the cases I have seen, it
exceeds the fever of last year in its malignity. These variations in diseases
call for corresponding changes in our practice.

I have communicated an account of the time and man (...) discharging the
contents of the gallbladder and bowels to ^^veral of our brethren. I ardently
hope it may be universally successful in their hands!

If any thing new occurs in your practice in the Hospital, do me the favor of
informing me of it.

With best wishes for your health and success in your present arduous
situation, I am your sincere friend,

BENJAMIN RUSH.

Doctors PHYSIC and COOPER. August 13, '98.
The following remarks, attempting to prove that the disease is contagious, is
taken from the Philadelphia Gazette:

"The present alarming situation of our city, is, alas! truly deplorable --
almost in a general state of infection with a disease, to whose virulence,
medicinal skill is lamentably compelled to acknowledge its inferiority! Former
experience is rendered, in a great measure, useless, by the very material
difference in the nature of the disease. -- The most copious bleeding, and the
most violent purgatives have been found ineffectual; and the success that will
attend the new system of emptying the gallbladder, is, at least,
problematical. With regard to the opinion of the non-contagion of the disorder,
I have very great reason to doubt it. I have known, lately, several instances,
that could not be accounted for upon any other principle than that of
contagion. The most striking of the cases I allude to, is, where several of a
family, living in a healthy and uninfected part of the city, took the disorder
from a person in the family, whom they had for several days closely attended;
without having themselves been in any part of the city that could even have
been supposed to be infected. I would caution my fellow-citizens not to trust
too implicitly to this fatal opinion, which has been so industriously
propagated. A confidence in it, in case it should happen to be erroneous, may
prove the destruction of thousands, while, by acting under a disbelief of it,
and using every possible precaution, many lives may be preserved. It is at
least doubtful whether it is, or is not, contagious; and there being a doubt, I
think the wisest course to be pursued is obvious: I would advise my friends, to
avoid, as much as possible, exposing themselves to the night air, or morning
fogs; nothing tending more effectually to predispose the body to infection."

Many persons who had gone into the country for safety, were afterward seized
with the fever. It is more than probable that they had imbibed the contagion
before they left the city. In consequence, the Board of Health, on the 22d of
August, authorized the physicians to receive into the Hospital, all such
persons as came from the country. There were now about fifty patients in the
Hospital: the new cases amounted to about forty, and the deaths, to above
thirty, per day. -- The difficulty of procuring nurses to attend the sick,
induced the Board of Health, to solicit such persons, of good character, as
were willing and qualified for that office, to leave their address at the
Health Office; where citizens, who required them, were invited to apply.

The sufferings of the poor, and, indeed of many others in middling
circumstances of life, were extreme: deprived, as they were, of all employment,
and unable to procure money from those who owed them; -- a stagnation to trade
and other causes, rendered them incapable of removing their families to the
country; and many of them were almost, literally, starving: even the resources
of credit were not left; as there were very few stores open, or bakers who
remained in town. In this crisis, the Guardians of the Poor liberally stepped
forward; and, in junction with the Board of Health, erected tents on the east
bank of the river Schuylkill; to which they invited the citizens to remove with
their families. There were also tents afterward erected at Masters' Place, for
the same laudable purpose; and provision was made for the relief of the poor in
the city, whose situations prevented them from removing.

The following are the names of the physicians who remained in town, at this
trying period:
Dr. Rush, Dr. Griffitts, Dr. Mease, Dr. Wista^, Dr. Gallaher, Dr. Caldwell,
Dr. Harris, Dr. Connover, Dr. Proudfit, Dr. Leib, Dr. Church, Dr. Boys, Dr. S.
Duffield, Dr. B. Duffield, Dr. Park, Dr. Stuart, Dr. Strong, Dr. Biglow, Dr.
Kinlaid, Dr. P^ie^fer, Dr. Yeatman, Dr. Trexo.
French Physicians.
Dr. Munges, Dr. Pascallis, Dr. Laroche, Dr. Devivier.
Names of the members of the Board of Health, who continued to meet and
transact business:
William Jones, William Penrose, William Linnard, William Dawson, James Oldden,
Isaac Price, John Watson, John Inskeep, Timothy Paxson, Joseph Eastburn.
William Allen, Health-Officer. William Nesbitt, Clerk to the Health-Office.
The two latter gentlemen were in this dangerous occupation in the years 1793
and 1797.

The increased malignity of the disease, together with the extreme distresses
of the poor, induced the Board of Health to present the following pathetic
address to the public:

Health-Office, September 1, 1798. Fellow Citizens,
Impelled by the awful progress and unparalleled malignity of the prevailing
fever, we are constrained to address your feelings, as well as your reason, in
order to avert the fatal destruction, which, with rapid strides, is pervading
our ill-fated city and suburbs.

The best skill of our physicians, and all the powers of medicine, it must be
acknowledged, have proved unequal in the contest with this devouring poison.

With the most affecting sympathy, and anxious solicitude, we have, to the best
of our judgments, endeavored to employ, as circumstances appeared to require,
the power and the means entrusted to us, in arresting its progress, and
alleviating its concomitant miseries. We shall continue to employ them with
unremitting zeal; but, we have neither the power nor the means to accomplish
ALL THE MEASURES necessary to check its extension, or provide for the pressing
exigencies of the moment. The powers delegated, and appropriations made by law,
to the institutions under our direction, are impotent, indeed, when compared to
the magnitude of the occasion.

It remains for our fellow-citizens to attain, by their energy, the ends,
which, alone, can stop its progress and diminish its horrors.

We have, in conjunction with the Guardians of the Poor, caused tents to be
erected on the east bank of the Schuylkill, for the accommodation of the
indigent; where near twelve hundred are already provided for, out of the fund
appropriated for the ordinary relief of the poor. This is but a partial
mitigation of the evils which environ thousands who have a claim upon the
philanthropy of those who are in more fortunate circumstances.

The difficulty of procuring a place of refuge, at present, in the country, is
too well known; and the expense attending the removal of a family, has
discouraged many from the attempt, who are in circumstances to live comfortably
at home.

What remains to be done? Citizens of respectability and influence! -- come
forward, and form yourselves into a committee for the purpose of erecting, on
the west bank of the Schuylkill, all the tents that can be collected: let the
tents be floored with boards, and made as comfortable as possible. -- If tents
cannot be had, boards, in abundance, may be procured for the erection of sheds.
Admonish those citizens who have no place of refuge, to take shelter there, --
particularly those from the east part of the city, the district of Southwark,
and the Northern Liberties. -- In short, ALL who can leave their homes, without
manifest injury; -- except those who are necessary for the protection of the
city and liberties.

The committee should have the general superintendance and regulation of the
tents, and authority to preserve order; contract for certain supplies of bread,
meat, vegetables, wood, etc. at the lowest possible rates. Those who are not in
circumstances to pay, must be supplied by public bounty.

It is at least an unequal, perhaps an unjust mode of raising money by an
appeal to the humanity of generous individuals; but, if on any occasion, it may
be justified, the present may be assumed without hesitation.

We call your attention to the actual and undisguised state of our city.
Consider the mortality and rapid increase of the sick at so early a period. --
View the list of your physicians, and mark how few are at their posts; and we
believe you will think, with us, that the preservation of health is only to be
attained by flight.

Do not flatter yourselves, fellow-citizens, that this picture is too highly
colored: we speak from conviction, and a knowledge of facts; and doubt not,
but that the lives of hundreds, perhaps of thousands, may be preserved, by the
adoption of these or similar measures.

WILLIAM JONES, President.

Much merit is due to the framer of this elegant, feeling, and pathetic
address, which, in a very ample manner, produced the contemplated relief. The
Board of Health were, however, aware, that it could not produce the immediate
supply which their exigencies presently required. To obviate which, they
requested their committee, which was appointed to act in junction with a
committee of the Guardians of the Poor, for the purpose of raising means for
the relief and assistance of persons desirous of removing from the City and
Liberties, to procure, if possible, the necessary aid. They accordingly met,
and agreed to the following resolutions:

Resolved, That a general subscription be solicited on loan; the sums to be
subscribed to be reimbursed out of any fund which the Legislature may hereafter
appropriate for the purpose.

Resolved, That Peter Mierken, William Jones, Isaac Price, James Oldden and
Jonathan Robeson, be appointed to receive the moneys so raised, to be applied
under the directions of the Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, and the
Guardians of the Poor.

Approved by the Board of Guardians of the Poor, PETER MIERKEN, President.
Almshouse, Sept. 3, 1798. Approved by the Board of Managers of the Marine and
City Hospitals, WILLIAM JONES, President.
Health-Office, Sept. 4, 1798.
Scarcely had the abovementioned address, and resolutions of the joint
committees, made known to the public the deplorable state of the city, and
sufferings of the poor, than the citizens of Philadelphia, then residing at
Germantown, actuated by the characteristic philanthropy and benevolence, for
which they are so eminently distinguished, met, and came to the following
resolutions, viz.

Germantown, September 3, 1798.
The citizens of Philadelphia at present residing in and near Germantown, being
deeply affected at the accumulating distress of their fellow-citizens who
remain in the city of Philadelphia, and particularly impressed (from the
address of the Board of Health of the 1st instant, and the resolutions of the
Committee of the Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals and the
Guardians of the Poor, dated this day) of the necessity of immediately
affording all the relief in their power, convened this afternoon at the Union
School-House, for the purpose of advancing the objects designated in the
address and resolutions --

The Hon. Thomas Mifflin, Esquire in the chair. James Gibson, Sec'ry.

The chairman read to the meeting the address of the Board of Health, as
published in the papers -- and the resolutions of a committee of the Managers
of the Marine and City Hospitals, and a committee of the Board of Guardians of
the Poor.

The chairman then proceeded to mention the extent to which the Board of
Managers and the Guardians of the Poor were authorized by law to provide funds
for defraying the expenses of these establishments; and information being
given, by other members, of the expenditures and appropriations of these funds
already made, which rendered them inadequate to the demands of the present
exigency -- the meeting came to the following resolutions:

Resolved, That a subscription for a loan, not exceeding 30,000 dollars, for
the assistance and relief of our suffering fellow-citizens, be forthwith opened.

That Robert Waln, Richard Hill Morris, General Morgan, Isaac Morris, Richard
Peter's, Robert Smith, Charles Shoemaker, William Rawle, Daniel Smith, Henry
Pratt, Charles Biddle, Samuel W. Fisher, George Latimer, John Wall, Robert
Hare, William Sansom, Robert Ralston, and William Buckley, be a committee to
procure subscriptions to the said loan.

That the committee be authorized to borrow of any of the Banks, such sum, not
exceeding the sum now agreed to be raised, as it may be necessary to advance
for the purposes of these resolutions.

That the committee shall appoint one of their number treasurer, to whom each
member shall, from time to time, pay over his collections; and the treasurer
shall, on receipt thereof, deposit the same in the Bank of Pennsylvania, in an
account to be opened for that purpose, and subject to the drafts of the
Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, and the Guardians of the Poor, after
deducting the amount of any moneys advanced on the credit of the fund.

Resolved, That the Secretary cause the proceedings of this meeting to be
published in one or more of the newspapers of the city of Philadelphia.
Adjourned.

Signed by order of the meeting, THO'S. MIFFLIN, Chairman.

The prospect which the city now afforded was truly deplorable. Accounts, from
almost every quarter east of Seventh-street, furnished the most gloomy pictures
of disease and death. The City Hospital contained about 100 sick persons, and
the daily admissions amounted to about 22. One hundred and seven new cases, and
sixty-seven deaths, per day, had been reported See table, at the end of this
chapter.
-- and to add, if possible, to the general distress, the sons of rapine and
robbery were availing themselves of the unguarded state of the city, to enhance
themselves by their ignominious plunder. On the night of the 2d of September,
the bank of Pennsylvania was opened, and robbed to the amount of one hundred
and sixty-two thousand eight hundred and twenty-one dollars and sixty one
cents, in cash and notes, the particulars of which we will hereafter relate.
Every thing seemed to portray ruin and desolation: even the persons employed to
drive the hearses and coachees, for the conveyance of the sick, by their bad
behavior, were aiding the mass of perplexity. In consequence of which, the
Board of Health were induced to advertise for sober and well-recommended
persons to fill this office.

To alleviate, in some degree, the sufferings of their fellow-citizens, Drs.
Rush and Griffitts published the following salutary

MEDICAL ADVICE TO THE CITIZENS OF PHILADELPHIA.
The following directions for the prevention and treatment of the prevailing
fever, are affectionately recommended to those citizens of Philadelphia, who
are unable to procure the regular attendance and advice of physicians, by
BENJAMIN RUSH, SAMUEL P. GRIFFITTS. September 3d, 1798.

THE seeds of the disease may exist in the body, for a considerable time,
without doing any harm. It is generally excited by one or more of the following
causes, which of course, ought to be carefully avoided, viz. fatigue, a long
walk, standing in the sun, or in a current of air, intemperance in eating and
drinking, costiveness, violent passions, or sudden emotions of the mind, thin
dressed, light bed clothes, and, above all, the night air.

It is of consequence for our citizens to know, that we have but one fever in
our city at present, and that every febrile indisposition partakes of the
prevailing malignant epidemic. Hundreds have died from mistaking the first
stage of the fever for a common cold. The mistake is a natural one; for, it
comes on like a cold, and is frequently excited by cool, or cold air. This
remark is intended to produce applications for medical aid as soon as possible
after feeling the least symptom of indisposition at the present juncture.

In the forming state of the fever, when the patient feels slightly indisposed,
and before he is confined to his bed, the following remedies generally check
the disease:

A purge of salts, castor oil, or a dose of jalap and calomel. If these fail of
giving relief, a gentle sweat should be excited in the usual way. If there be
much pain in the head or back, and the pulse be full, or tense, ten or twelve
ounces of blood should be lost, before the use of the sweat, and either before
or after taking the purge. Entire rest from business and exercise of all kinds
will be necessary to give efficacy to the above remedies.

If the existence of the disease were more early, and more generally admitted,
and the remedies which have been recommended, used before the fever was
completely formed, there are the strongest reasons to believe there would be
much less mortality from it.

After the disease is formed, and appears with more or less of the following
symptoms, viz. chills, great heat, headache, a redness in the eyes, sickness
at the stomach, vomiting, pains in the back, limbs and bowels, etc. the
following remedies are proper.

1. The loss of ten or twelve ounces of blood, two or three times a day, while
the pulse continues to be full, or tense. If the pulse should be slower, and
apparently weaker than natural, it calls for bleeding as much as it does when
it discovers preternatural fullness and tension.

2. The bowels should be purged, at the same time, with calomel mixed with
jalap or rhubarb, in powders or in pills. -- The operation of this purging
medicine should be aided, when practicable, by clysters, composed of half an
ounce of glauber salts, dissolved in half a pint of warm water, or of half a
pint of warm water with sweet oil, molasses, and common salt, of each a
table-spoonful, in it.

The bowels should be kept gently open through the whole course of the disease,
by means of the above clysters, and any other gently purging medicine.

3. If the stomach should be sick and oppressed with bile, a vomit of
ipecacuana, or tartar emetic may be given at any time on the 3d or 4th day of
the disease, provided the pulse has been reduced by previous bleeding and
purging. From five to ten drops of laudanum may be given to compose the stomach
if the vomit should operate more than three or four times.

4. Calomel should be given from the beginning, in doses of from two to five
grains, every two hours, in order to excite a salivation. If the calomel should
purge more than two or three times a day, four or five drops of laudanum may be
given two or three times a day, in order to confine the calomel to the bowels,
and thereby to determine it to the mouth and throat. We have seen no death
where this medicine has produced a salivation.

5. After the pulse is reduced by bleeding and purging, if the disease has not
yielded, a profuse sweat should be excited by wrapping the patient up in
blankets, with five or six hot bricks wetted with vinegar applied to different
parts of his body, and giving him at the same time large and repeated draughts,
of hot camomile or sage tea, hot lemonade or weak punch, or any other hot
liquor that is agreeable to him, to drink. This sweat should be continued but
FOUR or FIVE hours at a TIME, and but ONCE in the twenty-four hours. If the
patient should become fainty, during the use of this excellent remedy, it
should be discontinued for a few hours, but renewed (under the circumstances
above mentioned) if the disease should continue.

6. Blisters should be applied to the wrists and ankles, in common cases, about
the third or fourth day of the fever, if the pulse be reduced, or the sickness
at stomach is troublesome. If the head be much affected, a blister should be
applied to the neck or to the crown of the head, first cutting off the hair and
shaving it, and if the stomach should be much affected after the third or
fourth day a large blister should be applied to it.

7. In case of delirium with a languid pulse, poultices of raw garlic, with a
little mustard, should be applied to the feet,

8. Fresh air should be admitted into sick rooms at all times, and cool air in
the beginning of the fever, when the skin is hot, and the pulse full and tense.
In this state of the fever, the hands, feet and face should be washed, ten or
twelve times a day, with cold water. In a cool state of the skin, or when the
body is covered with sweat, cool air and cold water are improper.

9. The body and bed linen of the sick should be frequently changed, and all
offensive matters, discharged from them, should be instantly removed.

In cases of great weakness, the patient should not be permitted to rise from
his bed when under the operation of purging physic, nor upon any other occasion.

10. The drinks of sick people, in the beginning of the fever, should be toast
and water, tamarind water, lemonade, current jelly, dissolved in water, apple
water or barley water. In the latter stage of the fever, the drinks may be
porter and water, claret and water, milk and water, or camomile tea.

Weak tea and coffee may be taken in the beginning of the fever. In its second
stage, the patient may eat bread and milk, with roasted apples, or soft
peaches, chocolate, sago, tapioca, ripe fruits, weak chicken or veal broth, and
a little boiled chicken.

It will be improper to depend exclusively upon any one of the above remedies.
The combined force of them, all is barely sufficient, in many cases, to
overcome this formidable disease.

The following, which is ascribed to Dr. Currie, was published in the Gazette
of the United States:

DIRECTIONS
How to escape the Yellow-Fever, now prevalent in Philadelphia: Addressed
particularly to those citizens whose circumstances will not permit them to
comply with the recommendations of the Managers of the Marine and City
Hospitals.

The fever, which at this time prevails in our unfortunate city and suburbs, is
the very same, in kind, as that which prevailed in '93 and '97, occasioned by
imported contagion, and was introduced into it, for want of efficient
health-laws, and the proper regulation of quarantines, as I propose to make
appear in a future paper.

This contagion, however, appears, from numerous observations, and the most
authentic facts, to be capable of producing fever, only under particular
circumstances: these circumstances, removed or avoided, the contagion becomes
inactive and harmless.

This fever had not been observed to exist in Philadelphia, for more than
thirty years, before the year '93 -- and has never been known to exist in the
winter season in this climate; differing in this respect, from those contagious
fevers that are bred in jails, hospitals and prison ships; but perfectly
resembling the plagues which have been introduced at different times into
different maritime towns in Europe from certain parts of Africa, and the
Turkish dominions in Europe bordering upon Asia.

The circumstances which render the contagion of the yellow fever active, and
favor its spreading or becoming epidemic, appear to be, hot, rarefied and
stagnant, or confined air, more especially when replete and altered in its
salutary quality by putrid exhalations from dead vegetable and animal
substances. Under the recited circumstances, the majority of those who approach
very near to, or come in contact with the sick, so as to receive the
exhalations emitted by the lungs or skin, become in the course of a few days,
most commonly on the fifth or sixth day after such exposure, affected with the
same kind of fever; but as all that approach within the same distance to the
sick, do not afterward take the disease, though they have received the
contagious particles into their bodies, it implies that their constitutions are
not disposed to favor its operation; that is, that they are possessed of a
power to resist its action or impression, or that the contagion mixing with the
fluids in the stomach, or with those in the arteries, passes out again, with
some of the usual excretions.

The circumstances, which, in most cases, appear to give effect to the
contagion, so as to produce fever, after it has been received into the
circulation, through the medium of the stomach, lungs or skin, appear to be
such as have the power of inducing sudden and great debility in the several
functions of the body, and consequent spasm or constriction of the extreme
vessels, etc.

Among the chief of these, may be reckoned, sudden exposure to cold, after
great fatigue, or after being greatly heated by exercise, and exposure to the
scorching rays of the sun.

Intemperance, succeeded by abstinence, frequent blood letting, purging,
fasting, and constant terror or dread of the disease, have all a similar
effect. Whereas, moderate and refreshing exercise, the temperate use of such
nourishing food as has no tendency to stimulate or inflame, and rather to
preserve the bowels laxative than otherwise, and the temperate use of diluted
fermented liquors, particularly found bottled porter and claret, have the most
salutary effect in preventing the operation of the contagion, and also of
rendering the disease milder and more manageable by the physician, when it does
attack, than when it occurs in those previously debilitated.

The air in the open streets, I believe, never becomes sufficiently
contaminated by the contagious particles (let the patients be ever so numerous
in the houses) to communicate the disease to any person walking in the middle
of the street, or even on the pavements, when the wind blows from the opposite
side. This is a fact not only confirmed by the observations of the judicious
and accurate Dr. Russel, in his account of a pestilential fever at Aleppo, and
by all the physicians that have published an account of the disease, as it has
appeared in different parts of Europe, but is also established by the events of
last year, and by those of '93.

In the year '93, all the prisoners in the jail of Philadelphia, amounting to
more than 200; the prisoners in the almshouse; and the patients in the
Pennsylvania hospital, escaped the disease, owing to the precaution of
preventing the admission of any sick or suspicious person, as well as every
infected article into those places.

All the families, also, that remained in the city and confined themselves and
their domestics strictly to their own houses, and suffered no sick person, or
any one lately recovered from the disorder, or any material from an infected
house, to come near them; and employed some trusty person to furnish them with
marketing and other necessaries, from sources free from infection, escaped the
disease without exception. This was also the case with all the farmers that
attended the market, that cautiously avoided sleeping at, or going into any of
the chambers of the taverns, or places where they put up. This could not have
been the case, if the whole atmosphere of the city had been tainted, or replete
with noxious exhalations.

By observing the preceding rules and cautions, therefore, those inhabitants
who cannot procure a retreat in the country, may certainly preserve themselves
from taking the fever.

These are consolatory facts, drawn from experienced observers; and they are
facts that may be fitly opposed to the popular notions of contagion, so apt to
affect the imagination in moments of consternation and dismay.

Before I conclude, I think it proper to add, that I have frequently seen
persons, whose office it is to attend the sick, escape the disease in large
airy apartments, without observing any precaution at all; but have seldom
observed this to be the case in small confined places unfavourable for
ventilation, especially where the circumstances of the patient, would not admit
of daily changes of the bed and body linen. Cleanliness, daily changes of
apparel, and free ventilation appear, therefore, to be essential for preventing
the contagious and malignant effects of the fever.

Perhaps if physicians and nurses were studiously to guard against breathing
when near the patient, and were never to swallow their saliva; (by which it is
probable the contagion is more frequently conveyed into the body than by any
other means) were careful to rince their mouths with cold water and vinegar,
brandy and water or wine, and frequently to chew some agreeable aromatic
substance; were never to approach the sick with an empty stomach, and were to
rub half a dram or a dram of mercurial ointment upon their limbs every
night till it occasioned tenderness of the mouth, it would prevent the
contagion from operating, or at least render the disease much more mild and
manageable when it did occur.

As opinions require facts, and not names for their support, I shall conceal
mine under the signature of

MENTOR.

In consequence of the robbery, on the 2d of September, the banks of
North America and Pennsylvania, removed to Germantown on the 4th, and were soon
afterward followed by the bank of the United States. About this period, the
corporation caused a number of stalls to be erected at the Center House Tavern,
on Market street, for the accommodation of the citizens who had retired to the
vicinity of the city, that they might be supplied with the necessaries of life,
without exposing themselves to the disease, by going into the heart of the city.

The salutary effects of the address of the Board of Health, of September 1st,
began now to be discovered -- liberal donations, for the relief of the poor,
from all the neighboring towns, in cash, provisions, etc. were daily received.
-- The citizens of Baltimore were among the first who engaged in this very
humane duty. The following notification appeared in the Federal Gazette, of
that city, so early as Sept. 6th.

To the Citizens of Baltimore.
The alarming and distressed situation of our brethren, of the city of
Philadelphia, calls loudly for the benevolent assistance of all.

For the purpose of devising ways and means, to relieve and comfort, as far as
may be, all such persons as are afflicted by the present sore visitation, a
meeting of the citizens of Baltimore is requested, at the courthouse,
tomorrow morning, at nine o'clock.

It is not thought necessary to add further on this subject, referring to the
melancholy and affecting detail, published from the Health-Office, at
Philadelphia, on the 1st instant, September.

Baltimore, September 7.
TOWN MEETING.
In consequence of the notice yesterday, given in the Federal Gazette, a number
of the respectable inhabitants of this city, met at the courthouse, when James
Calhoun, mayor, was appointed chairman, and Joseph Townsend, secretary.

The meeting proceeded to take into consideration the distressed circumstance
of a number of the inhabitants of Philadelphia, occasioned by a malignant
disorder raging in that city and suburbs, as being movingly represented by the
communication of the Board of Health of that place, on the 1st instant -- and
being desirous to afford some assistance to alleviate their present awful
calamity.

Do unanimously resolve, That a subscription be opened by the members of the
City Council in each ward, for the purpose aforesaid, and the money, when
received, be paid into the hands of the mayor of the city, to be forwarded by
him to the Board of Health at Philadelphia.

It is also earnestly recommended, that the city council aforesaid, proceed to
solicit the donations of their fellow citizens with all possible expedition,
and that the inhabitants manifest a liberal disposition on the occasion.

Ordered, That the foregoing resolution and recommendation, be published in the
different newspapers of this city for information.

JOSEPH TOWNSEND, Sec'ry.

In consequence of the preceding laudable resolutions, the Board of Health
published the following address.

Health-Office, September 11 th, 1798. FELLOW CITIZENS,
Our address of the 1st inst. was intended to present to your view, the
deplorable state of our city, and to excite into active exertion, the
philanthropy and benevolence so eminently characteristic of the citizens of
Pennsylvania. The same generous sentiments which you have displayed, has
influenced the worthy and benevolent citizens of Baltimore; who, always alive
to the feeling of humanity, have, it appears, by the public papers, agreed to a
subscription, for the relief of our distressed fellow citizens.

We return them (...) the gratitude and respect to which dispositions so
amiable are entitled; but, it becomes our duty publicly to state, that a fund
has been provided for the purpose, upon the principle of a loan, in
anticipation of the liberality and justice of our Legislature, which precludes
the necessity of donations in money, from the humane citizens of our sister
states. Contributions of provisions from our fellow citizens in the country, as
well in New Jersey, as in our own state, have been forwarded for the use of the
distressed, with a liberality which does honor to the donors.

We flatter ourselves that similar donations will be continued by those
generous individuals, who are contiguous to the city, and can, with
convenience, spare a part of their produce for the relief of suffering humanity.

By order of the Board of Managers, WM. JONES, President.

The following letter, enclosing fifty dollars, was received by the President
of the Board of Health, on the 18th Sept.

Boston, September 12, 1798. To Wm. Jones, esquire. President of the committee of
Health at Philadelphia.
I have somewhere read that the widow's mite was received into the treasury:
accept mine in the cause of humanity; 'twas a trifle, but alas! A trifle is my
store -- Would those who wallow in prosperity, but feel the miseries of your
devoted city, and offer in proportion to their abilities, your distresses would
not be so severely felt. My only unhappiness is, that my power is not equal to
my wish.

Yours, A YANKEE SEAMAN.

About the 12th or 14th of September, the disease began to appear among the
convicts in the criminals' jail. One died on the 17th, and two more on the
18th, and several were lying sick. In consequence of which, the vagrant and
untried criminals, male and female, were removed to Morris's Buildings. The
whole number of prisoners in the jail, at this time, including debtors, was
about three hundred.

On the 18th, several of them attempted to make their escape by force, in
absence of the jailor. Perhaps they were partly led to this rash act, to avoid
the contagion which was then raging in the jail, and perhaps because there was
little danger of being taken, from the unprotected state of the city. But, in
this project, they were frustrated, by the undaunted vigilance of Robert
Wharton, Esquire then one of the aldermen of the city, now mayor, with a few
assistants; two of the criminals were shot, and one wounded with a bayonet
before the rest surrendered.

In consequence of the above proceedings, and the several robberies, which had
been committed; a number of the citizens formed themselves into an association,
for the protection of the city, during this deserted and unprotected period.
Their proceedings will be noticed in the next chapter.

The Board of Health, in order to remove, if possible, the aversion retained
against the City Hospital, and to induce the sick, who were destitute of the
conveniences which their situation required, to consent to be taken to the
Hospital, published the following comparative statement between the mortality
at the City Hospital, and that of the City and Liberties:

Health-Office, September 21, 1798.
The Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals present to public view,
the following simple statement of comparative facts, in order to remove
prejudices, and justly appreciate the importance and utility of an institution,
which, from the dreadful mortality of the prevailing disease, has been viewed
with a jaundiced eye.

It Is not enough that the City Hospital is amply provided with every thing which
can contribute to the comfort and cure of the sick, and is under the direction
of a resident physician, whose medical skill is no less an ornament to his
prefession than his benevolent and DISINTERESTED services are a blessing to
society -- It Is an Hospital, and that is an insuperable objection with the weak
and the prejudiced.

Let incontrovertible facts speak for themselves -- and take notice, that a
vast majority of the cases are sent there in the most desperate and protracted
state of the disease.

COMPARISON Between the mortality at the City Hospital and that of the City and
Liberties, from August 9, to September 19, inclusive For remarks on this
statement -- see Appendix, page XVI.
.
Number of cases reported by the physicians 2472 Of which have been sent to the
Hospital 535 Number of patients attended in the city 1937 Total number of
deaths from Brown's Gazette 1700 Of which number died at the Hospital,
something more than one half the number sent there 276 No. of deaths in the
City and Liberties nearly three-fourths the number attended there 1424

These facts cannot affect the well-earned reputation and meretorious services
of the physicians, in the City and Liberties, who have nobly remained at their
posts.

The great number of patients, widely extended -- confined situations -- bad
nursing -- negligence in applying the prescriptions, etc. are insurmountable
obstacles in a disease so virulent.

There will be completed, tomorrow, a spacious and airy building, in addition
to the comfortable accommodations already at the City Hospital.

What is the obvious deduction from the preceding facts? Remove the sick
immediately to the hospital, and the well to the encampments, and the excessive
mortality will, of course, subside.

By order of the Board of Managers, WILLIAM JONES, President.

The many valuable donations which had been received, and which were daily
pouring in to the encampments, and to the poor in the city, together with the
money procured by loans, and the voluntary subscriptions of individuals, now
enabled the Board of Health, Overseers of the Poor, and the different
committees, to render the situations of the indigent tolerably comfortable.

The following persons were appointed by the joint resolutions of the Board of
Health and the Guardians of the Poor, for the purpose of relieving such of
their fellow-citizens, whose situations rendered it improper for them to remove
to the encampments.

John Kehr, Peter Mierken, Alexander Steel, Thomas Allibone, Edward Garrigues,
Stephen Maxfield, Nathan A. Smith, Daniel Doughty, Peter Barker, John
Hutchinson, William Stevenson, John James, Thomas Savery, Rhea King, Pascal
Hollingsworth, John Teas.
They met at the Senate Chamber, in the State House, on the Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays, of each week, from three to six o'clock in the
afternoon; where they invited the indigent to apply for relief, and to bring
with them certificates from one or more respectable inhabitants, to evidence
that their families were in such a situation as to render it improper to remove
to the tents.

About the 21st of September, the fever first appeared in the Pennsylvania
Hospital. It is supposed to have been introduced by one of the nurses, who
brought some clothes from the city a few days previous.

The repeated robberies and thefts, induced the corporation to double the
number of ordinary watchmen; who, in junction with the patrols, appointed by
the citizens, continued to guard the city both day and night.

On the 22d of September, a number of the members of the society of Friends
held their annual meeting; but adjourned, on account of the fever, till
December. About fifty Friends, from different parts of the country, attended
this meeting. Of these, seventeen were soon after attacked with the fever,
twelve of whom died. The majority were attacked within five days after leaving
the city, though many of them resided here but one, and others only two days.

About the end of September and the beginning of October, the disease attained
to its crisis. The greatest number of new cases, reported in one day, during
the whole period of the calamity, was, one hundred and twenty-seven. This was
on the 7th of September. On the 21st, there were one hundred and twenty-six new
cases reported. On the 19th of September, thirty-two sick persons were admitted
into the City Hospital; and, on the 26th of the same month, sixteen died. These
were the greatest number of admissions and deaths that occurred. The highest
number of patients, remaining in the Hospital, was 164. This was on the 22d of
Sept. On the evening and night of the 27th, there was a great fall of rain,
which suddenly cooled the air. Probably, in consequence of this, the mortality
on the succeeding day was greater than at any other period of the fever. One
hundred and six persons were interred.

By comparing the tables of new cases, and of mortality, etc. as annexed, with
the register of the weather, it will be found, that both new cases and deaths
were augmented in consequence of either rainy, damp, or sudden cool weather;
but, that in a day or two afterward, both were diminished.

About the 24th of September, the following hand-bill, without either date or
signature, was published, distributed and posted up throughout the City and
Liberties:

REFLECT BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE!
FELLOW-CITIZENS! reflect upon your danger before it is too late. One hundred
of us are attacked with the fever every day. One half of that number is daily
carried to the grave. If we remain in town, it is probable that the fever will
continue five or six weeks longer; and, by that time, one-half of our number
will have been sick! -- and one-fourth of us will be no more!

How different is the situation of our friends in the country and in the tents!

Two thousand persons in the tents have lost but seventeen in twenty-five days,
while the same number in Philadelphia have lost one hundred and seventy-eight.

At the encampments, there is great plenty of good food:

In town it is resolved to give nothing to the poor who are able to go.

WHY DO YOU PREFER FAMINE, SICKNESS AND DEATH, TO HEALTH AND PLENTY?

It is not yet too late to remove.

GO, BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE!

From the 1st of October, the disease gradually abated. -- The annual election
of representatives was held at the State-House on the 9th, when many hundreds
of citizens came to the city to give their votes. -- On the 10th, only 14
interments occurred. In consequence of which, many families returned to their
homes; but, in order to prevent the fatal consequences which might accrue from
a premature return of the exiled, the Board of Health published the following:

Health-Office, October 11, 1798.
The Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals, felicitate their
fellow-citizens on the rapid decline of the prevailing fever since the 1st
inst. -- the prosperous state of the City Hospital, and enlivening prospect of
a speedy termination of the calamity, which has overwhelmed our city. None can
more assiduously desire the return of their fellow-citizens, in safety, to the
comforts of their own fireside; but they deprecate the consequences of
precipitation, where so much caution and prudence is required.

The apprehension of the Board has been awakened, by the too-hasty return of
many individuals, who have inconsiderately hazarded their own health and the
public welfare: several of whom, the Board are sorry to add, have been seized
with the fever shortly after their return.

The weather, since the 6th inst. has been extremely unfavourable, and the
number of the sick have considerably increased; which would evidently be
augmented by the accumulation of persons, particularly those from a pure
atmosphere. The Board earnestly solicit public attention to considerations so
important; and entreat the forbearance of their fellow-citizens, until
returning health shall invite them home.

The Board cannot too strongly impress the propriety and necessity of cleansing
and purifying, (previous to the return of the inhabitants,) the bedding,
clothing, and houses, in which the disease has existed; for which purpose,
they recommend the liberal use of lime. They also repeat their recommendation
to the Commissioners, to have the pumps frequently and copiously worked, as the
water is now extremely offensive and unwholesome.

The Board assure their fellow-citizens, that whenever the health of the City
and Liberties shall be so restored, as to admit the return of the inhabitants
with safety, not a moment shall be delayed in announcing the glad tidings.

By order of the Board of Managers, WM. JONES, President.

Notwithstanding this exhortation of the Board of Health, many families, whose
situations in the country, was, perhaps, not very agreeable, returned to the
city. It was doubtless in consequence of this, that both the new cases and
deaths sustained an increase. Many paragraphs appeared in the newspapers,
dissuading the citizens from returning, until the Board of Health should notify
to them that the danger no longer existed. Even examples were mentioned: the
most striking of which was the case of the family of John Lightbody,
bookbinder. They returned to the city about the 15th of October, together with
another family each consisting of three persons: the whole were taken sick, and
five died. The daughter of Mr. Lightbody, only, survived.

Toward the end of October, a remarkable change of weather took place; frost
and snow appeared, and put a sudden check to the disease. On the 1st of
November, the Board of Health discontinued their daily reports. The City
Hospital was closed, and the following consolatory address, invited citizens to
their homes:

Health-Office, November 1, 1798. Fellow-Citizens,
THE period so ardently desired, by us all, has at length arrived. -- Our best
information and judgment, corroborated by the opinion of the physicians, we
believe, warrants us in announcing to you, the restoration of general health to
our afflicted City and Liberties; and, that the citizens may return with
safety, if proper precautions are taken in cleasing and airing the houses,
bedding, and clothing; correcting the exhalations from the privies, by the
plentiful use of lime, and working copiously the private, as well as public,
pumps.

In the termination of a painful duty, we cannot repress our sentiments of
respectful veneration for the unexampled benevolence and charity which you have
displayed -- the suffering sick, the widow, and the fatherless have been
cherished; and hundreds of grateful fellow creatures have been wrested from the
grasp of disease and death, by your bounty. -- These virtues are a certain
pledge, that the objects which you have safely conducted through the tempest of
disease, will not be abandoned to the miseries of an inclement winter.

By order of the Board of Managers, WM. JONES, President.

CHAPTER IV.
Summary of the proceedings at the City Hospital -- Encampments on the
Schuylkill, and Masters's place -- Association for the protection of the city
-- Robbery of the bank -- Proceedings in the jail -- and at different parts of
the union, during the calamity.

HAVING, in the preceding pages, traced the rise, progress, and decline of the
disease, we now proceed, in a summary manner, to mention some occurrences,
which could not be previously noticed, without interfering with the general
connection of subject.

The most important proceedings of the Board of Health, we have thought proper
to notice, as they are replete with information to the various stages of the
calamity. -- No class or body of men were of more service to the city,
throughout the whole gloomy period, than these individuals. The members who
remained at their posts, and who merit the gratitude of the public, are
recorded in page 63. It includes the whole Board, except Messrs. John Newbold,
and James Wood. After the establishment of tents at Masters's place, Mr. John
Ins^eep presided there.
Their indefatigable exertions -- their arrangements in the city, and at the
City Hospital, with those of the Overseers and Guardians of the poor, for
alleviating distress, were judicious and salutary. It was the general custom of
the Board to meet and deliberate every morning at 11 o'clock. They framed the
regulations for the management of the City Hospital, and saw that they were
properly executed. Messrs. William Jones, William Dawson, and (previous to his
death) Isaac Price, were the members who most frequently visited the Hospital
for this purpose. The burial of the dead was likewise conducted by the
regulations of the Board: they provided coffins, hearses, etc. Most of the
coffins (rough pine boxes) were made in the jail by convicts. In the height of
the disease, the deaths were so numerous, that the Board found it necessary to
employ common carts: the number of hearses were inadequate; and even, with this
assistance, they were frequently under the necessity of conveying the dead to
the grave in the same coachees which carried the sick to the Hospital. Two, and
even three bodies were often carried together: about twelve hearses and carts,
and three coachees, were in constant employ. An improvement was made, for the
more easy conveyance of the sick patients, in the advanced stage of their
sickness. They could not be removed, without injury, in the coachees. The Board
caused three swing carriages to be made, by which the sick could lay at their
whole length in a bed, suspended from the shafts, between the wheels. Thus,
they were conveyed with such ease, as ameliorated some of the former consequent
distresses, without being disturbed by the jolting of the carriage. The
carriages, with horses, stood always ready, in the old Potter's Field.

For the receipts and expenditures of the Board, together with a sketch of
their proceedings, as detailed in their letter to the governor, see appendix,
page XXV.

The City Hospital stands on a low, flat piece of ground, on the east bank of
the Schuylkill, in Sassafras-street; with a tract of marshy ground in front:
The situation cannot be healthy. Formerly it was occupied for a tavern, when
the summer-houses, in the garden, were erected. -- The buildings, for the
accommodation of the sick, consist of two large frame houses: their form is an
oblong square, two stories high. The largest was erected, during the prevalence
of the last calamity, when the other was inadequate to contain the number of
sick. The summer-houses were covered with canvass, and a few small sheds were
erected for the convalescent. There are also stables and other outhouses. --
The management of the hospital was entrusted to the physicians, a steward and a
matron, under the inspection of the Board of Health. It was opened for the
reception of the sick about the 8th of August. They were placed under the care
of Drs. Physic and Cooper; gentlemen, eminent for medical skill and goodness
of heart. -- They made a voluntary offer of their services to the Board. --
There Dr. Cooper died, a victim to the contagion, much regretted. Dr. Rush
assisted as consulting physician, and Drs. May and Watt were appointed to
compound the medicines, etc. From the 6th of September, and to the 6th of
October, there were never less than one hundred patients in the Hospital, nor
more than one hundred and sixty-four. -- Medicine, fruit, wine, changes of
linen, and every other article, necessary for relief, comfort, and
accommodation, were amply provided.

The scenes of distress which the Hospital exhibited, were truly dismal: --
there we could hear the groans -- the moanings -- and the heavy sighs of "the
hundreds sick." No connexions were near to view their distress, or to soothe,
with the tear of friendship, their "little hour." When the coachees, which
brought out the sick, arrived, often might be seen an affrightened patient
enter, supported by strange Nurses, and bedewing his or her cheeks with tears.
The nurses were often obliged to hold the patient in bed by force, when
struggling with delirium, and others seemed to sleep out their life without any
feeling, while the screams of many were heard at a distance. Some bled from the
mouth and nose, and the black vomit issued, in streams, from others. Two, and
frequently three, were placed in one coffin.

The men and women occupied different wards. Particular attention was paid by
the nurses to the sick, both day and night. -- No complaints have been made;
but letters of thanks have frequently been sent to the physicians and managers
for kind treatment and attention.

Few of the nurses at the Hospital were attacked with the disease, although
exposed to concentrated contagion. It was often customary for them to sleep on
the same bed with the sick, and some have been known to swallow a portion of
the juices of the sick, without experiencing any injury. -- Dr. Physic
informed us, that he has frequently seen a nurse helping a patient to a
spoonful of food, and taking another, herself, alternately: that he has also
seen them eat the fruit that has been gnawed by the sick. One or two instances
occurred of wives nursing their husbands in the Hospital, and mothers their
children; none of which took the disease, though lying on the same bed. During
the whole period of the sickness, there were 899 See the tables of daily
returns.
persons admitted into the Hospital, of which 518 died.

The City Hospital burial-ground, was the general receptacle for the dead, from
the beginning of August to the first of November. Graves were dug, at the
commencement of the calamity, for every corpse; but, afterward, two or three
were put into one pit. The accumulated mortality, which commenced about the end
of August, rendered this mode impracticable. A more expeditious method of
interment was adopted. A large trench was dug, in which the coffins were piled
upon each other. It was conducted in such a manner, that the fresh mould, dug
from one end, covered the dead in another; while the hearses were drove to the
bottom of the trench, where they deposited the bodies. In two of these
trenches, upwards of fifteen hundred were interred; twelve or fourteen diggers
were employed. They remained, as observed before, in the field, night and day.
Sheds were constructed for their accommodation. Some were buried in this
ground, who are not mentioned in our list. It was not unfrequent for the
grave-diggers to find a dead body in the morning, which had been thrown over
the fence during the preceding night.

After most of the citizens, whose circumstances would permit, had fled to the
country, the poor began, generally, to suffer, and the disease sustained no
abatement. It rather continued to spread, and little hope remained that it
would terminate, until it should be destroyed by frost. A removal of the
healthy was the only hope left for its mitigation. The Board of Health, in
junction with the Guardians of the Poor, concerted measures for the
construction of temporary tents. These were soon afterward erected on the
banks of Schuylkill, between Spruce and Chesnut-streets. They were ready by the
24th of August, where fugitives crowded. A certificate was necessary, to gain
admission, from some respectable citizen, with an application to any of the
following gentlemen, who were appointed a joint committee from the Board of
Health and Guardians of the Poor to superintend this encampment: Peter Mierken,
Isaac Price, James Oldden, John Kehr.

They crowded, in the greatest abundance, from the south parts of the City and
Southwark: They were accommodated with every necessary of life, principally
from the donations of the opulent. The tents were made of canvass, and floored
with boards. Here nineteen hundred and fifty persons were fed, and some of them
clothed! While we admire the liberality of the public, which was displayed on
this occasion, we are induced to mention, that in many instances, advantages
were taken. Many sordid souls removed, and were fed and clothed, who possessed
independent resources. The names of freeholders, who hold property to the
amount of several thousands of dollars, could be mentioned, who here robbed the
poor of their pittance. The liberal hand must move reluctant, under an idea of
such a diabolical practice. Credit is due to the committee who superintended
this establishment, for both their attention and trouble. The rules which they
framed were judicious, and well adapted to the situation and manners of each
class. Some, as might naturally be supposed, were not the most orderly; such
were either sent to Morris's Buildings, or confined in a temporary prison, at
the encampment. Guards were stationed with arms, to preserve order, and prevent
any individuals from trespassing the rules. Schools, for the instruction of
children, were instituted; at which 137 male, and 143 female children,
attended. The hearty men were employed, in digging the canal. Public worship
was performed on Sundays; and medical advice, and attendance was given by Dr.
S. Dussield.

About the beginning of November, the committee were in need of clothing for
infants. They published the following:

The Committee appointed for the superintendance of the Tents, on Schuylkill,
acknowledge with gratitude and sincere satisfaction, the generous liberality of
donations that they have experienced. It is with deference to public opinion
and public compassion, that they inform their feeling fellow-citizens, that
they have near seventy pregnant women, who will, ^ere they leave the
encampment, stand in not only need, but necessity of clothing for their
infants. To mothers, whose hearts can beat with fondness to their offspring --
to those amiable young ladies, whose best and benevolent affections are
extended to the smiling babe -- to fathers, who have it in their power, this
respectful request is addressed.

By order of the Committee, PETER MIERKEN, Chairman.
October 3d.
The liberality of ladies, on this occasion, was ample, as appears from the
following address:

The Committee, who superintend the Tents, on the banks of Schuylkill,
Beg leave to acquaint their amiable female donors, that their prompt industry,
and unparralleled liberality, have been so abundantly bestowed, as to ^nable
them to request no further marks of their benevolence, in the article of
infants' and small childrens' clothing: Other donations will be thankfully
received, so as to provide for the ages of from four to twelve years.

They cannot find language energetic enough to thank them; but, when they are
informed, that they have put it in the power of the committee, to cloathe the
naked, to save the shivering child from perishing, and to send the infant warm,
and the mother happy away, their own benevolent and feeling hearts, will afford
them the best of gratifications.

By order of the committee, PETER MIERKEN, chairman.
Tents, 24 th October, 1798.
Dolls. Ct. The expenses of this encampment amounted to 18,537. 29 Donations
received in cash, 3,537.29 Ditto in produce and clothing, valued at 5,000.00
Cash, being part of 29,000 dollars borrowed from the Banks, on the faith of
being reimbursed by the legislature, 10,000.00 18,537. 29

Eight hundred and seventy-nine persons were relieved at this encampment, for
nearly nine weeks.

About the beginning of September, another encampment was erected at Masters'
Place, near the Mill-Pond, on the road to Germantown, about two miles from the
city, for the same benevolent purpose as that on the Schuylkill; to which the
fugitives, principally from the Northern-Liberties and Kensington, flocked.
John Inskeep, Jonathan Robeson, and Isaac W. Morris, were appointed a committee
for its superintendance. It was composed of wooden sheds, comfortable,
convenient, and, in every respect, adapted to the occasion; especially when it
is considered that they were erected in eight or ten days, and accommodated
upwards of two thousand persons. Besides the lodging-sheds, there were erected
an hospital, a large storehouse, and office, a bake-house and oven, and five
kitchens, with eight large fire-places. This encampment was situated on a
well-chosen spot, and laid out in regular order: the streets intersected each
other. The rules and regulations, which were printed and posted up in different
places in the encampment, do honor to the committee. Spirituous liquors were
prohibited, except in cases of supposed necessity. Slight offenses were
punished, by withholding provisions for a reasonable time; and, for those of a
more aggravated nature, the offender was expelled. All intercourse with the
city was cut off, except on urgent occasions. This was enforced, by placing
sentinels, at proper distances, around the encampment. Scavengers were
appointed, whose duty it was, every morning, to remove all the filth, and to
throw fresh earth into the necessaries; and, in every other respect, the utmost
attention was paid to cleanliness. They were abundantly supplied with
provisions of every kind; the arrangement for the delivery of the rations was
well planned, and the most scrupulous regard to justice observed in the
distribution. The decorum, which was so eminently maintained in the encampment,
amongst characters, too, some of which were not the most amiable, reflect great
honor both on the superintendants, and the example of many virtuous families,
who resided there. The first public address of the superintendants was on the
10th of September: they informed the public, that they stood in need of
vegetables, straw, etc. for the use of the distressed citizens, who had taken
refuge there; and they hoped that they would experience the same liberality
which had been extended to the Schuylkill encampment; having the same laudable
object in view. This public intimation produced an abundant supply. On the 28th
of the same month, the committee publicly acknowledged, that the liberality
which they had experienced, surpassed all expectation: that several villages
and neighbourhoods in New Jersey, had been eminently bountiful on this
occasion; that the supplies which they had occasionally received, had been
abundant, except in articles of clothing: they had received some very handsome
donations in that line; but not in sufficient abundance to supply their
pressing and numerous wants: that the number, under their care, was daily
increasing, and already amounted to upwards of thirteen hundred persons,
composed of both sexes, from one hour to eighty years old; but, that the
greater proportion of them, were helpless women and children. About two hundred
of the children were at the breast, the mothers of whom were generally without
shoe or stocking. The committee suggested, that linsey, flannels, and woollen
stockings, would be particularly acceptable, as well as every description of
second-hand and ready-made clothing. From this period, the lists of donations
swelled with individual bounty. Our citizens seemed to vie with each other who
should be the most liberal. Drs. Currie and Dewees, gratuitously offered their
services to the committee. Great attention and care was bestowed upon the sick
in this encampment, which was numerous. A few had the yellow fever. These
gentlemen received a public declaration of thanks from the committee.

The inhabitants of this encampment returned to their homes, generally, about
the 1st of November; but not before they had published a grateful and
affectionate tribute of laudable praise to their meritorious committee.

dols. cts. The expenses of this institution amounted to 18,822. 49 Donations
in cash dols 3,254.27 Ditto in produce and clothing, valued at 6,568.22 Cash
being part of the 29,000 dollars borrowed from the banks, on the faith of
legislative reimbursement 9,000 18,822. 49

There were about two thousand and twenty-four persons supplied at this
encampment from the 15th and 20th of September to the 1st of November.

It is a melancholy truth, that the most awful afflictions which befall our
fellow creatures, are not sufficient to awaken, in some minds, even the
feelings of sympathy. Callous to every sentiment of humanity, and dead to every
principle of virtue, some wretches, who, to the eternal disgrace of the human
character, were so totally depraved, that while walking even "in the valley of
the shadow of death," meditated and committed the most abominable crimes. While
every virtuous mind was filled with sympathetic sorrow for that general gloom,
which hovered over the city, there were villains lurking about, watching every
opportunity, during the absence of the citizens, to commit robbery on their
deserted houses. Notwithstanding that the number of ordinary watchmen had been
augmented, and patrols appointed to watch it during the day, several robberies
were committed. The bank of Pennsylvania, as observed before, was robbed; and
attempts were made by the prisoners in the criminals jail to escape. A
consideration of these circumstances, and the general unguarded state of the
city, induced a number of private citizens, to associate for the purpose of
affording it better protection.

Of this association, the following gentlemen were chosen officers: in the
city. John D. De Lacy, Edward Pole, Joseph Wright,

William Mansfield, in the Nothern Liberties. George Young, Southwark.


The association informed the public, that their intentions were merely to have
a body of men ready to turn out, armed and equipped, on any sudden emergency,
or to mount guard at any of the prisons, or elsewhere, if necessary; by thus
being ready with arms and ammunition, to repair, at the first notice, to their
respective alarm posts, that they might act with the greatest promptitude and
efficiency, and that the civil magistrates and other good citizens might know
where to find a body of men, prepared, to enforce a due obedience to the laws,
and preserve order and tranquillity.

The citizens were informed that in cases of fire, or riot in the city, the old
Potter's-Field was chosen as the alarm post, or rallying point, from its
central situation, and contiguity to both jails and Morris's Building, then the
place of confinement for vagrants; in the Northern Liberties, the city-hall or
townhouse; and in Southwark, Little's school house, to which all the members
of the association were to repair equipped, and there await the orders or
presence of their own officers, a magistrate, or other civil officer.

The alarm was to be given by firing a field piece.

Robbery of the Bank of Pennsylvania.
On the night of the 4th of August, some villains entered the bank, and made an
unsuccessful attempt to force open the doors of the cash vault, and to pick the
lock of an iron chest; but the institution sustained no loss; as it was
apprehended that the attempt would be renewed, and considering the insecurity
of the building, and the impossibility of making such repairs to it as would
render it safe, the porters were armed, and directed to sleep in the
banking-house, in order to guard against the success of future attempts. The
immediate removal of the bank to Carpenter's-hall was proposed. This building,
from its construction, and the improvements which had been made to it, when in
the occupancy of the Bank of the United States, was thought perfectly secure;
but previously to the removal, which took place on the Saturday following, a
new patent lock was put to the outer door, and two iron doors were fitted to
the cash vault, with locks which had been used for the book vault, and which
were of a better construction than any which could at that time be procured in
the city. The precaution of obliging the porters to sleep in the Bank was
continued, and the watchmen were charged to be particularly vigilant.

Thomas Cunningham, the porter, who is since dead, slept there alone, and early
in the morning of Sunday the 2d of September, Mr. Annesley, the runner, having
occasion to go to the Bank, found the back door of the banking house open; and
looking into the banking room, he discovered the doors of the back vault
likewise open. He immediately roused Cunningham, who was asleep up stairs; they
found all the windows secured, the back door unbarred, and the doors of the
cash vault unlocked. Upon an examination of the house, it was found that the
locks had been opened by false keys, for no injury was done to the wards of any
of them, nor was there any appearance of force having been used.

The loss which the institution had sustained, amounted to one hundred and
sixty-two thousand eight hundred and twenty-one dollars and sixty-one cents.

Every exertion was made to discover the perpetrators of this flagrant robbery.
Advertisements were published throughout the United States, cautioning the
public against the receipt of the post-notes stolen. Considerable rewards were
offered for the apprehension of those concerned in the robbery, in addition to
that of one thousand dollars, promised in the governor's proclamation. "Several
persons were arrested upon suspicion, and amongst those was Patrick Lion, the
smith, who was employed in fitting the iron doors of the cash vault, and
without whose privity it is believed this robbery has not been committed."

After unceasing vigilance they had the satisfaction to discover the
perpetrator of this daring robbery, so that the whole amount of the property
stolen was recovered, except about three thousand two hundred dollars.

One Isaac Davis, a carpenter, had an account open in this bank: The first
circumstance which excited suspicions against him, was a deposit of 16,000
dollars. Enquiry was made respecting his circumstances and character, which
were found to be such, as to induce the officers of the bank to watch his
conduct. On the 17th of November, he made another deposit of 3,910 dollars. The
suspicions were now increased, and it was thought proper to enquire at the
other banks, whether he had made any deposits with them? when such information
was obtained, as left no doubt but that he was the robber. He was then
apprehended, and, partly by threats, and partly by promise of an intercession
with the governor for his pardon, the confession of his guilt was extorted from
him.

His disclosures criminated only Thomas Cunningham, the late porter, and
himself; for, he repeatedly declared, that they alone were concerned in the
robbery. It was remarked, that Thomas Cunningham slept in the bank the night
that the robbery was committed, and that he was taken ill of the yellow fever
the day after and died in the course of the week. Davis said that they had
divided the money stolen, and that the deposits he had made in the different
banks, were part of his share. He assured them that he had returned all he was
possessed of, and that the remainder of the property stolen, would be found at
the house where Cunningham died. They searched the house described, but without
success. Davis was informed that unless he made a full disclosure, he would be
committed to prison, and his house searched: By threats and promises, he
acknowledged that he had visited Cunningham the day he was taken ill, and had
received from him the remainder of the money stolen, a great part of which he
had still secreted. They had then recovered in all 158^999 dollars and 53
cents: Davis also assigned over property which had cost him a short time before
800 dollars.

Davis declared that the plan of the robbery originated with Cunningham, who
procured the false keys, and that he does not know who made them.

The tenor of this is taken from the report of the committee, of the State
Assembly, who were appointed-to make enquiry on the subject. They received
their information from the officers of the bank. The attempt on the 4th of
August, and the robbery on the 1st September, were supposed to be committed by
the same persons. It does not appear evident that Cunningham, the porter, had
any concern in the robbery. He was found asleep in the bank next morning;
neither his conduct nor countenance discovered the least symptoms of guilt,
even to make him suspected. None of the money was found with him, when he died.
No evidence but that of Davis, appears to criminate him; and his death prevents
his pleading in his own defense. It is not uncommon, in criminal cases, for the
innocent to suffer punishment for the guilty: That Mr. Lion, who fitted the
doors (...) vault, should, at first, be implicated, was, perhaps, (...); but,
after the perpetrator was discovered, and after Mr. Lion was discharged, by a
grand jury, from the charges alleged against him, an idea should not be
impressed upon the public mind, founded upon presumption only, that he is the
man, " without whose privity, it is believed, this robbery has not been
committed" This is cruel, and injurious to an ingenious, industrious tradesman,
who required the preservation of character, to render his (...) useful to
himself, and to the public.

A convict, named Bradley, was the first person attacked in the criminals'
jail. He was confined in a cell. At this time, it raged in an alley that runs
from Fifth-street, near to the jail-wall, opposite to the cells; from whence it
is supposed to have reached Bradley, whose window it fronted. -- He was removed
on the (...) of September, and died in a few hours after. From him, the disease
communicated to other prisoners; the number of which, including debtors,
amounted to upwards of three hundred. Shortly afterward, the vagrants, and
prisoners confined for petty offenses, were removed to Morris's-Buildings, and
the debtors to Norristown: The convicts, amounting to about one hundred and
sixty, and untried of prisoners, near an hundred, then, only, remained in gaol.
Mr. Smith, the Jailor, on the appearance of the disease, became alarmed. He
relinquished his charge on the 8th of September, and removed to the country.
Robert Wharton, Esquire, a vigilant and active magistrate, now mayor of our city,
then assumed it. He resided there, and performed all the duties of jailor,
until shortly after the 17th of September, when he was assisted by Mr. Peter
Helm; who, afterward, took upon himself the charge. The services ^rendered by
Mr. Helm, during the calamity in 1793, when he presided at Rush-Hill-Hospital,
and in 1797, when he superintended the City-Hospital, at the Wigwam, together
with his services this year, justly entitle him to thanks. He was active in
these different capacities, and zealously and undauntedly run into danger --
but, the palm seems to rest upon other characters: Like the peacock in the
fable, which other birds wished to vie with, some have been plucking his
feathers.

After Mr. Helm took charge of the jail, he resided there day and night --
watched the convicts, and attended the sick, alternately. Some of the keepers
left the jail shortly after Mr. Smith. Others were taken sick. Their places
were supplied by constables, etc. The sick prisoners were attended by Dr.
Benjamin Duffield. He caused every humane and salutary measure to be adopted
for their accommodation. They were removed from the healthy, to a ward in the
east wing, which was converted into an hospital. The convalescents were kept in
a separate apartment. Strict attention was paid to cleanliness, for the better
security against the spreading of the disease. The green wood was removed from
the yard; all rubbage and putrifiable materials, were carried off: The
obstructed water-channel was cleared: The pavement was frequently washed, and
kept wet and cool, by means of the pump; and the sleeping wards, were, as
usual, constantly ventilated. To these precautions, which were adopted by
direction of Mr. Caleb Lownes, with their simple healthy diet, and the entire
prohibition of every kind of liquor, is, perhaps, to be ascribed, the
successful escape of so large a proportion of the prisoners. The disease spread
through every quarter of the jail. 'Dutch Hannah', a convict, was the first
victim in the west wing, where the females are kept. Several of the convicts
voluntarily offered their services as nurses, and attended the sick with
tenderness and attention. One John Brown was the first that made this laudable
offer. -- He was taken sick, and died. There were, in all, forty-four cases in
the jail; of which, twenty-seven paid their last debt to Nature. Nine were sent
to the City-Hospital; two of which, only, recovered. Thirty-five were attended
in jail; twenty of these survived.

On the 18th of August, some of the prisoners in the east wing attempted to
escape. Perhaps they were instigated from a consideration of the unguarded
state of the city -- the absence of the jailor -- and a wish to escape from the
fever. They took the advantage of a visit from the physician. They seized upon
the key of their apartment -- forced their way out, knocked down Mr. Evans, a
constable, then one of the assistant-keepers, and called to the convicts in the
yard to come to their assistance. Mr. Wharton, who was in a different part of
the jail, on hearing the alarm, went immediately to the assistance of the
keepers. Miller, the ringleader, had an axe lifted to dispatch Mr. Evans,
which Mr. R. Wharton, and Mr. G. Gass, an assistant-keeper, observing,
prevented, by well directed balls from their muskets, which broke the bone of
his right arm, and entered his body. -- Mr. Wharton and Mr. Gass fired at the
same time: the ball from the latter, it was generally supposed, proved fatal.

Another of the assailants, of the name of Vaughan, struck Mr. Evans with a bar
of iron. He then retreated to his apartment. Evans pursued him, and lodged a
ball in his lungs. He survived it about twenty-four hours. A Negro convict
wounded another by a bayonet. They eventually drove the gang into their
apartments. During the disturbance, the convicts behaved well: They did not
even show a wish to aid the offenders. The bravery and prompt exertions of Mr.
Wharton, deserve a high encomium. -- Joined by Mr. Evans and Mr. Gass, the
designs of these incorrigible villains were happily frustrated, and the city,
in all probability, only thus preserved from devastation and pillage.

An unsuccessful attempt was afterward made by two of the criminals, who were
confined in the east dungeon. -- They had nearly effected their escape, by
undermining the wall, when first discovered.

On the night of the 18th of October, seven of the prisoners were successful in
making their escape. They undermined the wall of the east wing, and got off;
and only two of the banditti were taken.

Several seaport towns in the United States, besides Philadelphia, have been
inflicted with the same calamity this summer. It visited New York about the
28th or 30th of July, nearly at the same period as it did here. The first
public intimation of its introduction there, was made on the 6th of August. The
citizens did not generally leave the town till the end of August, and toward
the beginning of September. Then the disease had made considerable progress.
The deaths amounted from twenty-three to twenty-five a day. -- It is estimated,
that one third to one-half of the whole inhabitants left that city. It
continued to rage till the 8th or 10th of November. During this period, the
deaths amounted to two thousand and eighty-six. One thousand five hundred and
twenty-four, of these, fell victims to its rage. The enquiries made, to
ascertain its cause, have generally been directed to those objects which tend
to prove its domestic origin. Hence, perhaps, it is, that this idea is the most
prevalent there.

Its introduction in Boston happened about the first of July. On the 4th of
August, the selectmen had a consultation with the physicians: From whose
reports, it appeared, that only sixteen persons had died with that disease
since its first appearance; and that there were but ten persons then sick: That
in all the cases, the probability was, that the infection was taken in or near
the Town-dock. That the disease did not appear, in any instance, to be
communicated from one person to another; "no physician, (...), or attendant on
the sick, having, at that time, taken the disorder."

At the same consultation, the physicians gave their opinion, that lobsters and
oysters, at that season of the year, and until the middle of September, were
extremely pernicious to the health, and predisposed the body to putrid
disorders.

From this time, a regular report of the number of deaths and of the sick was
published, by order of the selectmen, signed by Wm. Cooper, town clerk. On the
20th of August, there were twenty sick; on the 31st, they (...) to thirty-two,
and continued to increase until the ^^th of September, when there were
ninety-seven cases. Afterward, it gradually abated until tho 6th of October,
when it was checked at the approach of frost, and a succession of cold weather.
-- On the 18th, the inhabitants were invited to return from exile.

It made its appearance at Portsmouth. (N. H.) about the 20th of July, and
raged until the beginning of October. Previous to the 20th of August, eleven
persons died, seventeen were sick on the 2^th, five on the 10th of September;
and but only one case appeared on the 5th of October. A committee of health was
instituted; they made their first report on the 30th of August. Whether its
inhabitants generally ascribe this scourge to importation, or to domestic
origin, cannot be determined by us, nor, perhaps, by them.

A few cases occurred in Newport, ((...)) which excited alarm; but, upon
investigation, made by the town-council, they traced the cause ^o the shipping,
or to persons who had taken the contagion (...) did not generally spread, nor
was the (...) great.

New London: in (...) was also partially visited. On the 18th of September
forty-six were sick. The greatest number of new cases occurred between the 20th
and 25th of September. It ceased about the end of October.

Some cases appeared in Portland, Maine. It did not there rapidly spread.

Shortly after its commencement in Philadelphia, it extended to the
neighboring towns. At Wilmington, (Delaware,) it raged, at least with equal
violence, if not superior, in proportion to the number of inhabitants, than it
did in our city. They traced its origin to a communication with Philadelphia.
It subsided nearly at the same time as here. Two Hundred and fifty-two died.
Fifty died at Chestor, and at Marcus-Hook, fifty-two -- at Chew's Landing, a
small village in New Jersey, ten miles from Philadelphia, twenty-six died --
and at Cooper's Ferry, opposite to the city, about the same number. There were
also many cases at Trenton, ^amberton, Frankford, Bristol, etc. Many fell
victims. -- In Germantown and its neighborhood, fifty-eight (...) occurred, of
which thirty-three died; thirty-seven of the cases were actually in Germantown:
of those, twenty died.

Some went from the city with the disease on them; others were out but one day
previous to being attacked; but, generally, at about three, and sometimes six
days after. In some instances, it was not taken till they had been out ten,
twelve, fourteen, and even twenty-one days. The period between receiving it,
and its coming into action, ^^ried in different constitutions. In the full and
vigorous, it was less than in the (...). Intemperance, a dread of it, fatigue
or exposure to the sun, facilitated its action. Its violence was, in some
cases, as great as in the city, and its termination in death as speedy; but, in
general, the cases were protracted. Some had the black-vomit, and expired in
convulsions, and a great number of the successful, as well as unsuccessful
cases, assumed a yellowish color.

The following paragraphs, from newspapers, state that it (...) in several
other parts of the continent; but, we are not, however, in possession of any
other evidence:

"One-sixth part of the (...) of inhabitants, residing at City-Point (V), have
been (...) in the course twenty-odd days" -- "that the fatal malady was spread
by the ship Nestor, of Portland, captain Wait, which vessel arrived at
City-Point, from Philadelphia, on the 24th August, having thrown four dead
hands overboard on her passage. -- Being without hands to load with tobacco,
Negroes were called upon; and, out of eleven, thus employed, ten have died.
Almost every case can be traced to this vessel."

"Bilious fevers are unusually numerous and obstinate in many parts of the
country; and, in several interior towns, very fatal. At New-(...), great
sickness prevails, and the fever has the essential symptoms of yellow fever. At
Royalton, on White-River, in Vermont, and on the Grand-Isles, in (...)
Champlain, the yellow fever prevails with considerable mortality. The disease
has the characteristic symptoms of the genuine yellow fever, and terminates
fatally in about six days. Royalton is situated on the be^d of White-River, on
a dry, gravelly soil, but enclosed by very high mountains, which really make
the position of the town, a deep valley.

"At Windsor, i^ Vermont, a similar fever prevails. This is on Connecticut
river; the banks of which are high in that neighborhood, and make little or no
marsh; but, the town is almost surrounded by mountains. In such positions,
there is a great accumulation of heat, from the reverberated rays of the sun in
hot weather; and, in all such situations, the human race are more exposed to
autumnal fevers and dysentery, than on hills which overlook the surrounding
country."

"Baltimore has happily escaped this year. Their sufferings, in 1797, convinced
them of the propriety of an efficient quarantine law, and a strict attention to
cleanliness. Their care and their success is a good example to other cities.
Their mayor enforced a strict compliance with the ordinance for clearing the
gutters, and removing every kind of filth, not only from the streets, but from
the houses and lots. He also solicited the different fire-companies, to have
their engines frequently exercised in watering the streets. This was complied
with, as it was deemed necessary to guard against its domestic generation. On
the 10th of August, the Board of Health ordered that all vessels, arriving from
any of the West India islands, laden with certain cargoes, which they
particularly specified, should be prohibited by the health-officer from coming
up into port; but, that the cargo thereof should be discharged into another
vessel, while it remained in the river, and that necessary care should be
observed to purify the same, before it should be admitted into the city.
Communication between Baltimore and the cities of Philadelphia, New York,
Wilmington, etc. was prohibited, under certain restrictions, by proclamations
of the mayor, bearing date August 18th, and September 15th."

The governor of South Carolina issued a proclamation, directing that all
vessels which should arrive at Charleston, from Philadelphia, or any port or
place on the river Delaware, should be brought to, under the guns of
^ort-Johnson, and perform quarantine.

Many other places in the United States adopted similar measures. In the
different ports of Great Britain, our vessels were also obliged to ride
quarantine.

CHAPTER V.
Desultory remarks -- Incidents during the calamity.

THE following is taken from a newspaper of August 6th:

"Humanity must surely recoil at the circumstance, but the fact is certain,
that a poor, distressed object of human woe, was forcibly landed, on the
morning of Friday last, from a vessel, at the public wharf at the hay-scales,
in the district of the Northern-Liberties, at 11 o'clock; and lay exposed
there, without shelter, the same night, and remained under the debilitating
heat of Saturday, until one o'clock, when the poor sufferer expired, without
receiving the friendly aid of humanity to support him in the last moments of
life. His corpse was afterward suffered to be interred at the expense of a few
charitable citizens.

Query -- Whence, and from what cause, does this apathy of the police of the
district of the Northern Liberties arise? Are, or are not, the funds,
established by law, adequate to discharge common acts of humanity?

August 6. VERITAS.

It is almost impossible to conceive the miseries which some of our unfortunate
fellow-mortals were doomed to sustain. We give the following incidents as a
picture, though imperfect:

"About the middle of August, a German, a stranger in the place, applied to be
admitted into the Pennsylvania Hospital. His case did not come strictly within
their cognizance, and he was refused. He then solicited an entrance into the
almshouse; but having the dysentery, and not being entitled to a place of
residence there, he was unsuccessful. His next application was to the
Health-Officer of the port; but he conceiving himself unauthorized to send him
to the City-Hospital, the poor wretch was turned away, without any hope of
relief. What became of him, is not known; but the despondency depicted in his
countenance, produced a correspondent sentiment of sympathy in the minds of
many, all of whom seemed to regret his unhappy condition, though none knew in
what manner to grant him the aid he required."

The body of a man was found in the house of captain Stevens, which was almost
ate up by vermin. The family ha^ left the house about a month previous. Three
days after which, it was opened to get out some goods, and shut up again till
the end of September; when a captain Skaidmor^ procured the key to take out a
chest. As soon as he opened the door, such an offensive stench issued out of
it, as induced him, and a b^y who accompanied him, to retreat. They were both,
shortly after, taken sick. The body was suffered to remain till evening; when
two negroes were hired, for sixteen dollars, to throw the corpse into the
river. No trace was left to distinguish whether it was the (...) of a white or
of a black man, excepting his having long brown hair. -- It is true, t^^ough
very extraordinary, that ^he family do not know how he got in, nor what soul
had possessed the body. They left no person, to their knowledge, in the house.
It was well secured, and they found it so. He lay under a ^ot-bedstead, and had
nothing on but a shirt. Even a woman who afterward cleansed the house, took
sick and died. -- Hence, a father, a mother, a wife, or perhaps his children,
will, daily, hope to find him; but, while this anticipation may ^ull their
minds from too-deeply grieving at his loss, no trace remains of him. They do
not know that he is gone to "that bou^^e from whence no traveller returns."

A man was found dead in a house in Front, near Walnut-street. The corpse was
first discovered, by an offensive smell. From the time that elapsed after the
family left the house, it is thought, it laid there, at least, a month. It was
in so high a state of putrefaction, that it was removed by pieces to the coffin
in which it was deposited.

A man was found dead in a fa^l lo^^ who was seen, apparently hearty, only
three days previous.

A French gentleman was found dead in a house in Vine, near Front-street. The
corpse was discovered only by a (...) effluvia. No person lived in the house
with him.

A woman was found dead in Water-street. The corpse laid one day before it was
discovered. Her young child was alive upon the same bed with her.

The corpse of a woman was found on the commons, also of two men at No. 171,
North Second-street.

The corpse of a man was found in Water-street. It was carefully laid out, and
wrapped in a sheet, ready for the coffin.

September 23 -- A person was found dead in Eighth, between Race and
Vine-streets. On the 25th, a child was found dead, on the commons, near
Potter's-field. On the 27th, the body of a man was discovered on the wharf
below Mr. Wharton's counting house.

October 16 -- A dead woman was found in a house at the corner of Eighth and
Shippen-streets.

About the 16th of August, a person, passing through Union, between Second and
Third-streets, perceived a noxious effluvia, of the nature of that which is
emitted by coffee, in a state of putrefaction. He was next day seized with a
severe illness, and died in a few days.

About the 24th of August, a person went home in a fright, from having seen a
yellow-looking man. He took sick, and died in eight days.

The case of Jane Doron, at the City-Hospital, is somewhat remarkable: She was,
to all appearance, dead. A coffin was brought, and other preparations for her
interment pursued. But some doubt remained in the mind of Dr. May, the
physician. He returned -- and, upon examining her body, he felt a warmth, near
the heart, yet without any palpitation. Urged by this, he then resolved to try
his utmost efforts. He began to rub her arm, in order to bring on a pulse by
friction. The steward, who was also present, laid hold of the other arm, and
followed the example. In two hours, she showed symptoms of life, first, by a
quivering at the region of the heart, and a few hours afterward, by an
hysteric fit, which went off with a copious effusion of tears. She recovered.

Mr. J. Conchy's son died of the calamity. The same day his daughter went to
the river to bring water: She fell in, and was drowned.

A person entered the house of Mr. M'P --. He mentioned that he had just put a
body in a coffin. This alarmed Mrs. M'P --. She immediately took sick.
Distress, unusually accumulated, soon followed. Mrs. M'P -- and a child were
attacked. Mrs. M'P -- 's mother and brother went to assist them. They were
likewise seized; and all died but Mr. and Mrs. M'P --: nor did distress end
here: -- Whilst they were in state of convalescence, they were recommended to
move to a more airy, and less-infected situation. On their removal, they hired
a white nurse; having previously experienced the negligence of several black
ones. But, she proved to be more abandoned. She let in some persons during the
night. Their noise alarmed Mr. M'P --, who was but just able to walk. He went
to inquire what was going on; but, he found them gone, and fire on the floor in
several places. They were robbed of cash, plate, etc. -- Even the body-clothes
of the two patients, who were in bed, were carried off.

In many families the mortality was general. Three bodies have been taken out
of one house at one time. Whole families were, in several instances, swept off.
Mr. Wiles's wife died on the 26th of September. By the time the hearse came for
the corpse, his son was dead; his journeyman died the same day; next day Mr.
Wiles died, and his brother-in-law next day after.

Mr. Scott, a stout, robust man, in delirium, ran into the street in his shirt
and nightcap; and walked up several squares, before he was overtaken. A
patient made his escape from the Hospital with nothing on but his shirt, and
went to his lodgings, in Water-street, (a distance of two miles); when he
arrived, he was covered with blood; It was caused by his removing the bandages
from the orifice, where he was bled at the Hospital.

The screams of a woman, who died at No. 32, Carter's-alley, were heard to the
distance of Strawberry-alley, on the one side, and Dock-street on the other.
The wall of the room was sprinkled with blood, that issued from her mouth,
upwards of two feet from where her head lay.

Some were attacked in the street, others on the commons, and there generally
laid till a coach came to carry them to the Hospital. -- Drunkards, lying in
the street, have also been sent to the Hospital, supposed to have the fever.

Many scenes occurred to the drivers of the sick coachees, which were
calculated to soften hearts the most hardened! Fathers and mothers delivered to
them their sick children, children their parents, wives their husbands,
husbands their wives, etc. etc. but most frequently, masters their servants and
landlords their lodgers.

A gentleman who remained in the city during the calamity, principally from an
intention of assisting his suffering fellow creatures, in taking his rounds one
morning, met with a man lying in a gutter; who, in his agony, had much bruised
himself and torn his clothes. A number of people at a distance were viewing
him; but none ventured to his assistance. His own son had deserted him!
Shocking to humanity! Had it not been for the interference of the above
gentleman, he must have died, to the reproach of human nature, like a beast! He
was removed to the Hospital, where the last moments of this afflicted man were
somewhat assuaged by the lenient hand of attention. He lived but a few hours
after he was removed from the gutter.

A gentleman of New Jersey, went to Germantown. When arrived, he felt overcome
by heat and fatigue; but, notwithstanding, he transacted his business; and
immediately set off to return home. On his way in the road, which leads from
Frankford to Germantown, perceiving a pleasant place under the shade of a tree,
he laid down, with an intention of resting himself. Several persons, who passed
by, expressed their pity for his situation, supposing him ill with the fever,
but took good care to keep on the other side of the road. At length, a lady,
with her daughter, who happened to be riding by, perceived him, and supposing
him ill of the fever, ordered her servant to drive up to the fence. The
gentleman, surprised, raised himself up, and the lady in a sympathizing tone of
voice, desired to know if he was unwell. He informed her he was not. But she
supposing he was unwilling to confess it, pressed him, that if he had the
fever, and no friends near, she would take him to her house, which was close
by, and nurse him herself. The gentleman, impressed with gratitude, arose,
thanked her, and declared that he was only fatigued, and had not been in
Philadelphia.

A person from Philadelphia, traveling in west New Jersey, stopped at the
house of Mr. Craig, a miller, where he was attacked with the fever: he died in
a few days. During his illness, he was nursed by Mrs. Craig both day and night,
who would not let any others go nigh him. She remained with him till he died,
and even assisted to lay him in a coffin.

A woman of Wilmington, after losing one of her family with the fever that
raged there, fled with her five children to the house of her father, a few
miles from Chester. -- He possesses a large house, farm, etc. On their
approach, her father's housekeeper came to the gate, and forbid them to enter,
at the same time fastened it. The fugitives took shelter in a school-house,
nearly opposite, and received daily support, for near three weeks, from the
neighbors generally, the father's family excepted.

During the height of the calamity, it was difficult to procure nurses. The
hire was from one to five dollars per day! Richard Allen and William Gray, two
men of color, were very serviceable in assisting to procure nurses. They
recommended none but those whom they supposed could be trusted.

A young man, of the name of Henry Bullyberger, of Philadelphia, moved to
Upper-Providence, Delaware county, about fifteen miles from Philadelphia.
Contrary to the injunctions of his friends, he secretly visited Philadelphia to
see his relations. He went to the Hospital burying-ground: he there saw
seventeen interred. His sister and her husband, whom he visited, took the
fever, with himself, who all died in the space of nine days.

Many facts appear, which evidence that the yellow fever is contagious in
country places, distant from tide-water, marshes, etc. In Germantown, the
infection was, in several cases, communicated from one to another.

Table of daily returns for August.
City Hospital. Days. New Cases. Admitted. Died. Cured. Remaining. Total Deaths
in 1798. Total Deaths in 1793. 1 Total till this date. Total till this date. 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 53 66 9 4 1 2 12 11 10 9 1 10 7 6 11 11 2 19 16 7 12 7 6 18 20 5 13
9 4 23 17 11 14 3 4 22 20 4 15 6 6 22 27 9 16 7 2 27 17 7 17 10 3 2 32 15 6 18
15 3 3 32 19 5 19 9 7 2 32 24 9 20 5 5 1 30 16 7 21 50 11 3 38 20 8 22 38 11 3
46 31 13 23 42 11 20 10 24 49 10 11 2 54 25 17 25 37 8 6 1 55 40 12 26 111 18 7
1 65 48 17 27 19 10 65 34 12 28 60 8 6 1 67 36 22 29 69 13 8 65 33 24 30 53 12
8 4 67 45 20 31 81 18 6 3 77 31 17 605 222 112 17 626 325 Table of daily
returns for September.
City Hospital. Days. New Cases. Admitted. Died. Cured. Remaining. Total Deaths
in 1798. Total Deaths in 1793. 1 107 18 12 2 81 48 17 2 130 22 7 1 95 41 18 3 8
9 5 84 28 11 4 87 18 8 3 91 65 23 5 100 17 10 98 67 20 6 93 25 4 2 116 50 24 7
127 17 13 3 117 52 18 8 110 14 8 2 122 63 42 9 none-port. 16 7 13 120 73 32 10
11 13 2 115 74 29 11 91 14 8 5 117 73 23 12 105 15 9 122 71 33 13 85 16 9 3 125
57 37 14 92 10 8 3 112 61 48 15 97 18 7 4 117 60 56 16 198 27 14 7 121 128 67
17 27 14 7 121 128 81 18 105 17 7 131 57 68 19 84 32 9 1 151 58 61 20 72 20 9 6
154 69 67 21 126 16 13 158 78 57 22 86 15 7 1 164 68 76 23 194 15 10 26 142 71
68 24 18 15 145 63 96 25 85 25 8 12 149 80 87 26 95 14 16 6 140 77 52 27 96 13
146 86 60 28 54 13 1^ 13 136 106 51 29 67 9 8 4 133 75 57 30 10 11 85 63 2486
483 276 124 2004 1442 Table of daily returns for October.
City Hospital. Days. New Cases. Admitted. Died. Cured. Remaining. Total Deaths
in 1798. Total Deaths in 1793. 1 This (...) also includes the new cases of the
day previous.
100 11 15 22 116 85 74 2 39 19 9 116 83 67 3 41 16 3 12 117 49 78 4 22 8 7 118
46 58 5 25 5 4 16 101 36 71 6 18 9 8 17 85 38 76 7 48 8 2 25 82 8 2 2 6 85 29
90 9 27 6 3 88 20 102 10 32 6 2 14 78 14 93 11 47 7 3 82 43 119 12 36 14 8 87
41 111 13 23 9 2 12 82 27 104 14 48 8 8 82 40 81 15 8 5 85 34 80 16 22 7 4 12
76 32 70 17 27 4 4 76 25 80 18 27 4 3 77 25 59 19 17 4 5 24 52 34 65 20 13 4 2
54 19 55 21 26 4 1 58 14 59 22 3 4 57 20 82 23 16 1 4 40 22 54 24 10 5 1 14 44
17 38 25 12 5 1 48 16 35 26 12 2 1 49 20 23 27 5 3 1 12 39 20 13 28 18 3 3 39
16 25 29 3 5 7 30 22 17 30 8 3 3 30 15 16 31 10 2 3 29 16 22 729 193 126 168
943 1999 Table exhibiting the number of interments in each Burying-Ground.
NAMES. Aug. Sept. Oct. Total 1798 Total 1793 Christ Church 12 44 12 68 173 St.
Peter's 25 25 14 64 109 St. Paul's 14 21 9 44 70 First Presbyterian 18 17 12 47
73 Second Presbyterian 18 32 17 67 128 Third Presbyterian 19 33 1 69 107 Scots
Presbyterian 19 33 Associate Church 18 12 St. Mary's Church 52 147 38 237 281
Trinity Church 12 34 15 61 54 Friends 24 71 24 119 373 Free Quakers 10 6 7 23
39 Swedes 21 40 18 79 75 German Lutheran 54 192 128 374 641 German Reformed 29
97 66 192 261 Moravians 6 7 13 13 Baptists 5 29 11 45 60 Methodists 9 21 16 46
32 Universalists 9 2 Jews 00 2 African Episcopal and Methodist 5 9 5 19 City
Hospital 1716 1334 Kensington 235 169 Coates's 9 3573 4041 Total from the 1st
to the 5th Nov. 72 3645

The above table makes the total of deaths amount to 3645. Our list of the
names of the deceased only amounts to 3521; but, we think it probable, that the
total mortality, occasioned by the pestilence, this year, including those who
died in the country, exceeds 4000.

APPENDIX.
LETTER From a gentleman of experience and respectability, TO THE EDITORS.
I APPROVE your design of publishing a history of the malignant fever which has
ravaged our city, and diverse other parts of America. I hope it will be useful
to the citizens of the United States, and profitable to yourselves. Such light
as may be in my power to throw upon this subject, you shall have. I propose,
therefore, to answer your queries according to the best of my judgment, in the
order you have stated them.

Query I. "Is it" (the disease) "of domestic origin, or imported? If one, or
the other, be pleased to state the reasons for your opinion."

Answer. I believe the disease, this year, as in the years '93 and '97, to have
been imported; and, I will add, contagious: (this being still doubted by some,
and denied by others). My reasons are as follow. In the years '93 and '97, the
disorder broke out near the river, and spread, with remarkable regularity, up
and down the river; going from house to house and from street to street, until
it extended, from the river, quite to the westward part of the city. In the
present year, it appeared in several parts of the city, distant from each
other, nearly at the same time: From this circumstance, those gentlemen who had
entertained a belief that the disease we had in '93 and '97 was of domestic
origin, appeared confirmed in their opinion; and concluded that others, must
now agree with them, that the disease, both then and now, originated in this
city. If the regular manner in which the disorder spread over the city, in the
years '93 and '97, furnished an argument in favor of its being imported and
contagious, so does the manner in which it appeared among us in the present
year, furnish an argument, equally strong, that it was imported and contagious.
Its spreading over the whole city, in the present year, has been as uniform as
it was before; although it appeared in different parts of it nearly at the same
time. Two flat-men, who lodged near the sign of the Cross-Keys, were among the
first who died of this disorder. Two young men, of the names of Ralston and
Beaty, lodged together near the hay-scales, up town; they had worked on board
the ship Deborah; were both seized with the fever, and died. A young man, of
the name of Isdell, came from Burlington, went on board the Deborah to (...) an
acquaintance, was soon after seized with the fever, and died. Doctor Kheimly
attended a young man who died with the fever; the Doctor was informed this man
belonged to the Deborah. A young man, who belonged to the family of the
gentleman who owned the Deborah, died of the fever. It has been repeatedly
asserted, that Ely Shoemaker, and 'squire Servoss, were on board the Deborah;
they died of the fever. A gentleman, who lives at Kensington, has assured me,
that they were in health until the Deborah was taken there, to be repaired;
that several of the carpenters, who worked on board her, were seized with the
fever and died; and, from them, it spread through the place. Doctor Bennewell
happened to be near this vessel when she was there; he was soon after seized
with the fever; it spread through his family, and some of them died. It is
asserted, that a man, of the name of Philips, who lived in Water-street,
between Walnut-street and the Drawbridge, went down the river and brought up
one, or more sick men, from the Deborah; they died: Philips was seized with the
disease, and died. -- About the same time, the disorder appeared in the family
of the next neighbor of Philips, and soon after, in diverse other places in the
south part of the city, all of which could have been traced to the
neighborhood where Philips had died. It now made its appearance up town, about
the hay-scales, where Ralston and Beaty, who had worked on board the Deborah,
died; and at the Cross-Keys, where two shallopmen had died. In consequence of
my profession, as an apothecary, and persons coming from various parts of the
town for medicine, I had an opportunity of discovering that, although the
disease raged violently in many parts of the city at the same time, yet there
were many other parts entirely free from complaint; but, by degrees, the
healthy parts diminished in magnitude, and the sickly parts increased until
they met; after which, again, and before the disease had searched out every
part of the town, some parts, where the disorder had raged violently, became
free from disease; whilst other parts of the town were visited that before had
been healthy. Near thirty persons have died in a few houses, opposite this
city, in the Jerseys. The case of the vessel, mentioned in the newspapers,
sailing from this city to City-Point, in Virginia, is a striking proof of the
contagion of this disease; from this vessel the disorder spread, and great
numbers of the inhabitants died. About 12 persons, who came to the annual
meeting of the Friends, died. A man came from Wilmington to this city; was in
Water-street, near Philips's; was taken ill soon after he returned home, and
died. Sometime after, a quantity of rags, for a paper-maker, was sent from this
city to Wilmington; several young persons, who handled them, were taken ill and
died: from them, some say, it spread.

Those who hold that the disorder is of domestic origin, have said that many
places have been visited with as great mortality, in proportion to their
numbers, as this city; and who have had no intercourse with any place, so as to
have taken the disorder by infection; that the first who died among them, had
never been from home. This has been asserted by some, and contradicted by
others. It would be an arduous task to ascertain the facts, neither is it
material. If this should even be granted, it does by no means prove what is
endeavored to be inferred from it. If handling a few rags communicated the
disease, as at Wilmington, and opening a chest of clothes, as was the case at
Bordentown, might not the disorder have been carried, in some such way, where
it has been supposed to have originated, and at the same time unnoticed? Has it
not been frequently carried in bales of goods and clothing, from one country to
another? Is it then to be wondered at, that it should appear in some places
where its communication could not be traced or accounted for?

In the year '94, this city, Boston and New London, were clear of the disease;
and New York and Baltimore, were afflicted with it: In the present year, this
city, New York, Boston, New London, and other places, have had it, and
Baltimore was healthy. Now, it is scarcely possible that an epidemical disease,
originating in some peculiar state of the atmosphere, could appear so singular.
What extraordinary phenomenon has appeared, in the elements, to produce such
astonishing effects? Had some deadly exhalation arisen from the bowels of the
earth -- or such a blast of air, as, at times, appears in some parts of the
world, where men are suddenly smitten with disease -- had the heavens assumed
an appearance very unusual, we might, then, have had some reason to conclude
this disorder of domestic origin; but when the weather has been remarkably
serene and pleasant -- when the inhabitants of Philadelphia and Baltimore all
breathe the same common air (unless, indeed, at Baltimore it is less
salubrious) -- that, at the same time, a most mortal epidemic, as it is called,
should visit^^s, and they all enjoy good health! This cannot be: The disease we
have had among us, I believe, has arisen from no such cause. It is the opinion
of some gentlemen of the faculty, that coffee and grain, in a state of
putrefaction, will generate a putrid fever; but they do not agree in saying,
how far such a fever is contagious: Some, who admit that they would generate a
putrid fever, deny such a fever would be contagious; others do not admit that a
putrid fever would arise from such a cause. If coffee or grain, in a state of
putrefaction, will, at any time, generate a contagious putrid fever, it will at
all times do so, the state of the atmosphere being the same, because the
operations of nature are uniformly alike; but, among the farmers and millers in
America, no instances of the kind has appeared.

The late doctor Chauvett, who had resided many years in the West Indies,
always gave it as his opinion, that the fever, commonly called the West India
fever, from its prevailing there, was not natural to the climate, but was
imported from Africa. Doctor Letsom, of London, in a letter to a gentleman of
the faculty in this city, informs him, that a vessel sailed from Africa in the
year '93, and arrived in the West Indies, having a malignant fever on board;
that this fever spread among the king's troops with great mortality; that one
remarkable circumstance attending the disease was, that those who died seldom
survived the fifth day. It is now further well known, that, from the year '93
to the present time, the fever in the West Indies has been worse than usual. A
master of a vessel, who has sailed to the West Indies for some years past,
assured me, that, in the year '96, he lay near a British man of war of 74 guns,
that the fever appeared among the crew, and that 30 persons were buried from
her in twenty-four hours. A medical gentleman, with whom I am acquainted, has
further informed me, that he was on the coast of Africa, in the year 1788, when
the vessels that were there, had on board a disease resembling the one we have
had, in all respects. We see, then, in the year '88, this disorder was in
Africa; doctor Letsom has traced it from Africa to Philadelphia, in the year
'93; and that it has been in the West Indies from '93 to the present year. Is
it not then more than probable, that it has been repeatedly brought from thence
to the United States of America?

That this disease is the plague, or a plague, is evident, if we attend to the
symptoms and circumstances attending it. In the first place, great prostration
of strength attended the sick from the first attack; some died in a few hours
after they were taken ill; many died within 24 hours after; but generally on
the fifth day. Many were raving and distracted, and would have got away from
their nurses if they could. They frequently bled at the mouth and nose, and
died with the black vomit. There is a great resemblance, in other respects,
between the disease we have had, and those plagues which has visited other
countries.

Under the article of plague, in the Encyclopedia, we are told of a plague that
killed scarc^^ any women, and very few except lusty men. Another plague,
mentioned by Boterus, which assaulted none but the younger sort. Cardon speaks
of a plague at Basil, with which the Switzers were infected, and the Italians,
Germans and French, exempted; and a dreadful one at Copenhagen, which, though
it raged among the Danes, spared the Germans, Dutch and English, who went with
all freedom, and without the least danger, to the houses of the infected.
During the plague which ravaged Syria in 1760, it was observed, that people of
the soundest constitutions were the most liable to it, and that the weak and
delicate were either spared, or easily cured: it was most fatal to the Moors;
when it attacked them, it was, generally, incurable.

The disease we had in the years '93 and 97 was more mortal among men than
women; and was still more so among the strong and vigorous than among the weak
and delicate; and rarely attacked any under 14 years of age; the West-Indians
escaped it altogether. In the present year, it seems to have seized all ages
and both sexes, except the West-Indians, and they have escaped it as
heretofore; persons lately from Europe took it readily, and it was generally
mortal.

From the foregoing resemblance between the plague, which has desolated other
countries, and the sickness we have had, we may safely pronounce it a plague.
If, then, this is its proper appellation, it has not generated in America; no
cause, adequate to the generating such a disease, having appeared among us. To
say that the elements have undergone some extraordinary change, is merely an
assertion that does not appear to have any foundation. Is there not a great
degree of uniformity in the temperature of the air and elements, from
Massachusetts Bay to Virginia? and, yet, how different has been the fate of the
inhabitants, in particular places, between the (...) and the other. What
salubrity in the air and elements has Baltimore been blessed with beyond
Philadelphia, New York, Boston, and other places in the present year, and which
it was deprived of in the year '94, and Philadelphia enjoyed in preference?

The foregoing are reasons to induce me to believe the disease we have had, was
not an epidemical disease, occasioned by any peculiar state of the atmosphere,
nor occasioned by any stagnated filth in or near, our city. The disorder we
have had is no less than a plague; and, as no sufficient cause has appeared to
generate a plague, so, of consequence, it must have been imported.

It is generally agreed that the plague was never bred, or propagated, in
Britain; but was always imported there: and if it be so, may we not, with as
much reason, conclude it was never bred or generated in America? I do not say
this is impossible, but only contend it has never yet happened, although we
have had a disease, in the last war, approaching thereto, viz. the camp fever.

To what cause, then, shall we attribute the origin of such a disease? Not to a
few bags of damaged coffee, or vegetable substances, in a state of
putrefaction; this, in my opinion, would not do it. Although persons
approaching such a source of polluted air might get a fever, yet I cannot
believe such a fever would be contagious. My suspicions are, that this disease
takes its origin from human nature.

There are frequent plagues among the brute creation, and which are confined to
one particular species. I suspect, then, that those plagues originate in some
peculiar manner among the particular species which are afflicted, whether dogs,
cats, horses, or horned cattle. Plagues, therefore, among men, originate not by
means of damaged grain, coffee, or any vegetable substances, in a state of
putrefaction; but by means of human nature in a state of peculiar disease,
death and putrefaction. A number of persons crowded together, in a narrow
apartment, although in perfect health, will soon generate a disease; and it
will be more malignant the longer they are confined. A large encampment, if
provisions are bad, and the men not kept clean, and impurities not removed,
will generate disease -- these are the jail and camp fever, and resemble a
plague in some degree; but to render them so virulent, as to become highly
contagious, for they are contagious in some degree, it may possibly require
that most offensive and deadly exhalation, which arise from the human corpse in
a state of putrefaction; this combination of causes, together with a particular
state of the atmosphere, produces, as I suppose, what is properly, and
distinguishedly, called the plague. This effluvia operates upon persons of a
peculiar habit of body, as a poisonous leaven, so as speedily to reduce them to
that state of disease, in which they transmit the same pestilential miasmata,
as persons in the smallpox, and some other diseases, propagate the same
disease. I have either read, or heard, of a plague, arising from a grave having
been opened, when the corpse was in a state of putrefaction; the grave-digger
being first seized, and dying; from him it spread. That such a cause might
produce a malignant fever, there is no doubt; how far it would be contagious,
depends upon known facts: that the jail and camp fevers are contagious, in some
degree, is true; and that human corpse, in a state of putrefaction, will
communicate a malignant and putrid fever, is also true; that they may unite
together, and, under a peculiar state of the atmosphere, constitute a
malignant, putrid and contagious fever, is almost certain; and I very much
doubt whether any thing short of either one or other-of those causes, or these
combined, would produce such a fever. We are told, that an immense swarm of
locusts dying has occasioned a plague. I do not doubt the story; yet I do not
believe that this disease was contagious or catching from man to man; an
immense number of locusts, in a state of putrefaction, might contaminate the
air, so as to render it almost fatal for any person to breathe it. Thousands
might die from such a cause; yet this is a different thing from contagion;
every man being seized with such a sickness, derives his disorder immediately
from a great mass of contaminated air; but a contagious, putrid fever is where
the disease communicates an effluvia; which, being received by persons of a
peculiar habit of body, produces, in them, the same disease. It is highly
probable, as I have before observed, that every contagious disease with which
mankind are afflicted, arises from some peculiar cause among the species.

Those gentlemen who believe the disease we have had was neither imported nor
contagious, advance the following reasons, viz. that very few of those who
nursed in the disease took it; and many others escaped who were much exposed to
the contagion, and that it did not spread in the country. It is, indeed, one
consoling circumstance attending the disease, that there did not appear that
danger in nursing in it, as might have been apprehended from so malignant a
disease; but it does not therefore follow that it is not, or was not,
contagious. It is true, there are some persons of that peculiar habit of body
which do not take the disease, let them be ever so much exposed to it; were not
this the case, the world would soon be depopulated.

It has been said, that some of those who nursed at the hospital, in the midst
of great contagion, enjoyed their health; but leaving the hospital, and coming
into town, they caught the disorder. From this, it is inferred, that the
disease was not contagious in itself; but that the danger arose from the
peculiar state of the atmosphere in the city. Admitting the facts to be as
above stated, I account for the nurses escaping the sickness at the hospital,
and taking it in the city, upon other principles. The hospital is a building
which stands alone, and well aired, and was kept clean; the miasmata, arising
from the sick, was speedily extinguished, or carried away by the free admission
of the air: this, together with the contiguous vegetation, and the salubrious
exhalations arising therefrom, rendered it much safer, than where buildings
erected, with brick, are crowded together, and the streets paved. By those
means, the air must have been much more disposed to spread contagion, and to
add virulency to the disease.

I have now answered your query with respect to the origin of the disorder,
and, have further given you some reasons why I believe it to be contagious,
many others might be advanced.

2dly, You request to be informed of "the time when the first case appeared,
and where?"

On the 2d of July, Mark Miller died, as has been reported, with the usual
symptoms of the yellow fever. And us this case could not be traced to any
vessel from the West Indies, it has been used as an argument in favor of its
domestic origin: But, it is said, the bed on which he slept, at his lodgings in
Callowhill-street, was one on which a young man laid, while he had the yellow
fever in the year '97. If this be true, as I believe the disease to be of the
pestilential kind, it accounts for his having taken the disorder, and points
out the necessity of well cleansing houses. There were diverse other persons who
died in the month of June and July, (whose names I have forgot) with symptoms,
as it was said, very much resembling the yellow fever; and those gentlemen who
hold that the fever originated among us, advance these cases as additional
arguments in favor of their hypothesis: But, might they not have died in
consequence of contagion remaining, either in beds or clothing from the
preceding year, or from some vessels from the West Indies? for, the disease is
there, and no doubt has been brought by other vessels besides the Deborah and
Mary; or might not those persons have died of a billious fever, such as that
which sometimes prevails in the summer season, which is not contagious, yet, in
its symptoms, is very much like the malignant fever we have had among us? It
may be said, that if those persons had received the disorder either by a vessel
from the West Indies, from pestilential miasmata, remaining in beds or
clothing, the disorder would have spread from them over the city. This does
not follow, neither. There is no doubt but that a certain pre-disposition, in
the air, is necessary, in order for it to spread, and a pre-disposition of body
also to receive it. A warm summer produces this effect: it both renders the
atmosphere disposed to spread the disease, and the habits of bodies among the
people to receive it, and also it may require the summer season to produce this
effect, so as for it to spread generally, yet some individuals may take it
earlier. This sentiment seems corroborated from a great number having had the
disorder since it has generally abated; for, as some have taken the disorder
since the weather has been so favorable as to have very much extinguished it,
so some might have taken it from previous contagion, before the season was such
as to promote a general infection.

Your third query is, "What were the general appearances of the disease? Were
they any way different from the year '93." Answer. The general appearances of
the disease so nearly resembled the appearances in the year '93, as evidently
showed it to be the same disease, yet more malignant and mortal. In the year
'93, scarce any took the disorder under 14 or 15 years of age: it was less
mortal among women than men. In the present year, it has been very mortal among
all ages, and both sexes.

4th. You query, "What were the successful modes of treatment? did they differ
from former practice?"

Answer. The most successful mode of treating this disorder, appeared to be,
either by salivating the patient as speedily as possible, or by promoting a
copious sweat, on the first symptoms appearing; then to open the body well, and
by keeping it open with moderate purges, and frequent clystering. Although the
lancet was not so frequently used as heretofore, yet, in some cases, it was, in
my opinion, very proper. The regimen should be of the cooling kind; such as
that generally known and practiced in malignant fevers. If the patient should
be seized with a pain in the stomach, which is sometimes the case, and it is an
unfavourable symptom, I have known extraordinary good effects produced by
fomenting the part with a decoction of flaxseed. There is no disease which
depends more upon the nurse; for, if your physician is ever so skilful, if your
nurse is inattentive, you may, nevertheless, lose your friend; and, it is on
this account, that this disease has been more mortal than otherwise it would
have been. I have been informed by a young man, who nursed in the disorder, at
Wilmington, that the mortality was considerably less among those who were laid
under tents, and upon the ground, with only straw under them, than among those
who were attended in the usual way in dwelling houses.

5th. You query, "Was the disease in any cases infectious, when carried into
the country, distant from tide-water?"

Answer. This disease was infectious at Germantown: eight or ten persons took
it in two or three families. This disorder will be most mortal in cities that
are large, and populous, (whether they are on tide-water or not,) on account of
houses depriving each other of a free admission and circulation of the air, the
increased heat of cities, and their being deprived of the salubrity of
vegetation, and the occupation of many citizens confining them within doors.

6th. You ask, "What estimate do you make of the number who have died in the
country? How long were they out? Or whether, with them, it assumed such fatal
or violent appearances as here?"

Answer. I have taken no pains to ascertain the numbers who have died in the
country; but they are much greater than the numbers were in the year '93;
neither have I taken any pains to ascertain what length of time they were out.
With respect to those who were seized with the disorder in the country, it
appeared to be as fatal as in the city, although it did not spread as it did in
the city: the reason for which, I conceive to be, country houses are better
aired, and the advantages they have of the salubrious effects of vegetation.

7thly. "What are the best means of preventing its introduction or generation,
or to prevent its attack, when generated, besides that of flight?"

Answer. As this disorder is unquestionably imported from the West Indies, the
best means of preventing its introduction is, to stop all trade there for a few
months in the year; or to oblige vessels to perform a more effectual quarantine
than has been observed heretofore. The best way to prevent an attack of the
disease, when introduced among us, besides that of flight, is, to keep your
person and your habitation sweet and clean, use moderate exercise in the open
air, not to stand still in the sun, and avoid taking cold; to live temperately,
yet by no means too abstemiously, nor to take purgatives by way of prevention;
and, above all things, to acquire, if possible, a magnanimous mind that does
not fear death. I know of no better preventatives than the foregoing; yet, as
the disease is the plague, I believe many would take it, if exposed to the
contagion, let them use whatever precaution they may.

8thly. "What are the best means of cleansing houses, clothes, etc. of the
infected, and of destroying contagion?".

Answer. Gunpowder slashed in an infected room will expel the foul air, and
replace it with air free from contagion; but, that every closet and crevice may
be searched, shut your room close up, stop the fireplace, set a pan of coals
in the middle of the room, on which throw a quantity of brimstone, and fill
your room with the fumes; or, take a handful of common salt, or saltpeter, and
with it, about half a pound of oil of vitriol, hanging, at the same time,
wearing apparel, or any other article which you may apprehend is infected, in
the room. These fumes will penetrate every thing thoroughly, and cleanse them
from infection. Linens may be cleansed by steeping them in ley, and woolens in
soap suds. White-wash your walls with lime, and wash your floors with ley. To
bury an infected article in the ground ten days will cleanse it.

9thly. "Are there any particular classes of persons more subject to it than
others."

Answer. It appears that some persons are more liable to take it than others.
In this respect, it corresponds with some other plagues which have appeared at
different times. I know of no instance of a West-Indian taking the disorder,
although there was many in the city during the whole sickness. Europeans have
taken it very readily, and it has been generally mortal among them. Of the
Americans in the year '93, I know of but few who took it under 14 or 15 years
of age, and as I have observed before, it was more mortal among men than women;
and it has been more mortal then and the present year, among the robust and
sanguinary, than among persons of a spare habit of body. Of hard drinkers,
scarce one in twenty have recovered.

S. W.

TO THE EDITORS OF THE HISTORY OF THE YELLOW FEVER.
GENTLEMEN,
I HAVE received your circular letter of the 9th of November, containing
queries relative to the epidemic, which lately ravaged our city and other
places on this continent. The good that may result from your undertaking is
obvious, if it only contributes to propagate those opinions which will lead us
to efficacious measures for the preservation of a great population. Many old
countries have protected themselves against plagues and malignant fevers, and
why should we not imitate their improvements to obtain the same blessings? I
have now but little to say on the various topics of so interesting a subject,
yet, I think it is the duty of every individual, to submit to the public any
observation that he may deem conducive to relieve us from one of the greatest
calamities. That duty I endeavored to fulfill last year, and I would be obliged
to repeat what I have already published, if I were to answer all your queries.
I shall, however, content myself with a few observations that have occurred
during one year more of experience.

" Is the yellow fever of domestic origin?" Men wishing for speculative
demonstration, might perhaps be satisfied with what has been already said in
the affirmative of this question, and chiefly by the opinion of the majority of
the learned in the United States; but, if a proof of another kind is acceptable
-- a proof of fact and of experimental demonstration, such a proof has been
offered to me by a singular circumstance; and I beg your readers will weigh it
with impartiality, while their candor will require no further evidence than
that which is in the power of one witness to give.

A gentleman from a foreign country, who arrived during our late epidemic,
informed me, that although he was quite healthy, and had lived many years in
one of the West India islands, he did experience a disagreeable impression from
our atmosphere chiefly during the first days of his arrival; and that he had
even felt some fever, which justly alarmed him. In consequence, he fixed his
residence at two miles distant from town, where he never suffered any kind of
indisposition; yet, as he frequently came into the city, he then always
discovered that our atmosphere was impregnated with corrupted effluvia, which
he could assimilate to nothing better than to the effluvia from rotten wood.
This effect was very surprising to him; for he admired the regularity and the
cleanliness of this town in general. I answered, that if I could add to his
observation a greater evidence than that of a single individual, I could derive
from it a convincing proof, that the origin of our epidemic was a contagion
abundantly floating in our atmosphere, and incessantly renewed in it. It was
obvious to suppose that this gentleman was endowed with a particular degree of
acuteness in his olfactory organs, which power, however, is not very uncommon,
and which many among us do not perceive, being accustomed to live in a vitiated
atmosphere. But how could an imported disorder produce such an alteration in
it? Are not populous towns in Europe productive of much more corrupted vapors,
than those that can arise from a few patients scattered about? and yet none of
them, except in the Levant, are productive of pestilence. Moreover, all the
houses here, few excepted, were shut up during the last prevalence, and almost
none could produce the usual share of corruption which must continually arise
from inhabited places. It rested with me to collect as much evidence as I could
of an important fact, because the assertion of the above gentleman extended to
all the minutes which he passed in town, and at every time of his coming into
it from the house where he lodged in the country. It was consequently agreed
between us that he would submit to a trial, by which I could render both his
unprejudiced veracity, and the acuteness of his smelling power, unquestionable
proofs of an existing contagion in our atmosphere. I then desired him to come
with me, while I visited my patients. If I stopped at any place or house where
there was no sick, I would leave to him to discriminate whether effluvia or
corrupted miasma could be smelled in the neighborhood or in the entries
around. This observation was very difficult to make; but I thought it could not
be impossible to a man who could distinguish such alterations in the
atmosphere: it was besides grounded on the opinion and the fact of noxious
vapors sensibly arising from the b^ds or bodies of patients in the yellow
fever, and possibly diffusing at a great distance. The man accepted the task,
and fulfilled it wonderfully well. At every place where I stopped or went in,
he was able to tell whether a patient was in it or not: he could also discover
when I had put myself too much in contact with the sick. But I objected that
the contagious miasma, which he perceived so strongly in the neighborhood and
in the houses of the sick, might be supposed to be the cause of the corrupted
vapors, which he had observed in the atmosphere. He could not think so, he
said, because they were quite different, and he was now smelling a new sort of
human or animal putrefaction which he had not yet in any degree smelled in the
general currents of the air, within the avenues and the streets of the city.
For a last trial, I took with me a clean white pocket handkerchief, and left it
a few minutes in the bed of a patient. I wrapped it up again in a sheet of
paper. At the first interview with the gentleman, I suddenly unfolded it, and
shook it in his presence, and pretty near him, when he suddenly complained of
my diffusing very strong and corrupted vapors, such as he had smelled before
at my patients' houses. I finally remained satisfied of the extreme acuteness
of the senses of the observer, and of his veracity in ascertaining that our
atmosphere was contaminated with corrupted vapors. That the air is constantly
renewed and purified of any kind of impure emanations, even without wind, is a
fact that experience teaches us, in every populous town, and at any season of
the year; but, such effects cannot take place, when the local sources of
corruption, as the wharves, etc. are in a continual fermentation. This was
doubtless the case of Philadelphia. Then, it is not surprising, that our
atmosphere should bread fevers, contagion and death!

To unprejudiced people, it will appear impossible that an imported disorder
could contaminate the whole atmosphere during three months, and when so few
people remain in it.

The other point to which I may advert, in answer to your letter, is the
proportion of those who recovered by the benefit of medical art, and by the
method of treatment which has been generally employed by the greatest number of
our physicians. In giving such estimate, however, I wholly co^fine it within my
own opinion, and those of a few medical friends. Owing to the greater degree of
malignancy of the last epidemic, it should seem that the success of our
practice has not surpassed that of the year '97, although the best remedies
were more generally employed. It is true, that it is the peculiar character of
a contagious disorder to increase its deplorable effects in proportion to the
degree of alarm that it spreads; for, patients altogether given up to the most
shocking despair, and destitute of proper assistance, must necessarily soon
become victims of the sickness. These considerations, oblige us, gentlemen, to
limit our reckoning among or from the patients who were timely and properly
assisted; and of those, I think, that six recovered out of seven. If it was
made known that this just and true proportion of the sick recovered by more
respectable authorities than that of an individual, instead of so many dreadful
accounts of deaths incessantly published, certainly the people at large would
at least be supported by a consoling and relieving hope, and in fact, they
would be more careful of themselves; for, those who cannot conveniently remove
from the seat of the infection, would be more attentive in procuring medical
assistance, for which they apply too late or not at all, for want of confidence
in its remedies, and because they are not at all apprised of their effectual
applications. I shall also take the liberty to suggest, that the public
authority might easily obviate the disadvantage of the absence of many of our
regular physicians, by granting to those who choose to remain in the infected
places, the means of attending as many patients as they could, if they are not
used to keep the accommodation of a carriage.

One objection may be made against the above proportion of the patients
recovered under the help of medical art, if we attend, without explanation, to
a comparative statement on that subject, published by the health office, the
21st of September. So it stood; Number of cases reported by physicians, 2472 Of
which have been sent to the hospital, 535 Of which number died, only 276 Whilst
the number of deaths, in the City and Liberties, had been nearly three-fourths,
that is to say, out of 1935 cases in it, died 1424

The health office was solicitously impelled to publish (...) above statement,
in order to convince the people, that there was a great danger for them to stay
in town, and that the assistance prepared for them in the city-hospital was far
better than any they could procure in the city: in all respects that intention
was laudable; and, in many, the consequences were true; but it behooves a
physician to explain, why such a great number as the half of the sick died in
the hospital, and why three-fourths have fallen victims in town.

I never granted to a sick person an order for admission into the
city-hospital, but I lamented that it was too late, because one or two days had
been lost, by the patient indulging himself in the opinion, that his case was
not the yellow fever, or trying some remedies recommended by their neighbors;
or foolishly delaying to take a resolution, which ignorance and prejudice
rendered very painful to every one of them. To that delay, one or two days were
added before the patient would be admitted into the hospital, owing to neglect
in transmitting the order to the officers of the board of health, or to the
want of some body who could be sent for the carriage, or to accidental delays
of other kinds. Thus, it may be justly observed, to the honor of the
physicians employed in the city-hospital, that most of the patients they
received were taken sick three or four, and many four or five days previous to
their admission; yet, at that time, they had cured half of them.

We were in town witnesses to almost the same neglects, delays, and prejudices,
among the sick who called for bur assistance. Many refused to be sent to the
hospital, who died destitute of nurses and the most necessary remedies; while
they surely were not benefited by our atmosphere. They were also injured by the
heat, narrowness and uncleanliness of their houses and clothes. As the yellow
fever has often the surprising effect of suspending any kind of painful
sensation, many felt as if nothing of consequence ailed them, till the approach
of death. If, on the contrary, they were attacked with violent symptoms, they
were abandoned even by their nearest relations; but few charitable and
judicious nurses could be found; of the remaining physicians, many were sick
and confined. In short, I have seen about sixty or seventy patients, all of the
above description; the greatest part died; and it surely will be granted, that
if they had received proper assistance, the greater part must have recovered;
and, for the truth and justness of these observations, I can, I believe, with
confidence, call upon the candor and experience of the other physicians. It
will then be understood, why so many patients died in town with the yellow
fever, without derogating from the estimate I have given of those who recovered
under medical assistance.

Every body is now investigating what are the best means of preventing the
return of that calamity. We must congratulate ourselves on the laudable and
numerous exertions of our fellow citizens. The introduction of pure waters,
will, no doubt, prove one of the most beneficial improvements; for, it equally
answers the purpose of cleansing the streets, as refreshing the atmosphere. The
poor people also will have an easier and more convenient means for washing
their clothes, which they are used to keep dirty, during the summer, until they
can gather some rain water; but that is not all: many other causes did appear
to me very obnoxious to the wholesomness of the town. The casements and logs of
our wharves are old, and their surface is rotten; at low water, when a
scorching sun dries them up, they produce very infecting and dangerous
effluvia. The vicinity of the docks has always appeared to be the seat of many
deaths; because, at the periodical return of the tide, their filthy waters are
also returned, and the most corrupted and black mud is left again on the
bottom. Too many crowded buildings are unfortunately erected upon the wharves.
The whole east side of Philadelphia is walled by a double, thick and high range
of houses, through which the air has but few streets opened to circulate. The
conveniences of the shipping and mercantile business, have thus deprived the
metropolis of the refreshing and moist currents of air, that must necessarily
rise from one of the largest rivers There are about ten thousand houses in
Philadelphia; the ground also contains ten thousand deep ditches (...) privy
necessaries: many of them contain the animal filth of several generations, and,
for the cleaning of them, no law was enacted; no means were provided! Quere-Is
not the number of privy ditches, and the cubic solidity of this filth, in a
proportionate ratio for the corruption of all our waters, and for poisoning
every point of exhalation on our ground?
. The streets of the suburbs, and many of the city, are left in a surprising
state of degradation, and without pavement, while the numerous carriages and
great intercourse with the country, render them still worse; no declivity is
given to their waters; no police law is enacted to compel the inhabitants to
clean their foot-ways. There the rains, and the common sewers of houses, empty,
form ponds, and cover the surface with a thick stratum of animal and vegetable
putrefaction. There is nobody in those parts, and even South street, who could
not, when he pleases, manure his little garden with the black mud which
surrounds them. I never could think, gentlemen, as many do, that the numerous
burying-grounds enclosed in the city, were of no bad consequence. I believe
quite the reverse, and I supported it in my account of the yellow fever in '97,
by reasons and arguments which I do not think easy to refute. All those
burying-grounds are situated on the most elevated points of the city; and as
the highest part of the city is forty feet above the river, and as the ditches
are dug only six feet deep, I calculate that the bed of all our dead, lie
between 20 and 30 feet above the lowest ground. How many streets, consequently,
and how many cellars are lower than the lowest bottom of a burying-ground? I
ask now, whether the constant moisture and vapor of the ground can be
infiltrated from any where but from the high surrounding parts, and whether
waters washing thousands of dead bodies, renewed every year, do not retain the
most noxious particles, although these waters, under the whole ground of
Philadelphia, do circulate through the most homogeneous clay.

These are, gentlemen, the points of observation which have constantly fixed my
opinion, on the origin of our malignant fever; from which nothing now can
preserve us, except a cool summer, and frequent N. W. winds. Other remedies or
preventatives against such a calamity, will, I hope, be found in the liberality
and experience of our enlightened fellow-citizens; but it would be useless to
stress upon any other conjecture or hypothesis. It was always known, and never
objected but here, that the vicinity of effluvia from corrupted animal or
vegetable substances were pestilential, and produced fatal diseases; and
whenever such sources of contagion surround us, and exist with us, it would be
injudicious to dwell upon mere suppositions; for the importion of a fever will
always be a supposed doctrine, since it is generally granted, that during the
heat of summer, the same causes can produce it on board of vessels, at sea or
in our ports, and often carries off the whole of their crews. It is also very
extraordinary, that we should receive, by importation, a disorder which proves
so terrible among us, while it is but occasionally in the countries from where
we dread to receive it, and where it is hardly thought contagious, and never
threatens, to an alarming degree the population nor the prosperity of the
inhabitants.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Yours, etc. F. O. P.

Letter to Thomas Mifflin, Esquire. Governor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
From the Academy of Medicine of Philadelphia, on the origin and means of
preventing the return of the Yellow Fever.
SIR,
IN order to comply with your request to the Academy of Medicine, communicated
by Dr. Samuel Duffield, consulting Physician of the port, respecting the means
of preventing the return of the epidemic fever, which has lately afflicted our
city, the Academy have conceived the history of its origin, necessarily
connected with their answer.

We believe it was derived from the following sources:

1. The exhalations of the alleys, gutters, docks, and common sewers of the
city; and from stagnating water in its neighborhood.

2. The foul air discharged with the ballast of the ship Deborah, and the cargo
of the brig Mary; the former of which arrived from Hispaniola on the 18th July,
and the latter on the 29th of the same month. We reject the opinion of an
imported human contagion in either of the above vessels. It has not been
asserted that any person died of the yellow fever on board the Mary, during her
voyage: and if it be said, that several persons died on board the Deborah of
that disease, on her passage to this city, we cannot admit that they
contaminated the timbers or contents of the ship in such a manner, as to spread
the disease to persons at several hundred feet distance from ^he wharf at which
she was moored. The improbability of this opinion will appear from two
considerations.

First -- The disease is not contagious in the West Indies; and rarely, if ever
so, in the United States in hot weather, at which time only it makes its first
appearance in our country. So general is this opinion, that some physicians
have unfortunately refused to admit the existence of the fever in its
commencement in our city, only because it was not contagious.

Second -- The disease was in no instance propagated by those persons who were
supposed to have derived it from human contagion adhering to the timbers o^
contents of the Deborah and Mary, and who died with it in parts of the city
remote from the influence of the foul air of those vessels.

If it be said that the contagion of the yellow fever is not uniform in its
effects, it ought at least to be admitted, that it acts with most certainty
where it exists with most force; but the reverse of this took place in the
supposed origin of our late fever from imported contagion. We are the more
determined in our opinion of the foul air of the Deborah and Mary being the
cause of many cases of our fever, from similar cases of fever having been often
produced from similar causes, instances of which were mentioned in our letter
to you of last year.

In support of our opinion of the disease being derived from the exhalations of
our city before enumerated, we shall mention the names of the following
persons, who had the fever before the arrival of the Deborah or Mary, in our
port, viz. Benjamin Jones, Fromberger's Court, June 2d; Mary Wrigglesworth,
near the corner of Walnut and Tenth-streets, June 6th; Rebecca Trested, in
Front between Spruce and Union-streets, June 11th; Elizabeth Curran, Fourth
below South-street, June 27th; Mark Miller, Callowhill-street, and Molly
Zeller, Race-street, July 2d; Miss Byrne, Spruce between Second and Third
streets, July 11th; Mr. Vannost, Shannon-street wharves, July 12th. We
observed, moreover, and heard of a considerable number of persons who had the
disease in the western parts of the city, and in Southwark and the Northern
Liberties, who had not been exposed to contagion, nor breathed the air in the
neighborhood of Water-street for many weeks, and in some instances for several
months, before they were attacked by that fever.

In addition to the arguments in favor of the domestic sources of the fever,
that had been mentioned in our former letter, we shall add four more, that we
think cannot be refuted.

1. The atmosphere of our city, during the prevalence of the fever, produced
sensations of pain or sickness in many people who came into it from the
country; the same atmosphere became the cause of the disease and death in
others who visited the city, and who carefully avoided lodging, or any
intercourse with persons infected by the fever.

2. The disease prevailed in many inland towns of the United States, which had
no intercourse with those seaport towns in which it was epidemic. Those towns
were, in every instance we have heard of, situated near to putrid substances,
or stagnating water.

3. The disease was rarely contagious, even when it terminated in death, when
carried into the country, or into towns not exposed to putrid exhalations.

4. The general extinction of the disease by frost, clearly proves that it
exists chiefly in the atmosphere; and that it is not derived, in the first
instance, from human contagion; for frost, it is well known, does not act in
the autumnal months upon the bodies of the sick, nor upon their beds, clothing,
or any other supposed receptacle of contagion.

We wish to direct the attention of our fellow-citizens to the history of the
causes and remedies of pestilential diseases in foreign countries: In the ages
of medical superstition, when those diseases were believed to be imported, they
nearly depopulated cities for many successive years. Frequent and accumulated
suffering at last begat wisdom. The causes of pestilence were discovered to
exist in all countries, and domestic remedies were applied to remove them. The
effect of this change in the opinion and conduct of the nations of Europe has
been the almost general extirpation of malignant fevers from their cities and
sea ports. We have many documents to prove that the recurrence of the yellow
fever has been prevented in the cities of Europe by cleanliness. It formerly
prevailed in Italy, Spain, France, Germany, Holland, and, occasionally, in
Britain and Ireland, under the names of putrid, malignant, and bilious fevers,
also of the gall sickness and of the black fever. The last name was derived
from the black vomiting, which is so often the symptom of approaching death in
bilious fevers.

We are the more confirmed in the opinion we have delivered, that the yellow
fever is a native disease of our country, by discovering that the same opinion
is held by most of the physicians and citizens of our sister states. We lament
the prevalence of an opinion, that the admission of truth upon this subject,
will injure the credit of our city. Truth, upon all subjects is ultimately
friendly to general interest and happiness, while the remedies of the evils of
error, are always of a partial and transitory nature. We conceive that the
report of the existence of a disease of a nature so subtle as to elude the
utmost force of the health laws, and the greatest vigilance of health-officers,
will be much more injurious to our city, than a belief of its being derived
from causes which are obvious to our senses, and which, by active exertions,
might be easily and certainly removed, without oppressing or injuring our
commerce.

We shall repeat, in this place, the means recommended by us in our former
letter, with the addition of some others, for preventing a return of the
disease.

1. "Removing all those matters from our streets, gutters, cellars, gardens,
yards, stores, vaults, ponds, etc. which, by putrefaction in warm weather,
afford the most frequent cause of the disease in this country. For this
purpose, we recommend the appointment of a certain number of physicians, whose
business it shall be, to inspect all such places in the city, the Northern
Liberties and Southwark, as contain any matters, capable by putrefaction, of
producing the disease, and to have them removed.

2. "We earnestly recommend the frequent washing of all impure parts of the
city in warm and dry weather, by means of the pumps, until the water of the
river Schuylkill can be made to wash all the streets of the city; a measure
which we conceive promises to our citizens, the most durable exemption from
bilious fevers of all kinds, of domestic origin.

3. "To guard against the frequent source of yellow fever from the noxious air
in the holds of vessels, we recommend the unlading such vessels, as contain
cargoes liable to putrefaction, and the discharging the ballast of all vessels
at a distance from the city, during the months of June, July, August, September
and October. To prevent the generation of noxious air in the holds of vessels,
we conceive every vessel should be obliged, by law, to carry and use a
ventilator, and we recommend in a particular manner, the one lately invented by
Mr. Benjamin Wynkoop. We believe this invention to be one of the most important
and useful that has been made in modern times, and that it is calculated to
prevent not only the decay of ships and cargoes, but a very frequent source of
pestilential diseases of all kinds in commercial cities."

4. The filling up, or cleaning the docks in such a manner, that no matters,
capable of putrefaction, shall be exposed to the rays of the sun at low water.

5. The closing the common sewers, so as to admit water only, and the daily
removal of the filth of the city, destined to flow into them, by means of
covered carts or wagons made for that purpose.

6. The prevention of the filth of the city from being accumulated, and
stagnating in its neighborhood.

7. The prohibition of alleys and narrow streets in the future improvement of
the city.

8. An alteration of the present health law, which, by detaining vessels with
perishable cargoes for ten days at the hospital, in hot weather, is calculated
to increase the foul air in their holds; and we recommend also, that no vessel,
owned by a citizen of Philadelphia, be permitted to leave or enter our ports,
that is not provided with a ventilator.

We shall conclude our letter by deprecating, in the most solemn manner, the
continuance of a belief in the supposed importation of our fever, an opinion
which has led to the total negligence of the means of preventing its return;
also by humbly hoping that a merciful Providence may not correct our ignorance
and prejudices, by frequent returns of a calamity, which has in five years
swept away ten thousand of our inhabitants, and which in a few years may, if
not obviated by the only proper remedies, (under the influence of the present
inflammatory constitution of the atmosphere) annihilate our city.

Signed by order of the Academy of Medicine, of Philadelphia. PHILIP SING
PHYSIC, President. JOHN C OTTO, Secretary.

Dec. 3, 1798.
LETTER from the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, by direction of
the Governor, relative to the late Malignant Fever, to the Board of Health.
GENTLEMEN,
THE Governor is desirous of submitting to the legislature, a comprehensive
view of the mortality and expenditure, produced by the calamity, which has
recently afflicted the city and its suburbs. He, therefore, directs me to
request, that you will favor him with a report, and the necessary documents,
upon the subject. The information contemplated may be properly embraced,
perhaps, by the following enquiries.

1st. At what time, in what place, and in what manner, was the malignant fever
introduced into the city and suburbs?

2d. How long did the fever continue to rage, and what is the number of its
victims?

3d. What was the general police pursued by the Board, the overseers of the
poor, and their agents, to subdue, or mitigate the disease, to aid the sick, to
inter the dead, and to maintain the poor?

4th. What sum has been raised on this occasion, by taxes, by voluntary loan,
and by gratuitous contributions; what sum has been expended, and what balance
remains on hand?

5th. What is the number and condition of the citizens who have been relieved,
and will any extraordinary aid be necessary, on the part of the legislature,
for the support of the poor during the ensuing winter?

6th. What precautions ought to be taken to prevent the recurrence of so
dreadful a calamity?

Permit me to add, that it is the governor's wish, that the overseers of the
poor, and, particularly those active citizens, who superintended the business
of the camps, should be consulted in forming your report. As the legislature
meets on the 4th of December, I hope it will be convenient for you to comply
with the governor's request, in the course of the present month.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of sincere respect and esteem,
gentlemen, your most obedient humble servant, A. J. DALLAS, Secretary.
Secretary's Office, Philadelphia, 8th November, 1798.
To the President and Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals.
REPLY to the foregoing Letter.
Health-Office, 1 st December, 1798. SIR,
THE secretary of the commonwealth, in a communication of the 8th ^lt. by your
direction, having propounded certain queries relative to the late dreadful
calamity, a sense of duty, common interest, and a poignant retrospect of the
past scenes of misery and wretchedness, which came more immediately under our
care, have excited an intense solicitude and assiduity, on our part, to answer
satisfactorily your enquiries, and devise means for the prevention of so
terrible a scourge in future.

We regret that the continuance of the disease to so late a period has delayed
the adjustment of the accounts of the institutions under our direction, and
will consequently deprive us of that accuracy which is desirable. We believe,
however, that the report will not ultimately be found materially incorrect.

A few preliminary remarks, relative to the precautions which have been taken
in order to prevent the importation of disease, may not be superfluous.

The law, in respect to quarantine, has been construed and executed in the
strictest sense. Every power and effort which the board, or the officers under
their direction, were capable of exercising, has been employed to cut off all
communication with the vessels under quarantine. -- Every possible mode of
purification, which a law so manifestly defective would permit, has been
adopted, and the most rigid scrutiny had, before the vessels were permitted to
proceed to the city.

At the Marine Hospital, the fences were extended into the river, the more
completely to enclose the premises, and all intercourse therewith precluded.

For the sake of perspicuity we shall conform, as near as possible, to the
order in which you have presented the several subjects of enquiry; and

1st. The malignant fever, according to our information, first made its
appearance in Water-street, between Spruce and Walnut-streets, about the first
of August. Several respectable physicians declare that it appeared in the month
of June; and, that many unequivocal cases occurred early in July.

Unshackled by prejudice, and diffident of opinion, we have endeavored to
trace the disease to its origin, but without success. Those objects which have
been pointed to with the greatest confidence as the foreign source of the
disease, on investigation, afford no such proof.

Thus situated, it would be indecorous, in an official report to the chief
magistrate, to substitute opinion for fact. We deem a question, on which the
lives of thousands and the prosperity or annihilation of our flourishing city
may depend, of too much importance to rest upon the exclusive speculation of
either foreign or domestic origin.

In our answer to your 6th query, we shall endeavor to designate such general
measures as, when properly digested by legislative wisdom, are, in our
judgment, best calculated to guard against the recurrence of so fatal a malady
from either domestic or foreign sources.

2d. The disease continued to rage until about the first of November; and,
partially, until about the 5th. The whole number of victims, exclusive of those
who died in the country, are three thousand six hundred and forty five.

3d. The City Hospital was opened on the 7th August -- all vessels were
immediately removed by order of the Board from all the wharves included between
Mr. Levi Hollingsworth's and Tun Alley. -- The Board publicly admonished the
inhabitants of the infected neighborhood to remove without delay. -- A
quantity of damaged coffee and cocoa, imported on the 30th July, and stored in
Ross's stores, was reported on the 3d August to the Board to be in a putrid
state. It was immediately put on board the vessel in which it was imported, and
sent down to the Marine Hospital for purification.

Two skilful physicians and two assistants were appointed to reside at the City
Hospital, with a competent number of nurses and attendants, and every thing
necessary for the comfort and relief of the patients was provided. All the
powers of reasoning, persuasion, and authority, which the Board possessed,
short of absolute coercion, were assiduously employed to induce the sick to
remove instantly to the Hospital; for which purpose carriages constantly
attended, and litters were constructed as speedily as possibly, to convey them
with ease and convenience.

All the regular practicing physicians of the city and liberties were
authorized to grant orders for admission into the City Hospital. -- Hearses and
persons were employed for the speedy removal and interment of the dead, and the
Health-Office kept open day and night, for the purpose of receiving
applications and executing the duties of the office with promptitude.

In order to ascertain the progress of the disease and form some criterion by
which to judge of its extension or decline, as well as to mark those parts of
the city and liberties in which it raged with the greatest violence, a suitable
person was appointed to obtain from the physicians the daily reports of new
cases which occurred in their practice severally, together with the names and
residence of the patients.

Skilful physicians were appointed to attend the poor of the city and
liberties, and medicines provided for their use at the expense of the
institution.

The buildings at the City Hospital being found insufficient, a house
contiguous thereto was rented; the summer houses were covered with canvas, a
number of sheds, and a new frame building 60 by 20 feet, two stories high, were
erected for the better accommodation of the sick.

The alarming progress of the disease, and frightful increase of mortality; the
apparent temerity or apathy of some, and the indigence and distress of others,
impelled the Board to reiterate in terms the most impressive, their admonitions
to the inhabitants who were in circumstances to abandon their homes; and, in
conjuction with the Guardians of the poor, to provide a retreat for the
indigent.

Tents were accordingly erected on the east bank of Schuylkill, to which they
were invited to resort, and ample provision was there made for their comfort
and support. These measures being inadequate to the urgency of the occasion,
temporary buildings for the accommodation of near two thousand persons were
erected on Masters' ground, two miles above the city.

The regulation and superintendance of each encampment was confided to a
committee of respectable and humane citizens, who voluntarily undertook the
arduous task.

By the joint authority of the Board of Managers and the Board of Guardians of
the poor, a committee of respectable citizens were appointed for the
distribution of relief to the poor of the city and liberties, whose situation
rendered it improper to remove to the tents.

The infected houses and bedding were cleansed and purified, by order of the
Board, so far as was found practicable. This, however, was but partial, owing
to the inevitable difficulties and confusion occasioned by the calamity.

4th. The amount raised by taxes and by loan in anticipation of the taxes to be
levied the present year for the support of the Marine and City Hospitals, viz.

Borrowed on account of the taxes for the year 1797, D. 7268 09 A tax of 10,000
dollars has been levied for the present year; the sum collected on account
thereof, is 676 87 Received of the Bank of Pennsylvania, on the credit of the
taxes of the present year, 20,000 00 27,944 96 Private Loan.
Borrowed of the several Banks, on security of certain individuals, for the
relief of the poor, under the joint direction of the Board of Managers and the
Board of Guardians of the Poor, which sum was borrowed on the faith of
Legislative reimbursement, 29,000 00 Total raised by taxes and loans, 56,944 96
GRATUITOUS CONTRIBUTIONS RECEIVED FOR THE USE OF THE POOR. By the Board of
Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals.
In Cash, D. 14040 05 In produce and clothing valued at 2000 16,040 05 By the
Committee of the Tents on the Banks of Schuylkill.
In Cash, D. 3537 29 In produce and clothing valued at 5000 8,537 29 By the
Committee of the Encampment at Masters' place.
In Cash, D. 3,254 27 In produce and clothing, valued at 6,568 22 9,822 49 By
the Committee for the relief of the poor in the City and Liberties.
In Cash, D. 420 00 In produce and clothing valued at 1,178 68 1,598 68 Total,
Dolls. 35,998 51 SUMS EXPENDED BY THE SEVERAL INSTITUTIONS. By the Board of
Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals.
In cash, for the relief of the sick poor, D. 9,782 56 In produce and
clothing, valued at 2,000 00 Paid the distributing committee 4,257 49 Paid on
account Marine and City Hospitals, 20,975 20 37,015 25 By the Committee of the
Tents, on the Banks of Schuylkill.
In cash; of which 10,000 dollars was a part of the 29,000 loan, D. 13,537 29
In produce and clothing valued at 5,000 18,537 29 By the Committee of the
Encampment at Master's place.
In cash, of which 9000 dolls. was a part of the 29,000 dollars loan, D. 12,254
27 In produce and clothing valued at 6,568 22 18,822 49 By the Committee for
the relief of the poor in the City and Liberties.
In cash, of which 10,000 dollars was a part of the 29,000 dollars loan, D.
14,677 49 Deduct so much charged in the expenditures of the Board of Managers,
of the Marine and City Hospitals, paid to this committee for distribution,
4,257 49 10,420 In produce and clothing valued at 1,178 68 11,598 68 Total,
Dollars, 85,973 71 Recapitulation of the preceding statement.
Total amount of taxes and loans 56,944 96 Total amount of gratuitous
contributions 35,998 51 92,943 47 Total amount expended by the several
institutions. 85,973 71 Balance in the hands of the treasurer of the Marine and
City Hospitals Dollars 6,969 76

Note. The above balance is on account of the Marine and City Hospitals. This
sum, however, will be inadequate to the discharge of the debts now due by the
said institutions.

Number of persons relieved, viz.
At the City Hospital, 879 By the physicians appointed by the Board of Managers
of the Marine and City Hospitals to attend the poor of the City and Liberties,
about 3000 At the tents on Schuylkill and the vicinity thereof, 1950 At the
encampment on Masters' place and its vicinity, 2024 By the Committee for
distributing relief in the city and liberties, about 3500 Total 11,353

Exclusive of the above expenditures and numbers of persons relieved, the
guardians of the poor have incurred a very great and extraordinary expense for
the relief of orphans and persons distressed by the calamity.

5th. The poor will, doubtless, require extraodinary aid from the legislature
the ensuing winter, in consequence of the suspension of labor during the
prevalence of the disease, the extraordinary expenses incurred by sickness, or
removal from the city, and, in all probability, a short interval from the
return of the citizens to the closing of the navigation for the exercise of
industry.

6th. No question can be more interesting, none more entitled to serious
consideration, than that which shall determine the precautions to be adopted,
in order to prevent the recurrence of a calamity so destructive. Accordingly,
we find our fellow citizens generally engaged in the contemplation and
discussion of the subject.

Whatever difference of opinion may exist as to its origin, all appear to agree
in the general system of police necessary to guard against its introduction in
future.

The idea of resorting to the legislature of the union, for an act to interdict
the commerce from the Mediterranean and West Indies, during the summer months,
appears to be general, and if attainable, would certainly be most desirable, at
least until some effectual system shall be divised and completely ready for
execution.

The great diversity of sentiment which appears to prevail in the different
states, relative to the origin of the disease, together with the powerful
influence of commercial interest and rivalship, may create insurmountable
obstacles to the attainment of an efficient law from the general government.

Under these circumstances, we think it will be prudent to persevere with
energy in an application to the state legislature, for effectual quarantine and
health laws, with liberal endowments for the support of the several
institutions. It may here be proper to observe that a well digested quarantine
law of this state will be necessary (even in the event of a law of the general
government) to provide for the ease of vessels which may enter our port from
stress of weather, or other casualty during the period of interdiction.

We take the liberty of suggesting the propriety of an application to the
governments of the states of Delaware and New Jersey for their cooperation.
The principles of common interest and self-preservation, and their
participation in the late calamity, must dictate to them the necessity of such
a coalition.

A quarantine law to be effectual should make provision for the following
objects.

An insular situation, remote from the city, should be selected, if
practicable, for the place of quarantine; if none such can be obtained, forty
or fifty acres on some convenient part of the Delaware shore should be secured
by a high and strong enclosure -- wharves, ware houses, and other suitable
buildings should be erected for the reception and purification of cargoes and
accommodation of persons.

All vessels from the Mediterranean and West Indies, from the first of June to
the first October, should there discharge their cargoes, which, together with
the vessels, should be thoroughly purified, and perform a quarantine of at
least 20 days. Guards should be constantly posted at all the avenues, and guard
boats stationed around the fleet.

The law should provide for the prohibition of intercourse by land or water
with such of our sister states as may not adopt efficient quarantine laws; and
interdict all communication with infected places.

Having designated those general regulations, which we conceive are best
adapted to guard against the importation of disease, we shall take the liberty
of adverting to measures, which appear to us no less necessary to the health
and prosperity of our city.

If the domestic origin of the disease is denied, yet it must be allowed that
local causes have a potent effect in its diffusion, and increasing its
malignity; of this, fatal experience has furnished an irrefragable proof in the
excessive mortality, and number of the diseased, in particular parts of the
city and liberties.

We believe that these dreadful consequences would be greatly mitigated, if not
wholly averted, by a judicious reformation in the police of the city and
liberties.

The introduction of wholesome running water for domestic purposes, and for
washing the streets, and common sewers, is in our judgment, an object of
primary importance; the cleansing of all the docks to a depth below the level
of low water mark, a strict attention to the removal of all filth and
putrefying substances, and correcting the noxious effluvia from the privies in
the commencement of the hot season, would, we conceive, be productive of the
happiest effects.

The great attention which has been paid to the cleansing of the best improved
parts of our city, and the obvious neglect of remote and confined situations,
has long been a subject of serious complaint.

Any work, however great, will be but partial whilst the stagnant pools, and
filth of the narrow lanes, alleys and yards, in the extremities of the city,
and particularly in the districts of Southwark and the Nothern Liberties, are
suffered to exist.

We beg leave to call your attention to a subject which we consider as deeply
interesting.

The establishment of a City Hospital upon an enlarged plan, permanently
provided with every thing necessary for the comfort and relief of the sick, and
skilful professors, nurses, etc. provisionally engaged in the event of a
recurrence of the disease, would excite public confidence, and greatly diminish
the evils of the calamity. The situation of the present City Hispital, we
consider as highly improper for the purpose, from its contiguity to the marshes
of the Schuylkill. The lots and improvements thereon, if sold, would, probably
produce a sum equivalent to the purchase of an elevated situation, and the
completion of buildings better adapted to the purpose.

We have been led into unavoidable prolixity from the magnitude of the subject,
and a wish to contribute the result of our experience and observations. Should
they produce, in any degree, the desired effect, it will alleviate the
recollection of those painful scenes which it was our lot to witness, and our
duty to relieve.

By order of the Board of Managers of the Marine and City Hospitals. WILLIAM
JONES, President. Attest, TIMOTHY PAXSON, Clerk.

Thomas Mifflin, Esquire. Governor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
NAMES of the PERSONS WHO DIED IN PHILADELPHIA, And the neighborhood, from the
1st of August, to the 1st of November, 1798. ARRANGED IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER.
Carefully collected from the records of Clergymen, Clerks, Sextons, etc.
A.
Aaron^iter Matthias, Oct. 31. German Lutheran. Abbitch Andreas. Oct. 8. ditto.
Abbot Abel; Sep. 4. Friends. Abbot Juley, ditto 13. Trinity. Abbot Frederick,
ditto 16. ditto Abbot George, ditto 26. ditto Abbot George, ditto 29. ditto
Abbot George, Sep. 5. City Hospital. Abel Daniel, his daughter, Oct. 26. St.
Peter's. Abington Jane, Aug. 26. City Hospital. Abraham Mrs. her child, Sep. 2.
Methodists. Ackley Mordecai, Oct. 19. Friends. Adams Joseph, his child, Aug.
14. German Lutheran. Adams John, Sep. 4. City Hospital. Adams John, Aug 30.
ditto Adams Susan, Sep. 5. ditto Adams Mrs. Sep. 15. ditto Adams John,
September 24 ditto Adams Mrs. Sept. 24 ditto Adams widow, Sep 13. 3d
Presbyterian. Ditto her daughter, Sep. 18. ditto Addison Thomas, Sep 4. City
Hospital. Agin Charles, Sep. 12. ditto Agnew Felix, Oct. 28. St. Mary's. Aikins
Lawrence, Sep. 23. City Hospital. Aikins Mrs. ditto 26. ditto Aikin Benjamin,
Oct. 7. ditto Alberger Philip, Sep. German Reformed. Alberger Christina, Oct.
ditto Albright John, his child, Sep. 17. 2d Presbyterian. Alexander Charles,
Sep. 8. Kensington. Alexander Joseph, Sep. 16. City Hospital. Alexander Samuel,
Aug. 12. ditto Aline Victoire. Sep. 29. St. Mary's. Aoskin Robert, Sep. 13.
City Hospital. Allanson Elizabeth, Sep. 7. ditto Allardice Samuel, Aug. 26. 1st
Presbyterian. Allen Margaret, wife of John, Oct. 10. Christ Church. Allen
Margaret, Oct. 10. City Hospital. Allen Chamless, his wife. Aug. 1^. Friends.
Allen David, Sep. 20. City Hospital. Allen James Aug. 31. ditto Allen John,
Oct. 15. ditto Allen Charles, Nov. 4. ditto Almack Daniel, Sep. 22. Free
Quakers. Armstrong Mary, Sep. 11. City Hospital. Ambrose William, Sep. 29.
ditto Austin Rose, Sep. 9. ditto Ambruster Peter, his child, Sep. 8. German
Lutheran. Ambruster Peter, ditto 12 ditto Astuth Henry, Sept. 8. City Hospital.
Anderson Abel, Sep. 20. Anderson Mary, Sep. 9. ditto Anderson Susan, Nov. 2.
ditto Anderson William, Sep. 18. ditto Anderson Wm. his wife, Sep. 28. ditto
Anderson Ann, Sep. 20. ditto Anderson William, Oct. 3. ditto Andreas Philip,
Sep. 22. ditto Anderson Lio, Sep. 6. ditto Andreas Christian, his wife, Oct.
15. German Lutheran Armstrong Nancy, Oct. 10. City Hospital Andreas John, Oct.
22. German Lutheran. Ashton Joseph, Oct. 13. City Hospital. Andrews Abraham,
Aug. 23. ditto Ashem John, Nov. 1. ditto Annelly Sarah, Sep. 10. ditto Austin
Alexander, Aug. 25. ditto Anthony Charles, Sep. 16. St. Thomas. Art Sarah,
Sep. 15. Friends. Attmore Thomas, his child, ditto 11 ditto Anthony Nicholas,
Sep. 30. Kensington. Appleton Charles, his daughter, Sep. 14. Baptists.
Armstrong John, Sep. 16 City Hospital.
B
Babtian Polly, Sep. 13. Trinity. Bache B. F. printer, ditto 10. Christ Church.
Backley Mary, ditto 11. City Hospital. Badford Nerietta, ditto 10. ditto
Baffins Matilda, her child, ditto 30. ditto Baker Hilary, ditto 25. German
Lutheran. Bake William, ditto 7. City Hospital. Baker Jacob, his daughter, Oct.
5. German Lutheran. Baker Moses, ditto 4. City Hospital. Baker Bartholomew,
joiner, Sep. 8. St Mary's. Baker Lawrence, Aug. 30. ditto Baker Peter, son of
John, Sept. 9. ditto Baker Bartholomew, sen. ditto 9. ditto Baker Joseph, ditto
15. ditto Baker Juliana, a child, ditto 18. ditto Baker Samuel, his son, Aug.
25. Coates's. Balderson Mary, Oct. 11. City Hospital. Balderson Thomas, ditto
12. ditto Baliantine Robert, Sep. 5. Kensington. Balt Joseph, Oct. 3. City
Hospital. Balte Susan, Sept. 4. ditto Balton Benjamin, 2 of his children, Sep.
10. City Hospital. Bamouth Mrs. her daughter, ditto 30. Kensington. Bandy John,
ditto 4. City Hospital. Banning Joseph, his child, Oct. 14. Kensington. Baptian
Polly, Sept. 5. Trinity. Baptiste John, Aug. 18. City Hospital. Baptiste John,
ditto 20. ditto Barand Mr. Sept. 24. ditto Barclay Samuel, his son, ditto 20.
3d Presbyterian. Barfort John, his son, Aug. 6. aged 14. Swedes. Bark John,
Oct. 27. City Hospital. Barker John, ditto. 21. Swedes. Barnes Stephen, Aug.
31. City Hospital. Barnes Thomas, ditto 24. ditto Barnet Jacob, Sept. 18. ditto
Barnholt John, his child, ditto 1^. German Lutheran. Barrington Ann, ditto 12.
City Hospital. Barry Mrs. Aug. 16. ditto Barry Catherine, a child, Sept. 27.
St. Mary's. Barry John, Oct. 13. City Hospital. Barry Mary, ditto 2. ditto
Barry Mary, ditto 18. St. Mary's. Bartlen William, a child, Sept. 23. ditto
Bartley Jane, ditto 16. City Hospital. Barts John, his wife, ditto 20. Christ
Church. Basset David, ditto 15. City Hospital. Basset Mrs. ditto 12. ditto
Bassnett Eleanor, ditto 25. St. Mary's Bachelor John, ditto 12. City Hospital.
Bates John, ditto 3. ditto Bates John, Nov. 3. ditto Bates Samuel, Oct. 10.
ditto Batz William, son of Christian Batz, Oct. 2. Moravian. Batz John, Sept.
24. ditto Ditto his wife, ditto 29. ditto Bauer George, Aug. 13. German
Lutheran. Baumanin Barbara, Sept. 24. Trinity. Bayard John, ditto 29. City
Hospital. Bayley, Mr. ditto 13. Kensington. Bayley John, a child, Oct. 12. St.
Mary's. Bayley Robert, ditto, Aug. 22. 3d. Presbyterian. Baxter Mary, Sept. 16.
City Hospital. Beard Lydia, ditto 24. ditto Beard Margaret, ditto 22. ditto
Beats Conrad, ditto 30. German Lutheran. Beatty Archibald, Aug. 13. City
Hospital. Beatty William, ditto 8. ditto Beatty William, his daughter, Oct. 1.
St. Peter's. Ditto ditto ditto 15. ditto Ditto his son, ditto 16. ditto
Beaufort George, Sept. 2. City Hospital. Beavens William, ditto 27. ditto Bebel
Sarah, child, Oct. 20. St. Mary's. Bechler, Mr. Sept. 20. German Lutheran. Beck
Barbara, her child, ditto 9. ditto Beck Joseph, Oct. 27. City Hospital. Beck
Paul, sen. October 4. German Lutheran. Becker Peter, his son-in-law, Sept.
German Reformed. Beckman Garrett, Aug. ^3. City Hospital. Bedford Samuel, Oct.
31. ditto Bedford Thomas, Sept. 24. ditto Be Molly, ditto 25. ditto Be
Susanna, ditto 25. ditto Beesly Jacob. ditto 27. ditto Beetner Godfrid, Oct.
12. Trinity. Bekriter Mary, Sept. 7. Friends. Bell Alexander, ditto 5. City
Hospital. Bell Alexander, ditto 5. St. Paul's. Bender Abraham, Aug. 22. German
Lutheran. Bender Valentine, Sept. 30. City Hospital. Been Mr. his child, do.
30. Swedes. Benevil Dr. (...) servant maid, Catharine, Aug. 19. Kensington.
Benks, Azer Keden, Sept. 13. Swedes. Benner Thomas, his child, Oct. 23.
Methodist. Bennett Alexander N. Sept. 7. City Hospital. Bennett Elizabeth,
ditto 1. Christ Church. Bennett James, ditto 13. City Hospital. Bennett John,
ditto 5. Christ Church. Bennett Mary, ditto 24. City Hospital. Bennett Sarah,
ditto 4. Friends. Benson Catherine, ditto 24. City Hospital. Berg Peter, ditto
11. ditto Berghman Hannah, ditto 17. ditto Berrish Rosina, Oct. 6. German
Lutheran. Besly Mary, Sept. 11. Kensington. Bethary Cecy, do. (...). City
Hospital. Betsey, a black child, Oct. 23. ditto Bettle Philip, ditto 18. ditto
Beynroth William, Sept. 10. German Lutheran. Bickham Caleb, Oct. 16. Friends.
Biddle Thomas, Aug. 12. City Hospital. Bickerton Charles, Aug. 3. Swedes. Bigly
Susan, Oct. 23. City Hospital. Bietner Godfrid. Oct. 11. Trinity. Biglow
Josiah, M. D. Oct. 1. 2d Presbyterian. Bigham Mrs. Sep. 4. Bigham Mary, Sep.
24. City Hospital. Bignell Mary, Oct. 10. Kensington. Bigwood Polly, daughter
of James, Oct. 2. Methodists. Bitter John, Oct. 2. Swedes. Bitters John, Sep
16. City Hospital. Bitz Peter, Sep. 15. ditto Black James, Aug. 24. ditto Black
Mrs. Sept. 27. Associate. Black James, Sept. 20. City Hospital. Black-boy,
Sept. 23. ditto Blackburn Uriah, Sept. Bethel. Blair Samuel, his child, Sept.
2. 3d Presbyterian. Blair Jane, Oct. 14. ditto Boller William, Sept. 1 City
Hospital. Blaney Jacob, Sept. 3. ditto Blewer John, Oct. 15. ditto Bobmen John,
Sept. 23. ditto Bliss Michael, his wife, Sept. 14. German Lutheran. Both John,
his daughter, Sept. 1. ditto. Bogart John, Sept. 28. City Hospital. Bond
Thomas, Sept. 24. ditto. Boggs Daniel, Sept. 27. ditto. Bock Mary, widow, Oct.
1. Moravian. Bohlen Rebecca, Nov. 6. City Hospital. Bonsall Elizabeth, Sept.
20. ditto. Boils Hannah, Sept. 21. ditto. Boley Elizabeth, Sept. 7. ditto.
Bolton Edward, Sept. 3. ditto. Bolton Fanny, Sept. 28. ditto. Bolton Edward,
Sept. 2. St. Mary. Bonner John, Oct. 12. Methodists. Boney Elizabeth, Sept. 11.
German Lutheran. Bonsall Jesse, Sept. 4. and his wife, ditto. 23. Friends.
Bontzer Nicholas, his wife, Sept. 22. German Lutheran. Boodell Sarah, Oct. 3.
City Hospital. Boomer John, Sept. 22. ditto. Bories Mr. his child, Sept. 22.
ditto. Bormer Mr. his child, Oct. 12. German Lutheran. Boshill Daniel, Sept. 2.
City Hospital. Bolton Francis, Sept. 30. ditto. Bostick Henry, Sept. 7. ditto.
Bore John, Sept. 1. ditto. Bostick Henry, ditto. 7. ditto. Boston Daniel, ditto
6. ditto. Bostick Elizabeth, ditto 7. ditto. Boucher John, Oct. 31. ditto.
Bouchman John, Sept. 15. ditto. Bougie Anthony, Nov. 4. ditto. Bousch Henry,
Sept. 29. German Lutheran. Bowder William, ditto 5. City Hospital. Bower
Philip, ditto 7. ditto. Bower Joseph, Aug. 12. Kensington. Bower William, Sept.
5. City Hospital. Bower Margaret, Oct. 14. Kensington. Bower Mr. his friend, a
French lady, Aug. 15. ditto. Bowers Paul, his wife, Oct. 1. City Hospital.
Bowers Peter, Sep. 11. ditto. Bowker John, his child, Aug. 15. Kensington. Boyd
Catherine, daughter of John Boyd. Sept. 1. St. Peter's. Boyd Samuel, Sept. 5.
2d. Presbyterian. Boyd Ann, ditto 27. St. Mary's. Boil John, Aug. 12. City
Hospital. Boyer Elizabeth, Oct. 4. Kensington. Boil Biddy, Aug. 17. City
Hospital. Boil John, Sept. 19. ditto. Boil John, ditto 20. ditto. Boil Ann,
Nov. 1. St. Mary's. Boil Edward, Oct. 31. St. Mary's. Boyston George, Sept. 9.
City Hospital. Braden George, Aug. 28. Bradley Andrew, his child, Sept. 27.
Swedes. Bradley James, Sept. 8. City Hospital. Bradley, Andrew, Oct. 3. ditto.
Bradley Neal, Oct. 10. ditto. Brady widow, Sept. 22. Kensington. Brady widow,
ditto 27. ditto. Brady Henry, his child, Oct. 14. ditto. Brady James, Sept. 2.
City Hospital. Brady John, ditto 1. ditto. Brangers Clelman, ditto 27. ditto.
Branner Elizabeth, ditto 22. Friends. Branner George, his daughter, Oct. 4
ditto. Bray William, Sept. 10. City Hospital. Bredan Henry, ditto 1. ditto.
Braun widow, Oct. German Reformed. Breintnal Jane, Sept. 3. Friends. Breish
John, his child, Aug. 14. German Lutheran. Breish Widow, her daughter, ditto
17. ditto. Breneman, Christian, Oct. 1. City Hospital. Brennan Edward, Sept.
21. St. Mary's. Brennan William, ditto 29. ditto. Brenner George, his daughter,
Oct. 27. Friend's. Brenner Peter, Oct. 18. City Hospital. Brereton James, Sept.
25. ditto. Brewster Samuel, Aug. 29. St. Peter's. Brightwell Benjamin, Sept.
15. Kensington. Brightwell widow, Oct. 7. ditto. Ditto her daughter, Nov. 4.
ditto. Brimmer Mr. Oct. 1. City Hospital. Bringhurst William, Oct. 17.
Baptists. Bringhurst William, his son-in-law, Sept. 27. ditto. Brissington
Sarah, Sept. 5. City Hospital. Broadhead Jemima, Sept. 23. ditto. Brobet, son
of Mr. Sept. 24. ditto. Brooks John, Aug. 27. 3d Presbyterian. Brooks Thomas,
Sept. 28. Friend's. Broom Thomas, his child, Sept. 28. St Paul's. Broom Thomas,
ditto Oct. 8. ditto. Broomfield Elijah, his child, Sept. 3. Kensington. Brozy
Catherine, Sept. 2. City Hospital. Brown William, ditto 29. Christ Church.
Brown Samuel, Aug. 28. Friends. Brown Joseph, his child, Aug. 26. Kensington.
Brown Thomas, his child, Aug. 5. 2d Presbyterian. Brown Mrs. Sept. 17. ditto.
Brown Francis, Aug. 29. Trinity. Brown Charles, Sept. 6. City Hospital. Brown
Mr. his child, Oct. ^9, 1st Presbyterian. Brown Mary, Sept. 24. St. Mary's.
Brown John, child, Oct. 4. ditto. Brown Elizabeth, Aug. 28. Swedes. Brown
Rachel, her mother, Aug. 1. Methodists. Brown Ludwick, Sept. 13. German
Lutheran. Brown John, his wife. Oct. 10. Brown John, his child, Oct. 12. Brown
Thomas, Sept. 14. City Hospital. Brown Susannah, Sept. 15. ditto Brown Henry,
Sept. 26. ditto Brown Catherine, Oct. 3. ditto Brown Benjamin, ditto 30. ditto
Brown Jacob, Aug. 27. ditto Brown Isaac, ditto 26. ditto Brown Peter, Sept. 7.
ditto Brown Lawrence, Oct. 11. ditto Brown William, ditto 14. ditto Bryan
Sarah, Sept. 6. ditto Bruce John, his wife, ditto 15. ditto Bruce John, ditto
19. ditto Bryan Mealy, Aug. 27. ditto Brunot Felix, his child, ditto 29. German
Lutheran. Bryson Mary, daughter of James, Sept. 20. Christ Church. Bubroon, Mr.
his wife, Aug. 21. German Lutheran. Bucher Jacob, his son, Sept. 2. ditto
Bucher Jacob, his child, ditto 30. ditto Bucher Jacob, Oct. 2. ditto Bucher
Mary, ditto 9. City Hospital. Bucker Richard, Sept. 17. ditto Buckley Samuel.
Aug. 27. ditto Buckley Isaac, his child, Sept. 24. Christ Church. Buckley
Isaac, his daughter, Oct. 2. ditto Bull Jacob, Aug. 25. City Hospital. Buffum
James, Oct. 1. ditto Bullay Isabella, child of Andreas, Sept. 24. St. Mary's.
Bullburger Henry, ditto 27. City Hospital. Bulleaux John, ditto 2. ditto
Bulleaux Mary, ditto 2. ditto Bunker Elizabeth. Oct. 1. ditto Buntin John, his
child, Aug. 4^. Friends. Burk, Augustus Loir, ditto 23. City Hospital. Burk
Edward, his wife, Oct. 9. ditto Burk Eleanor, ditto 13. ditto Burkhard John,
ditto 10. ditto Burling John, his child, Sept. 10. Trinity. Burn Thomas, ditto
26. St. Mary's. Burns Paul, his son, Oct. 2. 3d Presbyterian. Burns George, his
child, ditto 10. St. Thomas's. Burns Hannah, Sept. 8. Swedes. Burns Mary, Nov.
1. City Hospital. Burnside Mr. Sept. 15. 3d Presbyterian. Busch, widow, Oct.
11. German Lutheran. Busby Sarah, Sept. 22. City Hospital. Bush Hannah, wife of
William, ditto 30. St. Thomas's. Bush Ann, ditto 30. City Hospital. Busher
Daniel, his child, ditto 27. Kensington. Busher John, Oct. 3. City Hospital.
Butcher John, son of Job, Sept. 10. Friends. Butcher David, Oct. 7. City
Hospital. Butler James, Sept. 18. Kensington. Butler Daniel, his child, ditto
27 ditto Buyer William, a child, Aug. 21. City Hospital. Byrne, Mrs. Rose,
Sept. 14. St. Mary's.
C.
Cabe Mrs. her child, Sept. 24. City Hospital. Cahile Eleanor, Aug. 16. ditto
Cain James, Sept. 22. ditto Cairns Patrick, Aug. 29. ditto Caldwell John, Sept.
11. German Lutheran. Caldwell Charles, ditto 11. ditto Caldwell Samuel, ditto
8. City Hospital. Calhoon Hetty, ditto 20. ditto Call Edward, son of John,
ditto 21. Swedes. Call John, his daughter, ditto 30. City Hospital. Callaghan
Edward, Aug. 29. ditto Callender Fanny, Oct. 11. ditto Callier Mary, Sept. 24.
ditto Call Mary, ditto 9. ditto Cameron John, his child, ditto 9. 3d
Presbyterian. Cameron Dongal, ditto 2. Friends. Camp Robert, ditto 7.
Kensington. Campbell Mrs. Aug. 24. City Hospital. Campbell, Mr. joiner, ditto
28. 3d Presbyterian. Campbell John, Sept. 25. City Hospital. Campbell John,
sexton, ditto 15. Methodists. Campbell Elizabeth, ditto 27. City Hospital.
Campbell Sarah, ditto 19. ditto Campbell Margaret, ditto 18. ditto Campbell
Jane, ditto 20. ditto Campbell William, Aug. 28. ditto Camphouse Hannah, Sept.
14. ditto Canady Mary, Aug. 31. ditto Canning Rachel, Sept. 15. Kensington.
Cannon Hugh, Oct. 1. Swedes. Cappavel Mrs. Sept. 19. City Hospital. Capper
Michael, ditto 21. ditto Carban Daniel, his son ditto 30. ditto Carberry
Daniel, Oct. 5. ditto Carberry Isabella, ditto 12. ditto Carberry Philip, ditto
1. ditto Carberry Isabella, ditto 9. ditto Carey Nathaniel, Aug. 29. ditto
Carey Mary, daughter of Charles, Oct. 4. Friends'. Carefoot Maria, Sept. 28.
City Hospital. Carger Henry, ditto 23. ditto Carigar Deborah, Oct. 6. ditto
Carner Elizabeth, Sept. 30. ditto Carney Jane, Aug. 20. ditto Carpenter
William, Sept. 16. Friends'. Carson Elizabeth, ditto 14. City Hospital. Carper
John, ditto 5. ditto Carper John, ditto 20. ditto Carr James, ditto 15. ditto
Carr Alexander, ditto 24. 3d Presbyterian. Carr Bernard, ditto 5. St. Mary's.
Carragher Philip, a child, Oct. 6. St. Mary's. Carrell John, Aug. 26. 1st
Presbyterian. Carrell Paul, Sept. 21. St. Mary's. Carroll Rebecca, her child,
ditto 30. German Lutheran. Carson Elizabeth, ditto 14. City Hospital. Cart
Mary, ditto 22. ditto Carter Sarah, ditto 2. ditto Carter John, his child, Aug.
30. Kensington. Carter Jacob, Oct. 1. City Hospital. Carter Miss, Aug 27. ditto
Carter James, Sept. 25. ditto Cash Cyuthia, widow, ditto 12. Christ Church.
Casler Jacob, September 30 ditto Cassidy Patrick, printer, ditto 13. St.
Mary's. Cassidy Widow, ditto 19. Swedes. Cassidy Charles, Oct. 10. City
Hospital. Cassidy Edward, Aug. 13. ditto Cassidy John, ditto 19. ditto
Casteline Anthony, Sept. 27. ditto Cat Polly, ditto 23. ditto Catherine Ketty,
Oct. 10. ditto Catherine Charles, ditto 12. ditto Cathers William. Aug. 4. St.
Paul's. Causey William, his child, ditto 17. 3d Presbyterian. Cavenough Hugh,
September 27 City Hospital Cauley George, ditto 7 ditto Chase John, a child,
August 10 St. Thomas's Chaloner Samuel, clerk Bank U. S. Sept. 17 Christ Church
Chambers Ann, ditto 7 City Hospital Chambers William, a child, August 21 St.
Mary's Chambers William, his child, September 26 Kensington Chandler Rachel,
October 5 City Hospital Charlton Daniel, ditto 3 Methodists Chat Claudius,
August 22 City Hospital Chase Edward, November 5 ditto Chateaudun, an infant,
September 24 St. Mary's Chatham Joseph, aged 87 years, October 4 Friends
Chatham John, his child, September 28 City Hospital Cheeseman Benjamin, ditto 7
Friends Cherry James, ditto 18 City Hospital Chestnut Margaret, ditto 15 ditto
Chesson John, ditto 26 ditto Chesson Adam, October 5 ditto Chester Samuel, his
wife, September 19 Kensington Chin Peter, September 15 City Hospital Chivenes
John, ditto 5 Baptists Chrissey William, ditto 24 City Hospital Christer
Catherine, ditto 30 ditto Christie Alexander, painter, ditto 14 1st
Presbyterian Christie James, October 7 German Lutheran Christie William,
September 23 City Hospital Christy William, his child, ditto 3 St. Paul's
Christy George, his wife, October 1 ditto Christman William, his two children,
ditto 18 Trinity Christman John, his wife, September 21 Swedes Church Mary,
September 4 Swedes Churchman Mary, ditto 8 Friends Cimsey Phoebe, ditto 11 City
Hospital Clark Deborah, August 29 ditto Clark Moses, September 3 ditto Clark
William, ditto 7 ditto Clark Joseph, ditto 22 ditto Clark Mrs. ditto 22 ditto
Clark John, ditto 29 ditto Clark Bathsheba, ditto 23 ditto Clark Thomas, son of
Joseph, August 27 Christ Church Clark Joseph, September 21 Friends Clark
Thomas, son of Joseph, ditto 27 ditto Clark Cornelius, August 25 City Hospital
Clark Joel, September 23 ditto Clark Thomas, his son, August 21 Swedes Clark
Mr. September 29 ditto Clark John, ditto 23 City Hospital Clark William, ditto
7 ditto Claypoole Daniel, ditto 2 ditto Clarkham John, ditto 8 ditto Clauser
widow, October 16 German Lutheran Clarkson Mary, August 30 Kensington Clauser
Jacob, his wife, October 2 German Lutheran Clauser Jacob, his child, ditto 10
ditto Clendening Robert, ditto 9 City Hospital Cline Peter August 30 ditto
Clifton William. September 16 Christ Church Clifton Elizabeth, ditto 10 Friends
Clinton Ann, ditto 1 Methodists Clouse William, ditto 25 City Hospital Cline
Susannah, October 4 ditto Clymer John, ditto 17 ditto Cline Christiana,
September 3 ditto Coal William, ditto 17 Kensington Coan Sarah, November 10
City Hospital Coats Abraham, his child, September 8 Kensington Coats Thomas,
October 12 City Hospital Coats William, ditto 12 ^oates's Cobbs Rebecca,
August 19 City Hospital Cockburn Mrs. wife of Philip, Aug. 26 St. Peter's
Cockburn Philip, August 18 ditto Ditto, his child, ditto 26 ditto Cochran,
John, September 27 City Hospital Cochler George, ditto 15 St. Mary's Cossin
Catherine, daughter of capt. Aug. 1 2d Presby. Cole Maria, September 8 City
Hospital Cole Richard, ditto 3 St. Mary's Cole Robert, ditto 16 City Hospital
Cole Joseph, ditto 19 ditto Cole Andrew, his wife, ditto 2^ ditto Coleman Mrs.
ditto German Reformed Coleman Philip, October 1 German Lutheran Coleman Philip,
September 21 ditto Colinton John, ditto 27 City Hospital Collard James, his
daughter, September 24 Methodists Collard James, his child, Aug. 11 ditto
Colley John, September 14 City Hospital Collins Joseph, ditto 3 ditto Collins
Mary, ditto 27 ditto Collins Philip, August Bethel Colton Antipass, September
23 City Hospital Condon William, October 8 St. Mary's Condy Benjamin, August 26
1st Presbyterian Conky Miss, September 11 Associate Connell John, October 8
City Hospital Connell Bridget, September 13 ditto Connelly Margaret, October 1
ditto Connelly Elizabeth, September 14 ditto Connels John, October 9 ditto
Condie Eliza, a child, September 4 Universalists Connor John, ditto 7 2d
Presbyterian Conry Edward, ditto 12 City Hospital Conson Elizabeth, August 19
ditto Conyer John, September 5 ditto Conway Mary, ditto 3 ditto Cook Samuel,
August 11 ditto Cook Betty, September 10 ditto Cook Elizabeth, ditto 14 ditto
Cook Levy, October 15 ditto Cook Conrad, ditto 8 ditto Cook Christian,
September 14 Kensington Cook Christina, ditto 14 ditto Cook Silence, August
Bethel Cook Ann, September 10 City Hospital Cook Eliza, ditto 30 ditto Cook
Eleanor, August 28 ditto Cook Elizabeth, her child, September 28 Swedes Coomps
Ann, ditto 11 City Hospital Coop Rachel, October 6 ditto Cooper Michael,
September 2 ditto Cooper Rachel, October 5 ditto Cooper Samuel, M. D. September
4 one of the physicians at the City Hospital Friends. Cooper George, his wife,
October 2 German Lutheran Cooper George, October 9 ditto. Cope Gottleib, his
child, August 6 ditto. Copper Hannah, September 8 City Hospital Copia John, his
daughter, August 27 St. Mary's Coram John, October 26 City Hospital Corbet
Alexander, his wife, November 1 Corbet James, September 29 City Hospital Cordos
Anthony, September 11 ditto. Corens Ann, ditto 24 St. Mary's Corneles Matthew,
his wife, August 22 Baptist Costie Davis, September 21 City Hospital Coulton
Hugh, September 10 3d Presbyterian Coulthart Mrs. October 11 City Hospital
Coulton David, September 13 ditto. Couram John, October 2^ ditto. Courtney
Susannah, a child, ditto. 27 ditto. Cowen George, August 31 City Hospital
Cowperth wait Mr. September 21 St. Peter's Cowperthwaite Mr. his widow, ditto
22 ditto. Coil Michael, October 15 City Hospital Coil Philip, September 11
St. Mary's Coward James, ditto 2 City Hospital Cox Widow, ditto 28 St. Paul's
Cox Sarah, October 2 City Hospital Cox Moses, August 8 Friends Cox Gabriel,
September 28 City Hospital Cox William, a child, October 19 ditto. Craig John,
August 15 ditto. Craig Comfort, ditto ^8 ditto. Craig James, ditto 20 St.
Peter's Craig George, September 3 Methodists Craig George, his wife, August 3
ditto. Cramp Catherine, September 21 Kensington Crampshire John, ditto 26 City
Hospital Crea Mrs. ditto 6 ditto. Crea Mary, ditto 23 ditto. Creamon John,
ditto 14 ditto. Cremer Mr. October 11 Swedes Creneman Elizabeth, September 23
City Hospital Cresson, son of widow, ditto 21 Friends Crew Ann, ditto 10 City
Hospital Crippin Mrs. Mary, ditto 4 St. Peter's Crippin Betsey, ditto 10 City
Hospital Crispin Michael, his child, August 14 Kensington Croker John,
September 26 City Hospital Cromley Thomas, August 16 German Lutheran Cromwell
John, his wife, October 5 St. Paul's Crosell Martha, her child, August 4
Kensington Cross Mr. his son, 14 years, October Universalists Croton Betsey,
October 1 City Hospital Crow John, August 27 ditto Crowden Mary, September 10
Christ Church Crowell Rachel, ditto 29 2d Presbyterian Crozier Miss, August 27
City Hospital Cummings Joseph, September 2 ditto Cummings Thomas, his child,
ditto 20 Friends Cummings Joseph, ditto 2 ditto Cunningham Peter, August 31
City Hospital Cunningham John, September 1 ditto Cunningham Ann, August 26 2d
Presbyterian Cunningham Ann, September 8 1st Presbyterian Cunningham Jane,
ditto 3 Christ Church Cunningham Thomas, ditto 8 Associate Cunningham Robert,
ditto 8 City Hospital Curgees Mr. his daughter, ditto 22 3d Presbyterian
Curlett Thomas, his son, ditto 2^ St. Peter's Currie John, ditto 20 German
Lutheran Currie Susan, August 28 City Hospital Curtis Elizabeth, September 4
ditto Curtis Joseph, his son, October 3 St. Thomas's Curtis Mary, September 27
St. Mary's Cushing John, September 4 City Hospital Cushing Samuel, ditto 27 2d
Presbyterian Cussell Jane, October 7 City Hospital Cussit Jane, ditto 6 ditto
Custis Abigail, ditto 20 St. Thomas's Cuthbert Robert, son of Anthony, October
7 St. Peter's
D
Daily John, October 10 City Hospital Dally Catherine, September 7 ditto Dally
Gifford, August 29 ditto Dandsler --, ditto 26 ditto Dane Mrs. ditto 25 ditto
Dane George ditto 16 ditto Danly Charles, a child, ditto 17 St. Mary's Dannaker
Samuel, September 22 German Lutheran Darnley Mr. 47, Penn st. ditto 11 City
Hospital Dartnell Thomas, son of Thomas, August 14 St. Peter's Dartnell Thomas,
Shoemaker, September 12 ditto Dastin John, ditto 25 City Hospital Dauterman
Jacob, his child, August 3 German Lutheran Davidson Ann, September 20 St.
Mary's Davidson Margaret, ditto 7 City Hospital Davidson Ann, ditto 4 ditto
Davie Adam, October 9 Associate Davie Adam, his child, ditto 4 ditto Davis
Jane, November 2 Methodists Davis John, September 10 City Hospital Davis Mary,
ditto 19 ditto Davis Margaret, ditto 17 ditto Davis Abner, October 12 ditto
Davis Mary, ditto 2 ditto Davis John, August 24 ditto Davis Margaret, September
5 ditto Davis Stephen, August 11 ditto Davis Sarah, October 9 Dawns William,
September 24 ditto Dawson George Henry, August 3 St. Peter's Dawson Charlotte,
September 17 City Hospital Day Thomas, August 26 ditto Day John, September 5
ditto Deads Sarah, ditto 14 ditto Deal John, October 1 ditto Deal John, his
daughter, German Reformed Deal James, November 3 City Hospital Deal William,
August 21 ditto Deal George, a child, September 2 ditto Death Jacob, his wife,
ditto 1^ Kensington Death Jacob, his child, ditto 26 ditto Debaskewill Thomas,
ditto 2 Baptist De Berey Joseph, his wife, ditto 4 St. Mary's Decoster
Ch^istiana, ditto 8 Trinity Deeden Jacob, ditto 3 City Hospital Deemer Lewis,
his daughter, August 28 3d Presbyterian Deevor Conrad, his child, September 29
German Lutheran Dehart Samuel, October 27 City Hospital Deihl Maria, ditto
German Reformed Deil William, August 21 City Hospital Deil John, September
German Reformed Deimting Francis, his child, August 5 ditto Lutheran Dekerieth
John, September 23 City Hospital Delamar Margaret, August 10 St. Mary's Delau
Barbara, October 1 German Lutheran Delavu Jane, ditto 10 Christ Church Demer
Rachel, September 11 City Hospital Demer Mary, ditto 16 ditto Demiss Ann, ditto
12 ditto Demot Charlotte ditto 15 ditto Demont Catherine, a child, ditto 12 St.
Mary's Denickson Joseph, August 30 City Hospital Denning Mary, September 29
ditto Denning Patrick, August 15 ditto Dennis John, August 21 ditto Dennis
Augustus, ditto 30 ditto Dennis Dolly, October 20 Kensington Dennis John, his
child, ditto 9 ditto Denny George, August 31 St. Mary's Denny Daniel, his son,
September 20 City Hospital Denny William, ditto 9 German Lutheran Denny Dennis,
August 31 City Hospital Derkin Widow, September 11 German Lutheran Derrickson
William August 25 City Hospital Dermot Elizabeth, September 1 ditto Derres
George ditto 11 Kensington Desey Charles, October 10 City Hospital Devette
Patrick, August 25 St. Mary's Deykman Peter, September 20 City Hospital Diamond
Mary, September 9 St. Mary's Dezay Philip, his child, ditto 19 German Lutheran
Diamond Conrad, ditto 27 ditto Dibert Philip, August 18 City Hospital Diamond
Widow, November 8 German Lutheran Dickson Sarah, August 29 City Hospital
Dickson Samuel, ditto 21 ditto Dick Ann, September 12 ditto Dickson Catherine,
ditto 28 ditto Dice, 45 south Water-street, ditto 19 ditto Dick Mrs. M August
30 St. Peter's Ditto her daughter, September 8. ditto Dickson John, his child,
August 16 Kensington Dickens Elizabeth, September 26 Methodists Dickens Rev.
Mr. John, ditto 27 ditto Diel Peter, ditto 27 German Lutheran Diel John, his
daughter, October German Reformed Dickson Ann, August 31 City Hospital Dietmer
Conrad, October German Reformed Diebrich Michael, his wife, ditto 4 German
Lutheran Diebrich Michael, October 6 ditto Dietz Simon, his child, September 25
German Lutheran Dietz Mr. schoolmaster, his wife, ditto 27 ditto Dietz
Frederick, ditto 24 City Hospital Dietz Margaret, ditto 24 ditto Digneron
Charles, his wife, ditto 5 St. Mary's Dillman Ann, ditto 25 City Hospital
Dillon Isabella, a child, ditto 29 St. Mary's Dillon Elizabeth, August 5 ditto
Dillon Martha, ditto 13 City Hospital Dinkle Catherine, ditto 24 ditto Diver
Patrick, ditto 14 ditto Dixey William, September 14 ditto Dixey William, ditto
18 Friends Dobbins Mary, October 15 ditto Dobelbower J. Henry, at Wilmington
Dobelbower Jacob, October 2 German Lutheran Dobelbower Frederick, ditto 6 ditto
Dobson John, ditto 16 City Hospital Dogle John, September 25 ditto Doll Mrs.
ditto 9 ditto Donahower Jacob, October 3 German Lutheran Donald John, his
child, September 2 Kensington Donaldson Captain Nathaniel, August 14 2d
Presbyterian Doney Mrs. September 8 City Hospital Doney John Gottle^b, ditto 1
German Lutheran Donnaker Widow, ditto 9 Kensington Donnelly James, ditto 7 City
Hospital Dorin William, August 14 ditto Dorffer Susannah, October German
Reformed Dorr Catherina, ditto ditto Dorrness George, ditto 13 German Lutheran
Dorsey Matthew, ditto 2 City Hospital Dorsey William, ditto 1 ditto Dorsey Dr.
his two children, August 25 St. Paul's Dougall Christina, September 18 City
Hospital Dougherty Mary, August 14 ditto Dougherty James, November 3 ditto
Dougherty Sarah, September 4 ditto Dougherty Hugh, ditto 29 ditto Dougherty
Madge, ditto 7 St. Mary's Doughten Christian, August 1 St. Peter's Douglas
John, September 26 City Hospital Douglas Elizabeth, November 1 3d Presbyterian
Douglas William, September 30 City Hospital Douglas Ann, ditto 7 ditto Douglas
Cooper, ditto 13 ditto Douglas William, ditto 17 ditto Dowdishell Barbara,
ditto 1 Kensington Dowell Elizabeth, ditto 28 City Hospital Dowlan James, ditto
17 St. Mary's Dowling Widow Elizabeth, October 1 St. Peter's Dowling Elizabeth,
daughter of John, August 14 ditto Dox George, his child, ditto 28 German
Lutheran Doyle Dennis, a child, ditto 13 St. Peter's Doyle George, September 17
City Hospital Draper Charles, September 23 City Hospital Dring Silas, ditto 10
ditto Droz Charlotte Humbert, 4 years, ditto 28 Free Quakers Dry John, ditto 4
City Hospital Dubois Mrs. ditto 27 ditto Duce Mr. Coombes's Alley, ditto 15
ditto Dudman Widow Mary, ditto 16 Baptists Duff Polly, ditto 20 Methodists Duff
Dawson, his child, August 5 St. Peter's Duff Henry, September 30 City Hospital
Duffy Grace, August 14 ditto Duffy John, October 26 ditto Duffy Catherine,
August 28 ditto Duffy Jane, September 17 St. Mary's Duffy John, ditto 30 ditto
Duffy Elizabeth, ditto 27 City Hospital. Dugall Christina, ditto 18 ditto Dugan
Adam, October 8 ditto Dunbar Widow, ditto 21 Swedes Duncan Matthew, his wife,
August 26 Scots Presbyterian Dunigar Catherine, October 8 City Hospital Dunlap
John, September 24 ditto Dunman Catherine, August 27 ditto Dunn David, November
5 ditto Dunn Nancy, September 20 ditto Dunn Mary, October 29 ditto Dunn John,
August 19 ditto Dunworth Catherine, ditto 24 ditto Dupray Peter, September 8
ditto Durang Mr. (...). ditto 13 ditto Durfenille Mr. his child, October ditto
Durham James, September 3 St. Mary's Dusepia --, ditto 14 City Hospital Dushane
Mrs. August 30 2d Presbyterian Dutton Widow, September 25 Coates's Dyer Amelia,
ditto 2 City Hospital Dyhart Prine, ditto 11 ditto
E.
Ealy Nelly, September 19 City Hospital Easby William, ditto 25 Baptist Easby
William, his widow, October 2 ditto Easby John, ditto 16 ditto Easby John, his
daughter, ditto 28 ditto Easton Douglas, son of David, August 2 Christ Church
Eckert George, September 7 City Hospital Eckert George, his wife, ditto 16
German Lutheran. Eckert Elizabeth, August ditto Reformed Eckert Catherine
October 1 ditto Eckford Walter, September 22 City Hospital. Ederton Samuel,
November 2 ditto Edwards Rosannah, September Bethel Edwards Mary, October 6
Friends Ehman Anna Maria, ditto 2 City Hospital Ehrenzeller Hilary, son of
Jacob, ditto 7 Christ Church Ehrenzeller Jacob, his son, September 16 Christ
Church Ehrenzeller Jacob, October 27 ditto Ehrhart Martin, August 25 German
Lutheran Ehrhart Michael, his child, September 4 ditto Ehrman Rebecca, October
German Reformed Elbele Jacob, September 15 German Lutheran Eldridge Jane,
November 3 City Hospital Elfry Christina, October German Reformed Elhart Peter,
his child, August 24 Kensington Eliza, November 4 City Hospital Elliot Robert,
October 20 ditto Elliot Mrs. corner of Shippen and Crab-street, Sept 21 ditto
Elliot Ann, ditto 9 ditto Elliot Thomas, his child, November 9 German Lutheran
Elliot Robert, September 18 1st Presbyterian Elliot William, October 6 City
Hospital Elliot John, August 13 City Hospital Elliot John, ditto 29 ditto Elkin
Martha, wife of Augel, September 19 Swedes Ellis Hannah, September 13 Christ
Church Ellison John, August 28 City Hospital Emerich Frederick, October 17
German Lutheran Emerich Frederick, ditto 28 ditto Emery Jabez, ditto 20
Moravians Emery Arthur, son of Jabez, ditto 21 ditto Emery Jabez, son of Jabez,
ditto 25 ditto Emery Elizabeth, September 3 City Hospital Enck, widow, ditto
German Reformed Enck Johannes, October ditto Enniss Alexander, September 15
City Hospital Enniss Ann, a child, August 31 St. Mary's Enniss Rev. Mr.
Michael, pastor of St. Mary Chapel, ditto Erffer George, a child, August German
Reformed Erlich George, his son, September 27 German Lutheran Esher Frederick,
his child, ditto 26 ditto Esler John, October 17 City Hospital Esler Maria,
September German Reformed Esling Paul, ditto 21 St. Mary's Esserise John, ditto
20 City Hospital Eter Adam, ditto 19 German Lutheran Etres George, his
daughter, August German Reformed Etres Johannes, September ditto Evans
Margaret, October 3 City Hospital Evans George, September 11 ditto Evans
Joseph, son of Isaac, August 6 St. Peter's Evans Margaret, her child, September
9 Kensington Evans Mrs. October 12 Coates's Evans Margaret, wife of Jacob,
September 26 Moravians Evans Ebenezer, August 10 City Hospital Evans Mary,
September 2 ditto Evans Elizabeth, ditto 3 ditto Everhart George, ditto 30
ditto Everhart John, his child, August 22 German Lutheran Everhart, widow,
October 8 ditto Everhart Martin, September 14 City Hospital Everly Adam, his
child, August 13 German Lutheran Everly Jacob, his child, September 15.
Kensington Evilt Mary, August 29 City Hospital Ewalt Jacob, his child, October
6 German Lutheran Ewing Mary, September 6 3d Presbyterian Ewing George, ditto
29 2d. Presbyterian Ewing Mary, ditto 4 City Hospital Eyler Catherine, ditto 9
German Lutheran Exly Helen, ditto 26 Kensington
F
Fabridge Peter, September 27 City Hospital Fagundus Margaret, ditto 18 ditto
Fagundus John, ditto 5 ditto Fairweather Alexander, October 1 Scots
Presbyterian Falby John, son of Timothy, September 19 Swedes Fallier Catherine,
October German Reformed Fan Christian, his wife, September 30 City Hospital
Fanning Rachel, ditto 21 ditto Farmer George, ditto 27 ditto Farns Moses, ditto
12 ditto Farrady John, ditto 11 ditto Farrell Diana, October 12 ditto Farrell
Patrick, a child, September 12 St. Mary's Farrety Joseph, ditto 10 City
Hospital Faulkner George, ditto 29 ditto Fausinger David, ditto German Reformed
Faus Mr. ditto ditto Fearon Mary, ditto 28 St. Peters's Fearon Richard, ditto
24 City Hospital Feeds Cupit ditto 15 ditto Feed -- ditto ditto Fegan John,
October 13 St. Mary's Feigs Mary, September 11 Christ Church Fengey Mary,
October 3 Swedes Fennel Mrs. upholstress, Front-street Featherbridge John, his
wife, August 27 Methodists Ditto his daughter, ditto 28 ditto Fenner, widow,
September German Reyormed Fenno John, his wife, ditto 4 2d Presbterian Fenno
John, his child, ditto 16 ditto Fenno John, Printer, ditto 14 ditto Ferguson
James, his wife, ditto 10 St. Paul's Ferguson Ebenezer, his young man, ditto 10
3d Presbyterian Ferguson James, ditto 13 Methodists Ferry Sarah, August 28 City
Hospital Fethorn John, October 18 Trinity Fetter James, his child, August 27
Kensington Field James, September 18 City Hospital Field Joseph, ditto 19 St.
Mary's Field Patrick, ditto 7 ditto Fife, Elizabeth, ditto 3 City Hospital
Fight Henry, October 13 ditto Fimpel Jacob, October 18 German Lutheran Fink
Major John, September 22 Kensington Finlay John, August 23 City Hospital Finny
John, his child, September 11 Kensington Finny Thomas, ditto 20 City Hospital
Fisher Zachariah, ditto 10 ditto Fisher Sebastian, ditto 26 ditto Fisher Mary,
ditto 6 ditto Fisher Elizabeth, ditto 7 ditto Fisher Elizabeth, ditto 15 ditto
Fisher Thomas, son of Miers, August 19 Friends Fisher Zachariah, his child,
ditto 22 Kensington Fisler William, November 1 City Hospital Fiss Peter,
October German Reformed Fister Mary, ditto 19 Kensington Fitzgerald Elizabeth,
September 21 City Hospital Fitzpatrick Edmund, August 17 ditto Flagg Jonathan,
his child, ditto 20 2d Presbyterian Flanagan Mr. September 8 City Hospital
Flanagan Phoebe, wife of Stephen, October 21 St. Peter's Fleek Christopher,
September 14 City Hospital Fleming John, August 18 ditto Fleming Mrs. September
21 2d Presbyterian Fletcher Elizabeth, ditto 13 City Hospital Fletcher
Elizabeth, her child, ditto 27 ditto Fletcher Mrs. her son, October 9
Universalists Flick George, ditto 16 Kensington Flick Widow, August German
Reformed Flicker Elizabeth, October 14 City Hospital Flicker Michael, his wife,
ditto 3 ditto Flood Ezekiel, ditto 26 ditto Flyhocker Henry, September 23 ditto
Fogie Mrs. ditto 28 ditto Fogie, william, ditto 5 Swedes Fogle Mr. his child,
August 29 German Lutheran Fogle Jacob, October 2 ditto Fogle Jacob, his child,
ditto 15 ditto Fogle Albrecht, his child, ditto (...) ditto Fogle Albrecht, his
wife, ditto 14 ditto Folier Ann, September 15 City Hospital Folwell Samuel, his
child, August German Reformed Fongey Mary, October 3 Swedes Fonsey Mrs.
September 12 City Hospital Ford Curtis James, August 25 ditto Ford Theophilus,
ditto 31 ditto Ford Mary, September 27 Christ Church Fordham John, his wife,
October. 12 Kensington Forrich Tobias, September 27 Trinity Forsberg Nicholas,
ditto 5 Swedes Forthner Frederick, son of widow, ditto 22 St Mary's Forthner
Elizabeth, daughter of ditto, ditto 24 ditto Forthner George, son of Nicholas,
ditto 20 ditto Foster Hannah, ditto 7 City Hospital Foulke Mary, August 25
ditto Foulke George, September 30 ditto Foulke George, October 1 City Hospital
Foulke Adam, August 17 German Lutheran Fournier Mr. September 28 City Hospital
Fow Peter, ditto 30 Kensington Fowler Dennis, ditto 30 City Hospital Fox
Christian, his son-in-law, ditto 29 German Lutheran Fox George, his child,
August 25 Kensington Fox Robert, his wife, September 7 2d Presbyterian Fox
Robert, ditto 15 ditto Foxall Agnes, wife of the Rev. Mr. Foxall. October 6
Methodists Foy Anna Maria, September 14 German Lutheran Foysberry Nicholas,
ditto 5 City Hospital Foy James, ditto 12 ditto France Jacob, October 31 German
Lutheran Francis Jacob, his wife, September 22 ditto Francis Jacob, his
daughter, ditto 24 ditto Franck Henry, October 24 Kensington Franck Christian,
September German Reformed Franklin Ann, ditto 24 City Hospital Fraser Daniel,
August 30 ditto Fraser Daniel, a child, September 23 ditto Fraser David, ditto
30 ditto Fraser Catherine, November 6 ditto Fraser Ludwick, October 14 German
Lutheran Fraunces Samuel M ditto 25 City Hospital Frederick John, son of Jacob,
shoemaker, Sept. 26 Kensington Frederick George, ditto 21 City Hospital
Fredericks Mr. his wife, September 23 German Lutheran Freed Mrs. ditto 24 City
Hospital Freish Mr. ditto 24 ditto French Thomas, ditto 14 ditto Freshel John,
ditto 19 ditto Frey Jacob, his son. ditto German Reformed Freytag Catherine,
October ditto Freytag, widow, November ditto Freytag Peter, ditto ditto Friend
Daniel, September 14 City Hospital Friess, brother of Jacob, October 25
Kensington Frieze Mr. his wife, ditto 30 ditto Frinden Salome, September 23
Trinity Fritz William, his child, August 30 Kensington Frompo Andrew, ditto 23
City Hospital Frondez Mr. his wife, September 27 German Lutheran Fry Thomas,
ditto 17 City Hospital Fry Jacob, ditto 29 ditto Fryburgh John, his child,
ditto 6 German Lutheran Furchill Daniel, ditto 11 City Hospital
G
Gallagher Edward, October 6 City Hospital Gallagher Ann, August 6 St. Mary's
Gallagher James, (porter) September 28 ditto Gallagher Miles, October 4 City
Hospital Gallagher Catherine, September 24 ditto Gallagher Mary, ditto 20 ditto
Gallagher William, ditto 25 ditto Gallagher Edward, October 5 ditto Gambas
Sarah, September 14 Kensington Gamber Jacob, October 27 ditto Gamber Johannes,
September German Reformed Ganett Margaret, August 29 City Hospital Gano
William, his son, October 13 2d Presbyterian Gardner William, his child, August
6 Kensington Gardner Mr. his child, September 10 St. Paul's Gardner Mr. do. do.
ditto 8 ditto Gardner Mrs. ditto 23 City Hospital Gardner John, his daughter,
August 9 2d Presbyterian Garlany Henry, October 15 City Hospital Garwood John,
his child, ditto 30 Swedes Gasper John, his child, September 2 Kensington Gaul
John, a child, August German Reformed Gaul Elizabeth, ditto 20 Trinity Gaynor
Thomas, October 6 St. Mary's Geitz Reinhart, September 22 City Hospital Gemore
Leonard, ditto 15 ditto Genet John, October 2 ditto Gentry Robert, his son,
August 25 Kensington Gentzler Baltzer, his wife, September ^5 German -- G --
John, October 4 City Hospital George John, ditto 10 ditto George John,
September 28 ditto Germain Peter, October 1 ditto Getts Andrew, his child,
August 11 German Lutheran Geyer Christina, October German Reformed Gibbons
George, September 25 Friends Gibbs Ann, October 19 City Hospital Gibbs
Margaret, ditto 14 ditto Gibson William, September 6 Christ Church Gilbert
John, ditto 7 City Hospital Gilbert John, October 29 Friends Gilbert John,
Penrose's wharf, September 7 City Hospital Gilbertson Mary, August 31 ditto
Giles Ann, October 17 ditto Gilfry John, September 10 Swedes. Gillam George,
October 4 City Hospital Gillaspie Henry, September 3 ditto Gillaspie Francis,
ditto 1 ditto Gillaspie James, ditto 2^ St. Mary's Gillet John Ludwick, August
25 German Lutheran Gillin John, ditto 14 St. Peter's Gilman Martin, September
14 German Lutheran Ginner Michael, August 26 City Hospital Girard Mary,
September 23 ditto Givin Margaret, ditto 5 ditto Glouse Elizabeth, October 2
ditto Glenn James, September 8 ditto Goble Peter, ditto 27 Kensington Godfreid
John, November 3 German Lutheran Goldsmith William, October 11 City Hospital
Gontzar George, his wife, November 4 German Lutheran Goodwin Elizabeth,
September 10 City Hospital Goom Henry, October 10 Kensington Gordon Phoebe,
September 28 City Hospital Gordon Charles, his child, August 10 Kensinton
Gordon James, September 4 City Hospital Gosser Philip, his wife, ditto 30
Kensington Gosner Mr. ditto 12 German Lutheran Ghost John, October 21 ditto
Gould David, August 23 City Hospital Goulden Eleanor, ditto 22 ditto Goulding
Jane, October 8 ditto Grace John, September 6 German Lutheran Grace Philip,
ditto 14 ditto Grace Lucy, November 4 City Hospital Grace Jacob, his child,
October 28 German Lutheran Grafar Madam, September 10 St. Mary's Grafort
Alexander, a child, ditto German Reformed Graham John, his child, ditto 19
Swedes Graham Daniel, October 5 Kensington Grandson Abraham, August 14 City
Hospital Grant William, his child, September 29 German Lutheran Grant William,
his child, October 11 ditto Grant Alexander, September 11 City Hospital Grant
James, October 16 ditto Grant Francis, September 17 ditto Grattan Andrew, ditto
13 Christ Church Grauel Johannes, his child, August German Reformed Grauel
Johannes, his child, September ditto Gravenstine widow, October 3 ditto
Lutheran Gray Joseph, his child, September 19 Friends Gray Joseph, his wife,
ditto 25 ditto Gray Samuel, his two children, ditto 27 St. Paul's Gray
Nathaniel, his child, ditto 7 St. Thomas's Gray Sarah, ditto 5 City Hospital
Gray --, Second, near South-street, ditto 20 ditto Gray Thomas, August 16 ditto
Gray William, September 6 ditto Greaves Robert, his wife, September 27 Swedes
Greaves Robert, his wife, October 11 ditto Greaves Robert, his child, ditto 15
ditto Green Mr. his wife, November 7 Kensington Green John, August 1 Swedes
Green Philip B. September 2^ German Lutheran Green John, September 16
Kensington Green Anna, ditto 13 German Lutheran Green Anna, ditto 30 City
Hospital Green Catherine, ditto 8 ditto Green Mary, ditto 20 ditto Greenleaf
William, ditto 28 ditto Greig Charles, ditto 11 ditto Grelanit Eleonora, ditto
10 St. Mary's Grenolds John, ditto (...) City Hospital Greston Carl, September
6 City Hospital Griffiths Eleanor, ditto 29 ditto Griffiths Elizabeth, October
3 ditto Griffiths Eliza N. ditto 3 ditto Grimes James, September 10 ditto
Grimes Joseph, son of John, September 23 St. Peter's Grimes Patrick, ditto 11
City Hospital Grimes Peter, ditto 14 ditto Griscom Rebecca, August 21 Friends
Griswold Elizabeth, October 2 St. Mary's Gross Frederick, September 16 German
Lutheran Grouss John, his child, October 21 ditto Growth Elizabeth, ditto 17
City Hospital Grubb Elizabeth, September 13 German Lutheran Grubb Elizabeth,
ditto 25 City Hospital Grysinburger Mr. his wife, October 17 German Lutheran
Gryson William, his wife, September 22 City Hospital Guesford George, August 29
ditto Guier Baltus, September 23 German Lutheran Gunterman Christina, October
ditto Reformed Gurling George, September 21 City Hospital Guy Jane, November 6
3d Presbyterian Guy Richard, his niece, September 30 ditto Gwin David, ditto 15
St. Peter's Gwin Margaret, ditto 4 City Hospital Gwinup George, ditto 9 German
Lutheran Gwinne Michael, August 26 City Hospital
H.
Hadfield Samuel, September 26 City Hospital Haffner Andrew, ditto 27 Trinity
Hagerty George, August 12 City Hospital Hahn Jacob, September 20 ditto Haines
James, ditto 12 ditto Hainey Margaret, ditto 15 ditto Halberstadt John, ditto
19 ditto Hall Elizabeth, October 13 ditto Hall George, his child, August 19
Kensington Hall Samuel, his child, October 28 3d Presbyterian Hall Esther,
October 2 City Hospital Hall William, October 7 ditto Halley John, September 30
St. Mary's Hamble Sarah, ditto 22 3d Presbyterian Hamilton James, October 14
City Hospital Hamilton Margaret, September 18 ditto Hamilton Franks, August 14
Christ Church Hamilton Robert, September 26 City Hospital Hamlain Hannah,
October 2 St. Mary's Hampstead Martin, September 1 St. Paul's Mainmet John, his
child, August 13 Kensington Hammond Henry, September 9 City Hospital Hampton
Mary, ditto 14 ditto Hampton John, November 5 Swedes Hance Jacob, August 26 3d
Presbyterian Hancock John, grocer, September 27 Baptists Hancock Mary, October
16 City Hospital Handle Adam, ditto 20 German Lutheran Handy Mrs September 26
City Hospital Hannet Antonietta, August 3 Trinity Hanlon Bridget, ditto 25 St.
Mary's Hannah John, September 15 City Hospital Hannah Edward, his child, August
23 3d Presbyterian Hannah John, September 24 ditto Hannah John, his daughter,
October 6 ditto Hannah William, September German Reformed Hans Mr. August 26
City Hospital Hansey Mary, October 13 ditto Hanson Henry, ditto 9 St. Mary's
Hanson Mary, ditto 31 City Hispital Hantley Thomas, ditto 23 ditto Harberger
Philip, September 2 ditto Harbeson Joseph, his son, August 5 2d Presbyterian
Harden Elizabeth, September 30 City Hospital Harden George, ditto 22 ditto
Hardy Thomas, October 1 ditto Hardy Christiana, ditto 15 3d Presbyterian
Hardy, captian, his daughter, ditto 23 Scots Presbyterian Hardy Alexander,
his daughter, August 20 Swedes Harding Sarah, September 23 Friends Harding
Margaret, ditto 27 City Hospital Hardwick John, August 17 ditto Harewson Jacob,
his son, October 22 Swedes Harewson Jacob, his child, ditto 29 ditto Harewson
Jacob, ditto 30 ditto Harewson Jacob, his wife, ditto 30 ditto Harken Ludwick,
September 15 City Hospital Harken John, October 23 St. Mary's Harken Edward
ditto 24 ditto Harken James, a child, September 9 ditto Harkens Sarah, ditto 25
ditto Harlen John, his wife, ditto 15 Swedes Harling Michael, August 8 City
Hospital Harpeger Catherine, September 25 St. Mary's Harper Benjamin, August 22
Friends Harper Benjamin, his child, September 12 ditto Harper Mrs. ditto 23
City Hospital Harris Walter, October 1 ditto Harrisburgh James, August 21 ditto
Harrison John, ditto 4 St. Paul's Heart Toney, ditto 9 City Hospital Heart
Charles, October 1 ditto Heart John, September 8 St. Mary's Heart John P. his
child, August 2 German Lutheran Heart Margaret, September 12 ditto Heart William,
October 14 City Hospital Heart Mary, ditto 19 ditto Hartford John, September 4
Methodists Hartline John, ditto 25 City Hospital Hartung Daniel, October German
Reformed Hartung Hannah, November ditto Hartwick James, August 16 2d
Presbyterian Hartwick James, his son, September 20 ditto Harvie Samuel, October
6 City Hospital Haslett Frances, ditto 2 Methodists Has^avanger Widow,
September 30 German Lutheran Hassner Jacob, his child, August 25 ditto Haslings
John, October 20 City Hospital Hatchler Charles, September 24 ditto Hatfield
Mary, August 31 Friends Hatfield Catherine, September 3 ditto Hanghey Paul,
August 28 City Hospital Hauet Antonietta child, ditto 3 Trinity Hautzel John,
November German Lutheran Hawkins Robert, August 30 City Hospital Hawkins Anna,
ditto 28 German Lutheran Hawood Mr. his child, ditto 10 Methodists Haws Henry,
his child, September 7 German Lutheran Hayes Anna, ditto 18 City Hospital Hayes
Jeremiah, October 8 ditto Hayes John, September 23 ditto Haynes Joseph, October
3 ditto Head Charlotte, September 2 ditto Headliten Barnet, ditto 22 ditto
Heaman Jane, ditto 21 St. Mary's Heck Widow, November 4 German Lutheran
Hefferman John, son of John, October 25 St. Peter's Heimberger Frederick, his
child, Sept. 18 German Lutheran Heirs Pritz, August 29 City Hospital Heisemer
Jacob, September 24 ditto Heller Joseph, ditto German Reformed Heller, Widow,
ditto ditto Heller Mr. his daughter, ditto ditto Heller Frederick, ditto ditto
Heller Adam, ditto ditto Heller Frederick, ditto 10 German Lutheran Hellot Mr.
his son, October 31 Universalists Helm John, son of Christian, September 30
Moravians Helm Johanues, October German Reformed Heltz William, son of Peter,
September ditto Heltz Johannes, ditto ditto Hendel Abraham, apothecary, ditto
ditto Hendel Rev. Dr. William, Pastor of the German Reformed Church, ditto
ditto Henderson John, August 26 City Hospital Henry Mary, September 4 St.
Mary's Henry John, August 25 City Hospital Henry John, October 11 ditto Henry
John, his wife, August 22 German Lutheran Henry John, his child, ditto 26 ditto
Henry James, his son, September 27 ditto Henry Mr. his child, ditto 13 1st
Presbyterian Henry David, ditto 2 St. Mary's Henry George, his child, October 1
Scots Presbyterian Henry George, October 3 Scots Presbyterian Henry George, his
widow, ditto 9 ditto Henry John, ditto 7 St. Mary's Henry David, September 2
City Hospital Henzel Maria, October German Reformed Hepler Catherine, September
17 German Lutheran Herbeg Michael, ditto 11 City Hospital Herbert George,
August 28 ditto Herbert Richard, September 3 ditto He^nberger Justina, August
German Reformed Heron Lankford, his child, ditto 18 German Lutheran Heron
James, his wife, October 24 ditto Hertzog Catherine, October 11 Trinity Hertzog
Christina, ditto 11 ditto Herschfelt Margaret, ditto 18 City Hospital Hesler
Andrew, September 21 St. Mary's Heson Benjamin, October 24 German Lutheran Hess
Charles, his wife, August 21 ditto Hetrick Matthew, his wife, September 21 3d
Presbyterian Hetteman, Mr. his son, ditto German Reformed Hetteman John, his
son-in-law, ditto ditto Hettlem John, his wife, ditto 3 German Lutheran Heydel
George, his wife, August 5 ditto Heyser Barbara, ditto 15 City Hospital Hickey
Jane, ditto 29 ditto Hickey Mary, October 2 St. Mary's Hickleys John, November
3 City Hospital Hickman Ann, October 27 Friends Hickman Sarah, ditto 30 ditto
Hickman Catherine, September 22 ditto Hickman John, October 6 ditto Hicks John,
September 16 ditto Hider William, a child, October 8 City Hospital Hierly John,
ditto 18 ditto Higgins Pres, his child, ditto 18 Methodists Higgins Mary, ditto
5 City Hospital Hiley Elizabeth, September 15 St. Mary's Hill John, August 31
City Hospital Hill Richard, a black, September 6 ditto Hill John, his daughter,
ditto 5 Swedes Hill Alice, ditto 27 City Hospital Hill Adam, ditto 30 ditto
Hill Henry, ditto 16 Friends Hill John, his son, ditto 2 ditto Hill Robert,
ditto 7 Scots Presbyterian Hill Margaret, widow of Robert, ditto 16 ditto Hill
George, his child, August 23 St. Mary's Hill Sarah, September 22 City Hospital
Hilleston Robert, ditto 16 ditto Hilligas Henry, ditto 26 Christ Church Hilter
Elizabeth, ditto 29 City Hospital Hilton Ann, October 9 ditto Hiltzheimer
Jacob, September German Reformed Himebach Mathias, ditto 17 German Lutheran
Hinckle John, his child, October 7 ditto Hinckle John, his child, ditto 13
German Lutheran Hinckle John, his child, September 30 ditto Hinckle John, his
wife, October 20 ditto Hinckle Margaret, September 21 ditto Hinckle John, his
child, October 2 ditto Hochstetler John, August 31 ditto Hocroft Elizabeth,
October 21 City Hospital Hocroft Elizabeth, ditto 21 ditto Hocroft Frederick,
November 3 ditto Hoff Christian, October 10 ditto Hoffman James, his child,
September 14 German Lutheran Hoffman John, a child, October 3 City Hospital
Hoffman Margaret, ditto 13 German Lutheran Hoffman Grace, September 9 City
Hospital Hoffman Adam, his son, ditto 20 St. Mary's Hoffner Jacob, October 17
German Lutheran Hoffner Andrew, September 8 City Hospital Hoglegnotz Simon,
ditto 30 German Lutheran Hoglegnotz, widow, October 18 ditto Holmes John,
August 18 City Hospital Holmes Joseph, September 10 ditto Holmes Josiah,
October 31 ditto Holsey Samuel, September 8 ditto Holstein Elizabeth, October
21 ditto Holster John, September 21 ditto Holtine Alexander, his wife, ditto 24
German Lutheran Holtine Alexander, ditto 26 ditto Ho^well Thomas, ditto 30 City
Hospital Homassell Charles, his wife, August 18 St. Peter's Homer John,
September 15 City Hospital Homassell Charles, his son, ditto 1 St. Peter's
Hookerman Betsey, ditto 2 Kensington Hopcard Lewis, ditto 6 City Hospital
Hopkins Charles, August 4 Christ Church Hopkins Philip, a child, ditto 1 St.
Mary's Hopkins William, September 7 City Hospital Hopkins Margaret, October 4
ditto Hone Mr. August 26 ditto Horman Ebenezer, a child, October 19 ditto Horn
Johannes, ditto German Reformed Horn William, ditto ditto Horn Benjamin,
captain, ditto 22 City Hospital Hortman Deitmak, September 20 ditto Houghman
Hambleton, ditto 5 ditto House Joseph, ditto 16 Kensington Houser John, ditto
18 German Lutheran Howard Jane, October 14 City Hospital Howell Agnes ditto 1
ditto Howell Joseph, August 10 Friends Hozey Rhoda, September 16 City Hospital
Horrish Nicholas, ditto 25 ditto Huber John, his child, ditto 3 German Lutheran
Huber Frederick, ditto 20 ditto Hubert, South street wharf, September 14 City
Hospital Hughes Mary, daughter of John, ditto 13 Swedes Hughes Hannah, October
9 City Hospital Hughes Mary, September 25 ditto Hughes captain, his child,
October 2 3d Presbyterian Hughes John, September 6 City Hospital Huil Peter,
ditto German Reformed Humphreys Molly, ditto 16 City Hospital Hulme^ George,
ditto 7 Kensington Humphreys William, ditto 30 ditto Humphreys Catherina, ditto
26 German Lutheran Hunt Henry, ditto 29 City Hospital Hunt Eleanor, ditto 25
Free Quakers Hunter Mrs ditto 3 City Hospital Hunter Margaret, August 26 St.
Mary's Hun Jacob, September 28 City Hospital Huron John, August 27 Trinity
Hursh Mary, ditto 24 City Hospital Hunter Daniel, November 1 ditto Hutz John,
his child, September 13 German Lutheran Hutz John, November 3 ditto Hutz John,
his child, August 22 ditto Huxburgh Rebecca, October 11 City Hospital (...)
John, ditto 1 German Lutheran Hynes Elizabeth, September 27 City Hospital Hynes
Nicholas, October 13 ditto
I
Innes James, colonel, August 3 Christ Church Innes John, September 11 City
Hospital Irwing David, his wife, August 19 St. Paul's Irwing David, his son,
ditto 28 ditto Irwing James, his wife, September 6 Swedes Irwine Catherine,
September 14 City Hospital Ising Juliana, October 10 ditto
J
Jackey, a negro, September 27 City Hospital Jackson Sarah, August 25 ditto
Jackson William, ditto 26 ditto Jackson Elizabeth, September 27 ditto Jackson,
August 25 ditto Jacobs Catherine, September 9 ditto Jacobs Nicholas, his
daughter, October 5 German Lutheran Jacobson Matthias, ditto 31 ditto James Mr.
ditto 9 City Hospital James Joseph, ditto 10 ditto James John, ditto 12 ditto
James Rachel, ditto 28 Friends James Rebecca, September 21 City Hospital
Jamieson Elizabeth, August 28 ditto Jamieson John, September 30 ditto Jamieson
John, his child, ditto 24 1st Presbyterian Jamieson Margaret, ditto 29 Christ
Church Jani^tee 177 Race street, ditto (...) City Hospital January William,
September 5 2d Presbyterian Jatricken Johannes, October German Reformed Jentzer
Johannes, ditto ditto Jeremiar Mary, September 24 City Hospital Jetter Henry,
ditto German Reformed Jeffries Mary, October 23 City Hospital Jobson Catherine,
September 14 ditto Joiner Lydia, ditto 10 ditto John's Thomas, ditto 11 St.
Peter's John's Richard, August 26 Friends Johnson Alexander, October 4 City
Hospital Johnston John, September 25 ditto Johnston Andrew, October 27 ditto
Johnston John, ditto 6 Methodist Johnston Maria, November 19 City Hospital
Johnston George, August 3 Christ Church Johnston Robert, September 19 ditto
Johnston Mrs. October 15 2d Presbyterian Johnston Culph, September 14 City
Hospital Johnston --, ditto 11 ditto Johnston Thomas, ditto 15 ditto Johnston
Samuel, ditto 18 ditto Johnston Willian, October 11 Swedes Johnston Ann,
September 27 City Hospital Johnston Henry, ditto 27 ditto Jones Mrs. Hannah,
September 26 Baptist Jones Rebecca, ditto 23 Friends Jones Ann, ditto 30 ditto
Jones Isaac, his child, ditto 27 German Lutheran Jones Benjamin, his child,
October 1 ditto Jones Catherine, ditto 19 City Hospital Jones Johannes, a
child, August German Reformed Jones Catherine, September ditto Jones Sarah,
November 1 Friends Jones Margaret, September 7 City Hospital Jones Margaret,
ditto 9 ditto Jones John, his wife, ditto 28 ditto Jones Elizabeth, ditto 5
ditto Jones Benjamin, ditto 27 ditto Jones -- August 21 ditto Jordan Susannah,
October 18 German Lutheran Jourdan Mary, August 21 City Hospital Jordan W C.
September 27 Swedes Josiah William, ditto 12 City Hospital Justice George,
October 5 German Lutheran Justis Thomas, captain, August (...) Friends Justis
William, September 9 ditto Justis John, October 4 German Lutheran Justis Ann,
ditto 21 City Hospital Juling Henrietta, ditto 1 German Lutheran Justis Rachel,
ditto 14 Friends
K
Kaeffer Mary, September 21 Trinity Kahl Christopher, his child, September 23
German Lutheran Kairnes Patrick, August 28 City Hospital Kammar Sermen,
September 18 ditto Kammerer Mrs. ditto German Reformed Kammerer Henry, jun.
ditto 6 German Lutheran Kammerer Henry, his wife, ditto 3 ditto Kane Eleanor, a
child, ditto 25 St Mary's Kane James, ditto 30 ditto Katts Michael, ditto 25
German Lutheran Kaucher Matthew, ditto German Reformed Kea Jane, ditto 13 City
Hospital Kean Ann, ditto 13 ditto Kean Ann, ditto 30 ditto Kean Mary, her
child, ditto 18 German Lutheran Kean Jane, ditto 19 City Hospital Kean
Eilzabeth, ditto 25 ditto Kean Mrs. her daughter, ditto 20 ditto Keemer John,
ditto 14 Swedes Keen Johannes, his wife, ditto German Reformed Keese William,
ditto 16 City Hospital Keith Thomas, ditto 9 3d Presbyterian Keith Thomas,
ditto 27 City Hospital Keith Phebe, October 3 ditto Keith William, ditto 20
ditto Keller Johannes, ditto German Reformed Keller Adam, his son, September 13
German Lutheran Keller Ludwick, ditto 22 ditto Kellin John, August 26 City
Hospital Kelly George, September 24 German Lutheran Kellin George, ditto 23
City Hospital Kelly Josiah, ditto 24 ditto Kelso Thomas, ditto 29 ditto Kel^o
Joseph, ditto 20 ditto Kemp William, ditto German Reformed Kemp Alexander,
October 1 City Hospital Kench Christian, September 16 German Lutheran Kennedy
Joseph, his daughter, August 30 ditto Kennedy Hugh, September 13 City Hospital
Kennedy David, November 9 Kennedy, a black, ditto 11 ditto Kennell Mr.
September 2 German Lutheran Kenny Mary, ditto 10 St. Mary's Kenny Hugh, ditto 5
City Hospital Keppele James, ditto 29 ditto Kepple George, ditto 24 German
Lutheran Kercher Samuel, ditto German Reformed Kerner William, ditto 20 German
Lutheran Kerr Nathaniel, August 29 City Hospital Kerr Isabella, ditto 18 ditto
Kerr James, September 12 ditto Kerr Elizabeth, ditto 30 ditto Kerr Elizabeth,
her child, October 1 ditto Kerr Joseph, his child, ditto 10 1st Presbyterian
Kesler Catherine, September 11 St. Mary's Kessy John, ditto 6 City Hospital
Kesserin Juliana, October 12 ditto Keys John, August 13 City Hospital Keys
John, October 29 ditto Keys George, ditto 31 ditto Keyser Michael, September 19
German Lutheran Keyser Mr. ditto 28 City Hospital Keyser --, ditto 28 City
Hospital Kidd William, ditto 5 Free Quakers Kidd Mr. ditto 2 German Lutheran
Kiefe Mary Ann, ditto 8 City Hospital Kiesman Mrs. October German Reformed
Killingworth Luke, his child, September 15 Methodist Kaller Catherina, ditto 11
St. Mary's Killingworth Lake, his son, August 14 Methodist Kimber Phebe,
October 18 Friends King John, September 4 City Hospital King Joseph, ditto 11
ditto King William, (...) Scots Presbyterian King Joseph, ditto 12 City
Hospital King Mary, October 30 ditto King Ann, September 5 ditto Kinley Nancy,
ditto 17 ditto Kintzinger Michael, ditto 11 ditto Kirkpatrick Mary, ditto 4
ditto Kisselman Frederick, August 29 St. Peter's Kittler John, his wife,
October (...) German Lutheran Klein Mr. his child, August 14 ditto Klein
Catherina, October 4 ditto Klein Peter, ditto 19 City Hospital Kline Mary,
September 5 Trinity Kline Philip, ditto 19 German Lutheran Klue Philip, ditto
27 ditto Kneill Ann, ditto 26 Trinity Knight Mary, wife of David, ditto 3
Christ Church Knight Isaac, October 14 Friends Knight Elizabeth, August 27 City
Hospital Knight Elizabeth, September 19 German Lutheran Knight Philip, October
10 ditto Knight Philip, his wife, September 30 ditto Knile Peggy, ditto 30
Trinity Knile Fanny, October 7 ditto Knodle John, his child, August 30 German
Reformed Kochler Mary, September 30 City Hospital Koller Michael, his wife,
ditto 3 German Lutheran Koogan Joseph, ditto 29 City Hospital Kraft Jacob, his
son, ditto 29 German Lutheran Kreider Frederick, September German Reformed
Kremer John, ditto 14 Trinity Kremer Barbara, ditto 8 ditto Kreutzbergher John,
his child, ditto 25 German Lutheran Krewier Frederick, a child, August German
Reformed Krey Patrick, October 8 German Lutheran Krimbich Christiana, ditto
German Reformed Krites John, ditto 28 German Lutheran Kruse Nicholas, ditto 7
ditto Kuln Philip, his child, ditto 4 ditto Kunkle George, his wife, October 1
Friends Kunkle John, his child, September 9 German Lutheran Kunkle John,
September 10 ditto Kunkle John, his son, ditto 15 ditto Kyffer Peter, his
child, August 26 ditto
L
Lace Elizabeth, daughter of William, Sept. 23 St. Peter's Laford Benjamin,
ditto 11 2d Presbyterian Langrange, Reverend Joseph, a French catholic
clergyman, ditto 1 St. Mary's Lord E^os, August 17 German Lutheran Lake
Richard, jun ditto 5 3d Presbyterian Lake Richard, his daughter, ditto 17 ditto
Larlor James, child, ditto 31 St. Mary's Lamb Mary, September 27 City Hospital
Lambert John, August 29 ditto Lambert Mrs. September 22 ditto Lambert Mrs. her
mother ditto 20 ditto Lambertus Christian, his wife, ditto 8 German Reformed
Landenschleager Wm. his sister-in-law, do. 4 ditto Reformed Lane Margaret.
August 18 City Hospital Lang John. September 24 ditto Lang Charles, his wife,
September 30 ditto Langall Ann, ditto 25 Friends Lapp Andrew, October 3 City
Hospital Langall Margaret, September 26 Friends Larger Henry, ditto ^4 City
Hospital Lasables Edward, ditto 4 German Lutheran Lasser John, August 30 City
Hospital Lathman Catherine, September 30 ditto Lauck Joseph, August 30 German
Lutheran Laughlin Catherine, September 25 City Hospital Laughlin Mary, ditto 25
ditto Laville Peter, his child, ditto 17 German Lutheran Lawler Elizabeth, a
child, August 17 St. Mary's Lawrence John, ditto 8 Friends Lawrance John, ditto
27 German Lutheran Lawrance William, September 11 City Hospital Lawrance James,
ditto 12 ditto Leag James, October 25 ditto Lear Adam, ditto 9 ditto Leary
William, ditto 29 ditto Leary James, September 20 ditto Leary Timothy, October
19 ditto Leaton John, September 20 ditto Lechler Maria, child, August 3 Trinity
Lechler George, ditto 23 ditto Lechler Joseph, September 12 ditto Lechler,
widow Barbara, October 3 ditto Lechler Hannah, September 26 City Hospital
Lechler John, ditto 18 Trinity Ledlie Margaret, October 16 City Hospital Lee
Ann, September 21 ditto Lees Samuel, August 31 Free Quakers Leeson Elizabeth,
September 22 City Hospital Leeson Samuel, ditto 24 ditto Legay Henrietta, ditto
17 ditto Legee Jacob, ditto 16 ditto Lehr Christian, October 23 German Lutheran
Lieb George, ditto 10 ditto Lieb George, his widow, November 6 ditto Leisly
Philip, his son, September 24 ditto Leisner Samuel, ditto 30 City Hospital
Lentz Mary, ditto 15 Trinity Lentz Henry, his child, August 3 German Lutheran
Lentz George, his child, September 1 ditto Lentz Martin, ditto 7 ditto Leonard
Catherine, ditto 3 City Hospital Leonard Michael, ditto German Reformed Leonard
Elizabeth ditto 13 City Hospital Les^lie, Mrs. ditto 25 ditto Lester John,
August 31 St. Mary's Letfield Letitia, September 30 City Hospital Letherman
Andrew, ditto 23 St. Mary's Letherman Catherine, October 1 ditto Letts, widow,
August 10 Baptist Leviere Thomas, September 5 City Hospital Levy Philip,
October 11 ditto Lewis Jonathan, ditto 5 Friends Lewis Curtis, September 3
Swedes Lewis Sarah, August 25 ditto Lewis James, September 12 German Lutheran
Lewis Ann, daughter of Joseph, ditto 16 City Hospital Lewis Ann, October 1
ditto Licky Jacob, a Child, September German Reformed Light Sarah, ditto 27
City Hospital Lightbody John, October 14 City Hospital Lightbody John, ditto 21
ditto Lightcop Michael, September 2 Kensington Lilly Margaret, ditto 23 City
Hospital Likes Henry, ditto 29 ditto Lindsay, Mrs. ditto 26 Associate Lindsay
Richard, October 25 City Hospital Linganfelter Jacob, September 10 ditto Link
George, his daughter, October 3 German Lutheran Link John, ditto 11 ditto
Lisengan Conrad, September 18 City Hospital Liter Jacob, ditto 21 German
Lutheran Little Susannah, October 1 City Hospital Little Elizabeth, daughter of
John, September 8 Swedes Lockhart Mary, October 29 City Hospital Logan John,
September 29 ditto Logan Mary, ditto 22 ditto Logan William, his wife, ditto 26
ditto Logan William, his daughter, ditto 28 ditto Logan James, ditto 13 ditto
Loesh George, October 10 ditto Logee Anthony, his twin child, August 9 St.
Paul's Lohra, widow, October German Reformed Long Sarah, September 28 City
Hospital Long Captain, ditto 8 ditto Longacre Isaac, son of Isaac, August 2 2d
Presbyterian Lorigan William, September 15 City Hospital Lotier Joseph, ditto
26 St. Mary's Louden John, ditto 2 City Hospital Lourman Maria, ditto 2 ditto
Louper John, his child, August 12 Kensington Love William, October 14 City
Hospital Lovell, Mr. September 2 ditto Loyd Isaac, merchant, August 11 Friends
Loyer Jacob, ditto 26 Trinity Lovier Evan, October 19 City Hospital Lucas Mary,
September 22 ditto Lucas Seth, ditto 16 St. Paul's Lucas William, October 24
City Hospital Ludwick, from north-alley ditto 21 ditto Ludwick William,
September 14 German Lutheran Luffborrow John, ditto 1 Kensington Luffborrow
Nathan, his child August 2 2d Presbyterian Lukins Sarah, October 21 City
Hospital Lutz Adam, September 5 ditto Lutz Elizabeth, October 22 ditto Lutz
Polly a child, ditto 7 ditto Lutz Abraham, his child, September 27 ditto Lutz
John, ditto 25 ditto Lutz Leonard, October 22 German Lutheran Lutz Susannah,
September 24 City Hospital Lutz John, his child, October 10 German Lutheran
Lutz, widow, ditto 11 ditto Lushet John, September 24 ditto Lybrant George, his
child, October 23 ditto Lycett William, August 24 City Hospital Lycett William,
his wife, September 9 ditto Lyndan James ditto 7 St. Mary's Lynne Richard, a
child, August 27 City Hospital. Lyle, Mr. his child, ditto German Reformed
Lynch Eleanor, September 15 St. Mary's Lynch Edward, his child, ditto 22 ditto
Lynch Hanuah, ditto 30 City Hospital Lynch John, October 3 ditto Lynch Elsy,
September 25 3d Presbyterian Lynch Elsy, her son, ditto 29 ditto
M.
Maa Nicholas, September German Reformed M'Adam Barney, ditto 3 City Hospital
M'Afee James, October 4 ditto M'Allister John, August 31 ditto M'Allister
William, September ^4 Associate M'Bride William, October 25 City Hospital
M'Cabe James, August 29 ditto M'Call Catherine, November 12 St. Thomas's
M'Carer Garret, his child, September 20 Baptist M'Carer Garret, October 7 ditto
M'Carer Garret, his child, ditto 18 ditto M'Carer Garret, his widow, ditto 20
ditto M'Carty Daniel, September 22 City Hospital M'Cathey Dennis, August 13
ditto M'Cauley Mary, a child, ditto 7 St. Mary's M'Cauley Winifred, September 8
ditto M'Celery Martha, her child, ditto 26 City Hospital M'Clay Mary, August 25
ditto M'Clay Christina, September 25 ditto M'Clellen John, October 21 3d
Presbyterian M'Clellen John, his child, November 1 2d Presbyterian M'Clellen
John, October 6 City Hospital M'Connell Mary, September 2 ditto M'Connell Mrs.
her daughter, ditto 12 St Peter's M'Cormick Jane, ditto 29 St. Mary's M'Cormick
Frederick, his child, August 29 ditto M'Cormick Mary, September 3 ditto
M'Cormick Isabella, ditto 24 City Hospital M'Conike Bridget, ditto 9 ditto
M'Coy Margaret, a child, August 28 St. Mary's M'Connell Mrs. October, (...) 2d
Presbyterian M'Coy Joseph, September 19 City Hospital M'Cormick Elizabeth,
August 28 ditto M'Coy Daniel, September 19 ditto M'Conly Peggy, October 2 ditto
M'Coy Catherine, September 23 ditto M'Coy John, November 6 ditto M'Coy Daniel,
his child, ditto 1 ditto M'Coy Mary, August 28 ditto M'Crea Elizabeth,
September 6 ditto M'Crea --, South, between Fifth and Sixth streets, do. 13
ditto M'Crea James, his wife, ditto 17 ditto M'Crea Matthew, ditto 23 ditto
M'Crea Robert, his child, August 21 2d Presbyterian M'Crea Mrs. September 27
ditto M'Crea widow, October 26 City Hospital M'Crossey Hugh, August 29 ditto
M'Cue Daniel, September 23 ditto M'Calloch John, a child, August 31 ditto
M'Cullom Margaret, September 24 ditto M'Cullom John, his child, November 10
Friends M'Cullom Archibald, September 14 City Hospital M'Curdy Sarah, October
17 ditto M'Dade William, a child, ditto 1 St. Mary's M'Daniel Catherine,
September 21 City Hospital M'Dermot Catherine, August 19 St. Mary's M'Dermot
Michael, October 18 City Hospital M'Devitt Neil, September 10 ditto M'Devitt
Robert, October 30 ditto M'Donald Alexander, September 25 ditto M'Donald
Margaret, October 29 ditto M'Donald Alexander, September 10 ditto M'Donald
Mary, September 11 City Hospital M'Donald John, ditto 23 ditto M'Donald
William, ditto 27 ditto M'Dowell Benjamin, ditto 14 ditto M'Dowell Maria, ditto
15 ditto M'Dunn James, ditto 26 ditto M'Elroy Jane, ditto 16 ditto M'Elroy Mrs.
October 20 ditto M'Elroy John, his child, September 27 Kensington M'Elwee
James, ditto 20 City Hospital M'Elwee Daniel, ditto 15 ditto M'Elwaine
Alexander, ditto 10 ditto M'Ewen John, November 10 ditto M'Fall Margaret,
September 23 ditto M'Farlane James, ditto 17 Methodists M'Farlane Mary,
daughter of Andrew, August 14 1st Presbyterian M'Farlane Elizabeth, September 6
City Hospital M'Farlane James, ditto 8 ditto M'Farlane Michael, ditto 18 ditto
M'Farlane Sarah, ditto 24 ditto M'Farlane Andrew, August 23 1st Presbyterian
M'Farrell Robert, September 27 City Hospital M'Faun Isabella, ditto 2 ditto
M'Fee Thomas. ditto 21 ditto M'Feely Ann, October 14 St. Mary's M'Ferran Mrs.
September 7 Kensington M'Garegal John, October 14 St. Mary's M'Garvey Rebecca,
daughter of John, Sept. 19 Christ Church M'Gee Robert, October 6 St. Mary's
M'Gill Martha, September 1 City Hospital M'Gill John, October 2 ditto M'Gavern
John, September 24 ditto M'Gilson Catherine, October 12 ditto M'Gilton Samuel,
September 21 ditto M'Ginnis Sarah, ditto 15 Kensington M'Glasky James, his son,
ditto 24 St. Peter's M'Glasky Isaac, October 26 City Hospital M'Goven Thomas,
September 1 ditto M'Gowan James, ditto 14 ditto M'Grane Patrick, ditto 30 St.
Mary's M'Grigor John, August 9 ditto M'Grigor John, October 19 City Hospital
M'Grigor John, ditto 25 ditto M'Grath James, a child, August 17 St. Mary's
M'Hughan Allan, September 12 City Hospital M'Intosh Mary, October 25 ditto
M'Intosh Isaac, September 8 ditto M'Intosh Alexander, October 1 ditto M'Intosh
Mrs. ditto M'Intyre Andrew, August 24 Swedes M'Kean John, September 21 City
Hospital M'Kean James, August 27 ditto M'Kean William, November 9 ditto Mackie
William, September 7 ditto Mackie Margaret, ditto 10 St. Mary's M'Kee John,
October 30 3d Presbyterian M'Kehan John, his widow, F^ee Quakers M'Kenzie
Elizabeth, September 21 Swedes M'Kenzie William, August 23 City Hospital
M'Kenzie Isabella, September 21 ditto M'Kenzie Charles, his child, ditto 14 1st
Presbyterian M'Kinlay James, October 13 City Hospital M'Lair Susan, ditto 13
ditto M'Laughlin Francis, September 3 St. Mary's M'Laughlin Mary, August 7
ditto M'Laughlin Michael, October 21 City Hospital M'Laughlin Mary Ann, August
17 ditto M'Laughlin Hugh, ditto 20 ditto M'Laughlin Mary, September 12 ditto
M'Laughlin Elizabeth, ditto 13 ditto M'Laughlin John, ditto 17 ditto M'Laughlin
William, ditto 17 ditto M'Laughlin Alexander, his wife, ditto 27 St. Paul's
M'Laughlin Elizabeth, August 15 City Hospital M'Laughlin James, September 5
ditto M'Laughlin Daniel, ditto 29 ditto M'Lean Daniel, August 23 ditto M'Lean
Isabella, ditto 31 ditto M'Lean William, September 21 ditto M'Lean David, ditto
11 Associate M'Luen Mary, ditto 16 City Hospital M'Mahon Michael, October 10
St. Mary's M'Mahon Edward, September 24 City Hospital M'Mahon Mrs. August 20
ditto M'Mahon --, ditto 23 ditto M'Manus John, ditto 29 St. Mary's M'Manus
Barney, September 29 City Hospital M'Manus John, August 29 ditto M'Manus
Barney, ditto 25 ditto M'Mullin Sarah, September 10 Kensington M'Mullin
Margaret, October 21 City Hospital M'Mullin John, ditto 13 Kensington M'Mullin
John, his child, August 11 3d Presbyterian M'Neill Neil, September 30 City
Hospital M'Nitt Robert, October 22 ditto M'Pherson Alexander, September 16
ditto M'Pherson Elizabeth, ditto 15 ditto M'Pherson captain, his child, October
11 St. Paul's M'Shane Barnabas, August 25 St. Mary's M'Shane Mrs. September 16
3d Presbyterian M'Tear Leonard, August 16 City Hospital M'Williams Helen,
September ditto Macx Catherina, ditto German Reformed Madan Hugh, August 9 City
Hospital Madan Hugh, ditto 9 St. Mary's Maees Elizabeth, September 23 City
Hospital Magers Philip, his daughter, ditto 23 ditto Maggs Catherine, ditto 29
ditto Maggs Catherine, October 29 ditto Maggs John, November 2 ditto Magonogill
John, September 4 City Hospital Mahaffey James, August 28 Kensington Mahaffey
Robert, October 10 City Hospital Mahaffey James, ditto 13 ditto Mahan John,
ditto 25 St. Mary's Maiger Philip, his child, October 1^ City Hospital Maiger
Philip, ditto 18 ditto Mail Patty, her child, ditto 8 Kensington Maine James,
his child, ditto 6 ditto Mallick John, September 19 City Hospital Maley
captain, his wife, ditto 19 2d Presbyterian Malsy James, August 25 City
Hospital Malony Thomas, ditto 25 St. Mary's Manakipper Dorothy, September 30
City Hospital Mann Conrad, ditto 29 ditto Mansfield Joseph, October 7 ditto
Maniny Elizabeth, September 21 St. Mary's Manuell Henry, ditto 13 City Hospital
Mangolt Frederick, and son, October German Reformed Marchback John, September 4
City Hospital Marewine Isaac, grocer, October 17 Moravians Mary's Jane,
September 19 Christ Church Marklaith John, ditto 5 City Hospital Marks James,
his wife, ditto 30 Kensington Marland George, his child, ditto 29 St. Mary's
Marley Richard, his child, August 6 Christ Church Marks Jacob, September 19
Trinity Mar John, his child, ditto 30 2d Presbyterian Mar John, do. do.
October 14 ditto Marsell Joseph, September 10 City Hospital Marsh Jasper, ditto
21 Friends Marsh John, ditto 22 City Hospital Marsh Charlotte, October 10 ditto
Marshall Francis, his child, August 28 St. Mary's Marshall Elizabeth, September
22 Christ Church Marshall Margaret, ditto 15 City Hospital Marshall Susan, her
daughter, October 4 Free Quakers Martin Charles, September 27 City Hospital
Martin Andrew, his wife, October 11 ditto Martin Peter, ditto 17 ditto Martin
Robert, September 10 ditto Martin Edward, ditto 27 St. Mary's Martin Patrick,
ditto 21 City Hospital Martin Rose, October 13 ditto Martin John, ditto 17
Friends Martin John, September 2 City Hospital Mary, from Love Lane, ditto 22
ditto Martin William, ditto 13 1st Presbyterian Mash Hannah, ditto 19 City
Hospital Mason capt. William, his son, August 23 St. Peter's Ditto do. his
wife, September 4 ditto Mason widow, mother of Philip, October 3 ditto Mason
Jacob, his child, ditto 10 City Hospital Massey captain, his child, September
26 3d Presbyterian Match John, ditto 18 City Hospital Matthews Ann, ditto 26
ditto Matthews James, October 17 3d Presbyterian Mauchest Paul, ditto 28 St.
Mary's Maxfield Stephen, his wife, August 26 Friends Maxwell Abigail, daughter
of John, October 1 Scots Presbyterian Maxwell Mary, do. do. ditto 6 ditto
Maxwell Hugh, son of do. ditto 12 ditto May Adam, his child, November 4 German
Lutheran Meads Elizabeth, August 20 City Hospital Mealy Thomas, October 1 ditto
Meary Thomas, September 19 ditto Meeker Mrs. August 31 ditto Meeker Elias,
ditto 31 ditto Megunigal John, September 4 St. Mary's Meginty James, ditto 30
ditto Meeker Mrs. August 31 City Hospital Mehon Eliza, September 7 Friends
Mehon Margaret, ditto 23 ditto Meonson John, ditto 18 St. Mary's Meredith
Wheeler, August 24 St. Peter's Mendenhall Adam, his wife, October 20 Friends
Merfrool Mr. September 7 Kensington Merritt widow, her child, ditto 25 City
Hospital Mershon Stephen, his son, ditto 30 ditto Meffinger Simon, ditto 5
ditto Meyer widow, ditto 26 ditto Metzger Johannes, August German Reformed
Metzger Johannes, September ditto Meyer Adam, his daughter, ditto 23 German
Lutheran Metzger Johannes, ditto German Reformed Meyer Henry, his son, ditto 29
German Lutheran Ditto ditto ditto ditto 28 ditto Ditto ditto his daughter,
October (...) ditto Ditto ditto his wife, ditto 7 ditto Meyer George, ditto 11
ditto Meyer Jacob, ditto 8 ditto Ditto ditto September German Reformed Meyer
George, ditto 10 City Hospital Meyer John, ditto 13 ditto Meyer Sarah, ditto 14
ditto Meywerth John, ditto German Reformed Michael Adam, August 29 City
Hospital Miller Robert, October 19 1st Presbyterian Miercken Peter, his
daughter, ditto 13 St. Peter's Miller Ann, ditto German Reformed Milgo
Charlotte, ditto 3 City Hospital Miller Christina, ditto German Reformed
Millard Thomas, shot at the prison, September 18 City Hospital Miller John,
ditto 3 ditto Miller Samuel, August 14 ditto Miller Charles, his wife,
September 18 German Lutheran Miller John, August 14 City Hospital Ditto ditto
September 19 German Lutheran Miller Mary, August 26 City Hospital Miller
Michael, September 23 German Lutheran Miller Ann. September 5 Trinity Ditto
Michael, his wife, ditto 24 German Lutheran Ditto David, his mother, ditto
German Reformed Ditto Michael, his danghter, October 5 German Lutheran Ditto
John, September German Reformed Ditto George, ditto 28 Kensington Ditto
Johannes, ditto German Reformed Ditto Henry, his wife, October 6 German
Lutheran Ditto George, September 22 City Hospital Ditto Margaret, ditto 17
ditto Ditto Mrs. October 12 Coates's Ditto do. from Kensington, September 19
City Hospital Ditto Jacob, ditto 30 ditto Ditto ditto, labourer, October 9
Kensington Ditto Matthew, ditto 5 City Hospital Ditto Jacob, his wife, ditto 9
Kensington Ditto ditto August 16 ditto Ditto Daniel. October 14 ditto Millis
John, his daughter, ditto 15 Christ Church Do. do. September 24 ditto Do. do.
son of John, ditto 28 ditto Do. do. October 24 City Hospital Mills Francis,
September 5 Kensington Do. ditto ditto 5 City Hospital Minx widow, her child,
October 1 German Lutheran Mills William, his wife, September 30 ditto Minders
Socrates, November 6 City Hospital Minnis Joseph, October 29 ditto Minx
Catherina, her child, September 24 German Lutheran Mista^her Mr. his daughter,
ditto 23 ditto Misty John, August 31 City Hospital Miseman Catherine, September
German Reformed Mitchell widow, ditto 11 City Hospital Mimy Rosalia, ditto 25
St. Mary's Mitchell Samuel, ditto 26 City Hospital Mitchell George, his
daughter, ditto 15 Swedes Mitchell captain, August 6 3d Presbyterian Mitchell
Catherine, September 29 City Hospital Mitchell Andrew, ditto 26 ditto Mitty
Paul, ditto 26 ditto Mills Elizabeth, ditto 27 ditto Moaxham James, son of
William, ditto 23 Free Quakers Moilet Elizabeth, ditto 7 City Hospital Molit
John Baptist, August 3 Trinity Mollin Margaret, October 3 City Hospital Monday
Maria, a child, September 25 St. Mary's Molly Catherine, ditto 23 City Hospital
Monday Francis, ditto 12 St. Mary's Molly, a black, ditto 7 City Hospital
Monaghan Catherine, August 26 St. Mary's Molly --, September 9 City Hospital
Monday Charles, August 28 ditto Montgomery George, ditto 23 ditto Montgomery
Andrew, his wife, September 14 Swedes Moodie captain, his child, August 30
Swedes Moon Samuel, October 6 City Hospital Moodie captain, his son, September
6 Swedes Money Michael, October German Reformed Moore John, August 27 City
Hospital Money widow, November German Reformed Moore Robert, August 26 City
Hospital Moore William, October 14 ditto Moore John, ditto Kensington Moore
William, ship carpenter, August 27 ditto Moore Mary, September 15 ditto Moore
Thomas, September 26 City Hospital Moore Elizabeth, a child, October 10 ditto
Moore Martha, October 11 ditto Moore Rachel, August 29 ditto Moore William, his
wife, September 14 German Lutheran Moore Samuel, ditto City Hospital Moorpole
John, his child, ditto 17 Kensington Morgan Benjamin, his son, August 4 Christ
Church Morgan widow, September 4 Friends Morgan John, October 11 City Hospital
Morgan Enoch, September 30 ditto Morgan John, ditto 28 ditto Morland John,
joiner, August 4 Baptists Morris Robert, son of John, September 20 Free Quakers
Morris Anthony, ditto Friends Morris William, son of Robert, October 9 Christ
Church Morris Sarah, October 6 City Hospital Morris Thomas, ditto 2 ditto
Morris John, carver, September ditto Morris Hugh, September 15 ditto Morris
James, his daughter, ditto 24 ditto Morris Robert, ditto 1 ditto Morris
Catherine, ditto Bethel Morris Ketty, ditto ditto Morse Rachel, August 29 City
Hospital Morton George, September 27 Swedes Morton Sarah, ditto 22 City
Hospital Mosely George, ditto 29 St. Paul's Mosely George, his child, October
16 ditto Moser Christian, ditto 4 City Hospital Moser widow, her child,
November German Reformed Moser Christian, September 19 German Lutheran Moser
George, Country. Moser Jacob, September 22 German Lutheran Moulin Anna, August
31 Trinity Moss Judith, September 16 City Hospital Moullia Cherry, ditto 21 St.
Mary's Mouport William, ditto 19 City Hospital Moylan John, ditto 7 St. Mary's
Much Jeremiah, his step daughter, ditto 9 St. Peter's Muckling William,
November 2 City Hospital Mullin Peter, September 6 ditto Mullin Elizabeth,
October 4 Kensington Mullin William, September 9 City Hospital Mullin Patrick,
ditto 26 ditto Mullin James, ditto 1 ditto Mullin Henry, August 10 St. Mary's
Mulligan James, September 13 ditto Mulligan Owen, ditto 8 ditto Mulry
Elizabeth, ditto 13 City Hospital Munges Almantine, a child, ditto 19 St.
Mary's Murgatroyd Thomas, his daughter, ditto 16 Christ Church Mure Bridget,
ditto 19 City Hospital Murphy Nicholas, ditto 19 ditto Murphy Nicholas, ditto
19 St. Mary's Murphy Mr. his wife, ditto 2 Scots Presbyterian Murphy Owen, his
child, ditto 2 St. Paul's Murphy William, labourer, ditto 5 Kensington Murphy
Terence, August 28 St. Mary's Murphy Terence ditto City Hospital Murphy
Michael, ditto 25 St. Paul's Murphy Henry, October 1 City Hospital Murphy
Edward, September 19 ditto Murphy John, August 29 St. Mary's Murphy Patty,
September 21 City Hospital Murray Daniel, September 19 Methodists Murray
Daniel, his child, October 12 ditto Murray James, August 19 City Hospital
Murray Daniel, his child, October 15 Methodists Murray William, his daughter,
September 22 City Hospital Murray Francis, ditto 22 St. Mary's Murrell John,
September 17 City Hospital Murrell Joseph, August 31 ditto Murren Eleanor,
September 17 ditto Myers John, ditto 16 ditto Mylander William, ditto 14 German
Lutheran Musgrove Charles, August 30 Swedes Mylinger William, September 20 City
Hospital Myrtetus Christopher, his daughter, ditto 13 Moravian Myers Catharine,
October 17 St. Mary's Mynnich Conrad, August German Reformed Mynnich widow, her
daughter, September ditto Mynnich Christina, November ditto
N.
Naglee Mary, September 15 City Hospital Naglee John, his child, ditto 10
Kensington Naglee Mr. his child, ditto 28 ditto Ditto do. ditto October 13
ditto Nail Conrad, his wife, September 16 Methodists Do. ditto, his child,
ditto 20 ditto Napier David, ditto 16 City Hospital Nash Elizabeth, ditto 7
ditto Nash John, August 31 ditto Needler Barbara, September 12 Trinity Negel
Elizabeth, October 12 German Lutheran Neise Eleanor, October 19 City Hospital
Nelson William, August 13 ditto Nelson David, joiner, October 13 3d
Presbyterian Nemand George, September 4 City Hospital Nenthinger Christina,
October German Reformed Netherwood Catherine, September 16 City Hospital
Netherwood John, ditto 13 ditto Neutral Maria, ditto 20 Trinity Newcamp --, a
woman, ditto 29 City Hospital Newdle Patrick, ditto 13 ditto Newman Frederick,
October 14 German Lytheran Newman Sarah, daughter of Benjamin, August 25
Coates's Newman Elizabeth, September 1 2d Presbyterian Newman widow, ditto 4
ditto Newman John, October 16 Methodists Newton Elizabeth, ditto 19 City
Hospital Newton Mrs. ditto 15 ditto Nichols Hoover, August 22 Swedes Nichols
Mary, ditto 21 City Hospital Nichols John, son of colonel N. October 6 Christ
Church Nigkoop John, September 3 City Hospital Nixon James, ditto 24 ditto
Noble Thomas, August 18 ditto Nongary Lewis, marquis of Modena, September 22
St. Mary's Norbeck Daniel, his child, ditto 19 Trinity Norkway Mary, October 11
City Hospital Norman Philip, September 20 ditto Norton John, August 23 ditto
Norris John, October 17 Scots Presbyterian Ditto do. ship-carpenter, September
16 Kensington Nory Jacob, ditto 25 City Hospital Nue Peter, his child, October
4 Kensington Nugent Eleanor, September 5 St. Mary's Nugent Francis, ditto 8
ditto Nugent Elizabeth, ditto 15 ditto Nugent Patrick, October 12 ditto
O
Oblinger Barbara, August 27 City Hospital Oakford Charles, his wife, September
25 Baptists Ditto ditto his daughter, ditto 27 ditto Oblinger Barbara, August
27 St. Mary's Obaire Mr. ditto 28 City Hospital O'Brian Timothy, a child, ditto
8 St. Mary's O'Brian Simon, September 9 City Hospital O'Brian Robert, ditto 16
ditto O'Brian Eleanor, ditto 17 ditto O'Connell Charles, ditto 2 ditto Odair
Catherine, August 26 Kensington O'Dounnell Connell, September 11 St. Mary's
Ohler Johannes, October German Reformed Ohler Andreas, ditto 10 German Lutheran
Oliver William, August 23 City Hospital Oliver Charles, September 17 City
Hospital Oliver Andrew, ditto 7 ditto Onet Peter, August 1 Kensington O'Neal
James, ditto 29 St. Mary's Oner Elizabeth, September 24 Christ Church Opperman
Adam, ditto 4 St. Mary's Omer John, October 27 German Lutheran Orr Hugh,
September 6 3d Presbyterian Orr Hugh, ditto 4 City Hospital Osburn Sarah,
October 17 ditto Osburn Samuel, ditto 18 ditto Ott Appolonia, September 26 St.
Mary's Otts John, August 26 City Hospital Ottington Matthew, his child, October
27 St. Paul's Ousford John, September 24 Christ Church Overman John, ditto 17
City Hospital Owen John, sen. October 10 ditto Owen John, jun. ditto 10 ditto
Owens Mr. August 17 ditto
P.
Pain Prince, September 15 City Hospital Palmer William, T. ditto 27 ditto
Palmer Joseph, November 15 ditto Pancake Philip, his daughter, September 11
German Lutheran Ditto do. ditto, October 28 ditto Parenbach Maria, September
German Reformed Parish Mary, ditto 16 City Hospital Park David, August 21 ditto
Parker Mary, ditto 26 Baptists Parker Mrs. her child, September 23 City
Hospital Ditto do. ditto, August 20 St. Paul's Parks Mrs. September 26 City
Hospital Parr Cabb, October 15 Christ Church Parr Hetty, ditto 13 City Hospital
Parram Susannah, September 6 Swedes Parry John, August 11 Free Quakers
Partridge Sarah, September 9 City Hospital Partridge Thomas, August 29 ditto
Paschall Jonathan, September 27 Friends Pasgill --, ditto 2 City Hospital
Pasiands --, corner of Lombard and Fifth-streets ditto Passfield George, August
30 Baptists Pastor Peter, ditto 31 City Hospital Pastoris Samuel, September 6
Friends Pastoris Sarah, ditto 11 ditto Paties Oliver, August 8 City Hospital
Patrick Ann, wife of Alexander, September 20 ditto Patrick Alexander, his son,
ditto 26 ditto Patterson John, October 27 ditto Patterson William, ditto 29
Swedes Patterson Samuel, September 11 City Hospital Patton William, a child,
August 24 St. Mary's Paukermaster Thomas, November 7 Kensington Paul captain,
his son, August 28 St. Paul's Paul Ann, ditto 21 City Hospital Paxson Robert,
November 6 ditto Peacock Alexander, September 6 ditto Peak Elizabeth, ditto 4
ditto Peale Rebecca, ditto 12 ditto Pearson Jane, ditto 22 Friends Pearson
Amos, August 29 City Hospital Pearson William, September 6 ditto Pechin John,
his child, August 28 St. Paul's Peck Elizabeth, September 4 City Hospital
Peckham Mary, ditto 22 ditto Pee John, August 30 3d Presbyterian Peltz Ann,
October German Reformed Peltz Corporal, September 5 City Hospital Pemberton
John, ditto German Reformed Ditto do. a black, November 2 City Hospital
Pennington Alexander, October 11 ditto Pepper Philip, November 8 German
Lutheran Perey John, house-carpenter, his wife, September 19 Baptists Ditto do.
his son, ditto 22 ditto Perey Samuel, house-carpenter, ditto 24 ditto Perey
John, his daughter, ditto 25 ditto Ditto do. house-carpenter, ditto 27 ditto
Ditto do. his daughter, ditto 28 ditto Perkeson Martin, his child, October 22
3d Presbyterian Perkins Jacob, his child, August 14 2d ditto Permer Catherine,
September 15 City Hospital Peter's Elizabeth, ditto 1 Methodists Peter's John,
his child, November 4 German Lutheran Peter's Miss, sister of Mr. Little, Sept.
27 Scots Presbyterian Petersham Christan, ditto 14 City Hospital Phillips
David, ditto 7 ditto Phillips Alexander, tailor, August (...) 3d Presbyterian
Phillips Hannah, ditto 20 Swedes Phillipson Catherine, September 14 City
Hospital Pic Mary Ann, ditto 18 St. Mary's Picken Mary, ditto 24 City Hospital
Pickering Samuel, ditto 14 ditto Pickering Rachel, ditto 23 ditto Piderman
Charles, ditto 28 German Lutheran Pierce Jacob, his child, ditto 8 Kensington
Piesseman Christina, October German Reformed Pister Jacob, his wife, ditto 18
Kensington Pister Catherina, ditto 16 German Lutheran Pister John, his wife,
August 31 ditto Platay Henry, September 21 ditto Platz Barbara, October 27
Trinity Plin Paul, his daughter, September German Reformed Do. do. a child,
October ditto Plisch Christina, September ditto Plowman Joseph, October 18 St.
Peter's Plumb Peter, ditto 2 St. Mary's Polany William, September 20 City
Hospital Pollard Richard, ditto 12 St. Peter's Ditto ditto, his mother, ditto
20 ditto Ditto ditto, his widow, ditto 28 ditto Ditto ditto, his daughter
Eliza, ditto 28 ditto Polling Jesserin, his child, August 1 Kensington Pollock
James, ditto 25 City Hospital Pollock Elizabeth, ditto 31 ditto Polly, from
Christian between 3d and 4th streets, Sept. 16 ditto Polly Robert, his child,
October 23 Trinity Poney --, August 12 City Hospital Pooly Elizabeth, September
20 ditto Pope Christopher, October 23 German Lutheran Porter James, August 9
City Hospital Porter John, ditto 12 ditto Porter Mary, ditto 9 Scots
Presbyterian Poth Adam, October 13 Trinity Potlens Elizabeth, September 5 City
Hospital Pottem Elizabeth, September 14 ditto Potter Thomas, ditto 20 ditto
Potter James, ditto 24 ditto Potter Nathaniel, ditto 6 3d Presbyterian Potts
Edward, August 18 Friends Poustich Poultice, September 8 City Hospital Powder
William, August 24 ditto Power John, ditto 24 St. Mary's Ditto do. ditto 26
City Hospital Ditto do. his child, September 3 German Lutheran Poynter James,
ditto 19 City Hospital Pratt Richard, ditto 25 ditto Praupert Mr. his child,
October German Reformed Precker John, August 23 City Hospital Prederse Henry,
September 2 ditto Prendergrass captain, August 28 Kensington Preston Rebecca,
daughter of James, September 2 Swedes Preston William, his son, August 29 St.
Peter's Ditto ditto, his wife, September 18 Friends Preston John, ditto 20
ditto Preston Joseph, ditto 18 ditto Price Isaac, watchmater, member of the
board of health, ditto 16 ditto Price widow, her son, ditto 1 German Lutheran
Price David, ditto 15 City Hospital Price Mary, ditto 1 ditto Primmell
Benjamin, his wife, August 24 Swedes Provoost William, September 21 City
Hospital Purphil Joseph, his child, October 2 Kensington Purtich Mr. his
son-in-law, ditto German Reformed Pie Rebecca, September 14 City Hospital
Q
Quain Thomas, his son, September 24 St. Peter's Queen Booker, ditto 7 City
Hospital Quin Christina, September 16 Kensington Quin Patrick, ditto 2 City
Hospital Quin William, ditto 6 St. Mary's Quinlain Ann, a child, ditto 15 ditto
R
Rain John, his grand child, September 23 1st Presbyterian Ralston Mrs. wife of
William, October 14 2d ditto Ralston Alexander, August 26 City Hospital Ralston
James, October 20 ditto Ramsay Alexander, his daughter, August 25 Swedes
Rampart Benjamin, September 5 City Hospital Rannels Rebecca, ditto 7 ditto Rape
Nicholas, October 27 ditto Raphune John, his child, ditto 27 German Lutheran
Ray Mrs. September 13 Scots Presbyterian Ray Oliver, ditto 4 St. Mary's Reach
William, ditto 15 City Hospital Read Peter, October 6 ditto Read Elizabeth,
ditto 22 ditto Read Peter, September Bethel Read Peter, his wife, ditto Read
Eleanor, ditto 27 City Hospital Reb Nicholas, his wife, October 13 German
Lutheran Rebel Adam, August 25 St. Mary's Records Mrs. her daughter, September
26 City Hospital Recud Peter, his mother, October 4 ditto Rees George,
September 28 ditto Rees George, ditto 16 ditto Regan William, ditto 11 ditto
Regan Hannah, ditto 11 ditto Regan Abigail, ditto 28 St. Mary's Regins Ann,
October 16 City Hospital Reid Andrew, September ^0 ditto Reid John, August 25
ditto Reese Joseph, September 30 ditto Reihle John, ship-carpenter, ditto 7
Kensington Reihle John, fisherman, his wife, ditto 29 ditto Reineck Jacob,
October 5 City Hospital Reineck Catherina, September German Reformed Relnhart
William, a child, October ditto Reily Mrs. September 5 St. Mary's Reilly Henry,
ditto 30 City Hospital Reiser Martin, his son, August 23 German Lutheran Reik
Frederic, September 18 City Hospital Do. ditto, his wife, ditto 20 ditto
Remington Clement, his child, August 4 Friends Renow --, ditto 19 City Hospital
Rencke Frederick, his wife, September 3 German Lutheran Renshaw Charles, his
child, August 21 St. Paul's Rensey Susan, ditto 30 City Hospital Reynolds
William, ditto 26 ditto Reynolds John, ditto 22 2d Presbyterian Reynolds
Charles, September 6 City Hospital Rible Jacob, ditto 15 ditto Rice Anthony,
ditto 1 ditto Rice Jacob, ditto 4 ditto Rice George, his child, August 23 St.
Paul's Richard Stephen, ditto 24 City Hospital Richard Mary, September 29 ditto
Richards Sarah, her child, October 2 ditto Richards Matthew, ditto 1 ditto
Richards Thomas, ditto 17 ditto Richards John, a child, September 20 St. Mary's
Richards Mark, ditto 30 ditto Richards Gasper, October 10 ditto Richards
Elizabeth, ditto 14 ditto Richards Mrs. her daughter, September 23 City
Hospital Richards George, October 19 ditto Richardson George, August 23 ditto
Rickets Nancy, September 7 ditto Rickets Lucy, October 13 Friends Riddell
James, ditto 2 City Hospital Riddell John, ditto 12 ditto Rider Rachel, August
23 ditto Ridgway John, ditto 22 ditto Ridgway Allen, his wife, October 31
Friends Riebel widow, September German Reformed Ries Miss, October 24 City
Hospital Riferts widow, her daughter, August 21 Kensington Riff Johannes,
October German Reformed Riffits Edward, ditto 3 Free Quakers Rigley Thomas,
August 11 City Hospital Riidesheim Anthony, October 21 Trinity Rine Ann, August
5 Baptists Riol Israel, September 25 Friends Rion Peter Jacobus, ditto 27 City
Hospital Ritchie Francis, ditto 10 ditto Rittenhouse Christian, his child,
August 21 Kensington Ritchie Martha, ditto 29 City Hospital Ritter Henry, a
child, September German Reformed Rittner Philip, ditto 9 German Lutheran River
Bastian, ditto 12 ditto Rivel Catherine, ditto 28 St. Mary's Ditto ditto, ditto
22, ditto Rivel Jacob, ditto 27 ditto Rivel William, ditto 24 ditto Rizer
Christian, October 5 City Hospital Rhea George, ditto 8 ditto Rhea Mrs. ditto
23 ditto Rhoades Sarah, August 26 ditto Rhoades William, his wife, October 30
German Lutheran Ditto ditto, his child, September 16 ditto Robert Isaac, August
8 City Hospital Robertshaur Charles, September 7 ditto Roberts John, ditto 26
ditto Roberts Sarah, daughter of widow, August ^9 St. Peter's Roberts Hannah,
ditto, ditto 21 ditto Roberts Israel, September 21 City Hospital Roberts widow,
her daughter, August 23 St. Peter's Roberts Charlotte, October 4 City Hospital
Roberts widow, her daughter, August 26 St. Peter's Roberts Mary, September 11
Free Quakers Ditto do. ditto 7 Christ Church Roberts Joseph. August 31 City
Hospital Robertson John, September 17 ditto Ditto do. ditto 19 ditto Robeson
Joseph, his son, ditto 4 Swedes Robinet Allen, ditto 7 Kensington Robeson
Joseph, ditto 10 Swedes Robinet Richard, his child, October 24 St. Paul's
Robins John, ditto 14 ditto Robins Thomas, September 4 City Hospital Robinson
widow, her child, ditto 27 ditto Robinson John, October 13 2d Presbyterian
Robinson Ann, September 14 City Hospital Robinson Mr. October 27 1st
Presbyterian Ditto do. his child, September 25 ditto Robison Margaret, ditto 18
City Hospital Robison Ann, August 19 ditto Robison --, opposite Mr. Miercken's,
September 17 ditto Robison Ann, August 29 S. Mary's Robison Joseph, September
10 Swedes Ditto do. his son, ditto 4 ditto Roche John, ditto 24 City Hospital
Roche Edward, ditto 23 St. Mary's Rody Neill, a child, August 16 ditto Rody
Catherine, September 12 ditto Rody Neill, August 19 ditto Roes Anthony,
September 1 Trinity Rogers Hugh, ditto 3 St. Mary's Rogers Francis, ditto 12
City Hospital Rogers Francis, a child, ditto 13 St. Mary's Rolsington Mrs. wife
of John, ditto 8 St. Peter's Ronaldson Andrew, October 11 City Hospital Rose
David, his child, September 9 St. Paul's Ronnion William, ditto 17 City
Hospital Roop John, his son, ditto 2 German Lutheran Rose David, sen. August
(...) St. Paul's Rorhman Conrad, his daughter, September 10 German Lutheran
Ross William, his child, ditto 21 Methodists Ross Sarah, ditto 12 City Hospital
Ross Margaret, ditto 5 ditto Ross William, ditto 22 Methodists Roth Elizabeth,
August 24 German Lutheran Rowen John, October 3 1st Presbyterian Rose David,
his child, September 9 St. Paul's Royston George, September 25 City Hospital
Row Sarah, ditto 29 ditto Ruddach William, ditto 14 1st Presbyterian Rudy
widow, a friend of here is, ditto German Reformed Rugan John, his apprentice,
ditto 20 City Hospital Rule Andrew, September 17 City Hospital Rumford Rebecca,
ditto 28 ditto Rummell Charlotte, October 24 ditto Rummell George, his child,
September 28 German Lutheran Runner Charles, October 5 ditto Rush Elizabeth,
daughter of B. Rush, August 21 1st Presbyterian Rush Nathan, September 25
Kensington Rush Andrew, ditto 30 City Hospital Rush captain Conrad, ditto
German Reformed Russell Margaret, October 6 City Hospital Russell Michael,
ditto 7 ditto Russell David, September 2 ditto Rutchillier Mary, ditto 11 St.
Mary's Rutherford Jane, ditto 24 City Hospital Rutter George, sign-painter,
ditto 25 Friends Rutter Peter, October 16 City Hospital Ryan Patrick, September
23 ditto Rybold John, October 23 Kensington
S.
St. Clair Joseph, September 19 City Hospital St. Ma^ti^ Catherine Adine, ditto
1^ St. Mary's St. Clair Mrs October 10 City Hospital St. Felix Mr. August 21
St. Mary's Salmon David, September 25 City Hospital St. Clair William, ditto 26
ditto Sampson John, ditto 26 Associate Sanamaker George, October 21 City
Hospital Sanford Sarah, wife of William, September 11 Christ Church Sander
Maria, ditto German Reformed Sa^^ders John, October 2 St. Peter's Ditto do
ditto 14 Kensington Ditto William, September 24 City Hospital Ditto Elizabeth,
October 26 ditto Ditto John, d^owned, ditto 24 ditto Savage Joseph, ditto 4
ditto Saver^to George, September 27 Kensington Sanyer Rebecca, her child,
October 19 City Hospital Sayre Francis Bowers, M. D. September 2 Christ Church
S^^^tlin Mary, ditto 14 City Hospital Ditto Abraham, ditto 2 ditto Scattergood
Thomas, his daughter, ditto 4 Friends (...) Conrad, August German Reformed
Scherer Conrad, ditto ditto Schlemmar Catherina, ditto ditto Schmidt George,
September 17 German Lutheran Ditto ditto, his wife, ditto ^7 ditto Ditto
Michael, ditto, August German Reformed Ditto William, his child, ditto 25
German Lutheran Schneider Mr be^ow South-street, Sept. 30 City Hospital Scho^dt
Peter, ditto 21 St. Mary's Schoeffer Bernard, ditto 17 ditto Schoenburgh
Godfrey, October 6 City Hospital Schroeder Frederick, September 22 German
Lutheran Schrupp Mr his son, ditto German Reformed Schuler Peter, son of
Christina, November 3 German Lutheran Ditto Mr. his wife, September 4 ditto
Schull Maria, ditto German Reformed Scott John, a child, August 4 St Mary's Do.
Mrs. September 6 2d Presbyterian Do. Sarah, ditto 1^ ditto Do. Susannah,
October 4 City Hospital Do. John, September 27 3d Presbyterian Do. Benjamin,
ditto 9 City Hospital Do. Stephen, ditto 14 ditto Do. James, ditto 15 ditto Do.
Ann, October 14 ditto Sculthorp James, ^eptember 23 ditto Seahart Hannah, ditto
11 ditto Seargill Hannah, August 29 ditto Seckel George David, September 29
German Lutheran Do. Hannah, ditto 26 City Hospital Do. Rebecca, ditto 28 ditto
Do. Henry, his widow, ditto 23 German Lutheran Seed Mary, ditto 22 City
Hospital Seguin Peter, a child, October 11 St. Mary's Service Ann, September 27
City Hospital Ditto Thomas, a child, ditto 12 1st Presbyterian Ditto John, jun.
ditto 20 ditto Ditto Elizabeth, ditto 14 ditto Servoss Jacob, August 27 2d
ditto Seybert Peter, October 9 German Lutheran Ditto Adam, his daughter, ditto
21 ditto Ditto Peter, his wife, ditto 22 ditto Ditto Margaret, ditto 31 ditto
Ditto Peter, his daughter, September 29 ditto Seyfferheldt Eliza, October 1
City Hospital Ditto Casper, September 23 German Lutheran Ditto Elizabeth, her
child, ditto 27 ditto Seyffert Andrew ditto 30 City Hospital Seyffert Sarah,
ditto 7 ditto Ditto Jacob, August 26 German Lutheran Ditto do. his child, ditto
28 ditto Seyfred Catherine, September 30 Kensington Sewell Clement, August 8
City Hospital Shaddock Hannah, September 24 ditto Shaffer Henry, his wife,
ditto 30 German Lutheran Ditto Jacob, ditto German Reformed Ditto Catherina, a
child, October ditto Ditto Martin, September 2 German Lutheran Ditto do. his
child, ditto 16 ditto Shaffin Norman, ditto 7 City Hospital Shaff^ner Dabney,
ditto 17 ditto Shallus George, ditto German Reformed Ditto Hassenclever, ditto
ditto Shane Mrs. ditto 18 City Hospital Shannon William, October 29 City
Hospital Sharman Stephen, November 8 German Lutheran Sharp Nancy, a black,
October 4 City Hospital Ditto Peter, his daughter, September 29 ditto Ditto
Hannah, ditto 26 ditto Shaw Samuel, ditto 11 ditto Do. do ditto 11 Kensington
Do. --, ditto 16 City Hospital Do. John, October 23 ditto Do Archibald, ditto
22 St. Mary's Shea John, son of Mrs. Walters, October 4 ditto Sheaff Peter, his
son, ditto German Reformed Shearman John, August 16 City Hospital Shell
Elizabeth, November 7 German Lutheran Shellema^ Rachel, September 1 City
Hospital Shemegen Peter, ditto 30 ditto Shenned James, his wife, October 2
Kensington Sheppard widow, her grandchild, September German Reformed Ditto
Ra^hel, ditto 14 City Hospital Ditto Joseph, ditto 28 ditto Ditto Stephen
October 18 ditto Ditto Mrs September German Reformed Ditto, widow of John,
ditto ditto Sheridan Abraham, a child, October ditto Shibely Mr September ditto
Shields John, ditto 5 City Hospital Ditto do. ditto 20 ditto Shilling Caroline,
October 2 ditto Shimer Ann, ditto 1 Trinity Shi^^el Nicholas, September 18 City
Hospital Ditto Frederick, his daughter, August 20 Christ Church Shippen Mr. his
child, October 2 City Hospital Shively Ludwick, his wife, ditto 1 Shmid^
Michael, his wife, August German Reformed Ditto Christina, September ditto
Ditto Michael, a child, October ditto Ditto widow, a child, ditto ditto Ditto
Christopher, ditto ditto Shnider Catherina, September ditto Ditto Jacob,
October ditto Ditto do. his widow, ditto ditto Ditto John, ditto 8 Trinity
Ditto Ludwick, September 14 City Hospital Shober widow, her child, ditto 6 St.
Paul's Ditto ditto, ditto, ditto 15 ditto Shoemaker Eli, August 9 Friends Ditto
Joseph, his child ditto 13 ditto Shook George, September 17 City Hospital Short
Mary, October 3 ditto Shotwell Eden, his daughter, August 31 Friends Ditto do.
September 4 ditto Shrank George, October 7 Kensington Shreier Peter, September
13 German Lutheran Shriner Elizabeth, ditto 25 St. Mary's Shriner George,
September 12 City Hospital Shrum Christopher, ditto 4 ditto Shugher Conrad,
ditto 22 German Lutheran Shuster Andrew, his daughter, August 26 ditto
Shweitzer Mr. September German Reformed Ditto Maria, ditto ditto Ditto John
Gottleib, his daughter, ditto (...) German Lutheran Sillicks John, his
daughter, August 10 Swedes Simeles Michael, a child, September 27 Trinity
Simkins Martha, August 20 Methodists Simmons Conrad, September 29 City Hospital
Simon August, August 14 ditto Ditto Christina, October German Reformed Ditto
John, September 5 German Lutheran Ditto Casper, ditto 15 Kensington Sim --, a
black, ditto 5 City Hospital Simpson John, his wife, ditto German Reformed
Ditto do. ditto 19 City Hospital Ditto Mary, ditto 14 Kensington Sims William,
ditto 11 City Hospital Singleton captain, ditto 10 ditto Ditto Nancy, daughter
of Thomas, August 22 Swedes Sitgreaves Mary, October 9 City Hospital Skates
William, September 27 ditto Skeats Elizabeth, ditto 26 ditto Skerrett Susannah,
October 17 ditto Skinner widow, her daughter, September German Reformed Ditto
William, August ditto Slay Mr. his child, September 26 Swedes Slinghoff Joseph,
ditto 2 German Lutheran Slicker Frederick, ditto 21 City Hospital Slimmer
Maria, October German Reformed Sluyter John, his child, ditto 10 German
Lutheran Ditto ditto his wife, ditto 15 ditto Sloane James, September 25 City
Hospital Small John, August 26 St. Mary's Smiley Henry, October 14 St. Paul's
Ditto John, September 4 City Hospital Ditto Mary, ditto 11 ditto Ditto Samuel,
ditto 4 ditto Smile Joseph, ditto 27 ditto Smith Reuben, August 26 ditto Ditto
Henry, ditto 26 ditto Ditto Thomas, September 6 ditto Ditto James, ditto 22
ditto Ditto William, October 13 ditto Ditto Bernard, ditto 29 ditto Ditto
James, ditto 29 ditto Ditto John, September 4 ditto Ditto do. ditto 24 ditto
Ditto do. ditto 5 ditto Ditto George, ditto 25 ditto Ditto Jacob, ditto 25
ditto Smith Edward, a child, September 28 City Hospital Ditto John, a child,
October 2 ditto Ditto Mary, ditto 1 ditto Ditto widow, corner of Eighth and
Spruce-streets ditto Ditto Catherine, October 4 ditto Ditto Grace, ditto 13
ditto Ditto Ann, September 4 ditto Ditto John, ditto 4 ditto Ditto do. ditto 5
ditto Ditto Sarah, August 18 ditto Ditto John, ditto ^5 St. Mary's Ditto Aaron,
September 21 Friends Ditto Amelia, three of her children, ditto 18 Kensington
Ditto captain Samuel, August ^1 2d Presbyterian Ditto Mr. his child, September
8 St. Paul's Ditto Jacob, ditto 7 Kensington Ditto Henry, October 4 Trinity
Ditto Amelia, ditto 30 Methodists Ditto Jeremiah, ditto 5 ditto Smothers Ralph,
September 30 City Hospital Ditto Henry, October 26 African Church Snell
Matthias, his wife, September 23 City Hospital Snick Mrs. ditto 12 ditto Snyder
Catherine, ditto 26 ditto Ditto John, son of John, ditto 23 St. Peter's Ditto
Elizabeth, ditto 22 Kensington Ditto George, ditto 27 ditto Ditto John, ditto
28 ditto Ditto Matthew, October 8 ditto Ditto Elizabeth, her child, September 9
German Lutheran Ditto Mary Ann, a child, October 27 St. Mary's Ditto George,
August 21 German Lutheran Ditto Casper, his son, September 10 ditto Ditto
Jacob, ditto 9 City Hospital Ditto Valentine, ditto 12 ditto Socundum John,
August 31 ditto Solsey Ace, September 4 ditto Sons Jacob, ditto 30 German
Lutheran Sorg William, October 18 Kensington Do. ditto his wife, ditto 18 ditto
Sork Sarah, August 30 ditto Sower John, September 20 City Hospital Ditto Henry,
his child, ditto 20 German Lutheran Sowerman Martin, his child, ditto 6 ditto
Ditto do. ditto ditto 2 ditto Sowerwalt Lawrence, ditto 3 St. Mary's Ditto
Mary, ditto 22 ditto Ditto Mark, October 26 ditto Speck Louisa, September 27
City Hospital Spongler George his daughter, August 22 1st Presbyterian Spray
Mary, September 10 City Hospital Springer Jacob, ditto 5 ditto Sproul
Alexander, ditto 9 3d Presbyterian Sparhawk John, his child, September 4
Kensington Spurrier John, ditto ^9 Christ Church Sroope Michael, August 31 City
Hospital Stret John, September German Reformed Stafford Mrs. August 24 City
Hospital Ditto James, ditto 25 ditto Ditto Margaret, September 26 ditto Stanley
Johannes, October German Reformed Ditto Thomas, his wife, September 17 St.
Peter's Start Mr. ditto 1 Kensington Staurt Maria, October German Reformed
Staut William, ditto ditto Steel Philip, September 27 City Hospital Do.
Stephen, ditto 28 German Lutheran Steinmetz Casper, ditto 19 ditto Steigmiller
Daniel, ditto 24 City Hospital Stenbach Abraham, ditto 17 ditto Stephens
Thomas, October 3 ditto Ditto Elizabeth, ditto 5 ditto Ditto major, ditto 5
ditto Ditto do. his son, ditto 11 ditto Ditto Mary, August 4 ditto Ditto Henry,
his daughter, ditto 11 Baptists Stercher Justus, September German Reformed
Stevens Christiana, October 29 City Hospital Stewart Sarah, August 26 ditto
Ditto Margaret, ditto 27 ditto Ditto Charles, ditto 27 ditto Ditto ditto,
September 11 ditto Ditto Zachariah, ditto 18 ditto Ditto Mr. clerk in
war-office, ditto 20 ditto Ditto Sarah, ditto 26 ditto Ditto Robert, ditto 30
ditto Ditto Charles, his son, ditto 30 ditto Ditto Alexander, October 1 ditto
Ditto John, ditto 15 ditto Ditto Anne, November 1 ditto Ditto Jane, ditto 5
ditto Ditto Joseph, September 26 ditto Ditto Margaret, October 30 1st
Presbyterian Ditto Mr. his daughter-in-law, ditto 18 Methodists Ditto Mrs.
August 10 Swedes Ditto captain, his child, October 19 3d Presbyterian Ditto
Zachariah, September 16 Baptists Ditto ditto, his widow, ditto 24 ditto Stiff
John, October 3 City Hospital Stiten Christian, August 22 ditto Still Amelia,
September 20 ditto Stille Gustavus, August 20 2d Presbyterian Stiller Margaret,
her child, September 17 German Lutheran Ditto Rebecca, her child, ditto 18
ditto Stock George, ditto 21 City Hospital Stokes James, his daughter, October
15 Christ Church Stone Charles, August 11 City Hospital Ditto Mary, October 1
ditto Stockert William, September 12 City Hospital Stoneburner David, October
11 City Hospital Stoneman Susan, August 6 Free Quakers Stouss George, his
daughter, October 4 City Hospital Stouss Joseph, September ^3 German Lutheran
Stoves Federick, August 31 City Hospital Straten George his child, ditto 4
Kensington Stow Eleanor, November 20 City Hospital Stowesberry Peter, September
20 German Lutheran Strart Henry, his child, August 7 Methodists Stricker
Elizabeth, September 26 City Hospital Stricker captain, ditto German Reformed
Stricker captain, his wife, August ditto Strife Christina, October 2 City
Hospital Strong Margaret, wife of Valentine, September 13 Swedes Stuberfield
William, October 2 City Hospital Stume Francis, August 26 Trinity Sturm widow,
September German Reformed Sturrier Justis, October ditto Stuz widow, ditto 12
German Lutheran Sullentine, his child, ditto 27 City Hospital Sullivan Daniel,
September 23 ditto Sullivan Cornelius, ditto 25 ditto Sullivan Dennis, ditto 18
ditto Summer Henry, August 26 German Lutheran Suter Mr. ditto 13 Kensington
Suter David, September 10 German Lutheran Syttle John, October 2 City Hospital
Sutton Mrs her child, September 27 Kensington Sutton John, his child, August 22
ditto Swain Ebenezer, October 18 Methodists Swain Nezer, son of James,
September 29 Christ Church Swan Stacy, August 23 City Hospital Swan John,
September 18 ditto Swanwick John, August 1 St. Peter's Swartz Sarah, October 18
Trinity Sweeny Miles, September 25 St. Mary's Sweeney Henry, ditto 3 Swedes
Sweitzer Michael, his wife, October 1 German Lutheran Swelbachs Henry, ditto 3
ditto Sykes Jacob, October 14 City Hospital Sylvain Daniel, his child, November
(...) Kensington
T
Taggart Elizabeth, October 18 City Hospital Taggart Mary Ann, September 2
ditto Taggart Robert, October 12 1st Presbyterian Tanner Philip, ditto City
Hospital Tanner Mary, September 29 City Hospital Tanzey Morgan, ditto 7 St
Mary's Taper Benjamin, his child, October 9 Kensington Ditto ditto ditto ditto
25 ditto Tar George, his wife, October 15 Kensington Tarrant Thomas, his child,
September 2 3d Presbyterian Tatton John, ditto 24 City Hospital Tauterman
Philip, October German Reformed Tailor Godfrey, September 27 City Hospital
Tailor Fanny, October 28 ditto Tailor Andrew, August 13 ditto Tailor Francis,
October 31 ditto Tailor Lewis, his child, September 9 Friends Tailor George,
his child, August 15 Kensington Tailor Elizabeth, daughter of John, August 1 2d
Presbyterian Tailor Abigail, September 27 St. Mary's Tailor John, his child,
August 17 German Lutheran Terry Sarah, ditto 29 City Hospital Tharnhill Joseph,
October 28 ditto Thackara John, son of William, August 6 St. Peter's Thibien
John, ditto 25 City Hospital Third John, his wife, September 18 Baptists Thomas
Jane, August 30 African Thomas Catharine, September 21 German Lutheran Thomas
widow, her child, ditto 27 ditto Thomas Elizabeth, November 11 City Hospital
Thomas widow, her son, September 13 3d Presbyterian Thomas Samuel, a black,
August 25 City Hospital Thomas Robert, ditto ditto Thomas Henry, ditto 31 ditto
Thomas John, ditto 16 ditto Thomas --, ditto 22 ditto Thompson Eleanor, October
20 ditto Thompson Mary Ann, August 26 1st Presbyterian Thompson Samuel,
September 22 ditto Thompson John, his child, ditto 28 ditto Thompson Jane,
ditto 4 Christ Church Thompson Peter, ditto 5 Friends Thompson Thomas, ditto 9
ditto Thompson John, of the Indian Queen, ditto 13 2d Presbyterian Thompson
John, son of John, blacksmith, ditto 20 ditto Thompson --, labourer, October 30
Universalists Thompson Thomas, ditto 3 1st Presbyterian Thompson Margaret,
November 4 ditto Thompson Mrs. August 24 City Hospital Thompson Sarah, wife of
captain, October 27 St. Peter's Thorburn James, September 14 City Hospital
Thornton John, his child, October 17 Kensington Thornton Hermanus, September 20
City Hospital Tiepo widow, ditto German Reformed Till John, August 30
Kensington Tillotson Catharine, ditto 15 Free Quakers Tilton Lydia, October 2^
City Hospital Timanus Conrad, his wife, September 3 German Lutheran Tinklemire
Rosannah, ditto 16 City Hospital Tobin David, August 22 St. Mary's Tobin
Eleanor, September 1^ City Hospital Toland Margaret, ditto 24 ditto Tolly Ann,
August 23 ditto Tomlinson Hannah, September 26 City Hospital Toy Jacob, ditto 8
Swedes Transom Jacob, ditto 12 City Hospital Trapp George, ditto 15 ditto
Travers Ann, October 2 ditto Trautwine William, his child, September 26 German
Lutheran Trem Peter, October 19 Trinity Triess John, October 8 German Lutheran
Treseler David, his child, ditto 29 ditto Tribet Simon, September 29 City
Hospital Tribet Simon, October 1 ditto Tribut Simon, his child, September 27
Kensington Trimbles John, October 4 3d Presbyterian Tripolet Jacob, September
German Reformed Trompo Andre, August 24 City Hospital Tro^^e Martin, his child,
August 30 German Lutheran Trumble Francis, September 11 Friends Trumble Hannah,
ditto 7 ditto Trumble Elizabeth, ditto 30 City Hospital Trump Daniel, his son,
October 19 1st Presbyterian Trump Mary, September 18 City Hospital Tryer Peter,
August 26 German Lutheran Tryer widow, September 15 ditto Tully Ann, August 23
St. Mary's Tully William, September 29 ditto Turner Mrs. her child, August 13
3d Presbyterian Turner Ann, September 13 Christ Church Turner Peter, ditto 15
St. Mary's Turner Mary, ditto 30 Swedes Ditto ditto August 18 City Hospital
Turner Margaret, September 14 ditto Tutton Robert, August 20 ditto
V
Vail Wilmas, September 29 City Hospital Valentine Mrs. her child, Valentine,
October 1 ditto Vallance captain Nicholas, August 1^ 3d Presbyterian Vallance
Mrs. October 4 1st Presbyterian Vallance Matthew, August 31 City Hospital Vance
Jacob, September 17 2d Presbyterian Vandergrift Jacob, ditto 2^ City Hospital
Vanderen Elizabeth, October 11 ditto Vanderhuval Frederick, ditto 19 ditto
Vanders^ust Abraham, August 27 ditto Vanderslau^g John, ditto 19 ditto Vandine
Elsy, September 22 ditto Vandines George, a black child, October 10 ditto
Vandive^ Grace, September 5 St. Paul's Vanhorn Benjamin, September 16
Kensington Vanhoven Frederick J^cobus Van Kempen Johannes ^oque, a child,
August 6 St. Mary's Vanleer Dr. his son, October Universalists Van Phul
William, Esquire. September German Reformed Van Phul William, Esquire. his son, ditto
ditto Vanseiver Jacob, his widow, ditto 5 Kensington Varden William, a child,
ditto 11 St. Mary's Varner Sarah, October 14 ditto Vauclery Gabriel, August 13
City Hospital Vaulbach Jacob, October German Reformed Vaughan John, September
20 City Hospital Vegneran Amelia, October 26 St. Mary's Venack Thomas,
September 19 City Hospital Vining Catherine, August 31 ditto Vizer Susannah,
September 21 German Lutheran Voight Henry, ditto 28 Trinity Voight Christian,
ditto 29 ditto Voight Barbara, October 1 ditto Volgrath Mrs. her child, ditto
German Reformed Volkrant Mr. September ditto
W
Waine Thomas, his child, August 17 3d Presbyterian Wainwright Samuel, his
daughter, November 3 Friends Walker Joseph, September 18 ditto Walker Tacy,
ditto 25 ditto Walker James, his child, August 30 Kensington Walker John, his
wife, October 10 ditto Walker John, his child, September 21 St. Mary's Walker
John, corder, ditto 3 Baptists Walker Bridget, August 17 City Hospital Walker
John, his wife, September 5 Baptists Wall Charles, his wife, ditto 8 ditto Do.
ditto, his son, ditto 10 ditto Wallace samuel, October 14 Friends Wallace Mary,
September 7 City Hospital Wallace Robert, his grandchild, ditto 18 1st
Presbyterian Ditto ditto, ditto ditto 2^ ditto Walsh Richard, ditto 4 St.
Mary's Walsh Ann, ditto 22 ditto Walsh Patrick, a child, ditto 28 ditto Walsh
James, ditto 30 City Hospital Walsh Mary, August 29 ditto Walsh Elizabeth,
September 16 ditto Walsh Mary, ditto 6 ditto Weaver Abraham, ditto 11 ditto
Watkins William, ditto 16 ditto Weaver Henry, ditto 16 ditto Weyfenfield
Elizabeth, ditto 10 ditto Walton Sarah, August 26 ditto Walton Samuel, a child,
September 9 Friends Ward Mark, ditto 1 City Hospital Webster --, ditto 17 ditto
Ward Elizabeth, ditto 27 Christ Church Warnek James, ditto 8 City Hospital
Waring Isaac, ditto 22 Friends Warner John, October 26 Friends Waters James,
his child, August 11 ditto Watt Aaron, September 14 City Hospital Watters
James, publisher Weekly Magazine, do. 1 St. Mary's Watkins Sarah, ditto 2 City
Hospital Watson captain, his wife, ditto 9 3d Presbyterian Way George, jun.
August 25 Christ Church Watson Mr. his wife, September German Reformed Way
Jane, ditto 28 Christ Church Wetherill Francis, August 29 City Hospital Weaver
Matthias, September 18 ditto Weber John, his son, ditto German Reformed Ditto
widow, her son, ditto ditto Ditto Jost, ditto ditto Weilds Hannah, ditto 3 City
Hospital Weber Jost, ditto German Reformed Ditto do. his wife, ditto ditto
Weisbach Mary, ditto 25 Kensington Weldon Alexander, his wife, October 12 ditto
Welcome Joseph, September 19 St. Mary's Wells Lydia, ditto 2 City Hospital
Wetterstim Catherina, ditto German Reformed Wells Edward, his daughter, ditto 1
Friends West Thomas, August German Reformed Wheaton Amos, sen. his wife,
September 30 Baptists Wheeler William, October 3 City Hospital Whelan John,
September 9 St. Mary's Warton George, ditto 13 City Hospital White Richard,
ditto 28 ditto White William, his child, ditto 4 3d Presbyterian Ditto ditto,
ditto 14 City Hospital White Mr. ditto 20 3d Presbyterian White Isaac,
ship-carpenter, his sister, ditto 9 Baptists White William, of U. S. frigate,
his daughter, do. 17 Christ Church White Mrs. ditto 11 2d Presbyterian White
Thomas, merchant, ditto 2 Associate Ditto ditto, ditto 12 City Hospital
Whitehead William, ditto 3 ditto Whitehead John, grocer, ditto 2 Scots
Presbyterian Ditto do. his wife, ditto 4 ditto Wild Thomas, August 26 City
Hospital Wicker Ann, ditto 30 ditto Whiteman Stophel, September 12 Kensington
Whitlock John, August 2^ City Hospital Wieseman George, September German
Reformed Wickersham William, ditto 16 Friends Wieler John, his child, ditto
German Reformed Widerspriger John, ditto 4 City Hospital Wieler John, a child,
ditto German Reformed Wild Joseph, his wife, ditto 26 Friends Wild Mrs. August
21 City Hospital Wild Joseph, his son, September 26 Friends Wild Joseph, ditto
27 ditto Wilds Miss, ditto 9 Methodists Wildworth Elizabeth, ditto 30 City
Hospital Wiley Richard, his daughter, Sept. 30 Christ Church Wilkes James,
October 5 City Hospital Will Nancy, ditto German Reformed Wilkins captain, his
daughter, September Universalists Williams David, his wife, ditto 15 Swedes
Williams Christopher, ditto 26 St. Mary's Williams Thomas, November 8 Friends
Williams Robert, his wife, September 20 Swedes Williams Jacob, August 30 City
Hospital Wilkin William, ditto 27 ditto Williams Adam, September 8 ditto
Williams Mary, ditto 11 African Church Williams Henrietta, October 4 City
Hospital Williams Joseph, his daughter, September 30 Friends Williamson Sarah,
(Eastburn) August 26 ditto Willis Mary, widow of Seth, September 22 Friends
Wilson Hugh, ditto 21 3d Presbyterian Wills Mary, August 24 City Hospital
Wilson Hugh, his wife, September 27 3d Presbyterian Wilson --, from
Shippen-street, October 1 ditto Wilson Hugh, his child, October 12 ditto Do.
do. do. ditto 18 ditto Wilson Mr. his child, ditto 5 1st Presbyterian Wilson
George, September 11 City Hospital Wilson Henrietta, ditto 8 St. Peter's Wilson
Mrs. ditto 26 2d Presbyterian Wimer Mr. October 6 Swedes Winkler Frederick, his
wife, August 27 Kensington Winkloe Frederick, ditto 26 City Hospital Winkler
Mary, September 10 Kensington Wind John, a child, August German Reformed Wolf
Michael, September 10 City Hospital Wisdom William, August 28 St. Paul's Wit
Francis, August 25 City Hospital Wood Benjamin, September 6 St. Paul's Wolf
Michael, ditto 7 City Hospital Wood George, August 16 Swedes Wolverton George,
September 8 City Hospital Wood Mary, August 19 ditto Wood William, September 10
ditto Woodside Sarah, ditto 14 ditto Woodward Anthony, October 14 African
Church Wooden Sarah, September 11 City Hospital Woos Mr October 5 ditto Work
Mary, September 2 ditto Works George, ditto 10 ditto Wray Andrew, his daughter,
August 2^ 3d Presbyterian Wray Andrew, his wife, ditto 26 ditto Wright Mary,
September 7 St. Mary's Wright John, ditto 8 ditto Wright Thomas, ditto 9 ditto
Wright William, August 22 Free Quakers Wyet John, ditto 26 Kensington
Y
Yakart Sarah, September 10 City Hospital Yard Sarah, wife of Edward
Universalists Yard Mary, October 13 City Hospital Yard John, September 11 ditto
Yarwood Mary Ann, ditto 28 ditto Yesterday Catherine, October 17 ditto Yeckel
Anthony, August 2 Trinity Yondez Francis, September 21 German Lutheran Yondez
Elizabeth, ditto 23 ditto Yorkson Francis, ditto 8 St. Paul's Yost Justis,
October 13 City Hospital Young William, his wife, ditto 3 3d Presbyterian Young
George, September 30 Baptists Young Catherine, August 28 Trinity Young Jacob,
September 15 ditto Young Francis, ditto 25 ditto Young Ann, ditto 17 ditto
Young Francis, ditto 2 ditto Young widow; August 26 German Lutheran Young
Philip, his child, August 30 ditto Young Philip, October 1 ditto Young
Christian, his wife, ditto 13 ditto Young Daniel, ditto 28 ditto Young
Elizabeth, ditto 26 ditto Young Peter, his daughter, ditto 21 ditto Young
Elizabeth, ditto 26 ditto Young Catherine, ditto 17 City Hospital Young Rogers,
September 25 ditto Young Rogers, ditto 17 ditto
Z
Zellinger Elizabeth, October 21 City Hospital Zean Rebecca, wife of Jonathan,
August 21 Friends Zeller Philip, October German Reformed Zerban Wendel, his
daughter, September 27 German Lutheran Zerban Wandel, innkeeper, ditto German
Reformed Zimmerman John, October ditto Zimmerman George Henry, ditto 16 City
Hospital
Interments of persons whose names are unknown.
AUGUST.
A French child, August 4 St. Mary's A woman from John Peckworth's, ditto 9
Baptist Richard (a black) ditto 13 City Hospital Apprentice of Joseph Wright,
ditto 16 St. Peter's A grown person. ditto 22 Swedes A young male child, ditto
24 ditto Three persons, August 24 City Hospital A twin child from North-Alley,
ditto 25 St. Peter's Adelaid, a child, ditto 26 St. Mary's A grown person,
ditto 26 Swedes Two negro children, ditto 27 City Hospital A woman from Joseph
Clarks, ditto 28 Christ Church Apprentice of John Naglee, ditto 28 German
Lutheran Catherine, from Pear-street, ditto 28 City Hospital Catherine, a grown
person, ditto 30 ditto Two persons from North Water-street, ditto 31 ditto
John, from the Dispensary ditto Apprentice of Daniel Hartung German Reformed A
child ditto
SEPTEMBER.
Elizabeth, from No. 235, South Second-st. Sept. 1 City Hospital Apprentice of
Daniel Cartright, ditto 1 St. Paul's A woman from No 78, Spruce-street, ditto 2
City Hospital A woman found dead on the commons, ditto 2 ditto Robert, from
Water below South-street, ditto 3 ditto Daughter of Mr. Bingham's housekeeper,
ditto 3 St Peter's Polly from Mr. Bingham's, ditto 3 City Hospital Charles,
ditto 3 ditto Thomas (a black), ditto 3 ditto James from No. 93 South
Second-street, ditto 4 ditto A person from Masters' Place, ditto 5 ditto
Charlotte, ditto 5 ditto Apprentice of John Naglee, ditto 5 German Lutheran A
young man from the Dispensary, ditto 6 3d Presbyterian Michael, from
Elbow-Lane, ditto 7 City Hospital Sarah (a black), ditto 8 ditto A drowned man,
ditto 8 ditto A woman from the Pennsylvania Hospital, ditto 9 ditto Mate of a
vessel from German-street, ditto 10 3d Presbyterian A man from Germany, ditto
German Reformed A French child, ditto 12 City Hospital A grown person, ditto 13
ditto A black woman from Mrs. Richards', ditto 14 ditto A child from the
Orphan-house, ditto 15 ditto A person from the Schuylkill tents, ditto 16 ditto
A man from the Almshouse, ditto 7 ditto A woman from ditto, ditto 13 ditto Two
children from ditto, ditto 16 ditto A man from ditto, ditto 17 ditto A mulatto
child from ditto, ditto 18 ditto A child from ditto, ditto 18 ditto A person
from No. 142, North Third-street, ditto 17 ditto A person from the Northern
Liberties, ditto 16 ditto A child from the Orphan-house, ditto 17 ditto Thomas
from Second below Christian-street, ditto 16 ditto A man from Thomas Rhoads',
ditto 17 ditto Kattie, ditto 19 ditto Chloe from Bloody-Lane, ditto 19 ditto
Hannah (a black) ditto 20 ditto A man found dead at No. 171, N. Second-st.
Sept.20 City Hospital Another man found dead at ditto, ditto 21 ditto A child
from the Almshouse, ditto 21 ditto A person from No. 82, North Fourth-st.
ditto 20 ditto A woman, ditto 20 ditto A person from Schuylkill tents, ditto 20
ditto Charlie from the city, ditto 23 ditto A woman from the Almshouse, ditto
23 ditto A woman from the city, ditto 23 ditto A person found dead in
Eighth-street, between Race and Vine, ditto 23 ditto A child from Schuylkill
tents, ditto 22 ditto A woman from the Almshouse, ditto 25 ditto A child found
dead near Potter's field, ditto 25 ditto A person from the city, ditto 25 ditto
A sailor from Humphreys' wharf, ditto 25 ditto A child from the Orphan-House,
ditto 24 ditto Apprentice from Catherine Cooper's, ditto 26 ditto Frances from
Mr. Low's, ditto 26 ditto A child from Schuylkill tents, ditto 26 ditto A
person from the Almshouse, ditto 27 ditto A child from Noble-street, ditto 27
ditto A man from a shallop near the Swedes' church, ditto 27 ditto A man found
dead on the wharf below Mr. Wharton's compting house, ditto 27 ditto A man from
Cherry-Alley, ditto 27 ditto A person from the Orphan-House ditto A soldier
from Pennsylvania Hospital, ditto 27 ditto A woman from Hannah Fritz's, ditto
27 ditto Servant man of George Lesshe^, ditto 27 ditto George (a black boy),
ditto 28 ditto Jeanie, ditto 28 ditto A child from the Almshouse, ditto 29
ditto A child from the Orphan-House, ditto 29 ditto Mary, servant of Mr.
Deanes, ditto 29 ditto A lad from widow Henderson's, ditto 29 ditto Victor, a
French child, September 29 ditto A woman from Anthony Morris', ditto 30 ditto A
grown person, ditto 30 ditto A man from Frankford road, ditto 30 ditto A person
from Schuylkill tents, ditto 30 ditto
OCTOBER.
Peter (a black), October 1 ditto Rossannah (a mullato), ditto 1 ditto A child
from Frankford, ditto A man from the corner of 4th and Plumb-street, do. 1
ditto A child from Schuylkill tents, ditto 1 ditto A child from the
Orphan-House, ditto 2 ditto Apprentice of Jacob Weaver's, ditto 2 Kensington
Apprentice of Valentine Hos^man's, ditto 3 German Lutheran Nancy from Polly
M'Cartey's, ditto 4 City Hospital A child from the Orphan House, ditto 5 ditto
A child from the Almshouse, ditto 3 ditto A man from ditto, ditto 5 ditto A
child from the Alms House, October 5 City Hospital A woman from ditto, ditto 7
(aged 106 years) ditto Two women from ditto ditto 7 ditto A child from ditto,
ditto 9 ditto An old man from ditto, ditto 10 ditto A child from ditto, ditto
13 ditto Hannah from 8th above Chestnut street, ditto 11 ditto A child from
Schuylkill tents, ditto 13 ditto A child from the Orphan-House, ditto 14 ditto
A woman from the city, ditto 13 ditto A woman from the Northern Liberties,
ditto 18 ditto A woman found dead in a house, corner of 8th and Shippen street,
ditto 16 ditto A child from the Almshouse, ditto 20 ditto An apprentice of
William Coats, ditto 2^ ditto Hannah, (a negro) ditto 23 ditto Hannah, (a
black) ditto 20 ditto John, a child, ditto 23 ditto A servant girl of Peter
Och. German Lutheran Robert, from Camptown, ditto 22 City Hospital Woman from
Chales Telghman's, ditto 2^ ditto Jane, (a black) ditto 27 ditto A person from
Masters' place ditto 28 ditto A child from Schuylkill tents, ditto 29 ditto A
child from the Orphan-House, ditto 25 ditto A black woman from the Almshouse,
ditto 27 ditto A child from the Orphan-House, ditto 31 ditto Isaac, from the
Pennsylvania Hospital, ditto
NOVEMBER.
A child from Schuylkill tents, November 1 ditto A woman from the Almshouse,
ditto 1 ditto A man from ditto. ditto 1 ditto An apprentice of Daniel Hartung,
ditto German Reformed A person from John Mearns's, ditto 4 City Hospital
Robert, (a black man) ditto 5 ditto A child from the Orphan House, ditto 2
ditto Ditto ditto, ditto 9 ditto A woman from Schuylkill tents, ditto 3 ditto A
child from ditto, ditto 7 ditto A person from the city. ditto 6 ditto A black
child from Southwark, ditto 15 ditto A woman from the Almshouse, ditto 2 ditto
A child from ditto, ditto 9 ditto Three persons from ditto, ditto 10 ditto A
child from ditto, ditto 15 ditto A black woman from ditto, ditto 15 ditto The
mate of the Aurora, July 27th. A negro girl from the Marine Hospital, July
14th. A person from the ship Nestor, July 29th.
NAMES OMITTED.
Benjamin Jones, June 2 Mark Millar, July 2 John Naglee, pilot, ditto 28 James
Roland, pilot, ditto 29 Hugh Dowel, printer, ditto 29 Free Quakers George
Ralston, ditto 30 Frederick Snyder, August 15 German Reformed John Lincoln,
ditto 2 Sarah Newton. ditto 2 William Adams's son, ditto 4 Free Quakers
Elizabeth Dewalt, ditto 6 German Reformed John Morris's daughter, ditto 7 Free
Quakers Magdalane Bernhart, ditto 9 German Reformed Eliza Crumpfield, ditto 10
ditto John Ash, ditto 11 ditto Solomon Steneman's child, 16 Free Quakers John
Tutton, ditto 20 St. Peter's Joseph Douglass, August William Griffiths,
bookseller, ditto Mr. North, clerk in the war-office, ditto James Stewart's
son, ditto 1st Presbyterian James Dunn, ditto ditto James Wilson, stone-cutter,
ditto ditto Ditto, his wife, ditto ditto David Hampton, stone-cutter, ditto
ditto Widow Gentle, ditto ditto Ditto, her daughter, ditto ditto Mrs
M'Klentick's daughter, ditto ditto George Wilson, baker, ditto ditto Martin
Haws, ditto ditto Mr. Kinnard's son, ditto Universalists Mrs. Kingston's
daughter ditto ditto John Sitgrieves, September 3 Frederick Kammerer, ditto 5
German Lutheran Henry Underwick, ditto 5 Kensington Henry Heineman, ditto 7
German Reformed Widow Mynnich, ditto 17 ditto Mrs. Tailor. ditto 17 City
Hospital Elizabeth Utchell, ditto 21 ditto James Johnston, baker ditto ditto
Mrs. Kerr, wife of James, ditto 1st Presbyterian Thomas Ryan's child, ditto
ditto Alexander Urquhart's child, ditto 2d Presbyterian Mary Fogie, widow,
October 3 Swedes Orpheus Reemer, ditto 4 ditto Edward Yard's wife, October 21
Free Quakers John Gould's widow, ditto 25 ditto Richard Mosely's child, ditto
27 St. Paul's John Merriam's child, ditto 29 Baptist Jacob Stinemeyers, ditto
31 German Lutheran Mathias Baltz German Reformed Ditto, his wife, ditto James
Crawford, printer, City Hospital Margaret Corbet, November 1 Christ Church
David Todd, ditto 2d Presbyterian Edward Carrol, ditto ditto Samuel Chambers,
ditto 15 ditto Alexander Bilsland, ditto ditto Margaret Emery, ditto 4 Moravian
Henry Townsend's child, ditto 5 Baptist John M'Donald, ditto 8 Free Quakers
Isaac Wetherill's son, ditto ditto Captain Reside's son, ditto 26 St. Peter's
In all 3,521 Names.


