EDGAR HUNTLY; OR, MEMOIRS OF A SLEEP-WALKER.

BY THE AUTHOR OF ARTHUR MERVYN, WIELAND, -- ORMOND, etc.

VOL. I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY H. MAXWELL, No. 3 LETITIA COURT, AND SOLD BY THOMAS
DOBSON, ASBURY DICKINS, AND THE PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS.

1799.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE flattering reception that has been given, by the public, to Arthur Mervyn,
has prompted the writer to solicit a continuance of the same favor, and to
offer to the world a new performance.

America has opened new views to the naturalist and politician, but has seldom
furnished themes to the moral painter. That new springs of action, and new
motives to curiosity should operate; that the field of investigation, opened to
us by our own country, should differ essentially from those which exist in
Europe, may be readily conceived. The sources of amusement to the fancy and
instruction to the heart, that are peculiar to ourselves, are equally numerous
and inexhaustible. It is the purpose of this work to profit by some of these
sources; to exhibit a series of adventures, growing out of the condition of our
country, and connected with one of the most common and most wonderful diseases
or affections of the human frame.

One merit the writer may at least claim; that of calling forth the passions
and engaging the sympathy of the reader, by means hitherto unemployed by
preceding authors. Peurile superstition and exploded manners; Gothic castles
and chimeras, are the materials usually employed for this end. The incidents of
Indian hostility, and the perils of the western wilderness, are far more
suitable; and, for a native of America to overlook these, would admit of no
apology. These, therefore, are, in part, the ingredients of this tale, and
these he has been ambitious of depicting in vivid and faithful colors. The
success of his efforts must be estimated by the liberal and candid reader.

C. B. B.

EDGAR HUNTLY; OR, MEMOIRS OF A SLEEP-WALKER.
CHAPTER I.
I SIT down, my friend, to comply with thy request. At length does the
impetuosity of my fears, the transports of my wonder permit me to recollect my
promise and perform it. At length am I somewhat delivered from suspense and
from tremors. At length the drama is brought to an imperfect close, and the
series of events, that absorbed my faculties, that hurried away my attention,
has terminated in repose. Till now, to hold a steadfast pen was impossible; to
disengage my senses from the scene that was passing or approaching; to forbear
to grasp at futurity; to suffer so much thought to wander from the purpose
which engrossed my fears and my hopes, could not be.

Yet am I sure that even now my perturbations are sufficiently stilled for an
employment like this? That the incidents I am going to relate can be recalled
and arranged without indistinctness and confusion? That emotions will not be
re-awakened by my narrative, incompatible with order and coherence? Yet when I
shall be better qualified for this task I know not. Time may take away these
headlong energies, and give me back my ancient sobriety: but this change will
only be effected by weakening my remembrance of these events. In proportion as
I gain power over words, shall I lose dominion over sentiments In proportion as
my tale is deliberate and slow, the incidents and motives which it is designed
to exhibit will be imperfectly revived and obscurely pourtrayed.

O! why art thou away at a time like this. Were thou present, the office to
which my pen is so inadequate would easily be executed by my tongue. Accents
can scarcely be too rapid, or that which words should fail to convey, my looks
and gestures would suffice to communicate. But I know thy coming is impossible.
To leave this spot is equally beyond my power. To keep thee in ignorance of
what has happened would justly offend thee. There is no method of informing
thee except by letter, and this method, must I, therefore, adopt.

How short is the period that has elapsed since thou and I parted, and yet how
full of tumult and dismay has been my soul during that period! What light has
burst upon my ignorance of myself and of mankind! How sudden and enormous the
transition from uncertainty to knowledge! --

But let me recall my thoughts: let me struggle for so much composure as will
permit my pen to trace intelligible characters. Let me place in order the
incidents that are to compose my tale. I need not call on thee to listen. The
fate of Waldegrave was as fertile of torment to thee as to me. His bloody and
mysterious catastrophe equally awakened thy grief, thy revenge, and thy
curiosity. Thou will catch from my story every horror and every sympathy which
it paints. Thou will shudder with my forboding and dissolve with my tears. As
the sister of my friend, and as one who honors me with her affection, thou will share in all my tasks and all my dangers.

You need not be reminded with what reluctance I left you. To reach this place
by evening was impossible, unless I had set out early in the morning, but your
society was too precious not to be enjoyed to the last moment. It was
indispensable to be here on Tuesday, but my duty required no more than that I
should arrive by sunrise on that day. To travel during the night, was
productive of no formidable inconvenience. The air was likely to be frosty and
sharp, but these would not incommode one who walked with speed. A nocturnal
journey in districts so romantic and wild as these, through which lay my road,
was more congenial to my temper than a noonday ramble.

By night-fall I was within ten miles of my uncle's house. As the darkness
increased, and I advanced on my way, my sensations sunk into melancholy. The
scene and the time reminded me of the friend whom I had lost. I recalled his
features, and accents, and gestures, and mused with unutterable feelings on the
circumstances of his death.

My recollections once more plunged me into anguish and perplexity. Once more I
asked, who was his assassin? By what motives could he be impelled to a deed
like this? Waldegrave was pure from all offense. His piety was rapturous. His
benevolence was a stranger to remisness or torpor. All who came within the
sphere of his influence experienced and acknowledged his benign activity. His
friends were few, because his habits were timid and reserved, but the existence
of an enemy was impossible.

I recalled the incidents of our last interview, my importunities that he
should postpone his ill-omened journey till the morning, his inexplicable
obstinacy; his resolution to set out on foot, during a dark and tempestuous
night, and the horrible disaster that befell him.

The first intimation I received of this misfortune, the insanity of vengeance
and grief into which I was hurried, my fruitless searches for the author of
this guilt, my midnight wanderings and reveries beneath the shade of that fatal
Elm, were revived and re-acted. I heard the discharge of the pistol, I
witnessed the alarm of Inglefield, I heard his calls to his servants, and saw
them issue forth, with lights and hasten to the spot whence the sound had
seemed to proceed. I beheld my friend, stretched upon the earth, ghastly with a
mortal wound, alone, with no traces of the slayer visible, no tokens by which
his place of refuge might be sought, the motives of his enmity or his
instruments of mischief might be detected.

I hung over the dying youth, whose insensibility forbade him to recognize his
friend, or unfold the cause of his destruction. I accompanied his remains to
the grave, I tended the sacred spot where he lay, I once more exercised my
penetration and my zeal in pursuit of his assassin. Once more my meditations
and exertions were doomed to be disappointed.

I need not remind thee of what is past. Time and reason seemed to have
dissolved the spell which made me deaf to the dictates of duty and discretion.
Remembrances had ceased to agonize, to urge me to headlong acts, and foster
sanguinary purposes. The gloom was half dispersed and a radiance had succeeded
sweeter than my former joys.

Now, by some unseen concurrence of reflections, my thoughts reverted into some
degree of bitterness. Methought that to ascertain the hand who killed my
friend, was not impossible, and to punish the crime was just. That to forbear
inquiry or withold punishment was to violate my duty to my God and to mankind.
The impulse was gradually awakened that bade me once more to seek the Elm; once
more to explore the ground; to scrutinize its trunk. What could I expect to
find? Had it not been an hundred times examined? Had I not extended my search
to the neighboring groves and precipices? Had I not pored upon the brooks, and
pryed into the pits and hollows, that were adjacent to the scene of blood?

Lately I had viewed this conduct with shame and regret; but in the present
state of my mind, it assumed the appearance of conformity with prudence, and I
felt myself irresistably prompted to repeat my search. Some time had elapsed
since my departure from this district. Time enough for momentous changes to
occur. Expedients that formerly were useless, might now lead instantaneously to
the end which I sought. The tree which had formerly been shunned by the
criminal, might, in the absence of the avenger of blood, be incautiously
approached. Thoughtless or fearless of my return, it was possible that he
might, at this moment, be detected hovering near the scene of his offenses.

Nothing can be pleaded in extenuation of this relapse into folly. My return,
after an absence of some duration, into the scene of these transactions and
sufferings, the time of night, the glimmering of the stars, the obscurity in
which external objects were wrapped, and which, consequently, did not draw my
attention from the images of fancy, may, in some degree, account for the
revival of those sentiments and resolutions which immediately succeeded the
death of Waldegrave, and which, during my visit to you, had been suspended.

You know the situation of the Elm, in the midst of a private road, on the
verge of Norwalk, near the habitation of Inglefield, but three miles from my
uncle's house. It was now my intention to visit it. The road in which I was
traveling, led a different way. It was requisite to leave it, therefore, and
make a circuit through meadows and over steeps. My journey would, by these
means, be considerably prolonged, but on that head I was indifferent, or
rather, considering how far the night had already advanced, it was desirable
not to reach home till the dawn.

I proceeded in this new direction with speed. Time, however, was allowed for
my impetuosities to subside, and for sober thoughts to take place. Still I
persisted in this path. To linger a few moments in this shade; to ponder on
objects connected with events so momentous to my happiness, promised me a
mournful satisfaction. I was familiar with the way, though trackless and
intricate, and I climbed the steeps, crept through the brambles, leapt the
rivulets and fences with undeviating aim, till at length I reached the craggy
and obscure path, which led to Inglefield's house.

In a short time, I descried through the dusk the wide-spread branches of the
Elm. This tree, however faintly seen, cannot be mistaken for another. The
remarkable bulk and shape of its trunk, its position in the midst of the way,
its branches spreading into an ample circumference, made it conspicuous from
afar. My pulse throbbed as I approached it.

My eyes were eagerly bent to discover the trunk and the area beneath the
shade. These, as I approached, gradually became visible. The trunk was not the
only thing which appeared in view. Somewhat else, which made itself
distinguishable by its motions, was likewise noted. I faultered and stopped.

To a casual observer this appearance would have been unnoticed. To me, it
could not but possess a powerful significance. All my surmises and suspicions,
instantly returned. This apparition was human, it was connected with the fate
of Waldegrave, it led to a disclosure of the author of that fate. What was I to
do? To approach unwarily would alarm the person. Instant flight would set him
beyond discovery and reach.

I walked softly to the road-side. The ground was covered with rocky masses,
scattered among shrub-oaks and dwarf-cedars, emblems of its sterile and
uncultivated state. Among these it was possible to elude observation and yet
approach near enough to gain an accurate view of this being.

At this time, the atmosphere was somewhat illuminated by the moon, which,
though it had already set, was yet so near the horizon, as to benefit me by its
light. The shape of a man, tall and robust, was now distinguished. Repeated and
closer scrutiny enabled me to perceive that he was employed in digging the
earth. Something like flannel was wrapped round his waist and covered his lower
limbs. The rest of his frame was naked. I did not recognize in him any one whom
I knew.

A figure, robust and strange, and half naked, to be thus employed, at this
hour and place, was calculated to rouse up my whole soul. His occupation was
mysterious and obscure. Was it a grave that he was digging? Was his purpose to
explore or to hide? Was it proper to watch him at a distance, unobserved and in
silence, or to rush upon him and extort from him by violence or menaces, an
explanation of the scene?

Before my resolution was formed, he ceased to dig. He cast aside his spade and
sat down in the pit that he had dug. He seemed wrapped in meditation; but the
pause was short, and succeeded by sobs, at first low, and at wide intervals,
but presently louder and more vehement. Sorely charged was indeed that heart
whence flowed these tokens of sorrow. Never did I witness a scene of such
mighty anguish, such heart-bursting grief.

What should I think? I was suspended in astonishment. Every sentiment, at
length, yielded to my sympathy Every new accent of the mourner struck upon my
heart with additional force, and tears found their way spontaneously to my
eyes. I left the spot where I stood, and advanced within the verge of the
shade. My caution had forsaken me, and instead of one whom it was duty to
persecute, I beheld, in this man, nothing but an object of compassion.

My pace was checked by his suddenly ceasing to lament. He snatched the spade,
and rising on his feet began to cover up the pit with the utmost diligence. He
seemed aware of my presence, and desirous of hiding something from my
inspection. I was prompted to advance nearer and hold his hand, but my
uncertainty as to his character and views, the abruptness with which I had been
ushered into this scene, made me still hesitate; but though I hesitated to
advance, there was nothing to hinder me from calling.

What, ho! said I. Who is there? What are you doing?

He stopped, the spade fell from his hand, he looked up and bent forward his face
toward the spot where I stood. An interview and explanation were now methought
unavoidable. I mustered up my courage to confront and interrogate this being.

He continued for a minute in his gazing and listening attitude. Where I stood
I could not fail of being seen, and yet he acted as if he saw nothing. Again he
betook himself to his spade, and proceeded with new diligence to fill up the
pit. This demeanor confounded and bewildered me. I had no power but to stand
and silently gaze upon his motions.

The pit being filled, he once more sat upon the ground, and resigned himself
to weeping and sighs with more vehemence than before. In a short time the fit
seemed to have passed. He rose, seized the spade, and advanced to the spot
where I stood.

Again I made preparation as for an interview which could not but take place.
He passed me, however, without appearing to notice my existence. He came so
near as almost to brush my arm, yet turned not his head to either side. My
nearer view of him, made his brawny arms and lofty stature more conspicuous;
but his imperfect dress, the dimness of the light, and the confusion of my own
thoughts, hindered me from discerning his features. He proceeded with a few
quick steps, along the road, but presently darted to one side and disappeared
among the rocks and bushes.

My eye followed him as long as he was visible, but my feet were rooted to the
spot. My musing was rapid and incongruous. It could not fail to terminate in
one conjecture, that this person was asleep. Such instances were not unknown to
me, through the medium of conversation and books. Never, indeed, had it fallen
under my own observation till now, and now it was conspicuous and environed
with all that could give edge to suspicion, and vigor to inquiry. To stand
here was no longer of use, and I turned my steps toward my uncle's habitation.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER II.
I HAD food enough for the longest contemplation. My steps partook, as usual,
of the vehemence of my thoughts, and I reached my uncle's gate before I
believed myself to have lost sight of the Elm. I looked up and discovered the
well-known habitation. I could not endure that my reflections should so
speedily be interrupted. I, therefore, passed the gate, and stopped not till I
had reached a neighboring summit, crowned with chesnut-oaks and poplars.

Here I more deliberately reviewed the incidents that had just occurred. The
inference was just, that the man, half-clothed and digging, was a sleeper: But
what was the cause of this morbid activity? What was the mournful vision that
dissolved him in tears, and extorted from him tokens of inconsolable distress?
What did he seek, or what endeavor to conceal in this fatal spot? The
incapacity of sound sleep denotes a mind sorely wounded. It is thus that
atrocious criminals denote the possession of some dreadful secret. The
thoughts, which considerations of safety enables them to suppress or disguise
during wakefulness, operate without impediment, and exhibit their genuine
effects, when the notices of sense are partly excluded, and they are shut out
from a knowledge of their entire condition.

This is the perpetrator of some nefareous deed. What but the murder of
Waldegrave could direct his steps hither? His employment was part of some
fantastic drama in which his mind was busy. To comprehend it, demands
penetration into the recesses of his soul. But one thing is sure; an incoherent
conception of his concern in that transaction, bewitches him hither. This it is
that deluges his heart with bitterness and supplies him with ever-flowing tears.

But whence comes he? He does not start from the bosom of the earth, or hide
himself in airy distance. He must have a name and a terrestrial habitation. It
cannot be at an immeasurable distance from the haunted Elm. Inglefield's house
is the nearest. This may be one of its inhabitants. I did not recognize his
features, but this was owing to the dusky atmosphere and to the singularity of
his garb. Inglefield has two servants, one of whom was a native of this
district, simple, guileless and incapable of any act of violence. He was,
moreover devoutly attached to his sect. He could not be the criminal.

The other was a person of a very different cast. He was an emigrant from
Ireland, and had been six months in the family of my friend. He was a pattern
of sobriety and gentleness. His mind was superior to his situation. His natural
endowments were strong, and had enjoyed all the advantage of cultivation. His
demeanor was grave, and thoughtful, and compassionate. He appeared not
untinctured with religion, but his devotion, though unostentatious, was of a
melancholy tenor.

There was nothing in the first view of his character calculated to engender
suspicion. The neighborhood was populous. But as I conned over the catalogue,
I perceived that the only foreigner among us was Clithero. Our scheme was, for
the most part, a patriarchal one. Each farmer was surrounded by his sons and
kinsmen. This was an exception to the rule. Clithero was a stranger, whose
adventures and character, previously to his coming hither, were unknown to us.
The Elm was surrounded by his master's domains. An actor there must be, and no
one was equally questionable.

The more I revolved the pensive and reserved deportment of this man, the
ignorance in which we were placed respecting his former situation, his possible
motives for abandoning his country and choosing a station so much below the
standard of his intellectual seize, the stronger my suspicions became.
Formerly, when occupied with conjectures relative to the same topic, the image
of this man did not fail to occur; but the seeming harmlessness of his ordinary
conduct, had raised him to a level with others, and placed him equally beyond
the reach of suspicion. I did not, till now, advert to the recentness of his
appearance among us, and to the obscurity that hung over his origin and past
life. But now these considerations appeared so highly momentous, as almost to
decide the question of his guilt.

But how were these doubts to be changed into absolute certainty. Henceforth
this man was to become the subject of my scrutiny. I was to gain all the
knowledge, respecting him, which those with whom he lived, and were the
perpetual witnesses of his actions, could impart. For this end I was to make
minute inquiries, and to put seasonable interrogatories. From this conduct I
promised myself an ultimate solution of my doubts.

I acquiesced in this view of things with considerable satisfaction. It seemed
as if the maze was no longer inscrutable. It would be quickly discovered who
were the agents and instigators of the murder of my friend.

But it suddenly occurred to me For what purpose shall I prosecute this search?
What benefit am I to reap from this discovery? How shall I demean myself when
the criminal is detected? I was not insensible, at that moment, of the impulses
of vengeance, but they were transient. I detested the sanguinary resolutions
that I had once formed. Yet I was fearful of the effects of my hasty rage, and
dreaded an encounter, in consequence of which, I might rush into evils which no
time could repair, nor penitence expiate.

But why, said I, should it be impossible to arm myself with firmness? If
forbearance be the dictate of wisdom, cannot it be so deeply engraven on my
mind as to defy all temptation, and be proof against the most abrupt surprise.
My late experience has been of use to me. It has shown me my weakness and my
strength. Having found my ancient fortifications insufficient to withstand the
enemy, what should I learn from thence but that it becomes me to strengthen and
enlarge them.

No caution indeed can hinder the experiment from being hazardous. Is it wise
to undertake experiments by which nothing can be gained, and much may be lost?
Curiosity is vicious, if undisciplined by reason, and inconducive to benefit.

I was not, however, to be diverted from my purpose. Curiosity, like virtue, is
its own reward. Knowledge is of value for its own sake, and pleasure is annexed
to the acquisition, without regard to any thing beyond. It is precious even
when disconnected with moral inducements and heartfelt sympathies, but the
knowledge which I sought by its union with these was calculated to excite the
most complex and fiery sentiment in my bosom.

Hours were employed in revolving these thoughts. At length I began to be
sensible of fatigue, and returning home, explored the way to my chamber without
molesting the repose of the family. You know that our doors are always
unfastened, and are accessible at all hours of the night.

My slumbers were imperfect, and I rejoiced when the morning light permitted me
to resume my meditations. The day glided away, I scarcely know how, and as I
had rejoiced at the return of morning, I now hailed, with pleasure, the
approach of night.

My uncle and sisters having retired, I betook myself, instead of following
their example, to the Chesnut-hill. Concealed among its rocks, or gazing at the
prospect, which stretched so far and so wide around it, my fancy has always
been accustomed to derive its highest enjoyment from this spot. I found myself
again at leisure to recall the scene which I had witnessed during the last
night, to imagine its connection with the fate of Waldegrave, and to plan the
means of discovering the secret that was hidden under these appearances.

Shortly, I began to feel insupportable disquiet at the thoughts of postponing
this discovery. Wiles and stratagems were practicable, but they were tedious
and of dubious success. Why should I proceed like a plotter? Do I intend the
injury of this person? A generous purpose will surely excuse me from descending
to artifices? There are two modes of drawing forth the secrets of another, by
open and direct means and by circuitous and indirect. Why scruple to adopt the
former mode? Why not demand a conference, and state my doubts, and demand a
solution of them, in a manner worthy of a beneficent purpose? Why not hasten to
the spot? He may be, at this moment, mysteriously occupied under this shade. I
may note his behavior; I may ascertain his person, if not by the features that
belong to him, yet by tracing his footsteps when he departs, and pursuing him
to his retreats.

I embraced the scheme, which was thus suggested, with eagerness. I threw
myself, with headlong speed, down the hill and pursued my way to the Elm. As I
approached the tree, my palpitations increased, though my pace slackened. I
looked forward with an anxious glance. The trunk of the tree was hidden in the
deepest shade. I advanced close up to it. No one was visible, but I was not
discouraged. The hour of his coming was, perhaps, not arrived. I took my
station at a small distance, beside a fence, on the right hand.

An hour elapsed before my eyes lighted on the object of which they were in
search. My previous observation had been roving from one quarter to another. At
last, it dwelt upon the tree. The person whom I before described was seated on
the ground. I had not perceived him before, and the means by which he placed
himself in this situation had escaped my notice. He seemed like one, whom an
effort of will, without the exercise of locomotion, had transported hither, or
made visible. His state of disarray, and the darkness that shrouded him,
prevented me, as before, from distinguishing any peculiarities in his figure or
countenance.

I continued watchful and mute. The appearances already described took place,
on this occasion, except the circumstance of digging in the earth. He sat
musing for a while, then burst into sighs and lamentations.

These being exhausted, he rose to depart. He stalked away with a solemn and
deliberate pace. I resolved to tread, as closely as possible, in his footsteps,
and not to lose sight of him till the termination of his career.

Contrary to my expectation, he went in a direction opposite to that which led
to Inglefield's. Presently, he stopped at bars, which he cautiously removed,
and, when he had passed through them, as deliberately replaced. He then
proceeded along an obscure path, which led across stubble fields, to a wood.
The path continued through the wood, but he quickly struck out of it, and made
his way, seemingly at random, through a most perplexing undergrowth of bushes
and briars.

I was, at first, fearful that the noise, which I made behind him, in trampling
down the thicket, would alarm him; but he regarded it not. The way that he had
selected, was always difficult; sometimes considerable force was requisite to
beat down obstacles; sometimes, it led into a deep glen, the sides of which
were so steep as scarcely to afford a footing; sometimes, into fens, from which
some exertions were necessary to extricate the feet, and sometimes, through
rivulets, of which the water rose to the middle.

For some time I felt no abatement of my speed or my resolution. I thought I
might proceed, without fear, through breaks and dells, which my guide was able
to penetrate. He was perpetually changing his direction. I could form no just
opinion as to my situation or distance from the place at which we had set out

I began at length to be weary. A suspicion, likewise, suggested itself to my
mind, whether my guide did not perceive that he was followed, and thus
prolonged his journey in order to fatigue or elude his pursuer. I was
determined, however, to baffle his design. Though the air was frosty, my limbs
were bedewed with sweat and my joints were relaxed with toil, but I was
obstinately bent upon proceeding.

At length a new idea occurred to me. On finding me indefatigable in pursuit,
this person might resort to more atrocious methods of concealment. But what had
I to fear? It was sufficient to be upon my guard. Man to man, I needed not to
dread his encounter.

We, at last, arrived at the verge of a considerable precipice. He kept along
the edge. From this height, a dreary vale was discoverable, embarrassed with
the leafless stocks of bushes, and encumbered with rugged and pointed rocks*
This scene reminded me of my situation. The desert tract called Nor-walk, which
I have often mentioned to you, my curiosity had formerly induced me to traverse
in various directions. It was in the highest degree, rugged, picturesque and
wild. This vale, though I had never before viewed it by the glimpses of the
moon, suggested the belief that I had visited it before. Such an one I knew
belonged to this uncultivated region. If this opinion were true, we were at no
inconsiderable distance from Inglefield's habitation. Where, said I, is this
singular career to terminate?

Though occupied with these reflections, I did not slacken my pursuit. The
stranger kept along the verge of the cliff, which gradually declined till it
terminated in the valley. He then plunged into its deepest thickets. In a
quarter of an hour he stopped under a projecture of the rock which formed the
opposite side of the vale. He then proceeded to remove the stalks, which, as I
immediately perceived, concealed the mouth of a cavern. He plunged into the
darkness, and in a few moments, his steps were heard no more!

Hitherto my courage had supported me, but here it failed. Was this person an
assassin, who was acquainted with the windings of the grotto, and who would
take advantage of the dark, to execute his vengeance upon me, who had dared to
pursue him to these forlorn retreats; or was he maniac, or walker in his sleep?
Whichever supposition were true, it would be rash in me to follow him. Besides,
he could not long remain in these darksome recesses, unless some fatal accident
should overtake him.

I seated myself at the mouth of the cave, determined patiently to wait till he
should think proper to emerge. This opportunity of rest was exceedingly
acceptable after so toilsome a pilgrimage. My pulse began to beat more slowly,
and the moisture that incommoded me ceased to flow. The coolness which, for a
little time, was delicious, presently increased to shivering, and I found it
necessary to change my posture, in order to preserve my blood from congealing.

After I had formed a path before the cavern's mouth, by the removal of
obstructions, I employed myself in walking to and fro. In this situation I saw
the moon gradually decline to the horizon, and, at length, disappear. I marked
the deepenings of the shade, and the mutations which every object successively
underwent. The vale was narrow, and hemmed in on all sides by lofty and
precipitous cliffs. The gloom deepened as the moon declined, and the faintness
of starlight was all that preserved my senses from being useless to my own
guidance.

I drew nearer the cleft at which this mysterious personage had entered. I
stretched my hands before it, determined that he should not emerge from his den
without my notice. His steps would, necessarily, communicate the tidings of his
approach. They could not move without a noise which would be echoed to, on all
sides, by the abruptnesses by which this valley was surrounded. Here, then, I
continued till the day began to dawn, in momentary expectation of the
stranger's reappearance.

My attention was at length excited by a sound that seemed to issue from the
cave. I imagined that the sleeper was returning, and prepared therefore to
seize him. I blamed myself for neglecting the opportunities that had already
been afforded, and was determined that another should not escape. My eyes were
fixed upon the entrance. The rustling increased, and presently an animal leapt
forth, of what kind I was unable to discover. Heart-struck by this
disappointment, but not discouraged, I continued to watch, but in vain. The day
was advancing apace. At length the sun arose, and its beams glistened on the
edges of the cliffs above, whose sapless stalks and rugged masses were covered
with hoar-frost. I began to despair of success, but was unwilling to depart,
until it was no longer possible to hope for the return of this extraordinary
personage. Whether he had been swallowed up by some of the abysses of this
grotto, or lurked near the entrance, waiting my departure, or had made his exit
at another and distant aperture, was unknown to me.

Exhausted and discouraged, I prepared, at length, to return. It was easy to
find my way out of this wilderness by going forward in one direction,
regardless of impediments and cross-paths. My absence I believed to have
occasioned no alarm to my family, since they knew not of my intention to spend
the night abroad. Thus unsatisfactorily terminated this night's adventures.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER III.
THE ensuing day was spent, partly in sleep, and partly in languor and
disquietude. I incessantly ruminated on the incidents of the last night. The
scheme that I had formed was defeated. Was it likely that this unknown person
would repeat his midnight visits to the Elm? If he did, and could again be
discovered, should I resolve to undertake a new pursuit, which might terminate
abortively, or in some signal disaster? But what proof had I that the same rout
would be taken, and that he would again inter himself alive in the same spot?
Or, if he did, since his reappearance would sufficiently prove that the cavern
was not dangerous, and that he who should adventure in, might hope to come out
again in safety, why not enter it after him? What could be the inducements of
this person to betake himself to subterranean retreats? The basis of all this
region is limestone; a substance that eminently abounds in rifts and cavities.
These, by the gradual decay of their cementing parts, frequently make their
appearance in spots where they might have been least expected. My attention has
often been excited by the hollow sound which was produced by my casual
footsteps, and which showed me that I trod upon the roof of caverns. A
mountain-cave and the rumbling of an unseen torrent, are appendages of this
scene, dear to my youthful imagination. Many of romantic structure were found
within the precincts of Nor-walk.

These I had industriously sought out; but this had hitherto escaped my
observation, and I formed the resolution of sometime exploring it. At present I
determined to revisit the Elm, and dig in the spot where this person had been
employed in a similar way. It might be that something was here deposited which
might exhibit this transaction in a new light. At the suitable hour, on the
ensuing night, I took my former stand. The person again appeared. My intention
to dig was to be carried into effect on condition of his absence, and was,
consequently, frustrated.

Instead of rushing on him, and breaking at once the spell by which his senses
were bound, I concluded, contrary to my first design, to wait his departure,
and allow myself to be conducted whithersoever he pleased. The track into which
he now led me was different from the former one. It was a maze, oblique,
circuitous, upward and downward, in a degree which only could take place in a
region so remarkably irregular in surface, so abounding with hillocks and
steeps, and pits and brooks as Salsbury. It seemed to be the sole end of his
labors to bewilder or fatigue his pursuer, to pierce into the deepest
thickets, to plunge into the darkest cavities, to ascend the most difficult
heights, and approach the slippery and tremulous verge of the dizziest
precipices.

I disdained to be outstripped in this career. All dangers were overlooked, and
all difficulties defied. I plunged into obscurities, and clambered over
obstacles, from which, in a different state of mind, and with a different
object of pursuit, I should have recoiled with invincible timidity. When the
scene had passed, I could not review the perils I had undergone without
shuddering.

At length my conductor struck into a path which, compared with the ruggedness
of that which we had lately trodden, was easy and smooth. This track led us to
the skirt of the wilderness, and at no long time we reached an open field, when
a dwelling appeared, at a small distance, which I speedily recognized to be
that belonging to Inglefield. I now anticipated the fulfillment of my
predictions. My conductor directed his steps toward the barn, into which he
entered by a small door.

How were my doubts removed! This was no other than Clithero Edny. There was
nothing in his appearance incompatible with this conclusion. He and his fellow
servant occupied an apartment in the barn as a lodging room. This arduous
purpose was accomplished, and I retired to the shelter of a neighboring shed,
not so much to repose myself after the fatigues of my extraordinary journey, as
to devise farther expedients.

Nothing now remained but to take Clithero to task; to repeat to him the
observations of the two last nights; to unfold to him my conjectures and
suspicions; to convince him of the rectitude of my intentions, and to extort
from him a disclosure of all the circumstances connected with the death of
Waldegrave, which it was in his power to communicate.

In order to obtain a conference, I resolved to invite him to my uncle's, to
perform a certain piece of work for me under my own eyes. He would, of course,
spend the night with us, and in the evening I would make an opportunity of
entering into conversation with him.

A period of the deepest deliberation was necessary to qualify myself for
performing suitably my part in this projected interview. I attended to the
feelings that were suggested in this new state of my knowledge. I found reason
to confide in my newly acquired equanimity. Remorse, said I, is an ample and
proper expiation for all offenses. What does vengeance desire but to inflict
misery? If misery come, its desires are accomplished. It is only the obdurate
and exulting criminal that is worthy of our indignation. It is common for pity
to succeed the bitterest suggestions of resentment. If the vengeful mind be
delighted with the spectacle of woes of its own contriving, at least its canine
hunger is appeased, and thenceforth, its hands are inactive.

On the evening of the next day, I paid a visit to Inglefield. I wished to
impart to him the discoveries that I had made, and to listen to his reflections
on the subject. I likewise desired to obtain all possible information from the
family respecting the conduct of Clithero.

My friend received me with his usual kindness. Thou art no stranger to his
character; thou know with what paternal affection I have ever been regarded
by this old man; with what solicitude the wanderings of my reason and my freaks
of passion, have been noted and corrected by him. Thou know his activity to
save the life of thy brother, and the hours that have been spent by him, in
aiding my conjectures as to the cause of his death, and inculcating the lessons
of penitence and duty.

The topics which could not but occur at such a meeting, were quickly
discussed, and I hastily proceeded to that subject which was nearest my heart.
I related the adventures of the two preceding nights, and mentioned the
inference to which they irresistably led.

He said that this inference coincided with suspicions he had formed, since our
last interview, in consequence of certain communications from his housekeeper.
It seems the character of Clithero, had, from the first, exercised the
inquisitiveness of this old lady. She had carefully marked his musing and
melancholy deportment. She had tried innumerable expedients for obtaining a
knowledge of his past life, and particularly of his motives for coming to
America. These expedients, however profound and addressful, had failed. He took
no pains to elude them. He contented himself with turning a deaf ear to all
indirect allusions and hints, and, when more explicitly questioned, with simply
declaring that he had nothing to communicate worthy of her notice.

During the day he was a sober and diligent workman. His evenings he spent in
incommunicative silence. On sundays, he always rambled away, no one knew
whither, and without a companion. I have already observed that he and his
fellow servant occupied the same apartment in the barn. This circumstance was
not unattended to by Miss Inglefield. The name of Clithero's companion was
Ambrose. This man was copiously interrogated by his mistress, and she found him
by no means so refractory as the other.

Ambrose, in his tedious and confused way, related that soon after Clithero and
he had become bed-fellows, the former was considerably disturbed by
restlessness and talking in his sleep. His discourse was incoherent. It was
generally in the tone of expostulation, and appeared to be entreating to be
saved from some great injury. Such phrases as these "have pity; "have mercy,"
were frequently intermingled with groans, and accompanied with weeping.
Sometimes he seemed to be holding conferences with some one, who was making him
considerable offers on condition of his performing some dangerous service. What
he said, in his own person, and in answer to his imaginary tempter, testified
the utmost reluctance.

Ambrose had no curiosity on the subject. As this interruption prevented him at
first from sleeping, it was his custom to put an end to the dialogue, by
awakening his companion, who betrayed tokens of great alarm and dejection, on
discovering how he had been employed, he would solicitously inquire what were
the words that he had uttered; but Ambrose's report was seldom satisfactory,
because he had attended to them but little, and because he begrudged every
moment in which he was deprived of his accustomed repose.

Whether Clithero had ceased from this practice, or habit had reconciled his
companion to the sounds, they no longer occasioned any interruption to his
slumber.

No one appeared more shocked than he at the death of Waldegrave. after this
event his dejection suddenly increased. This symptom was observed by the
family, but none but the housekeeper took the trouble to notice it to him, or
build conjectures on the incident. During nights, however, Ambrose experienced
a renewal of his ancient disturbances. He remarked that Clithero, one night,
had disappeared from his side. Ambrose's range of reflection was extremely
narrow. Quickly falling asleep, and finding his companion beside him when he
awoke, he dismissed it from his mind.

On several ensuing nights he awakened in like manner, and always found his
companion's place empty. The repetition of so strange an incident at length
incited him to mention it to Clithero. The latter was confounded at this
intelligence. He questioned Ambrose with great anxiety as to the particulars of
this event, but he could gain no satisfaction from the stupid in attention of
the other. From this time there was a visible augmentation of his sadness. His
fits of taciturnity became more obstinate, and a deeper gloom sat upon his brow.

There was one other circumstance, of particular importance, mentioned by the
housekeeper. One evening some one on horseback, stopped at this gate. He
rattled at the gate, with an air of authority, in token of his desire that some
one would come from the house. Miss Inglefield was employed in the kitchen,
from a window of which she perceived who it was that made the signal. Clithero
happened, at the same moment, to be employed near her. She, therefore, desired
him to go and see whom the stranger wanted. He laid aside his work and went.
The conference lasted above five minutes. The length of it excited in her a
faint degree of surprise, inducing her to leave her employment, and pay an
unintermitted attention to the scene. There was nothing, however, but its
duration that rendered it remarkable.

Clithero at length entered, and the traveller proceeded. The countenance of
the former betrayed a degree of perturbation which she had never witnessed
before. The muscles of his face was distorted and tremulous. He immediately sat
down to his work, but he seemed, for some time, to have lost all power over his
limbs. He struggled to avoid the sight of the lady, and his gestures,
irresolute, or misdirected, betokened the deepest dismay. After some time, he
recovered, in some degree, his self-possession; but, while the object was
viewed through a new medium, and the change existed only in the imagination of
the observer, a change was certainly discovered.

These circumstances were related to me by Inglefield and corroborated by his
housekeeper. One consequence inevitably flowed from them. The sleep-walker, he
who had led me through so devious a tract, was no other than Clithero. There
was, likewise, a strong relation between this person and him who stopped at the
gate. What was the subject of discourse between them? In answer to Miss
Inglefield's interrogatories, he merely said that the traveller inquired
whither the road led, which at a small distance forward, struck out of the
principal one. Considering the length of the interview it was not likely that
this was the only topic.

My determination to confer with him in private acquired new force from these
reflections. Inglefield assented to my proposal. His own affairs would permit
the absence of his servant for one day. I saw no necessity for delay, and
immediately made my request to Clithero. I was fashioning an implement, I told
him, with respect to which I could not wholly depend upon my own skill. I was
acquainted with the dexterity of his contrivances, and the neatness of his
workmanship. He readily consented to assist me on this occasion. Next day he
came. Contrary to my expectation, he prepared to return home in the evening. I
urged him to spend the night with us; but no: It was equally convenient, and
more agreeable to him, to return.

I was not aware of this resolution. I might, indeed, have foreseen, that,
being conscious of his infirmity, he would desire to avoid the scrutiny of
strangers. I was painfully disconcerted, but it occurred to me, that the best
that could be done, was to bear him company, and seize some opportunity, during
this interval, of effecting my purpose. I told him, that since he would not
remain, I cared not if, for the sake of recreation, and of a much more
momentous purpose, I went along with him. He tacitly, and without apparent
reluctance, consented to my scheme, and accordingly, we set off together. This
was an awful crisis. The time had now come, that was to dissipate my
uncertainty. By what means should I introduce a topic so momentous and
singular? I had been qualified by no experience for rightly conducting myself
on so critical an emergency. My companion preserved a mournful and inviolable
silence. He afforded me no opening, by which I might reach the point in view.
His demeanor was sedate, while I was almost disabled, by the confusion of my
thoughts, to utter a word.

It was a dreadful charge that I was about to insinuate. I was to accuse my
companion of nothing less than murder. I was to call upon him for an avowal of
his guilt. I was to state the grounds of my suspicions, and desire him to
confute, or confirm them. In doing this, I was principally stimulated by an
ungovernable curiosity; yet, if I intended not the conferring of a benefit, I
did not, at least, purpose the infliction of evil. I persuaded myself, that I
was able to exclude from my bosom, all sanguinary or vengeful impulses; and
that, whatever should be the issue of this conversation, my equanimity would be
unsubdued.

I revolved various modes of introducing the topic, by which my mind was
engaged. I passed rapidly from one to another. None of them were sufficiently
free from objection, to allow me to adopt it. My perplexity became, every
moment, more painful, and my ability to extricate myself, less.

In this state of uncertainty, so much time elapsed, that the Elm at length
appeared in sight. This object had somewhat of a mechanical influence upon me.
I stopped short, and seized the arm of my companion. Till this moment, he
appeared to have been engrossed by his own reflections, and not to have heeded
those emotions, which must have been sufficiently conspicuous in my looks.

This action recalled him from his reverie. The first idea that occurred to
him, when he had noticed my behavior, was, that I was assailed by some sudden
indisposition.

What is the matter, said he, in a tone of anxiety: Are you not well?

Yes, replied I, perfectly well; but stop a moment; I have something to say to
you.

To me? Answered he, with surprise.

Yes, said I, let us turn down this path, pointing at the same time, to that
along which I had followed him the preceding night.

He now partook, in some degree, of my embarrassment.

Is there any thing particular? said he, in a doubting accent. There he stopped.

Something, I answered, of the highest moment. Go with me down this path. We
shall be in less danger of interruption.

He was irresolute and silent, but seeing me remove the bars and pass through
them, he followed me. Nothing more was said till we entered the wood. I trusted
to the suggestions of the moment. I had now gone too far to recede, and the
necessity that pressed upon me, supplied me with words. I continued.

This is a remarkable spot. You may wonder why I have led you to it. I ought
not to keep you in suspense. There is a tale connected with it, which I am
desirous of telling you. For this purpose I have brought you hither. Listen to
me.

I then recapitulated the adventures of the two preceding nights. I added
nothing, nor retrenched any thing. He listened in the deepest silence. From
every incident, he gathered new cause of alarm. Repeatedly he wiped his face
with his handkerchief, and sighed deeply. I took no verbal notice of these
symptoms. I deemed it incumbent on me to repress nothing. When I came to the
concluding circumstance, by which his person was identified, he heard me,
without any new surprise. To this narrative, I subjoined the inquiries that I
had made at Inglefield's, and the result of those inquiries. I then continued
in these words.

You may ask why I subjected myself to all this trouble? The mysteriousness of
these transactions would have naturally suggested curiosity in any one. A
transient passenger would probably have acted as I have done. But I had motives
peculiar to myself. Need I remind you of a late disaster? That it happened
beneath the shade of this tree? Am I not justified in drawing certain
inferences from your behavior? What they are, I leave you to judge. Be it your
task, to confute, or confirm them. For this end I have conducted you hither.

My suspicions are vehement. How can they be otherwise? I call upon you to say
whether they be just.

The spot where we stood was illuminated by the moon, that had now risen,
though all around was dark. Hence his features and person were easily
distinguished. His hands hung at his side. His eyes were downcast, and he was
motionless as a statue. My last words seemed scarcely to have made any
impression on his sense. I had no need to provide against the possible
suggestions of revenge. I felt nothing but the tenderness of compassion. I
continued, for some time, to observe him in silence, and could discover no
tokens of a change of mood. I could not forbear, at last, to express my
uneasiness at the fixedness of his features and attitude.

Recollect yourself. I mean not to urge you too closely. This topic is solemn,
but it need not divest you of the fortitude becoming a man.

The sound of my voice startled him. He broke from me, looked up, and fixed his
eyes upon me with an expression of affright. He shuddered and recoiled as from
a spectre. I began to repent of my experiment. I could say nothing suitable to
this occasion. I was obliged to stand a silent and powerless spectator, and to
suffer this paroxysm to subside of itself. When its violence appeared to be
somewhat abated, I resumed.

I can feel for you. I act not thus, in compliance with a temper that delights
in the misery of others. The explanation that I have solicited is no less
necessary for your sake than for mine. You are no stranger to the light in
which I viewed this man. You have witnessed the grief which his fate
occasioned, and the efforts that I made to discover, and drag to punishment his
murderer. You heard the execrations that I heaped upon him, and my vows of
eternal revenge. You expect that, having detected the offender, I will hunt him
to infamy and death. You are mistaken. I consider the deed as sufficiently
expiated.

I am no stranger to your gnawing cares. To the deep and incurable despair that
haunts you, to which your waking thoughts are a prey, and from which sleep
cannot secure you. I know the enormity of your crime, but I know not your
inducements. Whatever they were, I see the consequences with regard to
yourself. I see proofs of that remorse which must ever be attendant on guilt.

This is enough. Why should the effects of our misdeeds be inexhaustible? Why
should we be debarred from a comforter? An opportunity of repairing our errors
may, at least, be demanded from the rulers of our destiny.

I once imagined, that he who killed Waldegrave inflicted the greatest possible
injury on me. That was an error, which reflection has cured. Were futurity laid
open to my view, and events, with their consequences unfolded; I might see
reason to embrace the assassin as my best friend. Be comforted.

He was still incapable of speaking; but tears came to his relief. Without
attending to my remonstrances, he betrayed a disposition to return. I had,
hitherto, hoped for some disclosure, but now feared that it was designed to be
withheld. He stopped not till we reached Inglefield's piazza. He then spoke,
for the first time, but in an hollow and tremulous voice.

You demand of me a confession of crimes. You shall have it. Some time you
shall have it. When it will be, I cannot tell. Something must be done, and
shortly.

He hurried from me into the house, and after a pause, I turned my steps
homewards. My reflections, as I proceeded, perpetually revolved round a single
point. These were scarcely more than a repetitition, with slight variations, of
a single idea.

When I awoke in the morning, I hied, in fancy, to the wilderness. I saw
nothing but the figure of the wanderer before me. I traced his footsteps anew,
retold my narrative, and pondered on his gestures and words. My condition was
not destitute of enjoyment. My stormy passions had subsided into a calm,
portentous and awful. My soul was big with expectation. I seemed as if I were
on the eve of being ushered into a world, whose scenes were tremendous, but
sublime. The suggestions of sorrow and malice had, for a time, taken their
flight, and yielded place to a generous sympathy, which filled my eyes with
tears, but had more in it of pleasure than of pain. That Clithero was
instrumental to the death of Waldegrave, that he could furnish the clue,
explanatory of every bloody and mysterious event, that had hitherto occurred,
there was no longer the possibility of doubting. He, indeed, said I, is the
murderer of excellence, and yet it shall be my province to emulate a father's
clemency, and restore this unhappy man to purity, and to peace.

Day after day passed, without hearing any thing of Clithero. I began to grow
uneasy and impatient. I had gained so much, and by means so unexpected, that I
could more easily endure uncertainty, with respect to what remained to be
known. But my patience had its limits. I should, doubtless, have made use of
new means to accelerate this discovery, had not his timely appearance made them
superfluous.

Sunday being at length arrived, I resolved to go to Inglefield's, seek an
interview with his servant, and urge him, by new importunities, to confide to
me the secret. On my way thither, Clithero appeared in sight. His visage was
pale and wan, and his form emaciated and shrunk. I was astonished at the
alteration, which the lapse of a week had made in his appearance. At a small
distance I mistook him for a stranger. As soon as I perceived who it was, I
greeted him with the utmost friendliness. My civilities made little impression
on him, and he hastened to inform me, that he was coming to my uncle's, for the
purpose of meeting and talking with me. If I thought proper, we would go into
the wood together: and find some spot, where we might discourse at our leisure,
and be exempt from interruption.

You will easily conceive with what alacrity I accepted his invitation. We
turned from the road into the first path, and proceeded in silence, till the
wildness of the surrounding scenery informed us, that we were in the heart of
Nor-walk. We lighted on a recess, to which my companion appeared to be
familiar, and which had all the advantages of solitude, and was suitable to
rest. Here we stopped. Hitherto my companion had displayed a certain degree of
composure. Now his countenance betokened a violent internal struggle. It was a
considerable time before he could command his speech. When he had so far
effected the conquest of his feelings, he began.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER IV.
YOU call upon me for a confession of my offenses. What a strange fortune is
mine! That an human being, in the present circumstances, should make this
demand, and that I should be driven, by an irresistible necessity to comply
with it! That here should terminate my calamitous series! That my destiny
should call upon me to lie down and die, in a region so remote from the scene
of my crimes; at a distance, so great, from all that witnessed and endured
their consequences!

You believe me to be an assassin. You require me to explain the motives that
induced me to murder the innocent. While this is your belief, and this the
scope of your expectations, you may be sure of my compliance. I could resist
every demand but this.

For what purpose have I come hither? Is it to relate my story? Shall I calmly
sit here, and rehearse the incidents of my life? Will my strength be adequate
to this rehearsal? Let me recollect the motives that governed me, when I formed
this design. Perhaps, a strenuousness may be imparted by them, which,
otherwise, I cannot hope to obtain. For the sake of those, I consent to conjure
up the ghost of the past, and to begin a tale that, with a fortitude like mine,
I am not sure that I shall live to finish.

You are unacquainted with the man before you. The inferences which you have
drawn, with regard to my designs, and my conduct, are a tissue of destructive
errors. You, like others, are blind to the most momentous consequences of your
own actions. You talk of imparting consolation. You boast the benificence of
your intentions. You set yourself to do me a benefit. What are the effects of
your misguided zeal, and random efforts? They have brought my life to a
miserable close. They have shrouded the last scene of it in blood. They have
put the seal to my perdition.

My misery has been greater than has fallen to the lot of mortals. Yet it is
but beginning. My present path, full as it is of asperities, is better than
that into which I must enter, when this is abandoned. Perhaps, if my pilgrimage
had been longer, I might, at some future day, have lighted upon hope. In
consequence of your interference, I am forever debarred from it. My existence
is henceforward to be invariable. The woes that are reserved for me, are
incapable alike of alleviation or intermission.

But I came not hither to recriminate. I came not hither to accuse others but
myself. I know the retribution that is appointed for guilt like mine. It is
just. I may shudder at the foresight of my punishment and shrink in the
endurance of it; but I shall be indebted for part of my torment to the vigor
of my understanding, which teaches me that my punishment is just. Why should I
procrastinate my doom and strive to render my burden more light. It is but
just that it should crush me. Its procrastination is impossible. The stroke is
already felt. Even now I drink of the cup of retribution. A change of being
cannot agravate my woe. Till consciousness itself be extinct, the worm that
gnaws me will never perish.

Fain would I be relieved from this task. Gladly would I bury in oblivion the
transactions of my life* but no. My fate is uniform. The demon that controuled
me at first is still in the fruition of power. I am entangled in his fold, and
every effort that I make to escape only involves me in deeper ruin. I need not
conceal, for all the consequences of disclosure are already experienced. I
cannot endure a groundless imputation, though to free me from it, I must create
and justify imputations still more atrocious. My story may at least be brief.
If the agonies of remembrance must be awakened afresh, let me do all that in me
lies to shorten them.

I was born in the county of Armagh. My parents were of the better sort of
peasants, and were able to provide me with the rudiments of knowledge. I should
doubtless have trodden in their footsteps, and have spent my life in the
cultivation of their scanty fields, if an event had not happened, which, for a
long time, I regarded as the most fortunate of my life; but which I now regard
as the scheme of some infernal agent and as the primary source of all my
calamities.

My father's farm was a portion of the demesne of one who resided wholly in the
metropolis, and consigned the management of his estates to his stewards and
retainers. This person married a lady, who brought him great accession of
fortune. Her wealth was her only recommendation in the eyes of her husband,
whose understanding was depraved by the prejudices of luxury and rank, but was
the least of her attractions in the estimate of reasonable beings.

They passed some years together. If their union were not a source of misery to
the lady, she was indebted for her tranquillity to the force of her mind. She
was, indeed, governed, in every action of her life by the precepts of duty,
while her husband listened to no calls but those of pernicious dissipation. He
was immersed in all the vices that grow out of opulence and a mistaken
education.

Happily for his wife his career was short. He was enraged at the infidelity of
his mistress, to purchase whose attachment, he had lavished two thirds of his
fortune. He called the paramour, by whom he had been supplanted, to the field.
The contest was obstinate, and terminated in the death of the challenger.

This event freed the lady from many distressful and humiliating obligations.
She determined to profit by her newly acquired independence, to live
thenceforward conformable to her notions of right, to preserve and improve, by
schemes of economy, the remains of her fortune, and to employ it in the
diffusion of good. Her plans made it necessary to visit her estates in the
distant provinces.

During her abode in the manor of which my father was a vassal, she visited his
cottage. I was at that time a child. She was pleased with my vivacity and
promptitude, and determined to take me under her own protection. My parents
joyfully acceded to her proposal, and I returned with her to the capital.

She had an only son of my own age. Her design, in relation to me, was, that I
should be educated with her child, and that an affection, in this way, might be
excited in me toward my young master, which might render me, when we should
attain to manhood, one of his most faithful and intelligent dependents. I
enjoyed, equally with him, all the essential benefits of education. There were
certain accomplishments, from which I was excluded, from the belief that they
were unsuitable to my rank and station. I was permitted to acquire others,
which, had she been actuated by true discernment, she would, perhaps, have
discovered to be far more incompatible with a servile station. In proportion as
my views were refined and enlarged by history and science, I was likely to
contract a thirst of independence, and an impatience of subjection and poverty.

When the period of childhood and youth was past, it was thought proper to send
her son, to improve his knowledge and manners, by a residence on the continent.
This young man was endowed with splendid abilities. His errors were the growth
of his condition. All the expedients that maternal solicitude and wisdom could
suggest, were employed to render him an useful citizen. Perhaps this wisdom was
attested by the large share of excellence which he really possessed; and, that
his character was not unblemished, proved only, that no exertions could
preserve him from the vices that are inherent in wealth and rank, and which
flow from the spectacle of universal depravity.

As to me, it would be folly to deny, that I had benefited by my opportunities
of improvement. I fulfilled the expectation of my mistress, in one respect. I
was deeply imbued with affection for her son, and reverence for herself.
Perhaps the force of education was evinced in those particulars, without
reflecting any credit on the directors of it. Those might merit the name of
defects, which were regarded by them as accomplishments. My unfavorable
qualities, like those of my master, were imputed to my condition, though,
perhaps, the difference was advantageous to me, since the vices of servitude
are less hateful than those of tyranny.

It was resolved that I should accompany my master in his travels in quality of
favorite domestic. My principles, whatever might be their rectitude were
harmonious and flexible. I had devoted my life to the service of my patron. I
had formed conceptions of what was really conducive to his interest, and was
not to be misled by specious appearances. If my affection had not stimulated my
diligence, I should have found sufficient motives in the behavior of his
mother. She condescended to express her reliance on my integrity and judgment.
She was not ashamed to manifest, at parting, the tenderness of a mother, and to
acknowledge that, all her tears were not shed on her son's account. I had my
part in the regrets that called them forth.

During our absence, I was my master's constant attendent. I corresponded with
his mother, and made the conduct of her son the principal theme of my letters.
I d^^^^ed it my privilege, as well as duty to sit in judgment on his actions,
to form my opinions without regard to selfish considerations, and to avow them
whenever the avowal tended to benefit. Every letter which I wrote, particularly
those in which his behavior was freely criticized, I allowed him to peruse. I
would, on no account, connive at, or participate in the slightest irregularity.
I knew the duty of my station, and assumed no other control than that which
resulted from the avoiding of deceit, and the open expression of my sentiments.
The youth was of a noble spirit, but his firmness was wavering. He yielded to
temptations which a censor less rigorous than I would have regarded as venial,
or, perhaps laudable. My duty required me to set before him the consequences of
his actions, and to give impartial and timely information to his mother.

He could not brook a monitor. The more he needed reproof, the less supportable
it became. My company became every day less agreeable, till at length, there
appeared a necessity of parting. A separation took place, but not as enemies. I
never lost his respect. In his representations to his mother, he was just to my
character and services. My dismission was not allowed to injure my fortune, and
his mother considered this event merely as a new proof of the inflexible
consistency of my principles.

On this change in my situation, she proposed to me to become a member of her
own family. No proposal could be more acceptable. I was fully acquainted with
the character of this lady, and had nothing to fear from injustice and caprice.
I did not regard her with filial familiarity, but my attachment and reverence
would have done honor to that relation. I performed for her the functions of a
steward. Her estates in the city were put under my direction. She placed
boundless confidence in my discretion and integrity, and consigned to me the
payment, and in some degree, the selection and government of her servants. My
station was a servile one, yet most of the evils of servitude were unknown to
me. My personal ease and independence were less infringed than that of those
who are accounted the freeest members of society. I derived a sort of authority
and dignity from the receipt and disbursement of money. The tenants and debtors
of the lady were, in some respects, mine. It was, for the most part, on my
justice and lenity that they depended for their treatment. My lady's household
establishment was large and opulent. Her servants were my inferiors and
menials. My leisure was considerable, and my emoluments large enough to supply
me with every valuable instrument of improvement or pleasure.

These were reasons why I should be contented with my lot. These circumstances
alone would have rendered it more eligible than any other, but it had
additional, and far more powerful recommendations, arising from the character
of Mrs. Lorimer, and from the relation in which she allowed me to stand to her.

How shall I enter upon this theme? How shall I expatiate upon excellencies,
which it was my fate to view in their genuine colors, to adore with an
immeasurable and inextinguishable ardour, and which, nevertheless, it was my
hateful task to blast and destroy? Yet I will not be spared. I shall find in
the rehearsal, new incitements to sorrow. I deserve to be supreme in misery,
and will not be denied the full measure of a bitter retribution.

No one was better qualified to judge of her excellencies. A casual spectator
might admire her beauty, and the dignity of her demeanor. From the
contemplation of those, he might gather motives for loving or revering her. Age
was far from having withered her complexion, or destroyed the evenness of her
skin; but no time could rob her of the sweetness and intelligence which
animated her features. Her habitual beneficence was bespoken in every look.
Always in search of occasions for doing good, always meditating scenes of
happiness, of which she was the author, or of distress, for which she was
preparing relief, the most torpid insensibility was, for a time, subdued, and
the most depraved smitten by charms, of which, in another person, they would
not perhaps have been sensible.

A casual visitant might enjoy her conversation, might applaud the rectitude of
her sentiments, the richness of her elocution, and her skill in all the offices
of politeness. But it was only for him, who dwelt constantly under the same
roof, to mark the inviolable consistency of her actions and opinions, the
ceaseless flow of her candor, her cheerfulness, and her benevolence. It was
only for one who witnessed her behavior at all hours, in sickness and in
health, her management of that great instrument of evil and good, money, her
treatment of her son, her menials, and her kindred, rightly to estimate her
merits.

The intercourse between us was frequent, but of a peculiar kind. My office in
her family required me often to see her, to submit schemes to her
consideration, and receive her directions. At these times she treated me in a
manner, in some degree, adapted to the difference of rank, and the inferiority
of my station, and yet widely dissimilar from that, which a different person
would have adopted, in the same circumstances. The treatment was not that of an
equal and a friend, but still more remote was it from that of a mistress. It
was merely characterised by affability and condescension, but as such it had no
limits.

She made no scruple to ask my council in every pecuniary affair, to listen to
my arguments, and decide conformably to what, after sufficient canvassings and
discussions, should appear to be right. When the direct occasions of our
interview were dismissed, I did not of course withdraw. To detain or dismiss me
was indeed at her option, but, if no engagement interfered, she would enter
into general conversation. There was none who could with more safety to herself
have made the world her confessor; but the state of society in which she lived,
imposed certain limitations on her candor. In her intercourse with me there
were fewer restraints than on any other occasion. My situation had made me more
intimately acquainted with domestic transactions, with her views respecting her
son, and with the terms on which she thought proper to stand with those whom
old acquaintance or kindred gave some title to her good offices. In addition to
all those motives to a candid treatment of me, there were others which owed
their efficacy to her maternal regard for me, and to the artless and
unsuspecting generosity of her character.

Her hours were distributed with the utmost regularity, and appropriated to the
best purposes. She selected her society without regard to any qualities but
probity and talents. Her associates were numerous, and her evening
conversations embellished with all that could charm the senses or instruct the
understanding. This was a chosen field for the display of her magnificence, but
her grandeur was unostentatious, and her gravity unmingled with hautiness. From
these my station excluded me, but I was compensated by the freedom of her
communications in the intervals. She found pleasure in detailing to me the
incidents that passed on those occasions, in rehearsing conversations and
depicting characters. There was an uncommon portion of dramatic merit in her
recitals, besides valuable and curious information. One uniform effect was
produced in me by this behavior. Each day, I thought it impossible for my
attachment to receive any new accessions, yet the morrow was sure to produce
some new emotion of respect or of gratitude, and to set the unrivalled
accomplishments of this lady in a new and more favorable point of view. I
contemplated no change in my condition. The necessity of change, whatever were
the alternative, would have been a subject of piercing regret. I deemed my life
a cheap sacrifice in her cause. No time would suffice to discharge the debt of
gratitude that was due to her. Yet it was continually accumulating. If an
anxious thought ever invaded my bosom it arose from this source.

It was no difficult task faithfully to execute the functions assigned to me.
No merit could accrue to me from this source. I was exposed to no temptation. I
had passed the feverish period of youth. No contagious example had contaminated
my principles. I had resisted the allurements of sensuality and dissipation
incident to my age. My dwelling was in pomp and splendor. I had amassed
sufficient to secure me, in case of unforeseen accidents, in the enjoyment of
competence. My mental resources were not despicable, and the external means of
intellectual gratification were boundless. I enjoyed an unsullied reputation.
My character was well known in that sphere which my lady occupied, not only by
means of her favorable report, but in numberless ways in which it was my
fortune to perform personal services to others.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER V.
MRS. LORIMER had a twin brother. Nature had impressed the same image upon
them, and had modelled them after the same pattern. The resemblance between
them was exact to a degree almost incredible. In infancy and childhood they
were perpetually liable to be mistaken for each other. As they grew up nothing
to a superficial examination appeared to distinguish them but the sexual
characteristics. A sagacious observer would, doubtless, have noted the most
essential differences. In all those modifications of the features which are
produced by habits and sentiments, no two persons were less alike. Nature
seemed to have intended them as examples of the futility of those theories,
which ascribe every thing to conformation and instinct, and nothing to external
circumstances; in what different modes the same materials may be fashioned, and
to what different purposes the same materials may be applied. Perhaps the
rudiments of their intellectual character as well as of their form, were the
same; but the powers, that in one case, were exerted in the cause of virtue,
were, in the other, misapplied to sordid and flagitious purposes.

Arthur Wiatte, that was his name, had ever been the object of his sister's
affection. As long as he existed she never ceased to labor in the promotion of
his happiness. All her kindness was repaid by a stern and inexorable hatred.
This man was an exception to all the rules which govern us in our judgments of
human nature. He exceeded in depravity all that has been imputed to the
arch-foe of mankind. His wickedness was without any of those remorseful
intermissions from which it has been supposed that the deepest guilt is not
entirely exempt. He seemed to relish no food but pure unadulterated evil. He
rejoiced in proportion to the depth of that distress of which he was the author.

His sister, by being placed most within the reach of his enmity, experienced
its worst effects. She was the subject on which, by being acquainted with the
means of influencing her happiness, he could try his malignant experiments with
most hope of success. Her parents being high in rank and wealth, the marriage
of their daughter was, of course, an object of anxious attention. There is no
event on which our felicity and usefulness more materially depends, and with
regard to which, therefore, the freedom of choice and the exercise of our own
understanding ought to be less infringed, but this maxim is commonly
disregarded in proportion to the elevation of our rank and extent of our
property.

The lady made her own election, but she was one of those who acted on a
comprehensive plan, and would not admit her private inclination to dictate her
decision. Her happiness of others, though founded on mistaken views, she did
not consider as unworthy of her regard. The choice was such as was not likely
to obtain the parental sanction, to whom the moral qualities of their
son-in-law, though not absolutely weightless in the balance, were greatly
inferior to the considerations of wealth and dignity.

The brother set no value on any thing but the means of luxury and power. He
was astonished at that perverseness which entertained a different conception of
happiness from himself. Love and friendship he considered as groundless and
chimerical, and believed that those delusions, would, in people of sense, be
rectified by experience; but he knew the obstinacy of his sister's attachment
to these phantoms, and that to bereave her of the good they promised was the
most effectual means of rendering her miserable. For this end he set himself to
thwart her wishes. In the imbecility and false indulgence of his parents he
found his most powerful auxiliaries. He prevailed upon them to forbid that
union which wanted nothing but their concurrence, and their consent to endow
her with a small portion of their patrimony to render completely eligible. The
cause was that of her happiness and the happiness of him on whom she had
bestowed her heart. It behoved her, therefore, to call forth all her energies
in defense of it, to weaken her brother's influence on the minds of her
parents, or to win him to be her advocate. When I reflect upon her mental
powers, and the advantages which should seem to flow from the circumstance of
pleading in the character of daughter and sister, I can scarcely believe that
her attempts miscarried. I should have imagined that all obstacles would yield
before her, and particularly in a case like this, in which she must have
summoned all her forces, and never have believed that she had struggled
sufficiently.

Certain it is that her lot was fixed. She was not only denied the husband of
her choice, but another was imposed upon her, whose recommendations were
irresistible in every one's apprehension but her own. The discarded lover was
treated with every sort of contumely. Deceit and violence were employed by her
brother to bring his honor, his liberty, and even his life into hazard. All
these iniquities produced no considerable effect on the mind of the lady. The
machinations to which her love was exposed, would have exasperated him into
madness, had not her most strenuous exertions been directed to appease him.

She prevailed on him at length to abandon his country, though she thereby
merely turned her brother's depravity into a new channel. Her parents died
without conciousness of the evils they inflicted, but they experienced a bitter
retribution in the conduct of their son. He was the darling and stay of an
ancient and illustrious house, but his actions reflected nothing but disgrace
upon his ancestry, and threatened to bring the honors of their line to a
period in his person. At their death the bulk of their patrimony devolved upon
him. This he speedily consumeed in gaming and riot. From splendid, he descended
to meaner vices. The efforts of his sister to recall him to virtue were
unintermitted and fruitless. Her affection for him he converted into a means of
prolonging his selfish gratifications. She decided for the best. It was no
argument of weakness that she was so frequently deceived. If she had judged
truly of her brother, she would have judged not only without example, but in
opposition to the general experience of mankind. But she was not to be forever
deceived. Her tenderness was subservient to justice. And when his vices had led
him from the gaming table to the higway, when seized at length by the ministers
of law, when convicted and sentenced to transportation, her intercession was
solicited, when all the world knew that pardon would readily be granted to a
supplicant of her rank, fortune, and character, when the criminal himself, his
kindred, his friends, and even indifferent persons implored her interference,
her justice was inflexible: She knew full well the incurableness of his
depravity; that banishment was the mildest destiny that would befall him; that
estrangement from ancient haunts and associates was the condition from which
his true friends had least to fear.

Finding entreaties unavailing, the wretch delivered himself to the suggestions
of his malice, and he vowed to be bloodily revenged on her inflexibility. The
sentence was executed. That character must indeed be monstrous from which the
execution of such threats was to be dreaded. The event sufficiently showed that
our fears on this head were well grounded. This event, however, was at a great
distance. It was reported that the fellons, of whom he was one, mutinied on
board the ship in which they had been embarked. In the affray that succeeded it
was said that he was killed.

Among the nefarious deeds which he perpetrated was to be numbered the
seduction of a young lady, whose heart was broken by the detection of his
perfidy. The fruit of this unhappy union was a daughter. Her mother died
shortly after her birth. Her father was careless of her destiny. She was
consigned to the care of an hireling, who, happily for the innocent victim,
performed the maternal offices for her own sake, and did not allow the want of
a stipulated recompense to render her cruel or neglectful.

This orphan was sought out by the benevolence of Mrs. Lorimer and placed under
her own protection. She received from her the treatment of a mother. The ties
of kindred, corroborated by habit, was not the only thing that united them.
That resemblance to herself, which had been so deplorably defective in her
brother, was completely realized in his offspring. Nature seemed to have
precluded every difference between them but that of age. This darling object
excited in her bosom more than maternal sympathies. Her soul clung to the
happiness of her Clarice, with more ardour than to that of her own son. The
latter was not only less worthy of affection, but their separation necessarily
diminished their mutual confidence.

It was natural for her to look forward to the future destiny of Clarice. On
these occasions she could not help contemplating the possibility of a union
between her son and niece. Considerable advantages belonged to this scheme, yet
it was the subject of hope rather than the scope of a project. The
contingencies were numerous and delicate on which the ultimate desirableness of
this union depended. She was far from certain that her son would be worthy of
this benefit, or that, if he were worthy, his propensities would not select for
themselves a different object. It was equally dubious whether the young lady
would not think proper otherwise to dispose of her affections. These
uncertainties could be dissipated only by time. Meanwhile she was chiefly
solicitous to render them virtuous and wise.

As they advanced in years, the hopes that she had formed were annihilated. The
youth was not exempt from egregious errors. In addition to this, it was
manifest that the young people were disposed to regard each other in no other
light than that of brother and sister. I was not unapprised of her views. I saw
that their union was impossible. I was near enough to judge of the character of
Clarice. My youth and intellectual constitution made me peculiarly susceptible
to female charms. I was her playfellow in childhood, and her associate in
studies and amusements at a maturer age. This situation might have been
suspected of a dangerous tendency. This tendency, however, was obviated by
motives of which I was, for a long time, scarcely conscious.

I was habituated to consider the distinctions of rank as indellible. The
obstructions that existed, to any wish that I might form, were like those of
time and space, and as, in their own nature, insuperable.

Such was the state of things previous to our setting out upon our travels.
Clarice was indirectly included in our correspondence. My letters were open to
her inspection, and I was sometimes honored with a few complimentary lines
under her own hand. On returning to my ancient abode, I was once more exposed
to those sinister influences which absence had, at least, suspended. Various
suitors had, meanwhile, been rejected. Their character, for the most part, had
been such as to account for her refusal, without resorting to the supposition
of a lurking or unavowed attachment.

On our meeting she greeted me in a respectful but dignified manner. Observers
could discover in it nothing not corresponding to that difference of fortune
which subsisted between us. If her joy, on that occasion, had in it some
portion of tenderness, the softness of her temper, and the peculiar
circumstances in which we had been placed, being considered, the most rigid
censor could find no occasion for blame or suspicion.

A year passed away, but not without my attention being solicited by something
new and inexplicable in my own sensations. At first I was not aware of their
true cause; but the gradual progress of my feelings left me not long in doubt
as to their origin. I was alarmed at the discovery, but my courage did not
suddenly desert me. My hopes seemed to be extinguished the moment that I
distinctly perceived the point to which they led. My mind had undergone a
change. The ideas with which it was fraught were varied. The sight, or
recollection of Clarice, was sure to occasion my mind to advert to the recent
discovery, and to revolve the considerations naturally connected with it. Some
latent glows and secret trepidations were likewise experienced, when, by some
accident, our meetings were abrupt or our interviews unwitnessed; yet my usual
tranquillity was not as yet sensibly diminished. I could bear to think of her
marriage with another without painful emotions, and was anxious only that her
choice should be judicious and fortunate.

My thoughts could not long continue in this state. They gradually became more
ardent and museful. The image of Clarice occurred with unseasonable frequency.
Its charms were enhanced by some nameless and indefinable additions. When it
met me in the way I was irresistibly disposed to stop and survey it with
particular attention. The pathetic cast of her features, the deep glow of her
cheek, and some catch of melting music, she had lately breathed, stole
incessantly upon my fancy. On recovering from my thoughtful moods, I sometimes
found my cheeks wet with tears, that had fallen unperceived, and my bosom
heaved with involuntary sighs.

These images did not content themselves with invading my wakeful hours; but,
likewise, incroached upon my sleep. I could no longer resign myself to slumber
with the same ease as before. When I slept, my visions were of the same
impassioned tenor.

There was no difficulty in judging rightly of my situation. I knew what it was
that duty exacted from me. To remain in my present situation was a chimerical
project. That time and reflection would suffice to restore me to myself was a
notion equally falacious. Yet I felt an insupportable reluctance to change it.
This reluctance was owing, not wholly or chiefly to my growing passion, but to
the attachment which bound me to the service of my lady. All my contemplations
had hitherto been modelled on the belief of my remaining in my present
situation during my life. My mildest anticipations had never fashioned an event
like this. Any misfortune was light in comparison with that which tore me from
her presence and service. But should I ultimately resolve to separate, how
should I communicate my purpose. The pain of parting would scarcely be less on
her side than on mine. Could I consent to be the author of disquietude to her?
I had consecrated all my faculties to her service. This was the recompense
which it was in my power to make for the benefits that I had received. Would
not this procedure bear the appearance of the basest ingratitude? The shadow
of an imputation like this was more excruciating than the rack.

What motive could I assign for my conduct? The truth must not be told. This
would be equivalent to supplicating for a new benefit. It would more become me
to lessen than increase my obligations. Among all my imaginations on this
subject, the possibility of a mutual passion never occurred to me. I could not
be blind to the essential distinctions that subsist among men. I could
expatiate, like others, on the futility of ribbonds and titles, and on the
dignity that was annexed to skill and virtue; but these, for the most part,
were the incoherences of speculation, and in no degree influenced the stream of
my actions, and practical sentiments. The barrier that existed in the present
case, I deemed insurmountable. This was not even the subject of doubt. In
disclosing the truth, I should be conceived to be soliciting my lady's mercy
and intercession; but this would be the madness of presumption. Let me impress
her with any other opinion than that I go in search of the happiness that I
have lost under her roof. Let me save her generous heart from the pangs which
this persuasion would infallibly produce.

I could form no stable resolutions. I seemed unalterably convinced of the
necessity of separation, and yet could not execute my design. When I had
wrought up my mind to the intention of explaining myself on the next interview,
when the next interview took place my tongue was powerless. I admitted any
excuse for postponing my design, and gladly admitted any topic, however foreign
to my purpose.

It must not be imagined that my health sustained no injury from this conflict
of my passions. My patroness perceived this alteration. She inquired with the
most affectionate solicitude, into the cause. It could not be explained. I
could safely make light of it, and represented it as something which would
probably disappear of itself, as it originated without any adequate cause. She
was obliged to acquiesce in my imperfect account.

Day after day passed in this state of fluctuation. I was conscious of the
dangers of delay, and that procrastination, without rendering the task less
necessary, augmented its difficulties. At length, summoning my resolution, I
demanded an audience. She received me with her usual affability. Common topics
were started; but she saw the confusion and trepidation of my thoughts, and
quickly relinquished them. She then noticed to me what she had observed, and
mentioned the anxiety which these appearances had given her. She reminded me of
the maternal regard which she had always manifested toward me, and appealed to
my own heart whether any thing could be said in vindication of that reserve
with which I had lately treated her, and urged me as I valued her good opinion,
to explain the cause of a dejection that was too visible.

To all this I could make but one answer: Think me not, Madam, perverse or
ungrateful. I came just now to apprise you of a resolution that I had formed. I
cannot explain the motives that induce me. In this case, to lie to you would be
unpardonable, and since I cannot assign my true motives, I will not mislead you
by false representations. I came to inform you of my intention to leave your
service, and to retire with the fruits of your bounty, to my native village,
where I shall spend my life, I hope, in peace.

Her surprise at this declaration was beyond measure. She could not believe her
ears. She had not heard me rightly. She compelled me to repeat it. Sill I was
jesting. I could not possibly mean what my words imported.

I assured her, in terms still more explicit, that my resolution was taken and
was unalterable, and again entreated her to spare me the task of assigning my
motives.

This was a strange determination. What could be the grounds of this new
scheme? What could be the necessity of hiding them from her? This mystery was
not to be endured. She could by no means away with it. She thought it hard that
I should abandon her at this time, when she stood in particular need of my
assistance and advice. She would refuse nothing to make my situation eligible.
I had only to point out where she was deficient in her treatment of me and she
would endeavor to supply it. She was willing to augment my emoluments in any
degree that I desired. She could not think of parting with me; but, at any
rate, she must be informed of my motives.

It is an hard task, answered I, that I have imposed upon myself. I foresaw its
difficulties, and this foresight has hitherto prevented me from undertaking it;
but the necessity by which I am impelled, will no longer be withstood. I am
determined to go; but to say why, is impossible. I hope I shall not bring upon
myself the imputation of ingratitude; but this imputation, more intolerable
than any other, must be borne, if it cannot be avoided but by this disclosure.

Keep your motives to yourself, said she. I have too good an opinion of you to
suppose that you would practice concealment without good reason. I merely
desire you to remain where you are. Since you will not tell me why you take up
this new scheme, I can only say that it is impossible there should be any
advantage in this scheme. I will not hear of it I tell you. Therefore, submit
to my decree with a good grace.

Notwithstanding this prohibition I persisted in declaring that my
determination was fixed, and that the motives that governed me would allow of
no alternative.

So, you will go, will you, whether I will or no? I have no power to detain
you? You will regard nothing that I can say?

Believe me, madam, no resolution ever was formed after a more vehement
struggle. If my motives were known, you would not only cease to oppose, but
would hasten my departure. Honor me so far with your good opinion, as to
believe that, in saying this, I say nothing but the truth, and render my duty
less burdensome by cheerfully acquiescing in its dictates.

I would, replied my lady, I could find somebody that has more power over you
than I have. Whom shall I call in to aid me in this arduous task?

Nay, dear madam, if I can resist your entreaties, surely no other can hope to
succeed.

I am not sure of that, said my friend, archly: there is one person in the
world whose supplications, I greatly suspect, you would not withstand.

Whom do you mean? said I, in some trepidation.

You will know presently. Unless I can prevail upon you, I shall be obliged to
call for assistance.

Spare me the pain of repeating that no power on earth can change my resolution.

That Is a fib, she rejoined, with increased archness. You know it is. If a
certain person entreat you to stay, you will easily comply. I see I cannot hope
to prevail by my own strength. That is a mortifying consideration, but we must
not part, that is a point settled. If nothing else will do, I must go and fetch
my advocate. Stay here a moment.

I had scarcely time to breathe, before she returned, leading in Clarice. I did
not yet comprehend the meaning of this ceremony. The lady was overwhelmed with
sweet confusion. Averted eyes and reluctant steps, might have explained to me
the purpose of this meeting, if I had believed that purpose to be possible. I
felt the necessity of new fortitude, and struggled to recollect the motives
that had hitherto sustained me.

There, said my patroness, I have been endeavoring to persuade this young man
to live with us a little longer. He is determined, it seems, to change his
abode. He will not tell why, and I do not care to know, unless I could show his
reasons to be groundless. I have merely remonstrated with him on the folly of
his scheme, but he has proved refractory to all I can say. Perhaps your efforts
may meet with better success.

Clarice said not a word. My own embarrassment equally disabled me from
speaking. Regarding us both, for some time, with a benign aspect, Mrs. Lorimer
resumed, taking an hand of each and joining them together.

I very well know what it was that suggested this scheme. It is strange that
you should suppose me so careless an observer as not to note, or not to
understand your situation. I am as well acquainted with what is passing in your
heart as you yourself are, but why are you so anxious to conceal it. You know
less of the adventurousness of love than I should have suspected. But I will
not trifle with your feelings.

You, Clithero, know the wishes that I once cherished. I had hoped that my son
would have found, in this darling child, an object worthy of his choice, and
that my girl would have preferred him to all others. But I have long since
discovered that this could not be. They are nowise suited to each other. There
is one thing in the next place desirable* and now my wishes are accomplished. I
see that you love each other, and never, in my opinion, was a passion more
rational and just. I should think myself the worst of beings if I did not
contribute all in my power to your happiness. There is not the shadow of
objection to your union. I know your scruples, Clithero, and am sorry see that
you harbor them for a moment. Nothing is more unworthy of your good sense.

I found out this girl long ago. Take my word for it, young man, she does not
fall short of you in the purity and tenderness of her attachment. What need is
there of tedious preliminaries. I will leave you together, and hope you will
not be long in coming to a mutual understanding. Your union cannot be completed
too soon for my wishes. Clarice is my only and darling daughter. As to you
Clithero, expect henceforth that treatment from me, not only to which your own
merit intitles you, but which is due to the husband of my daughter. -- With
these words she retired and left us together.

Great God! deliver me from the torments of this remembrance. That a being by
whom I was snatched from penury and brutal ignorance, exalted to some rank in
the intelligent creation, reared to affluence and honor, and thus, at last,
spontaneously endowed with all that remained to complete the sum of my
felicity, that a being like this -- but such thoughts must not yet be -- I must
shut them out, or I shall never arrive at the end of my tale. My efforts have
been thus far successful. I have hitherto been able to deliver a coherent
narrative. Let the last words that I shall speak afford some glimmering of my
better days. Let me execute without faltering the only task that remains for me.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER VI.
HOW propitious, how incredible was this event! I could scarcely confide in the
testimony of my senses. Was it true that Clarice was before me, that she was
prepared to countenance my presumption, that she had slighted obstacles which I
had deemed insurmountable, that I was fondly beloved by her, and should shortly
be admitted to the possession of so inestimable a good? I will not repeat the
terms in which I poured forth, at her feet, the raptures of my gratitude. My
impetuosity soon extorted from Clarice, a confirmation of her mother's
declaration. An unrestrained intercourse was thenceforth established between
us. Dejection and languor gave place, in my bosom, to the irradiations of joy
and hope. My flowing fortunes seemed to have attained their utmost and
immutable height.

Alas! They were destined to ebb with unspeakably greater rapidity, and to
leave me, in a moment, stranded and wrecked.

Our nuptials would have been solemnised without delay, had not a melancholy
duty interferred. Clarice had a friend in a distant part of the kingdom. Her
health had long been the prey of a consumption. She was now evidently tending
to dissolution. In this extremity she entreated her friend to afford her the
consolation of her presence. The only wish that remained was to die in her arms

This request could not but be willingly complied with. It became me patiently
to endure the delay that would thence arise to the completion of my wishes.
Considering the urgency and mournfulness of the occasion, it was impossible for
me to murmur, and the affectionate Clarice would suffer nothing to interfere
with the duty which she owed to her dying friend. I accompanied her on this
journey, remained with her a few days, and then parted from her to return to
the metropolis. It was not imagined that it would be necessary to prolong her
absence beyond a month. When I bade her farewell, and informed her on what day
I proposed to return for her, I felt no decay of my satisfaction. My thoughts
were bright and full of exultation. Why was not some intimation afforded me of
the snares that lay in my path? In the train laid for my destruction, the agent
had so skilfully contrived that my security was not molested by the faintest
omen.

I hasten to the crisis of my tale. I am almost dubious of my strength. The
nearer I approach to it, the stronger is my aversion. My courage, instead of
gathering force as I proceed, decays. I am willing to dwell still longer on
preliminary circumstances. There are other incidents without which my story
would be lame. I retail them because they afford me a kind of respite from
horrors, at the thought of which every joint in my frame trembles. They must be
endured, but that infirmity may be forgiven, which makes me inclined to
procrastinate my suffering.

I mentioned the lover whom my patroness was compelled, by the machinations of
her brother, to discard. More than twenty years had passed since their
separation. His birth was mean and he was without fortune. His profession was
that of a surgeon. My lady not only prevailed upon him to abandon his country,
but enabled him to do this by supplying his necessities from her own purse. His
excellent understanding was, for a time, obscured by passion; but it was not
difficult for my lady ultimately to obtain his concurrence to all her schemes.
He saw and adored the rectitude of her motives, did not disdain to accept her
gifts, and projected means for maintaining an epistolary intercourse during
their separation.

Her interest procured him a post in the service of the East India company. She
was, from time to time, informed of his motions. A war broke out between the
Company and some of the native powers. He was present at a great battle in
which the English were defeated. She could trace him by his letters and by
other circumstances thus far, but here the thread was discontinued, and no
means which she employed could procure any tidings of him. Whether he was
captive, or dead, continued, for several years, to be merely matter of
conjecture.

On my return to Dublin, I found my patroness engaged in conversation with a
stranger. She introduced us to each other in a manner that indicated the
respect which she entertained for us both. I surveyed and listened to him with
considerable attention. His aspect was noble and ingenious, but his sunburned
and rugged features bespoke a various and boisterous pilgrimage. The furrows of
his brow were the products of vicissitude and hardship, rather than of age. His
accents were fiery and energetic, and the impassioned boldness of his address,
as well as the tenor of his discourse, full of allusions to the past, and
regrets that the course of events had not been different, made me suspect
something extraordinary in his character.

As soon as he left us, my lady explained who he was. He was no other than the
object of her youthful attachment, who had, a few days before, dropped among us
as from the skies. He had a long and various story to tell. He had accounted
for his silence by enumerating the incidents of his life. (He had escaped from
the prisons of Hyder, had wandered on foot, and under various disguises,
through the northern district of Hindoostaun. He was sometimes a scholar of
Benares, and sometimes a disciple of the Mosque. According to the exigencies of
the times, he was a pilgrim to Mecca or to Jagunaut. By a long, circuitous, and
perilous route, he at length arrived at the Turkish capital. Here he resided
for several years, deriving a precarious subsistence from the profession of a
surgeon. He was obliged to desert this post, in consequence of a duel between
two Scotsmen. One of them had embraced the Greek religion, and was betrothed to
the daughter of a wealthy trader of that nation. He perished in the conflict,
and the family of the lady not only procured the execution of his antagonist,
but threatened to involve all those who were known to be connected with him in
the same ruin.

His life being thus endangered, it became necessary for him to seek a new
residence. He fled from Constantinople with such precipitation as reduced him
to the lowest poverty. He had traversed the Indian conquests of Alexander, as a
mendicant. In the same character, he now wandered over the native country of
Philip and Philoepamen. He passed safely through multiplied perils, and
finally, embarking at Salonichi, he reached Venice. He descended through the
passes of the Apennine into Tuscany. In this journey he suffered a long
detention from banditti, by whom he was waylaid. In consequence of his harmless
deportment, and a seasonable display of his chirurgical skill, they granted him
his life, though they, for a time restrained him of his liberty, and compelled
him to endure their society. The time was not misemployed which he spent
immured in caverns and carousing with robbers. His details were eminently
singular and curious, and evinced the accuteness of his penetration, as well
the steadfastness of his courage.

After emerging from these wilds, he found his way along the banks of the Arno
to Leghorn. Thence he procured a passage to America, whence he had just
returned, with many additions to his experience, but none to his fortune.

This was a remarkable event. It did not at first appear how far its
consequences would extend. The lady was, at present, disengaged and
independent. Though the passion which clouded her early prosperity was extinct,
time had not diminished the worth of her friend, and they were far from having
reached that age when love becomes chimerical and marriage folly. A
confidential intercourse was immediately established between them. The bounty
of Mrs. Lorimer soon divested her friend of all fear of poverty. At any rate,
said she, he shall wander no further, but shall be comfortably situated for the
rest of his life. All his scruples were vanquished by the reasonableness of her
remonstrances and the vehemence of her solicitations.

A cordial intimacy grew between me and the newly arrived. Our interviews were
frequent, and our communications without reserve. He detailed to me the result
of his experience, and expatiated without end on the history of his actions and
opinions. He related the adventures of his youth, and dwelt upon all the
circumstances of his attachment to my patroness. On this subject I had heard
only general details. I continually found cause, in the course of his
narrative, to revere the illustrious qualities of my lady, and to weep at the
calamities to which the infernal malice of her brother had subjected her.

The tale of that man's misdeeds, amplified and dramatized, by the indignant
eloquence of this historian, oppressed me with astonishment. If a poet had
drawn such a portrait I should have been prone to suspect the soundness of his
judgment. Till now I had imagined that no character was uniform and unmixed,
and my theory of the passions did not enable me to account for a propensity
gratified merely by evil, and delighting in shrieks and agony for their own
sake.

It was natural to suggest to my friend, when expatiating on this theme, an
inquiry as to how far subsequent events had obliterated the impressions that
were then made, and as to the plausibility of reviving, at this more auspicious
period, his claims on the heart of his friend. When he thought proper to notice
these hints, he gave me to understand that time had made no essential
alteration in his sentiments in this respect, that he still fostered an hope,
to which every day added new vigor, that whatever was the ultimate event, he
trusted in his fortitude to sustain it, if adverse, and in his wisdom to
extract from it the most valuable consequences, if it should prove prosperous.

The progress of things was not unfavourable to his hopes. She treated his
insinuations and professions with levity; but her arguments seemed to be urged,
with no other view than to afford an opportunity of confutation; and, since
there was no abatement of familiarity and kindness, there was room to hope that
the affair would terminate agreeably to his wishes.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER VII.
CLARICE, meanwhile, was absent. Her friend seemed, at the end of a month, to
be little less distant from the grave than at first. My impatience would not
allow me to wait till her death. I visited her, but was once more obliged to
return alone. I arrived late in the city, and being greatly fatigued, I retired
almost immediately to my chamber.

On hearing of my arrival, Sarsefield hastened to see me. He came to my
bedside, and such, in his opinion, was the importance of the tidings which he
had to communicate, that he did not scruple to rouse me from a deep
sleep........

At this period of his narrative, Clithero stopped. His complexion varied from
one degree of paleness to another. His brain appeared to suffer some severe
constriction. He desired to be excused, for a few minutes, from proceeding. In
a short time he was relieved from this paroxysm, and resumed his tale with an
accent tremulous at first, but acquiring stability and force as he went on.

On waking, as I have said, I found my friend seated at my bedside. His
countenance exibited various tokens of alarm. As soon as I perceived who it
was, I started, exclaming What is the matter?

He sighed. Pardon, said he, this unseasonable intrusion. A light matter would
not have occasioned it. I have waited, for two days past, in an agony of
impatience, for your return. Happily, you are, at last, come. I stand in the
utmost need of your council and aid.

Heaven defend! cried I. This is a terrible prelude. You may, of course, rely
upon my assistance and advice. What is it that you have to propose?

Tuesday evening, he answered, I spent here. It was late before I returned to
my lodgings. I was in the act of lifting my hand to the bell, when my eye was
caught by a person standing close to the wall, at the distance of ten paces.
His attitude was that of one employed in watching my motions. His face was
turned toward me, and happened, at that moment, to be fully illuminated by the
rays of a globe-lamp that hung over the door. I instantly recognized his
features. I was petrified. I had no power to execute my design, or even to
move, but stood, for some seconds gazing upon him. He was, in no degree,
disconcerted by the eagerness of my scrutiny. He seemed perfectly indifferent
to the consequences of being known. At length he slowly turned his eyes to
another quarter, but without changing his posture, or the sternness of his
looks. I cannot describe to you the shock which this encounter produced in me.
At last I went into the house, and have ever since been excessively uneasy.

I do not see any ground for uneasiness

You do not then suspect who this person is?

No....

It is Arthur Wiatte....

Good heaven! It is impossible. What, my lady's brother?

The same....

It cannot be. Were we not assured of his death? That he perished in a mutiny
on board the vessel in which he was embarked for transportation?

Such was rumor, which is easily mistaken. My eyes cannot be deceived in this
case. I should as easily fail to recognize his sister, when I first met her, as
him. This is the man, whether once dead or not, he is, at present, alive, and
in this city.

But has any thing since happened to confirm you in this opinion.

Yes, there has. As soon as I had recovered from my first surprise, I began to
reflect upon the measures proper to be taken. This was the identical Arthur
Wiatte. You know his character. No time was likely to change the principles of
such a man, but his appearance sufficiently betrayed the incurableness of his
habits. The same sullen and atrocious passions were written in his visage. You
recollect the vengeance which Wiatte denounced against his sister. There is
every thing to dread from his malignity. How to obviate the danger, I know not.
I thought, however, of one expedient. It might serve a present purpose, and
something better might suggest itself on your return.

I came hither early the next day. Old Gowan the porter is well acquainted with
Wiatte's story. I mentioned to him that I had reason to think that he had
returned. I charged him to have a watchful eye upon every one that knocked at
the gate, and that if this person should come, by no means to admit him. The
old man promised faithfully to abide by my directions. His terrors, indeed,
were greater than mine, and he knew the importance of excluding Wiatte from
these walls.

Did you not inform my lady of this?

No. In what way could I tell it to her? What end could it answer? Why should I
make her miserable? But I have not done. Yesterday morning Gowan took me aside,
and informed me that Wiatte had made his appearance, the day before, at the
gate. He knew him, he said, in a moment. He demanded to see the lady, but the
old man told him she was engaged, and could not be seen. He assumed peremtory
and haughty airs, and asserted that his business was of such importance as not
to endure a moment's delay. Gowan persisted in his first refusal. He retired
with great reluctance, but said he should return tomorrow, when he should
insist upon admission to the presence of the lady. I have inquired, and find
that he has not repeated his visit. What is to be done?

I was equally at a loss with my friend. This incident was so unlooked for.
What might not be dreaded from the monstrous depravity of Wiatte? His menaces
of vengeance against his sister still rung in my ears. Some means of eluding
them were indispensable. Could law be resorted to? Against an evil like this,
no legal provision had been made. Nine years had elapsed since his
transportation. Seven years was the period of his exile. In returning,
therefore, he had committed no crime. His person could not be lawfully
molested. We were justified, merely, in repelling an attack. But suppose we
should appeal to law, could this be done without the knowledge and concurrence
of the lady? She would never permit it. Her heart was incapable of fear from
this quarter. She would spurn at the mention of precautions against the hatred
of her brother. Her inquietude would merely be awakened on his own account.

I was overwhelmed with perplexity. Perhaps if he were sought out, and some
judgment formed of the kind of danger to be dreaded from him, by a knowledge of
his situation and views, some expedient might be thence suggested.

But how should his haunts be discovered? This was easy. He had intimated the
design of applying again for admission to his sister. Let a person be stationed
near at hand, who, being furnished with an adequate description of his person
and dress, shall mark him when he comes, and follow him, when he retires, and
shall forthwith impart to us the information on that head which he shall be
able to collect.

My friend concurred in this scheme. No better could, for the present, be
suggested. Here ended our conference.

I was thus supplied with a new subject of reflection. It was calculated to
fill my mind with dreary forbodings. The future was no longer a scene of
security and pleasure. It would be hard for those to partake of our fears, who
did not partake of our experience. The existence of Wiatte, was the canker that
had blasted the felicity of my patroness. In his reappearance on the stage,
there was something portentous. It seemed to include in it, consequences of the
utmost moment, without my being able to discover what these consequences were.

That Sarsefield should be so quickly followed by his Arch-foe; that they
started anew into existence, without any previous intimation, in a manner
wholly unexpected, and at the same period. It seemed as if there lurked, under
those appearances, a tremendous significance, which human sagacity could not
uncover. My heart sunk within me when I reflected that this was the father of
my Clarice. He by whose cruelty her mother was torn from the enjoyment of
untarnished honor, and consigned to infamy and an untimely grave: He by whom
herself was abandoned in the helplessness of infancy, and left to be the prey
of obdurate avarice, and the victim of wretches who traffic in virgin
innocence: Who had done all that in him lay to devote her youth to guilt and
misery. What were the limits of his power? How may he exert the parental
prerogatives?

To sleep, while these images were haunting me, was impossible. I passed the
night in continual motion. I strode, without ceasing, across the floor of my
apartment. My mind was wrought to an higher pitch than I had ever before
experienced. The occasion, accurately considered, was far from justifying the
ominous inquietudes which I then felt. How then should I account for them?

Sarsefield probably enjoyed his usual slumber. His repose might not be
perfectly serene, but when he ruminated on impending or possible calamities,
his tongue did not cleave to his mouth, his throat was not parched with
unquenchable thirst, he was not incessantly stimulated to employ his
superfluous fertility of thought in motion. If I trembled for the safety of her
whom I loved, and whose safety was endangered by being the daughter of this
miscreant, had he not equal reason to fear for her whom he also loved, and who,
as the sister of this ruffian, was encompassed by the most alarming perils. Yet
he probably was calm while I was harassed by anxieties.

Alas! The difference was easily explained. Such was the beginning of a series
ordained to hurry me to swift destruction. Such were the primary tokens of the
presence of that power by whose accursed machinations I was destined to fall..
You are startled at this declaration. It is one to which you have been little
accustomed. Perhaps you regard it merely as an effusion of phrenzy. I know what
I am saying. I do not build upon conjectures and surmises. I care not indeed
for your doubts. Your conclusion may be fashioned at your pleasure. Would to
heaven that my belief were groundless, and that I had no reason to believe my
intellects to have been perverted by diabolical instigations.

I could procure no sleep that night. After Sarsefield's departure I did not
even lie down. It seemed to me that I could not obtain the benefits of repose
otherwise than by placing my lady beyond the possibility of danger.

I met Sarsefield the next day. In pursuance of the scheme which had been
adopted by us on the preceding evening, a person was selected and commissioned
to watch the appearance of Wiatte. The day passed as usual with respect to the
lady. In the evening she was surrounded by a few friends. Into this number I
was now admitted. Sarsefield and myself made a part of this company. Various
topics were discussed with ease and sprightliness. Her societies were composed
of both sexes, and seemed to have monopolized all the ingenuity and wit that
existed in the metropolis.

After a slight repast the company dispersed. This separation took place
earlier than usual on account of a slight indisposition in Mrs. Lorimer.
Sarsefield and I went out together. We took that opportunity of examining our
agent, and receiving no satisfaction from him, we dismissed him, for that
night, enjoining him to hold himself in readiness for repeating the experiment
tomorrow. My friend directed his steps homeward, and I proceeded to execute a
commission, with which I had charged myself.

A few days before, a large sum had been deposited in the hands of a banker,
for the use of my lady. It was the amount of a debt which had lately been
recovered. It was lodged here for the purpose of being paid on demand of her or
her agents. It was my present business to receive this money. I had deferred
the performance of this engagement to this late hour, on acccount of certain
preliminaries which were necessary to be adjusted.

Having received this money, I prepared to return home. The inquietude which
had been occasioned by Sarsefield's intelligence, had not incapacitated me from
performing my usual daily occupations. It was a theme, to which, at every
interval of leisure from business or discourse, I did not fail to return. At
those times I employed myself in examining the subject on all sides; in
supposing particular emergencies, and delineating the conduct that was proper
to be observed on each. My daily thoughts were, by no means, so fear-inspiring
as the meditations of the night had been.

As soon as I left the banker's door, my meditations fell into this channel. I
again reviewed the recent occurrences, and imagined the consequences likely to
flow from them. My deductions were not, on this occasion, peculiarly
distressful. The return of darkness had added nothing to my apprehensions. I
regarded Wiatte merely as one against whose malice it was wise to employ the
most vigilant precautions. In revolving these precautions nothing occurred that
was new. The danger appeared without unusual aggravations, and the expedients
that offered themselves to my choice, were viewed with a temper not more
sanguine or despondent than before.

In this state of mind I began and continued my walk. The distance was
considerable between my own habitation and that which I had left. My way lay
chiefly through populous and well frequented streets. In one part of the way,
however, it was at the option of the passenger either to keep along the large
streets, or considerably to shorten the journey, by turning into a dark,
crooked, and narrow lane. Being familiar with every part of this metropolis,
and deeming it advisable to take the shortest and obscurest road, I turned into
the alley. I proceeded without interruption to the next turning. One night
officer, distinguished by his usual ensigns, was the only person who passed me.
I had gone three steps beyond when I perceived a man by my side. I had scarcely
time to notice this circumstance, when an hoarse voice exclaimed. "Damn ye
villain, you are a dead man!"

At the same moment a pistol flashed at my ear, and a report followed. This,
however, produced no other effect, than, for a short space, to overpower my
senses. I staggered back, but did not fall.

The ball, as I afterward discovered, had grazed my forehead, but without
making any dangerous impression. The assassin, perceiving that his pistol had
been ineffectual, muttered, in an enraged tone, -- This shall do your business
-- At the same time, he drew a knife forth from his bosom.

I was able to distinguish this action by the rays of a distant lamp, which
glistened on the blade. All this passed in an instant. The attack was so abrupt
that my thoughts could not be suddenly recalled from the confusion into which
they were thrown. My exertions were mechanical. My will might be said to be
passive, and it was only by retrospect and a contemplation of consequences,
that I became fully informed of the nature of the scene.

If my assailant had disappeared as soon as he had discharged the pistol, my
state of extreme surprise might have slowly given place to resolution and
activity. As it was, my sense was no sooner struck by the reflection from the
blade, than my hand, as if by spontaneous energy, was thrust into my pocket. I
drew forth a pistol --

He lifted up his weapon to strike, but it dropped from his powerless fingers.
He fell and his groans informed me that I had managed my arms with more skill
than my adversary. The noise of this encounter soon attracted spectators.
Lights were brought and my antagonist discovered bleeding at my feet. I
explained, as briefly as I was able, the scene which they witnessed. The
prostrate person was raised by two men, and carried into a public house, nigh
at hand.

I had not lost my presence of mind. I, at once, perceived the propriety of
administering assistance to the wounded man. I dispatched, therefore, one of
the bystanders for a surgeon of considerable eminence, who lived at a small
distance, and to whom I was well known. The man was carried into an inner
apartment and laid upon the floor. It was not till now that I had a suitable
opportunity of ascertaining who it was with whom I had been engaged. I now
looked upon his face. The paleness of death could not conceal his well known
features. It was Wiatte himself who was breathing his last groans at my
feet!....

The surgeon, whom I had summoned, attended; but immediately perceived the
condition of his patient to be hopeless. In a quarter of an hour he expired.
During this interval, he was insensible to all around him. I was known to the
surgeon, the landlord and some of the witnesses. The case needed little
explanation. The accident reflected no guilt upon me. The landlord was charged
with the care of the corse till the morning, and I was allowed to return home,
without further impediment.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER VIII.
TILL now my mind had been swayed by the urgencies of this occasion. These
reflections were excluded, which rushed tumultuously upon me, the moment I was
at leisure to receive them. Without foresight of a previous moment, an entire
change had been wrought in my condition.

I had been oppressed with a sense of the danger that flowed from the existence
of this man. By what means the peril could be annihilated, and we be placed in
security from his attempts, no efforts of mind could suggest. To devise these
means, and employ them with success, demanded, as I conceived, the most
powerful sagacity and the firmest courage. Now the danger was no more. The
intelligence in which plans of mischief might be generated, was extinguished or
flown. Lifeless were the hands ready to execute the dictates of that
intelligence. The contriver of enormous evil, was, in one moment, bereft of the
power and the will to injure. Our past tranquillity had been owing to the belief
of his death. Fear and dismay had resumed their dominion when the mistake was
discovered. But now we might regain possession of our wonted confidence. I had
beheld with my own eyes the lifeless corpse of our implacable adversary. Thus,
in a moment, had terminated his long and flagitious career. His restless
indignation, his malignant projects, that had so long occupied the stage, and
been so fertile of calamity, were now at an end!

In the course of my meditations, the idea of the death of this man had
occurred, and it bore the appearance of a desirable event. Yet it was little
qualified to tranquilise my fears. In the long catalogue of contingencies,
this, indeed, was to be found; but it was as little likely to happen as any
other. It could not happen without a series of anterior events paving the way
for it. If his death came from us, it must be the theme of design. It must
spring from laborious circumvention and deep laid stratagems.

No. He was dead. I had killed him. What had I done? I had meditated nothing. I
was impelled by an unconscious necessity. Had the assailant been my father the
consequence would have been the same. My understanding had been neutral. Could
it be? In a space so short, was it possible that so tremendous a deed had been
executed? Was I not deceived by some portentous vision? I had witnessed the
convulsions and last agonies of Wyatte. He was no more, and I was his destroyer!

Such was the state of my mind for some time after this dreadful event.
Previously to it I was calm, considerate, and self-collected. I marked the way
that I was going. Passing objects were observed. If I adverted to the series of
my own reflections, my attention was not seized and fastened by them. I could
disengage myself at pleasure, and could pass, without difficulty, from
attention to the world within, to the contemplation of that without.

Now my liberty, in this respect, was at an end. I was fettered, confounded,
smitten with excess of thought, and laid prostrate with wonder! I no longer
attended to my steps. When I emerged from my stupor, I found that I had trodden
back the way which I had lately come, and had arrived within sight of the
banker's door. I checked myself, and once more turned my steps homeward.

This seemed to be an hint for entering into new reflections. The deed, said I,
is irretreivable. I have killed the brother of my patroness, the father of my
love.

This suggestion was new. It instantly involved me in terror and perplexity.
How shall I communicate the tidings? What effect will they produce? My lady's
sagacity is obscured by the benevolence of her temper. Her brother was sordidly
wicked. An hoary ruffian, to whom the language of pity was as unintelligible as
the gabble of monkeys. His heart was fortified against compunction, by the
atrocious habits of forty years: he lived only to interrupt her peace, to
confute the promises of virtue, and convert to rancour and reproach the fair
fame of fidelity.

He was her brother still. As an human being, his depravity was never beyond
the health-restoring power of repentance. His heart, so long as it beat, was
accessible to remorse. The singularity of his birth had made her regard this
being as more intimately her brother, than would have happened in different
circumstances. It was her obstinate persuasion that their fates were blended.
The rumor of his death she had never credited. It was a topic of
congratulation to her friends, but of mourning and distress to her. That he
would one day reappear upon the stage, and assume the dignity of virtue, was a
source of consolation with which she would never consent to part.

Her character was now known. When the doom of exile was pronounced upon him,
she deemed it incumbent on her to vindicate herself from aspersions founded on
misconceptions of her motives in refusing her interference. The manuscript,
though unpublished, was widely circulated. None could resist her simple and
touching eloquence, nor rise from the perusal without resigning his heart to
the most impetuous impulses of admiration, and enlisting himself among the
eulogists of her justice and her fortitude. This was the only monument, in a
written form, of her genius. As such it was engraven on my memory. The picture
that it described was the perpetual companion of my thoughts.

Alas! It had, perhaps, been well for me if it had been buried in eternal
oblivion. I read in it the condemnation of my deed, the agonies she was
preparing to suffer, and the indignation that would overflow upon the author of
so signal a calamity.

I had rescued my life by the sacrifice of his. Whereas I should have died.
Wretched and precipitate coward! What had become of my boasted gratitude* Such
was the zeal that I had vowed to her. Such the services which it was the
business of my life to perform. I had snatched her brother from existence. I
had torn from her the hope which she so ardently and indefatigably cherished.
From a contemptible and dastardly regard to my own safety I had failed in the
moment of trial, and when called upon by heaven to evince the sincerity of my
professions.

She had treated my professions lightly. My vows of eternal devotion she had
rejected with lofty disinterestedness. She had arraigned my impatience of
obligation as criminal, and condemned every scheme I had projected for freeing
myself from the burden which her beneficence had laid upon me. The impassioned
and vehement anxiety with which, in former days, she had deprecated the
vengeance of her lover against Wiatte, rung in my ears. My senses were shocked
anew by the dreadful sounds "Touch not my brother. Wherever you meet with him,
of whatever outrage he be guilty, suffer him to pass in safety. Despise me:
abandon me: kill me. All this I can bear even from you, but spare, I implore
you, my unhappy brother. The stroke that deprives him of life will not only
have the same effect upon me, but will set my portion in everlasting misery."

To these supplications I had been deaf. It is true I had not rushed upon him
unarmed, intending no injury nor expecting any. Of that degree of wickedness I
was, perhaps, incapable. Alas! I have immersed myself sufficiently deep in
crimes. I have trampled under foot every motive dear to the heart of honor. I
have shown myself unworthy the society of men.

Such were the turbulent suggestions of that moment. My pace slackened. I
stopped and was obliged to support myself against a wall. The sickness that had
seized my heart penetrated every part of my frame. There was but one thing
wanting to complete my distraction...My lady, said I, believed her fate to be
blended with that of Wiatte. Who shall affirm that the persuasion is a
groundless one. She had lived and prospered, notwithstanding the general belief
that her brother was dead. She would not hearken to the rumor. Why? Because
nothing less than indubitable evidence would suffice to convince her? Because
the counter-intimation flowed from an infalible source? How can the latter
supposition be confuted? Has she not predicted the event?

The period of terrible fulfillment has arrived. The same blow that bereaved him
of life, has likewise ratified her doom.

She has been deceived. It is nothing more, perhaps, than a fond
imagination....It matters not. Who knows not the cogency of faith? That the
pulses of life are at the command of the will? The bearer of these tidings will
be the messenger of death. A fatal sympathy will seize her. She will shrink,
and swoon, and perish at the news!

Fond and short-sighted wretch! This is the price thou have given for security.
In the rashness of thy thought thou said, Nothing is wanting but his death
to restore us to confidence and safety. Lo! the purchase is made. Havoc and
despair, that were restrained during his life, were let loose by his last sigh.
Now only is destruction made sure. Thy lady, thy Clarice, thy friend, and
thyself, are, by this act, involved in irretreivable and common ruin!

I started from my attitude. I was scarcely conscious of any transition. The
interval was fraught with stupor and amazement. It seemed as if my senses had
been hushed in sleep, while the powers of locomotion were unconsciously exerted
to bear me to my chamber. By whatever means the change was effected, there I
was....

I have been able to proceed thus far. I can scarcely believe the testimony of
my memory that assures me of this. My task is almost executed, but whence shall
I obtain strength enough to finish it? What I have told is light as gossamer,
compared with the insupportable and crushing horrors of that which is to come.
Heaven, in token of its vengeance, will enable me to proceed. It is fitting
that my scene should thus close.

My fancy began to be infected with the errors of my understanding. The mood
into which my mind was plunged was incapable of any propitious intermission.
All within me was tempestuous and dark. My ears were accessible to no sounds
but those of shrieks and lamentations. It was deepest midnight, and all the
noises of a great metropolis were hushed. Yet I listened as if to catch some
strain of the dirge that was begun. Sable robes, sobs and a dreary solemnity
encompassed me on all sides. I was haunted to despair by images of death,
imaginary clamours, and the train of funeral pageantry. I seemed to have passed
forward to a distant era of my life. The effects which were to come were
already realized. The foresight of misery created it, and set me in the midst
of that hell which I feared.

From a paroxysm like this the worst might reasonably be dreaded, yet the next
step to destruction was not suddenly taken. I paused on the brink of the
precipice, as if to survey the depth of that phrensy that invaded me; was able
to ponder on the scene, and deliberate, in a state that partook of calm, on the
circumstances of my situation. My mind was harrassed by the repetition of one
idea. Conjecture deepened into certainty. I could place the object in no light
which did not corroborate the persuasion that, in the act committed, I had
ensured the destruction of my lady. At length my mind, somewhat relieved from
the tempest of my fears, began to trace and analize the consequences which I
dreaded.

The fate of Wiatte would inevitably draw along with it that of his sister. In
what way would this effect be produced? Were they linked together by a sympathy
whose influence was independent of sensible communication? Could she arrive at
a knowledge of his miserable end by other than verbal means? I had heard of
such extraordinary co-partnerships in being and modes of instantaneous
intercourse among beings locally distant. Was this a new instance of the
subtlety of mind? Had she already endured his agonies, and like him already
ceased to breathe.

Every hair bristled at this horrible suggestion. But the force of sympathy
might be chimerical. Buried in sleep, or engaged in careless meditation, the
instrument by which her destiny might be accomplished, was the steel of an
assassin. A series of events, equally beyond the reach of foresight, with those
which had just happened, might introduce, with equal abruptness, a similar
disaster. What, at that moment, was her condition? Reposing in safety in her
chamber, as her family imagined. But were they not deceived? Was she not a
mangled corse? Whatever were her situation, it could not be ascertained, except
by extraordinary means, till the morning. Was it wise to defer the scrutiny
till then? Why not instantly investigate the truth?

These ideas passed rapidly through my mind. A considerable portion of time and
amplification of phrase are necessary to exhibit, verbally, ideas contemplated
in a space of incalculable brevity. With the same rapidity I conceived the
resolution of determining the truth of my suspicions. All the family, but
myself, were at rest. Winding passages would conduct me, without danger of
disturbing them, to the hall from which double staircases ascended. One of
these led to a saloon above, on the east side of which was a door that
communicated with a suit of rooms, occupied by the lady of the mansion. The
first was an antichamber, in which a female servant usually lay. The second was
the lady's own bedchamber. This was a sacred recess, with whose situation,
relative to the other apartments of the building, I was well acquainted, but of
which I knew nothing from my own examination, having never been admitted into
it.

Thither I was now resolved to repair. I was not deterred by the sanctity of
the place and hour. I was insensible to all consequences but the removal of my
doubts. Not that my hopes were balanced by my fears. That the same tragedy had
been performed in her chamber and in the street, nothing hindered me from
believing with as much cogency as if my own eyes had witnessed it, but the
reluctance with which we admit a detestable truth.

To terminate a state of intolerable suspense, I resolved to proceed forthwith
to her chamber. I took the light and paced, with no interruption, along the
galleries. I used no precaution. If I had met a servant or robber, I am not
sure that I should have noticed him. My attention was too perfectly engrossed
to allow me to spare any to a casual object. I cannot affirm that no one
observed me. This, however, was probable from the distribution of the dwelling.
It consisted of a central edifice and two wings, one of which was appropriated
to domestics, and the other, at the extremity of which my apartment was placed,
comprehended a library, and rooms for formal, and social, and literary
conferences. These, therefore, were deserted at night, and my way lay along
these. Hence it was not likely that my steps would be observed.

I proceeded to the hall. The principal parlour was beneath her chamber. In the
confusion of my thoughts I mistook one for the other. I rectified, as soon as I
detected my mistake. I ascended, with a beating heart, the staircase. The door
of the antichamber was unfastened. I entered, totally regardless of disturbing
the girl who slept within. The bed which she occupied was concealed by
curtains. Whether she were there, I did not stop to examine. I cannot recollect
that any tokens were given of wakefulness or alarm. It was not till I reached
the door of her own apartment that my heart began to falter.

It was now that the momentousness of the question I was about to decide,
rushed with its genuine force, upon my apprehension. Appaled and aghast, I had
scarcely power to move the bolt. If the imagination of her death was not to be
supported, how should I bear the spectacle of wounds and blood? Yet this was
reserved for me. A few paces would set me in the midst of a scene, of which I
was the abhorred contriver. Was it right to proceed? There were still the
remnants of doubt. My forebodings might possibly be groundless. All within
might be safety and serenity. A respite might be gained from the execution of
an irrevocable sentence. What could I do? Was not any thing easy to endure in
comparison with the agonies of suspense? If I could not obviate the evil I must
bear it, but the torments of suspense were susceptible of remedy.

I drew back the bolt, and entered with the reluctance of fear, rather than the
cautiousness of guilt. I could not lift my eyes from the ground. I advanced to
the middle of the room. Not a sound like that of the dying saluted my ear. At
length, shaking off the fetters of hopelesness, I looked up....

I saw nothing calculated to confirm my fears. Every where there reigned quiet
and order. My heart leaped with exultation. Can it be, said I, that I have been
betrayed with shadows?....But this is not sufficient....

Within an alcove was the bed that belonged to her. If her safety were
inviolate, it was here that she reposed. What remained to convert tormenting
doubt into ravishing certainty? I was insensible to the perils of my present
situation. If she, indeed, were there, would not my intrusion awaken her? She
would start and perceive me, at this hour, standing at her bedside. How should
I account for an intrusion so unexampled and audacious? I could not communicate
my fears. I could not tell her that the blood with which my hands were stained
had flowed from the wounds of her brother.

My mind was inaccessible to such considerations. They did not even modify my
predominant idea. Obstacles like these, had they existed, would have been
trampled under foot.

Leaving the lamp, that I bore, on the table, I approached the bed. I slowly
drew aside the curtain and beheld her tranquilly slumbering. I listened, but so
profound was her sleep that not even her breathings could be overheard. I
dropped the curtain and retired.

How blissful and mild were the illuminations of my bosom at this discovery. A
joy that surpassed all utterance succeeded the fierceness of desperation. I
stood, for some moments, wrapped in delightful contemplation. Alas! It was a
luminous but transient interval. The madness, to whose black suggestions it
bore so strong a contrast, began now to make sensible approaches on my
understanding.

True, said I, she lives. Her slumber is serene and happy. She is blind to her
approaching destiny. Some hours will at least be rescued from anguish and
death. When she wakes the phantom that soothed her will vanish. The tidings
cannot be withheld from her. The murderer of thy brother cannot hope to enjoy
thy smiles. Those ravishing accents, with which thou have used to greet me,
will be changed. Scouling and reproaches, the invectives of thy anger and the
maledictions of thy justice will rest upon my head.

What is the blessing which I made the theme of my boastful arrogance? This
interval of being and repose is momentary. She will awake but only to perish at
the spectacle of my ingratitude. She will awake only to the consciousness of
instantly impending death. When she again sleeps she will wake no more. I her
son, I, whom the law of my birth doomed to poverty and hardship, but whom her
unsolicited beneficence snatched from those evils, and endowed with the highest
good known to intelligent beings, the consolations of science and the
blandishments of affluence; to whom the darling of her life, the offspring in
whom are faithfully preserved the linaments of its angelic mother, she has not
denied!....What is the recompense that I have made? How have I discharged the
measureless debt of gratitude to which she is entitled? Thus!....

Cannot my guilt be extenuated? Is there not a good that I can do thee? Must I
perpetrate unmingled evil? Is the province assigned me that of an infernal
emisary, whose efforts are concentred in a single purpose and that (...) I am
the author of thy calamities. Whatever misery is reserved for thee, I am the
source whence it flows. Can I not set bounds to the stream? Cannot I prevent
thee from returning to a consciousness which, till it ceases to exist, will not
cease to be rent and mangled?

Yes. It is in my power to screen thee from the coming storm: to accelerate thy
journey to rest. I will do it....

The impulse was not to be resisted. I moved with the suddenness of lightning.
Armed with a pointed implement that lay....it was a dagger. As I set down the
lamp, I struck the edge. Yet I saw it not, or noticed it not till I needed its
assistance. By what accident it came hither, to what deed of darkness it had
already been subservient, I had no power to inquire. I stepped to the table and
seized it.

The time which this action required was insufficient to save me. My doom was
ratified by powers which no human energies can counterwork....Need I go
farther? Did you entertain any imagination of so frightful a catastrophe? I am
overwhelmed by turns with dismay and with wonder. I am prompted by turns to
tear my heart from my breast, and deny faith to the verdict of my senses.

Was it I that hurried to the deed? No. It was the demon that possessed me. My
limbs were guided to the bloody office by a power foreign and superior to mine.
I had been defrauded, for a moment, of the empire of my muscles. A little
moment for that sufficed.

If my destruction had not been decreed why was the image of Clarice so long
excluded? Yet why do I say long? The fatal resolution was conceived, and I
hastened to the execution, in a period too brief for more than itself to be
viewed by the intellect.

What then? Were my hands embrued in this precious blood? Was it to this
extremity of horror that my evil genius was determined to urge me? Too surely
this was his purpose; too surely I was qualified to be its minister.

I lifted the weapon. Its point was aimed at the bosom of the sleeper. The
impulse was given....

At the instant a piercing shriek was uttered behind me, and a stretched-out
hand, grasping the blade, made it swerve widley from its aim. It descended, but
without inflicting a wound. Its force was spent upon the bed.

O! for words to paint that stormy transition! I loosed my hold of the dagger.
I started back, and fixed eyes of frantic curiosity on the author of my rescue.
He that interposed to arrest my deed, that started into being and activity at a
moment so pregnant with fate, without tokens of his purpose or his coming being
previously imparted, could not, methought, be less than divinity.

The first glance that I darted on this being corroborated my conjecture. It
was the figure and the linaments of Mrs. Lorimer. Neglegently habited in
flowing and brilliant white, with features bursting with terror and wonder, the
likeness of that being who was stretched upon the bed, now stood before me.

All that I am able to conceive of angel was comprised in the moral
constitution of this woman. That her genius had overleaped all bounds, and
interposed to save her, was no audacious imagination. In the state in which my
mind then was no other belief than this could occupy the first place.

My tongue was tied. I gazed by turns upon her who stood before me, and her who
lay upon the bed, and who, awakened by the shriek that had been uttered, now
opened her eyes. She started from her pillow, and, by assuming a new and more
distinct attitude, permitted me to recognize Clarice herself!

Three days before, I had left her, beside the bed of a dying friend, at a
solitary mansion in the mountains of Donnegal. Here it had been her resolution
to remain till her friend should breathe her last. Fraught with this
persuasion; knowing this to be the place and hour of repose of my lady, hurried
forward by the impetuosity of my own conceptions, deceived by the faint gleam
which penetrated through the curtain and imperfectly irradiated features which
bore, at all times, a powerful resemblance to those of Mrs. Lorimer, I had
rushed to the brink of this terrible precipice!

Why did I linger on the verge? Why, thus perilously situated, did I not throw
myself headlong? The steel was yet in my hand. A single blow would have pierced
my heart, and shut out from my remembrance and foresight the past and the
future?

The moment of insanity had gone by, and I was once more myself. Instead of
regarding the act which I had meditated as the dictate of compassion or of
justice, it only added to the sum of my ingratitude, and gave wings to the
whirlwind that was sent to bear me to perdition.

Perhaps I was influenced by a sentiment which I had not leisure to distribute
into parts. My understanding was, no doubt, bewildered in the maze of
consequences which would spring from my act. How should I explain my coming
hither in this murderous guise, my arm lifted to destroy the idol of my soul,
and the darling child of my patroness? In what words should I unfold the tale
of Wiatte, and enumerate the motives that terminated in the present scene? What
penalty had not my infatuation and cruelty deserved? What could I less than
turn the dagger's point against my own bosom?

A second time, the blow was thwarted and diverted. Once more this beneficent
interposer held my arm from the perpetration of a new iniquity. Once more
frustrated the instigations of that demon, of whose malice a mysterious
destiny had consigned me to be the sport and the prey.

Every new moment added to the sum of my inexpiable guilt. Murder was
succeeded, in an instant, by the more detestable enormity of suicide. She, to
whom my ingratitude was flagrant in proportion to the benefits of which she was
the author, had now added to her former acts, that of rescuing me from the last
of mischiefs.

I threw the weapon on the floor. The zeal which prompted her to seize my arm,
this action occasioned to subside, and to yield place to those emotions which
this spectacle was calculated to excite. She watched me in silence, and with an
air of ineffable solicitude. Clarice, governed by the instinct of modesty,
wrapped her bosom and face in the bedclothes, and testified her horror by
vehement, but scarcely articulate exclamations.

I moved forward, but my steps were random and tottering. My thoughts were
fettered by reverie, and my gesticulations destitute of meaning. My tongue
faltered without speaking, and I felt as if life and death were struggling
within me for the mastery.

My will, indeed, was far from being neutral in this contest. To such as I,
annihilation is the supreme good. To shake off the ills that fasten on us by
shaking off existence, is a lot which the system of nature has denied to man.
By escaping from life, I should be delivered from this scene, but should only
rush into a world of retribution, and be immersed in new agonies.

I was yet to live. No instrument of my deliverance was within reach. I was
powerless. To rush from the presence of these women, to hide me forever from
their scrutiny, and their upbraiding, to snatch from their minds all traces of
the existence of Clithero, was the scope of unutterable longings.

Urged to flight by every motive of which my nature was susceptible, I was yet
rooted to the spot. Had the pause been only to be interrupted by me, it would
have lasted forever.

At length, the lady, clasping her hands and lifting them, exclaimed, in a tone
melting into pity and grief:

Clithero! what is this? How came you hither and why?

I struggled for utterance: I came to murder you. Your brother has perished by
my hands. Fresh from the commission of this deed, I have hastened hither, to
perpetrate the same crime upon you.

My brother! replied the lady, with new vehemence, O! say not so! I have just
heard of his return from Sarsefield and that he lives.

He is dead, repeated I, with fierceness: I know it. It was I that killed him.

Dead! she faintly articulated, And by thee Clithero? O! cursed chance that
hindered thee from killing me also! Dead! Then is the omen fulfilled! Then am I
undone! Lost forever!

Her eyes now wandered from me, and her countenance sunk into a wild and rueful
expression. Hope was utterly extinguished in her heart, and life forsook her at
the same moment. She sunk upon the floor pallid and breathless....

How she came into possession of this knowledge I know not. It is possible that
Sarsefield had repented of concealment, and, in the interval that passed
between our separation and my encounter with Wiatte, had returned, and informed
her of the reappearance of this miscreant

Thus then was my fate consummated. I was rescued from destroying her by a
dagger, only to behold her perish by the tidings which I brought. Thus was
every omen of mischief and misery fulfilled. Thus was the enmity of Wiatte,
rendered efficacious, and the instrument of his destruction, changed into the
executioner of his revenge.

Such is the tale of my crimes. It is not for me to hope that the curtain of
oblivion will ever shut out the dismal spectacle. It will haunt me forever. The
torments that grow out of it, can terminate only with the thread of my
existence, but that I know full well will never end. Death is but a shifting of
the scene, and the endless progress of eternity, which, to the good, is merely
the perfection of felicity, is, to the wicked, an accumulation of woe. The
self-destroyer is his own enemy* this has ever been my opinion. Hitherto it has
influenced my action. Now, though the belief continues, its influence on my
conduct is annihilated. I am no stranger to the depth of that abyss, into which
I shall plunge. No matter. Change is precious for its own sake.

Well: I was still to live. My abode must be somewhere fixed. My conduct was
henceforth the result of a perverse and rebellious principle. I banished myself
forever from my native soil. I vowed never more to behold the face of my
Clarice, to abandon my friends, my books, all my wonted labors, and accustomed
recreations.

I was neither ashamed nor afraid. I considered not in what way the justice of
the country would affect me. It merely made no part of my contemplations. I was
not embarrassed by the choice of expedients, for trammeling up the visible
consequences and for eluding suspicion. The idea of abjuring my country, and
flying forever from the hateful scene, partook, to my apprehension, of the
vast, the boundless, and strange: of plunging from the height of fortune to
obscurity and indigence, corresponded with my present state of mind. It was of
a piece with the tremendous and wonderful events that had just happened.

These were the images that haunted me, while I stood speechlessly gazing at
the ruin before me. I heard a noise from without, or imagined that I heard it.
My reverie was broken, and my muscular power restored. I descended into the
street, through doors of which I possessed one set of keys, and hurried by the
shortest way beyond the precincts of the city. I had laid no plan. My
conceptions, with regard to the future, were shapeless and confused. Successive
incidents supplied me with a clue, and suggested, as they rose, the next step
to be taken.

I threw off the garb of affluence, and assumed a beggar's attire. That I had
money about me for the accomplishment of my purposes was wholly accidental. I
traveled along the coast, and when I arrived at one town, knew not why I
should go further; but my restlessness was unabated, and change was some
relief. I at length arrived at Belfast. A vessel was preparing for America. I
embraced eagerly the opportunity of passing into a new world. I arrived at
Philadelphia. As soon as I landed I wandered hither, and was content to wear
out my few remaining days in the service of Inglefield.

I have no friends. Why should I trust my story to another? I have no
solicitude about concealment; but who is there who will derive pleasure or
benefit from my rehearsal? And why should I expatiate on so hateful a theme?
Yet now have I consented to this. I have confided in you the history of my
disasters. I am not fearful of the use that you may be disposed to make of it.
I shall quickly set myself beyond the reach of human tribunals. I shall relieve
the ministers of law from the trouble of punishing. The recent events which
induced you to summon me to this conference, have likewise determined me to
make this disclosure.

I was not aware, for some time, of my perturbed sleep. No wonder that sleep
cannot soothe miseries like mine: that I am alike infested by memory in
wakefulness and slumber. Yet I was anew distressed at the discovery that my
thoughts found their way to my lips, without my being conscious of it, and that
my steps wandered forth unknowingly and without the guidance of my will.

The story you have told is not incredible. The disaster to which you allude
did not fail to excite my regret. I can still weep over the untimely fall of
youth and worth. I can no otherwise account for my frequenting this shade than
by the distant resemblance which the death of this man bore to that of which I
was the perpetrator. This resemblance occurred to me at first. If time were
able to weaken the impression which was produced by my crime, this similitude
was adapted to revive and enforce them.

The wilderness, and the cave to which you followed me, were familiar to my
sunday rambles. Often have I indulged in audible griefs on the cliffs of that
valley. Often have I brooded over my sorrows in the recesses of that cavern.
This scene is adapted to my temper. Its mountainous asperities supply me with
images of desolation and seclusion, and its headlong streams lull me into
temporary forgetfulness of mankind.

I comprehend you. You suspect me of concern in the death of Waldegrave. You
could not do otherwise. The conduct that you have witnessed was that of a
murderer. I will not upbraid you for your suspicions, though I have bought
exemption from them at an high price.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER IX.
THERE ended his narrative. He started from the spot where he stood, and,
without affording me any opportunity of replying or commenting, disappeared
amidst the thickest of the wood. I had no time to exert myself for his
detention. I could have used no arguments for this end, to which it is probable
he would have listened. The story I had heard was too extraordinary, too
completely the reverse of all my expectations, to allow me to attend to the
intimations of self-murder which he dropped.

The secret, which I imagined was about to be disclosed, was as inscrutable as
ever. Not a circumstance, from the moment when Clithero's character became the
subject of my meditations, till the conclusion of his tale, but served to
confirm my suspicion. Was this error to be imputed to credulity? Would not any
one, from similar appearances, have drawn similar conclusions? Or is there a
criterion by which truth can always be distinguished. Was it owing to my
imperfect education that the inquietudes of this man were not traced to a deed
performed at the distance of a thousand leagues, to the murder of his patroness
and friend?

I had heard a tale which apparently related to scenes and persons far distant,
but though my suspicions have appeared to have been misplaced, what should
hinder but that the death of my friend was, in like manner, an act of momentary
insanity and originated in a like spirit of mistaken benevolence?

But I did not consider this tale merely in relation to myself. My life had
been limited and uniform. I had communed with romancers and historians, but the
impression made upon me by this incident was unexampled in my experience. My
reading had furnished me with no instance, in any degree, parallel to this, and
I found that to be a distant and second-hand spectator of events was widely
different from witnessing them myself and partaking in their consequences. My
judgment was, for a time, sunk into imbecility and confusion. My mind was full
of the images unavoidably suggested by this tale, but they existed in a kind of
chaos and not otherwise, than gradually, was (...) to reduce them to distinct
particulars, and subject them to a deliberate and methodical inspection.

How was I to consider this act of Clithero? What a deplorable infatuation! Yet
it was the necessary result of a series of ideas mutually linked and connected.
His conduct was dictated by a motive allied to virtue. It was the fruit of an
ardent and grateful spirit.

The death of Wiatte could not be censured. The life of Clithero was
unspeakably more valuable than that of his antagonist. It was the instinct of
self-preservation that swayed him. He knew not his adversary in time enough, to
govern himself by that knowledge. Had the assailant been an unknown ruffian,
his death would have been followed by no remorse. The spectacle of his dying
agonies would have dwelt upon the memory of his assassin like any other
mournful sight, in the production of which he bore no part.

It must at least be said that his will was not concerned in this transaction.
He acted in obedience to an impulse which he could not control, nor resist.
Shall we impute guilt where there is no design? Shall a man extract food for
self-reproach from an action to which it is not enough to say that he was
actuated by no culpable intention, but that he was swayed by no intention
whatever? If consequences arise that cannot be foreseen, shall we find no
refuge in the persuasion of our rectitude and of human frailty? Shall we deem
ourselves criminal because we do not enjoy the attributes of deity? Because our
power and our knowledge are confined by impassable boundaries?

But whence arose the subsequent intention? It was the fruit of a dreadful
mistake. His intents were noble and compassionate. But this is of no avail to
free him from the imputation of guilt. No remembrance of past beneficence can
compensate for this crime. The scale, loaded with the recriminations of his
conscience, is immovable by any counter-weight.

But what are the conclusions to be drawn by dispassionate observers? Is it
possible to regard this person with disdain or with enmity? The crime
originated in those limitations which nature has imposed upon human faculties.
Proofs of a just intention are all that are requisite to exempt us from blame.
He is thus in consequence of a double mistake. The light in which he views this
event is erroneous. He judges wrong and is therefore miserable.

How imperfect are the grounds of all our decisions? Was it of no use to
superintend his childhood, to select his instructors and examples, to mark the
operations of his principles, to see him emerging into youth, to follow him
through various scenes and trying vicissitudes, and mark the uniformity of his
integrity? Who would have predicted his future conduct? Who would not have
affirmed the impossibility of an action like this?

How mysterious was the connection between the fate of Wiatte and his sister!
By such circuitous, and yet infalible means, were the prediction of the lady
and the vengeance of the brother accomplished! In how many cases may it be
said, as in this, that the prediction was the cause of its own fulfillment? That
the very act, which considerate observers, and even himself, for a time,
imagined to have utterly precluded the execution of Wiatte's menaces, should be
that inevitably leading to it. That the execution should be assigned to him,
who, abounding in abhorrence, and in the act of self-defence, was the slayer of
the menacer.

As the obstructor of his designs, Wiatte waylaid and assaulted Clithero. He
perished in the attempt. Were his designs frustrated?....No. It was thus that
he secured the gratification of his vengeance. His sister was cut off in the
bloom of life and prosperity. By a refinement of good fortune, the voluntary
minister of his malice had entailed upon himself exile without reprieve and
misery without end.

But what chiefly excited my wonder was the connection of this tale with the
destiny of Sarsefield. This was he whom I have frequently mentioned to you as
my preceptor. About four years previous to this era, he appeared in this
district without fortune or friend. He desired, one evening, to be accomodated
at my uncle's house. The conversation turning on the objects of his journey,
and his present situation, he professed himself in search of lucrative
employment. My uncle proposed to him to become a teacher, there being a
sufficient number of young people in this neighborhood to afford him
occupation and subsistence. He found it his interest to embrace this proposal.

I, of course, became his pupil, and demeaned myself in such a manner as
speedily to grow into a favorite. He communicated to us no part of his early
history, but informed us sufficiently of his adventures in Asia and Italy, to
make it plain that this was the same person alluded to by Clithero. During his
abode among us his conduct was irreproachable. When he left us, he manifested
the most poignant regret, but this originated chiefly in his regard to me. He
promised to maintain with me an epistolary intercourse. Since his departure,
however, I had heard nothing respecting him. It was with unspeakable regret
that I now heard of the disappointment of his hopes, and was inquisitive
respecting the measures which he would adopt in his new situation. Perhaps he
would once more return to America, and I should again be admitted to the
enjoyment of his society. This event I anticipated with the highest
satisfaction.

At present, the fate of the unhappy Clithero was the subject of abundant
anxiety. On his suddenly leaving me, at the conclusion of his tale, I supposed
that he had gone upon one of his usual rambles, and that it would terminate
only with the day. Next morning a message was received from Inglefield
inquiring if any one knew what had become of his servant. I could not listen to
this message with tranquillity. I recollected the hints that he had given of
some design upon his life, and admitted the most dreary forebodings. I speeded
to Inglefield's. Clithero had not returned, they told me, the preceding
evening. He had not apprized them of any intention to change his abode. His
boxes, and all that composed his slender property, were found in their ordinary
state. He had expressed no dissatisfaction with his present condition.

Several days passed, and no tidings could be procured of him. His absence was
a topic of general speculation, but was a source of particular anxiety to no
one but myself. My apprehensions were surely built upon sufficient grounds.
From the moment that we parted, no one had seen or heard of him. What mode of
suicide he had selected, he had disabled us from discovering, by the
impenetrable secrecy in which he had involved it.

In the midst of my reflections upon this subject, the idea of the wilderness
occurred. Could he have executed his design in the deepest of its recesses?
These were unvisited by human footsteps, and his bones might lie for ages in
this solitude without attracting observation. To seek them where they lay, to
gather them together and provide for them a grave, was a duty which appeared
incumbent on me, and of which the performance was connected with a thousand
habitual sentiments and mixed pleasures.

Thou know my devotion to the spirit that breathes its inspiration in the
gloom of forests and on the verge of streams. I love to immerse myself in
shades and dells, and hold converse with the solemnities and secrecies of
nature in the rude retreats of Norwalk. The disappearance of Clithero had
furnished new incitements to ascend its cliffs and pervade its thickets, as I
cherished the hope of meeting in my rambles, with some traces of this man. But
might he not still live? His words had imparted the belief that he intended to
destroy himself. This catastrophe, however, was far from certain. Was it not in
my power to avert it? Could I not restore a mind thus vigorous, to tranquil and
wholesome existence? Could I not subdue his perverse disdain and immeasurable
abhorrence of himself. His upbraiding and his scorn were unmerited and
misplaced. Perhaps they argued phrensy rather than prejudice; but phrensy, like
prejudice, was curable. Reason was no less an antidote to the illusions of
insanity like his, than to the illusions of error.

I did not immediately recollect that to subsist in this desert was impossible.
Nuts were the only fruits it produced, and these were inadequate to sustain
human life. If it were haunted by Clithero, he must occasionally pass its
limits and beg or purloin victuals. This deportment was too humiliating and
flagitious to be imputed to him. There was reason to suppose him smitten with
the charms of solitude, of a lonely abode in the midst of mountainous and
rugged nature; but this could not be uninterruptedly enjoyed. Life could be
supported only by occasionally visiting the haunts of men, in the guise of a
thief or a mendicant. Hence, since Clithero was not known to have reappeared,
at any farm-house in the neighborhood, I was compelled to conclude, either
that he had retired far from this district, or that he was dead.

Though I designed that my leisure should chiefly be consumed in the bosom of
Norwalk. I almost dismissed the hope of meeting with the fugitive. There were
indeed two sources of my hopelessness on this occasion. Not only it was
probable that Clithero had fled far away, but, should he have concealed himself
in some nook or cavern, within these precincts, his concealment was not to be
traced. This arose from the nature of that sterile region.

It would not be easy to describe the face of this district, in a few words.
Half of Solebury, thou know, admits neither of plough nor spade. The
cultivable space lies along the river, and the desert, lying on the north, has
gained, by some means, the apellation of Norwalk. Can thou imagine a space,
somewhat circular, about six miles in diameter, and exhibiting a perpetual and
intricate variety of craggy eminences and deep dells.

The hollows are single, and walled around by cliffs, ever varying in shape and
height, and have seldom any perceptible communication with each other. These
hollows are of all dimensions, from the narrowness and depth of a well, to the
amplitude of one hundred yards. Winter's snow is frequently found in these
cavities at mid-summer. The streams that burst forth from every crevice, are
thrown, by the irregularities of the surface, into numberless cascades, often
disappear in mists or in chasms, and emerge from subterranean channels, and,
finally, either subside into lakes, or quietly meander through the lower and
more level grounds.

Wherever nature left a flat it is made rugged and scarcely passable by
enormous and fallen trunks, accumulated by the storms of ages, and forming, by
their slow decay, a moss-covered soil, the haunt of rabbets and lizards. These
spots are obscured by the melancholy umbrage of pines, whose eternal murmurs
are in unison with vacancy and solitude, with the reverberations of the
torrents and the whistling of the blasts. Hiccory and poplar, which abound in
the low-lands, find here no fostering elements.

A sort of continued vale, winding and abrupt, leads into the midst of this
region and through it. This vale serves the purpose of a road. It is a tedious
maze, and perpetual declivity, and requires, from the passenger, a cautious and
sure foot. Openings and ascents occasionally present themselves on each side,
which seem to promise you access to the interior region, but always terminate,
sooner or later, in insuperable difficulties, at the verge of a precipice, or
the bottom of a steep.

Perhaps no one was more acquainted with this wilderness than I, but my
knowledge was extremely imperfect. I had traversed parts of it, at an early
age, in pursuit of berries and nuts, or led by a roaming disposition.
Afterward the sphere of my rambles was enlarged and their purpose changed.
When Sarsefield came among us, I became his favorite scholar and the companion
of all his pedestrian excursions. He was fond of penetrating into these
recesses, partly from the love of picturesque scenes, partly to investigate its
botanical and mineral productions, and, partly to carry on more effectually
that species of instruction which he had adopted with regard to me, and which
chiefly consisted in moralizing narratives or synthetical reasonings. These
excursions had familiarized me with its outlines and most accessible parts; but
there was much which, perhaps, could never be reached without wings, and much
the only paths to which I might forever overlook.

Every new excursion indeed added somewhat to my knowledge. New tracks were
pursued, new prospects detected, and new summits were gained. My rambles were
productive of incessant novelty, though they always terminated in the prospect
of limits that could not be overleaped. But none of these had led me wider from
my customary paths than that which had taken place when in pursuit of Clithero.
I had faint remembrance of the valley, into which I had descended after him,
but till then I had viewed it at a distance, and supposed it impossible to
reach the bottom but by leaping from a precipice some hundred feet in height.
The opposite steep seemed no less inaccessible, and the cavern at the bottom
was impervious to any views which my former positions had enabled me to take of
it.

My attention to re-examine this cave and ascertain whither it led, had, for a
time, been suspended by different considerations. It was now revived with more
energy than ever. I reflected that this had formerly been haunted by Clithero,
and might possibly have been the scene of the desperate act which he had
meditated. It might at least conceal some token of his past existence. It might
lead into spaces hitherto unvisited, and to summits from which wider landscapes
might be seen.

One morning I set out to explore this scene. The road which Clithero had taken
was laboriously circuitous. On my return from the first pursuit of him, I
ascended the cliff in my former footsteps, but soon lighted on the beaten track
which I had already described. This enabled me to shun a thousand obstacles,
which had lately risen before me, and opened an easy passage to the cavern.

I once more traversed this way. The brow of the hill was gained. The ledges of
which it consisted, afforded sufficient footing, when the attempt was made,
though viewed at a distance they seemed to be too narrow for that purpose. As I
descended the rugged stair, I could not but wonder at the temerity and
precipitation with which this descent had formerly been made. It seemed if the
noon-day-light and the tardiest circumspection would scarcely enable me to
accomplish it, yet then it had been done with headlong speed, and with no
guidance but the moon's uncertain rays.

I reached the mouth of the cave. Till now I had forgotten that a lamp or a
torch might be neccessary to direct my subterranean footsteps. I was unwilling
to defer the attempt. Light might possibly be requisite, if the cave had no
other outlet. Somewhat might present itself within to the eyes, which might
forever elude the hands, but I was more inclined to consider it merely as an
avenue, terminating in an opening on the summit of the steep, or on the
opposite side of the ridge. Caution might supply the place of light, or, having
explored the cave as far as possible at present, I might hereafter return,
better furnished for the scrutiny.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER X.
WITH these determinations, I proceeded. The entrance was (...) and compelled
me to resort to hands as well as feet. At a few yards from the mouth the light
disappeared, and I found myself immersed in the dunnest obscurity. Had I not
been persuaded that another had gone before me, I should have relinquished the
attempt. I proceeded with the utmost caution, always ascertaining, by
outstretched arms, the height and breadth of the cavity before me. In a short
time the dimensions expanded on all sides, and permitted me to resume my feet.

I walked upon a smooth and gentle declivity. Presently the wall, on one side,
and the ceiling receded beyond my reach. I began to fear that I should be
involved in a maze, and should be disabled from returning. To obviate this
danger it was requisite to adhere to the nearest wall, and conform to the
direction which it should take, without straying through the palpable
obscurity. Whether the ceiling was lofty or low, whether the opposite wall of
the passage was distant or near, this, I deemed no proper opportunity to
investigate.

In a short time, my progress was stopped by an abrupt descent. I set down the
advancing foot with caution, being aware that I might at the next step
encounter a bottomless pit. To the brink of such an one I seemed now to have
arrived. I stooped, and stretched my hand forward and downward, but all was
vacuity.

Here it was needful to pause. I had reached the brink of a cavity whose depth
it was impossible to ascertain. It might be a few inches beyond my reach, or
hundreds of feet. By leaping down I might incur no injury, or might plunge into
a lake or dash myself to pieces on the points of rocks.

I now saw with new force the propriety of being furnished with a light. The
first suggestion was to return upon my footsteps, and resume my undertaking on
the morrow. Yet, having advanced thus far, I felt reluctance to recede without
accomplishing my purposes. I reflected likewise that Clithero had boldy entered
this recess, and had certainly came forth at a different avenue from that at
which he entered.

At length it occurred to me, that though I could not go forward, yet I might
proceed along the edge of this cavity. This edge would be as safe a guidance,
and would serve as well for a clue by which I might return, as the wall which
it was now necessary to forsake.

Intense dark is always the parent of fears. Impending injuries cannot in this
state be descried, nor shunned, nor repelled. I began to feel some faltering of
my courage and seated myself, for a few minutes, on a stoney mass which arose
before me. My situation was new. The caverns I had hitherto met with, in this
desert, were chiefly formed of low-browed rocks. They were chambers, more or
less spacious, into which twilight was at least admitted; but here it seemed
as if I was surrounded by barriers that would forever cut off my return to air
and to light.

Presently I resumed my courage and proceeded. My road appeared now to ascend.
On one side I seemed still upon the verge of a precipice, and, on the other,
all was empty and waste. I had gone no inconsiderable distance, and persuaded
myself that my career would speedily terminate. In a short time, the space on
the left hand, was again occupied, and I cautiously proceeded between the edge
of the gulf and a rugged wall. As the space between them widened I adhered to
the wall.

I was not insensible that my path became more intricate and more difficult to
retread in proportion as I advanced. I endeavored to preserve a vivid
conception of the way which I had already passed, and to keep the images of the
left, and right hand wall, and the gulf, in due succession in my memory

The path which had hitherto been considerably smooth, now became rugged and
steep. Chilling damps, the secret trepidation which attended me, the length and
difficulties of my way, enhanced by the ceaseless caution and the numerous
expedients which the utter darkness obliged me to employ, began to overpower my
strength. I was frequently compelled to stop and recruit myself by rest. These
respites from toil were of use, but they could not enable me to prosecute an
endless journey, and to return was scarcely a less arduous task than to proceed.

I looked anxiously forward in the hope of being comforted by some dim ray,
which might assure me that my labors were approaching an end. At last this
propitious token appeared, and I issued forth into a kind of chamber, one side
of which was open to the air and allowed me to catch a portion of the
checquered sky. This spectacle never before excited such exquisite sensations
in my bosom. The air, likewise, breathed into the cavern, was unspeakably
delicious.

I now found myself on the projecture of a rock. Above and below the hill-side
was nearly perpendicular. Opposite, and at the distance of fifteen or twenty
yards, was a similar ascent. At the bottom was a glen, cold, narrow and
obscure. The projecture, which served as a kind of vestibule to the cave, was
connected with a ledge, by which, though not without peril and toil, I was
conducted to the summit.

This summit was higher than any of those which were interposed between itself
and the river. A large part of this chaos of rocks and precipices was sujected,
at one view, to the eye. The fertile lawns and vales which lay beyond this, the
winding course of the river, and the slopes which rose on its farther side,
were parts of this extensive scene. These objects were at any time fitted to
inspire rapture. Now my delight was enhanced by the contrast which this
lightsome and serene element bore to the glooms from which I had lately
emerged. My station, also, was higher, and the limits of my view, consequently
more ample than any which I had hitherto enjoyed.

I advanced to the outer verge of the hill, which I found to overlook a steep,
no less inaccessible, and a glen equally profound. I changed frequently my
station in order to diversify the scenery. At length it became necessary to
inquire by what means I should return. I traversed the edge of the hill, but on
every side it was equally steep and always too lofty to permit me to leap from
it. As I kept along the verge, I perceived that it tended in a circular
direction, and brought me back, at last, to the spot from which I had set out.
From this inspection, it seemed as if return was impossible by any other way
than that through the cavern.

I now turned my attention to the interior space. If you imagine a cylindrical
mass, with a cavity dug in the center, whose edge conforms to the exterior
edge; and, if you place in this cavity another cylinder, higher than that which
surrounds it, but so small as to leave between its sides and those of the
cavity, an hollow space, you will gain as distinct an image of this hill as
words can convey. The summit of the inner rock was rugged and covered with
trees of unequal growth. To reach this summit would not render my return
easier; but its greater elevation would extend my view, and perhaps furnish a
spot from which the whole horizon was conspicuous.

As I had traversed the outer, I now explored the inner edge of this hill. At
length I reached a spot where the chasm, separating the two rocks, was narrower
than at any other part. At first view, it seemed as if it were possible to leap
over it, but a nearer examination showed me that the passage was impracticable.
So far as my eye could estimate it, the breadth was thirty or forty feet. I
could scarcely venture to look beneath. The height was dizzy, and the walls,
which approached each other at top, receded at the bottom, so as to form the
resemblance of an immense hall, lighted from a rift, which some convulsion of
nature had made in the roof. Where I stood there ascended a perpetual mist,
occasioned by a torrent that dashed along the rugged pavement below.

From these objects I willingly turned my eye upon those before and above me,
on the opposite ascent. A stream, rushing from above, fell into a cavity, which
its own force seemed gradually to have made. The noise and the motion equally
attracted my attention. There was a desolate and solitary grandeur in the
scene, enhanced by the circumstances in which it was beheld, and by the perils
through which I had recently passed, that had never before been witnessed by me.

A sort of sanctity and awe environed it, owing to the consciousness of
absolute and utter loneliness. It was probable that human feet had never before
gained this recess, that human eyes had never been fixed upon these gushing
waters. The aboriginal inhabitants had no motives to lead them into caves like
this, and ponder on the verge of such a precipice. Their successors were still
less likely to have wandered hither. Since the birth of this continent, I was
probably the first who had deviated thus remotely from the customary paths of
men.

While musing upon these ideas, my eye was fixed upon the foaming current. At
length, I looked upon the rocks which confined and embarrassed its course. I
admired their phantastic shapes, and endless irregularities. Passing from one
to the other of these, my attention lighted, at length, as if by some magical
transition, on.....an human countenance!

My surprise was so abrupt, and my sensations so tumultuous that I forgot for a
moment the perilous nature of my situation. I loosened my hold of a pine
branch, which had been hitherto one of my supports, and almost started from my
seat. Had my station been, in a slight degree nearer the brink than it was, I
should have fallen headlong into the abyss.

To meet an human creature, even on that side of the chasm which I occupied,
would have been wholly adverse to my expectation. My station was accessible by
no other road than that through which I had passed, and no motives were
imaginable by which others could be prompted to explore this road. But he whom
I now beheld, was seated where it seemed impossible for human efforts to have
placed him....

But this affected me but little in comparison with other incidents. Not only
the countenance was human, but in spite of shaggy and tangled locks, and an air
of melancholy wildness, I speedily recognized the features of the fugitive
Clithero?

One glance was not sufficient to make me acquainted with this scene. I had
come hither partly in pursuit of this man, but some casual appendage of his
person, something which should indicate his past rather than his present
existence, was all that I hoped to find. That he should be found alive in this
desert; that he should have gained this summit, access to which was apparently
impossible, were scarcely within the boundaries of belief.

His scanty and coarse garb, had been nearly rent away by brambles and thorns,
his arms, bosom and cheek were overgrown and half-concealed by hair. There was
somewhat in his attitude and looks denoting more than anarchy of thoughts and
passions. His rueful, ghastly, and immovable eyes, testified not only that his
mind was ravaged by despair, but that he was pinched with famine.

These proofs of his misery thrilled to my inmost heart. Horror and shuddering
invaded me as I stood gazing upon him, and, for a time, I was without the power
of deliberating on the measures which it was my duty to adopt for his relief.
The first suggestion was, by calling, to inform him of my presence. I knew not
what counsel or comfort to offer. By what words to bespeak his attention, or by
what topics to molify his direful passions I knew not. Though so near, the gulf
by which we were separated was impassable. All that I could do was to speak.

My surprise and my horror were still strong enough to give a shrill and
piercing tone to my voice. The chasm and the rocks loudened and reverberated my
accents while I exclaimed..... Man! Clithero!

My summons was effectual. He shook off his trance in a moment. He had been
stretched upon his back, with his eyes fixed upon a craggy projecture above, as
if he were in momentary expectation of its fall, and crushing him to atoms. Now
he started on his feet. He was conscious of the voice, but not of the quarter
whence it came. He was looking anxiously around when I again spoke.....Look
hither: It is I who called

He looked. Astonishment was now mingled with every other dreadful meaning in
his visage. He clasped his hands together and bent forward, as if to satisfy
himself that his summoner was real. At the next moment he drew back, placed his
hands upon his breast, and fixed his eyes on the ground

This pause was not likely to be broken but by me. I was preparing again to
speak. To be more distinctly heard, I advanced closer to the brink. During this
action, my eye was necessarily withdrawn from him. Having gained a somewhat
nearer station, I looked again, but....he was gone!

The seat which he so lately occupied was empty. I was not forewarned of his
disappearance, or directed to the course of his flight by any rustling among
leaves. These indeed would have been overpowered by the noise of the cataract.
The place where he sat was the bottom of a cavity, one side of which terminated
in the verge of the abyss, but the other sides were perpendicular or
overhanging. Surely he had not leaped into this gulf, and yet that he had so
speedily scaled the steep was impossible.

I looked into the gulf, but the depth and the gloom allowed me to see nothing
with distinctness. His cries or groans could not be overheard amidst the uproar
of the waters. His fall must have instantly destroyed him, and that he had
fallen was the only conclusion I could draw.

My sensations on this incident cannot be easily described. The image of this
man's despair, and of the sudden catastrophe to which my inauspicious
interference had led, filled me with compunction and terror. Some of my fears
were relieved by the new conjecture, that, behind the rock on which he had
lain, there might be some aperture or pit into which he had descended, or in
which he might be concealed.

I derived consolation from this conjecture. Not only the evil which I dreaded
might not have happened, but some alleviation of his misery was possible. Could
I arrest his footsteps and win his attention, I might be able to insinuate the
lessons of fortitude; but if words were impotent, and arguments were nugatory,
yet to set by him in silence, to moisten his hand with tears, to sigh in
unison, to offer him the spectacle of sympathy, the solace of believing that
his demerits were not estimated by so rigid a standard by others as by himself,
that one at least among his fellow men regarded him with love and pity, could
not fail to be of benign influence.

These thoughts inspired me with new zeal. To effect my purpose it was
requisite to reach the opposite steep. I was now convinced that this was not an
impracticable undertaking, since Clithero had already performed it. I once more
made the circuit of the hill. Every side was steep and of enormous height, and
the gulf was no where so narrow as at this spot. I therefore returned hither,
and once more pondered on the means of passing this tremendous chasm in safety.

Casting my eyes upward, I noted the tree at the root of which I was standing.
I compared the breadth of the gulf with the length of the trunk of this tree,
and it appeared very suitable for a bridge. Happily it grew obliquely, and, if
felled by an axe, would probably fall of itself, in such a manner as to be
suspended across the chasm. The stock was thick enough to afford me footing,
and would enable me to reach the opposite declivity without danger or delay.

A more careful examination of the spot, the site of the tree, its dimensions
and the direction of its growth convinced me fully of the practicability of
this expedient, and I determined to carry it into immediate execution. For this
end I must hasten home, procure an axe, and return with all expedition hither.
I took my former way, once more entered the subterranean avenue, and slowly
reemerged into day. Before I reached home, the evening was at hand, and my
tired limbs and jaded spirits obliged me to defer my undertaking till the
morrow.

Though my limbs were at rest, my thoughts were active through the night. I
carefully reviewed the situation of this hill, and was unable to conjecture by
what means Clithero could place himself upon it. Unless he occasionally
returned to the habitable grounds, it was impossible for him to escape
perishing by famine. He might intend to destroy himself by this means, and my
first efforts were to be employed to overcome this fatal resolution. To
persuade him to leave his desolate haunts might be a laborious and tedious
task, meanwhile all my benevolent intentions would be frustrated by his want of
sustenance. It was proper, therefore, to carry bread with me, and to place it
before him. The sight of food, the urgencies of hunger, and my vehement
entreaties might prevail on him to eat, though no expostulation might suffice
to make him seek food at a distance.

END OF VOL. I.
EDGAR HUNTLY; OR, MEMOIRS OF A SLEEP-WALKER.

BY THE AUTHOR OF ARTHUR MERVYN, WIELAND, -- ORMOND, etc.

VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY H. MAXWELL, No. 3 LETITIA COURT, AND SOLD BY THOMAS
DOBSON, ASBURY DICKINS, AND THE PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS.

1799.

EDGAR HUNTLY; OR, MEMOIRS OF A SLEEP-WALKER.
CHAPTER XI.
NEXT morning I stored a small bag with meat and bread, and throwing an axe on
my shoulder, set out, without informing any one of my intentions, for the hill.
My passage was rendered more difficult by these encumbrances, but my
perseverance surmounted every impediment, and I gained, in a few hours, the
foot of the tree, whose trunk was to serve me for a bridge. In this journey I
saw no traces of the fugitive.

A new survey of the tree confirmed my former conclusions, and I began my work
with diligence. My strokes were repeated by a thousand echoes, and I paused at
first somewhat startled by reverberations, which made it appear as if not one,
but a score of axes, were employed at the same time on both sides of the gulf.

Quickly the tree fell, and exactly in the manner which I expected and desired.
The wide-spread limbs occupied and choked up the channel of the torrent, and
compelled it to seek a new outlet and multiplied its murmurs. I dared not trust
myself to cross it in an upright posture, but clung, with hands and feet, to
its rugged bark. Having reached the opposite cliff I proceeded to examine the
spot where Clithero had disappeared. My fondest hopes were realised, for a
considerable cavity appeared, which, on a former day, had been concealed from
my distant view by the rock.

It was obvious to conclude that this was his present habitation, or that an
avenue, conducting hither and terminating in the unexplored sides of this pit,
was that by which he had come hither, and by which he had retired. I could not
hesitate long to slide into the pit. I found an entrance through which I
fearlessly penetrated. I was prepared to encounter obstacles and perils similar
to those which I have already described, but was rescued from them by
ascending, in a few minutes, into a kind of passage, open above, but walled by
a continued rock on both sides. The sides of this passage conformed with the
utmost exactness to each other. Nature, at some former period, had ccasioned
the solid mass to dispart at this place, and had thus afforded access to the
summit of the hill. Loose stones and ragged points formed the flooring of this
passage, which rapidly and circuitously ascended.

I was now within a few yards of the surface of the rock. The passage opened
into a kind of chamber or pit, the sides of which were not difficult to climb.
I rejoiced at the prospect of this termination of my journey. Here I paused,
and throwing my weary limbs on the ground, began to examine the objects around
me, and to meditate on the steps that were next to be taken.

My first glance lighted on the very being of whom I was in search. Stretched
upon a bed of moss, at the distance of a few feet from my station, I beheld
Clithero. He had not been roused by my approach, though my footsteps were
perpetually stumbling and sliding. This reflection gave birth to the fear that
he was dead. A nearer inspection dispelled my apprehensions, and showed me that
he was merely buried in profound slumber. Those vigils must indeed have been
long which were at last succeeded by a sleep so oblivious.

This meeting was, in the highest degree, propitious. It not only assured me of
his existence, but proved that his miseries were capable to be suspended. His
slumber enabled me to pause, to ruminate on the manner by which his
understanding might be most successfully addressed; to collect and arrange the
topics fitted to rectify his gloomy and disastrous perceptions.

Thou know that I am qualified for such tasks neither by my education nor my
genius. The headlong and ferocious energies of this man could not be repelled
or diverted into better paths by efforts so undisciplined as mine. A despair so
stormy and impetuous would drown my feeble accents. How should I attempt to
reason with him? How should I outroot prepossessions so inveterate; the fruits
of his earliest education, fostered and matured by the observation and
experience of his whole life. How should I convince him that since the death of
Wiatte was not intended, the deed was without crime; that, if it had been
deliberately concerted, it was still a virtue, since his own life could, by no
other means, be preserved; that when he pointed a dagger at the bosom of his
mistress he was actuated, not by avarice, or ambition, or revenge, or malice.
He desired to confer on her the highest and the only benefit of which he
believed her capable. He sought to rescue her from tormenting regrets and
lingering agonies.

These positions were sufficiently just to my own view, but I was not called
upon to reduce them to practice. I had not to struggle with the consciousness
of having been rescued by some miraculous contingency, from embruing my hands
in the blood of her whom I adored; of having drawn upon myself suspicions of
ingratitude and murder too deep to be ever effaced; of having bereft myself of
love, and honor, and friends, and spotless reputation; of having doomed myself
to infamy and detestation, to hopeless exile, penury, and servile toil. These
were the evils which his malignant destiny had made the unalterable portion of
Clithero, and how should my imperfect eloquence annihilate these evils? Every
man, not himself the victim of irretreivable disasters, perceives the folly of
ruminating on the past, and of fostering a grief which cannot reverse or recall
the decrees of an immutable necessity; but every man who suffers is unavoidably
shackled by the errors which he censures in his neighbor, and his efforts to
relieve himself are as fruitless as those with which he attempted the relief of
others.

No topic, therefore, could be properly employed by me on the present occasion.
All that I could do was to offer him food, and, by pathetic supplications, to
prevail on him to eat. Famine, however obstinate, would scarcely refrain when
bread was placed within sight and reach. When made to swerve from his
resolution in one instance, it would be less difficult to conquer it a second
time. The magic of sympathy, the perseverance of benevolence, though silent,
might work a gradual and secret revolution, and better thoughts might
insensibly displace those desperate suggestions which now governed him.

Having revolved these ideas, I placed the food which I had brought at his
right hand, and, seating myself at his feet, attentively surveyed his
countenance. The emotions, which were visible during wakefulness, had vanished
during this cessation of remembrance and remorse, or were faintly discernible.
They served to dignify and solemnize his features, and to embellish those
immutable lines which betokened the spirit of his better days. Linaments were
now observed which could never co-exist with folly, or associate with obdurate
guilt.

I had no inclination to awaken him. This respite was too sweet to be
needlessly abridged. I determined to await the operation of nature, and to
prolong, by silence and by keeping interruption at a distance, this salutary
period of forgetfulness. This interval permitted new ideas to succeed in my
mind.

Clithero believed his solitude to be unapproachable. What new expedients to
escape inquiry and intrusion might not my presence suggest! Might he not
vanish, as he had done on the former day, and afford me no time to assail his
constancy and tempt his hunger? If, however, I withdrew during his sleep, he
would awake without disturbance, and be, unconscious for a time, that his
secrecy had been violated. He would quickly perceive the victuals and would
need no foreign inducements to eat. A provision, so unexpected and
extraordinary, might suggest new thoughts, and be construed into a kind of
heavenly condemnation of his purpose. He would not readily suspect the motives
or person of his visitant, would take no precaution against the repetition of
my visit, and, at the same time, our interview would not be attended with so
much surprise. The more I revolved these reflections, the greater force they
acquired. At length, I determined to withdraw, and, leaving the food where it
could scarcely fail of attracting his notice, I returned by the way that I had
come. I had scarcely reached home, when a messenger from Inglefield arrived,
requesting me to spend the succeeding night at his house, as some engagement
had occurred to draw him to the city.

I readily complied with this request. It was not neccessary, however, to be
early in my visit. I deferred going till the evening was far advanced. My way
led under the branches of the elm which recent events had rendered so
memorable. Hence my reflections reverted to the circumstances which had lately
occurred in connection with this tree.

I paused, for some time, under its shade. I marked the spot where Clithero had
been discovered digging. It showed marks of being unsettled, but the sod which
had formerly covered it and which had lately been removed, was now carefully
replaced. This had not been done by him on that occasion in which I was a
witness of his behavior. The earth was then hastily removed and as hastily
thrown again into the hole from which it had been taken.

Some curiosity was naturally excited by this appearance. Either some other
person, or Clithero, on a subsequent occasion, had been here. I was now
likewise led to reflect on the possible motives that prompted the maniac to
turn up this earth. There is always some significance in the actions of a
sleeper. Somewhat was, perhaps, buried in this spot, connected with the history
of Mrs. Lorimer or of Clarice. Was it not possible to ascertain the truth in
this respect?

There was but one method. By carefully uncovering this hole, and digging as
deep as Clithero had already dug, it would quickly appear whether any thing was
hidden. To do this publicly by daylight was evidently indiscreet. Besides, a
moment's delay was superfluous. The night had now fallen, and before it was
past this new undertaking might be finished. An interview was, if possible, to
be gained with Clithero on the morrow, and for this interview the discoveries
made on this spot might eminently qualify me. Influenced by these
considerations, I resolved to dig. I was first, however, to converse an hour
with the housekeeper, and then to withdraw to my chamber. When the family were
all retired, and there was no fear of observation or interruption, I proposed
to rise and hasten, with a proper implement, hither.

One chamber, in Inglefield's house, was usually reserved for visitants. In
this chamber thy unfortunate brother died, and here it was that I was to sleep.
The image of its last inhabitant could not fail of being called up, and of
banishing repose; but the scheme which I had meditated was an additional
incitement to watchfulness. Hither I repaired, at the due season, having
previously furnished myself with candles, since I knew not what might occur to
make a light necessary.

I did not go to bed, but either sat musing by a table or walked across the
room. The bed before me was that on which my friend breathed his last. To rest
my head upon the same pillow, to lie on that pallet which sustained his cold
and motionless limbs, were provocations to remembrance and grief that I desired
to shun. I endeavored to fill my mind with more recent incidents, with the
disasters of Clithero, my subterranean adventures, and the probable issue of
the schemes which I now contemplated.

I recalled the conversation which had just ended with the housekeeper.
Clithero had been our theme, but she had dealt chiefly in repetitions of what
had formerly been related by her or by Inglefield. I inquired what this man had
left behind, and found that it consisted of a square box, put together by
himself with uncommon strength, but of rugged workmanship. She proceeded to
mention that she had advised her brother, Mr. Inglefield, to break open this
box and ascertain its contents, but this he did not think himself justified in
doing. Clithero was guilty of no known crime, was responsible to no one for his
actions, and might sometime return to claim his property. This box contained
nothing with which others had a right to meddle. Somewhat might be found in it,
throwing light upon his past or present situation, but curiosity was not to be
gratified by these means. What Clithero thought proper to conceal, it was
criminal for us to extort from him.

The housekeeper was by no means convinced by these arguments, and at length,
obtained her brother's permission to try whether any of her own keys would
unlock this chest. The keys were produced, but no lock nor keyhole were
discoverable. The lid was fast, but by what means it was fastened, the most
accurate inspection could not detect. Hence she was compelled to lay aside her
project. This chest had always stood in the chamber which I now occupied.

These incidents were now remembered, and I felt disposed to profit by this
opportunity of examining this box. It stood in a corner, and was easily
distinguished by its form. I lifted it and found its weight by no means
extraordinary. Its structure was remarkable. It consisted of six sides, square
and of similar dimensions. These were joined, not by mortice and tennon; not by
nails, not by hinges, but the junction was accurate. The means by which they
were made to cohere were invisible.

Appearances on every side were uniform, nor were there any marks by which the
lid was distinguishable from its other surfaces.

During his residence with Inglefield, many specimens of mechanical ingenuity
were given by his servant. This was the workmanship of his own hands. I looked
at it, for some time, till the desire insensibly arose of opening and examining
its contents.

I had no more right to do this than the Inglefields, perhaps indeed this
curiosity was more absurd, and the gratification more culpable in me than in
them. I was acquainted with the history of Clithero's past life, and with his
present condition. Respecting these, I had no new intelligence to gain, and no
doubts to solve. What excuse could I make to the proprietor, should he ever
reappear to claim his own, or to Inglefield for breaking open a receptacle
which all the maxims of society combine to render sacred.

But could not my end be gained without violence. The means of opening might
present themselves on a patient scrutiny. The lid might be raised and shut down
again without any tokens of my act; its contents might be examined, and all
things restored to their former condition in a few minutes.

I intended not a theft. I intended to benefit myself without inflicting injury
on others. Nay, might not the discoveries I should make, throw light upon the
conduct of this extraordinary man, which his own narrative had withheld? Was
there reason to confide implicitly on the tale which I had heard.

In spite of the testimony of my own feelings, the miseries of Clithero
appeared in some degree, phantastic and groundless. A thousand conceivable
motives might induce him to pervert or conceal the truth. If he were thoroughly
known, his character might assume a new appearance, and what is now so
difficult to reconcile to common maxims, might prove perfectly consistent with
them. I desire to restore him to peace, but a thorough knowledge of his actions
is necessary, both to show that he is worthy of compassion, and to suggest the
best means of extirpating his errors. It was possible that this box contained
the means of this knowledge.

There were likewise other motives which, as they possessed some influence,
however small, deserve to be mentioned. Thou know that I also am a
mechanist. I had constructed a writing desk and cabinet, in which I had
endeavored to combine the properties of secrecy, security, and strength, in
the highest possible degree. I looked upon this therefore with the eye of an
artist, and was solicitous to know the principles on which it was formed. I
determined to examine, and if possible to open it.

EDGAR HUNTLY; CHAPTER XII.
I SURVEYED it with the utmost attention. All its parts appeared equally solid
and smooth. It could not be doubted that one of its sides served the purpose of
a lid, and was possible to be raised. Mere strength could not be applied to
raise it, because there was no projecture which might be firmly held by the
hand, and by which force could be exerted. Some spring, therefore, secretly
existed which might forever elude the senses, but on which the hand, by being
moved over it, in all directions, might accidentally light.

This process was effectual. A touch, casually applied at an angle, drove back
a bolt, and a spring, at the same time, was set in action, by which the lid was
raised above half an inch. No event could be supposed more fortuitous than
this. An hundred hands might have sought in vain for this spring. The spot in
which a certain degree of pressure was sufficient to produce this effect, was
of all, the last likely to attract notice or awaken suspicion.

I opened the trunk with eagerness. The space within was divided into numerous
compartments, none of which contained any thing of moment. Tools of different
and curious constructions, and remnants of minute machinery, were all that
offered themselves to my notice.

My expectations being thus frustrated, I proceeded to restore things to their
former state. I attempted to close the lid; but the spring which had raised it
refused to bend. No measure that I could adopt, enabled me to place the lid in
the same situation in which I had found it. In my efforts to press down the
lid, which were augmented in proportion to the resistance that I met with, the
spring was broken. This obstacle being removed, the lid resumed its proper
place; but no means, within the reach of my ingenuity to discover, enabled me
to push forward the bolt, and thus to restore the fastening.

I now perceived that Clithero had provided not only against the opening of his
cabinet, but likewise against the possibility of concealing that it had been
opened. This discovery threw me into some confusion. I had been tempted thus
far, by the belief that my action was without witnesses, and might be forever
concealed. This opinion was now confuted. If Clithero should ever reclaim his
property, he would not fail to detect the violence of which I had been guilty.
Inglefield would disapprove in another what he had not permitted to himself,
and the unauthorized and clandestine manner in which I had behaved, would
aggravate, in his eyes, the heinousness of my offense.

But now there was no remedy. All that remained was to hinder suspicion from
lighting on the innocent, and to confess, to my friend, the offense which I had
committed. Meanwhile my first project was resumed, and, the family being now
wrapped in profound sleep, I left my chamber, and proceeded to the elm. The moon
was extremely brilliant, but I hoped that this unfrequented road and
unseasonable hour would hinder me from being observed. My chamber was above the
kitchen, with which it communicated by a small staircase, and the building to
which it belonged was connected with the dwelling by a gallery. I extinguished
the light, and left it in the kitchen, intending to relight it, by the embers
that still glowed on the hearth, on my return.

I began to remove the sod, and cast out the earth, with little confidence in
the success of my project. The issue of my examination of the box humbled and
disheartened me. For some time I found nothing that tended to invigorate my
hopes. I determined, however, to descend, as long as the unsettled condition of
the earth showed me that some one had preceded me. Small masses of stone were
occasionally met with, which served only to perplex me with groundless
expectations. At length my spade struck upon something which emitted a very
different sound. I quickly drew it forth, and found it to be wood. Its regular
form, and the crevices which were faintly discernible, persuaded me that it was
human workmanship, and that there was a cavity within. The place in which it
was found, easily suggested some connection between this and the destiny of
Clithero. Covering up the hole with speed, I hastened with my prize to the
house. The door, by which the kitchen was entered, was not to be seen from the
road. It opened on a field, the farther limit of which was a ledge of rocks,
which formed, on this side, the boundary of Inglefield's estate and the
westernmost barrier of Norwalk.

As I turned the angle of the house, and came in view of this door, methought I
saw a figure issue from it. I was startled at this incident, and, stopping,
crouched close to the wall, that I might not be discovered. As soon as the
figure passed beyond the verge of the shade, it was easily distinguished to be
that of Clithero! He crossed the field with a rapid pace, and quickly passed
beyond the reach of my eye.

This appearance was mysterious. For what end he should visit this habitation,
could not be guessed. Was the contingency to be lamented, in consequence of
which an interview had been avoided? Would it have compelled me to explain the
broken condition of his trunk? I knew not whether to rejoice at having avoided
this interview, or to deplore it.

These thoughts did not divert me from examining the nature of the prize which
I had gained. I relighted my candle and hied once more to the chamber. The
first object, which, on entering it, atracted my attention, was the cabinet
broken into twenty fragments, on the hearth. I had left it on a low table, at a
distant corner of the room.

No conclusion could be formed, but that Clithero had been here, had discovered
the violence which had been committed on his property, and, in the first
transport of his indignation, had shattered it to pieces. I shuddered on
reflecting how near I had been to being detected by him in the very act, and by
how small an interval I had escaped that resentment, which, in that case, would
have probably been wreaked upon me.

My attention was withdrawn, at length, from this object, and fixed upon the
contents of the box which I had dug up. This was equally inaccessible with the
other. I had not the same motives for caution and forbearance. I was somewhat
desperate, as the consequences of my indiscretion could not be aggravated, and
my curiosity was more impetuous, with regard to the smaller than to the larger
cabinet. I placed it on the ground and crushed it to pieces with my heel.

Something was within. I brought it to the light, and, after loosing numerous
folds, at length drew forth a volume. No object, in the circle of nature, was
more adapted than this, to rouse up all my faculties. My feelings were anew
excited on observing that it was a manuscript. I bolted the door, and, drawing
near the light, opened and began to read.

A few pages was sufficent to explain the nature of the work. Clithero had
mentioned that his lady had composed a vindication of her conduct toward her
brother, when her intercession in his favor was solicited and refused. This
performance had never been published, but had been read by many, and was
preserved by her friends as a precious monument of her genius and her virtue.
This manuscript was now before me.

That Clithero should preserve this manuscript, amidst the wreck of his hopes
and fortunes, was apparently conformable to his temper. That, having formed the
resolution to die, he should seek to hide this volume from the profane
curiosity of survivors, was a natural proceeding. To bury it rather than to
burn, or disperse it into fragments, would be suggested by the wish to conceal,
without committing what his heated fancy would regard as sacrilege. To bury it
beneath the elm, was dictated by no fortuitous or inexplicable caprice. This
event could scarcely fail of exercising some influence on the perturbations of
his sleep, and thus, in addition to other causes, might his hovering near this
trunk, and throwing up this earth, in the intervals of slumber, be accounted
for. Clithero. indeed, had not mentioned this proceeding in the course of his
narrative; but that would have contravened the end for which he had provided a
grave for this book.

I read this pious tale with unspeakable eagerness. It essentially agreed with
that which had been told by Clithero. By drawing forth events into all their
circumstances, more distinct impressions were produced on the mind, and proofs
of fortitude and equanimity were here given, to which I had hitherto known no
parallel. No wonder that a soul like Clithero's, pervaded by these proofs of
inimitable excellence, and thrillingly alive to the passion of virtuous fame,
and the value of that existence which he had destroyed, should be overborne by
horror at the view of the past.

The instability of life and happiness was forcibly illustrated, as well as the
perniciousness of error. Exempt as this lady was from almost every defect, she
was indebted for her ruin to absurd opinions of the sacredness of
consanguinity, to her anxiety for the preservation of a ruffian, because that
ruffian was her brother. The spirit of Clithero was enlightened and erect, but
he weakly suffered the dictates of eternal justice to be swallowed up by
gratitude. The dread of unjust upbraiding hurried him to murder and to suicide,
and the imputation of imaginary guilt, impelled him to the perpetration of
genuine and enormous crimes.

The perusal of this volume ended not but with the night. Contrary to my hopes,
the next day was stormy and wet. This did not deter me from visiting the
mountain. Slippery paths and muddy torrents were no obstacles to the purposes
which I had adopted. I wrapped myself, and a bag of provisions, in a cloak of
painted canvass and speeded to the dwelling of Clithero.

I passed through the cave and reached the bridge which my own ingenuity had
formed. At that moment, torrents of rain poured from above, and stronger blasts
thundered amidst these desolate recesses and profound chasms. Instead of
lamenting the prevalence of this tempest, I now began to regard it with
pleasure. It conferred new forms of sublimity and grandeur on this scene.

As I crept with hands and feet, along my imperfect bridge, a sudden gust had
nearly whirled me into the frightful abyss below. To preserve myself, I was
oblidged to loose my hold of my burden and it fell into the gulf. This
incident disconcerted and distressed me. As soon as I had effected my dangerous
passage, I screened myself behind a cliff, and gave myself up to reflection.

The purpose of this arduous journey was defeated, by the loss of the
provisions I had brought. I despaired of winning the attention of the fugitive
to supplications, or arguments tending to smother remorse, or revive his
fortitude. The scope of my efforts was to consist in vanquishing his aversion
to food; but these efforts would now be useless, since I had no power to supply
his cravings.

This deficiency, however, was easily supplied. I had only to return home and
supply myself anew. No time was to be lost in doing this; but I was willing to
remain under this shelter, till the fury of the tempest had subsided. Besides,
I was not certain that Clithero had again retreated hither. It was requisite to
explore the summit of this hill, and ascertain whether it had any inhabitant. I
might likewise discover what had been the success of my former experiment, and
whether the food, which had been left here on the former day, was consumed or
neglected.

While occupied with these reflections, my eyes were fixed upon the opposite
steeps. The tops of the trees, waving to and fro, in the wildest commotion, and
their trunks, occasionally bending to the blast, which, in these lofty regions,
blew with a violence unknown in the tracts below, exhibited an awful spectacle.
At length, my attention was attracted by the trunk which lay across the gulf,
and which I had converted into a bridge. I perceived that it had already
somewhat swerved from its original position, that every blast broke or loosened
some of the fibers by which its root was connected with the opposite bank, and
that, if the storm did not speedily abate, there was imminent danger of its
being torn from the rock and precipitated into the chasm. Thus my retreat would
be cut off, and the evils, from which I was endeavoring to rescue another,
would be experienced by myself.

I did not just then reflect that Clithero had found access to this hill by
other means, and that the avenue by which he came, would be equally commodious
to me. I believed my destiny to hang upon the expedition with which I should
re-cross this gulf. The moments that were spent in these deliberations were
critical, and I shuddered to observe that the trunk was held in its place by
one or two fibers which were already stretched almost to breaking.

To pass along the trunk, rendered slippery by the wet, and unsteadfast by the
wind, was eminently dangerous. To maintain my hold, in passing, in defiance of
the whirlwind, required the most vigorous exertions. For this end it was
necessary to discommode myself of my cloak, and of the volume, which I carried
in the pocket of my cloak. I believed there was no reason to dread their being
destroyed or purloined, if left, for a few hours or a day, in this recess. If
laid beside a stone, under shelter of this cliff, they would, no doubt, remain
unmolested till the disappearance of the storm should permit me to revisit this
spot in the afternoon or on the morrow.

Just as I had disposed of these encumbrances, and had risen from my seat, my
attention was again called to the opposite steep, by the most unwelcome object
that, at this time, could possibly occur. Something was perceived moving among
the bushes and rocks, which, for a time, I hoped was no more than a racoon or
oppossum; but which presently appeared to be a panther. His gray coat, extended
claws, fiery eyes, and a cry which he at that moment uttered, and which, by its
resemblance to the human voice, is peculiarly terrific, denoted him to be the
most ferocious and untamable of that detested race The gray Cougar. This animal
has all the essential characteristics of a tiger. Though somewhat inferior in
size and strength, these are such as to make him equally formidable to man.
.

The industry of our hunters has nearly banished animals of prey from these
precincts. The fastnesses of Norwalk, however, could not but afford refuge to
some of them. Of late I had met them so rarely, that my fears were seldom
alive, and I trod, without caution, the ruggedest and most solitary haunts.
Still, however, I had seldom been unfurnished in my rambles with the means of
defense,

My temper never delighted in carnage and blood. I found no pleasure in
plunging into bogs, wading through rivulets, and penetrating thickets, for the
sake of dispatching wood-cocks and squirrels. To watch their gambols and
flittings, and invite them to my hand, was my darling amusement when loitering
among the woods and the rocks. It was much otherwise, however, with regard to
rattlesnakes and panthers. These I thought it no breach of duty to exterminate
wherever they could be found. These judicious and sanguinary spoilers were
equally the enemies of man and of the harmless race that sported in the trees,
and many of their skins are still preserved by me as trophies of my juvenile
prowess.

As hunting was never my trade or my sport, I never loaded myself with
fowling-piece or rifle. Assiduous exercise had made me master of a weapon of
much easier carriage, and, within a moderate distance, more destructive and
unerring. This was the Tom-hawk. With this I have often severed an oak branch
and cut the sinews of a cat-o'mountain, at the distance of sixty feet.

The unfrequency with which I had lately encountered this foe, and the
encumbrance of provision, made me neglect, on this occasion, to bring with me
my usual arms. The beast that was now before me, when stimulated by hunger, was
accustomed to assail whatever could provide him with a banquet of blood. He
would set upon the man and the deer with equal and irresistible ferocity. His
sagacity was equal to his strength, and he seemed able to discover when his
antagonist was armed and prepared for defense.

My past experience enabled me to estimate the full extent of my danger. He sat
on the brow of the steep, eyeing the bridge, and apparently deliberating
whether he should cross it. It was probable that he had scented my footsteps
thus far, and should he pass over, his vigilance could scarcely fail of
detecting my assylum. The pit into which Clithero had sunk from my view was at
some distance. To reach it was the first impulse of my fear, but this could not
be done without exciting the observation and pursuit of this enemy. I deeply
regretted the untoward chance that had led me, when I first came over, to a
different shelter.

Should he retain his present station, my danger was scarcely lessened. To pass
over in the face of a famished tiger was only to rush upon my fate. The falling
of the trunk, which had lately been so anxiously deprecated, was now, with no
less solicitude, desired. Every new gust, I hoped, would tear asunder its
remaining bands, and, by cutting off all communication between the opposite
steeps, place me in security.

My hopes, however, were destined to be frustrated. The fibers of the prostrate
tree, were obstinately tenacious of their hold, and presently the animal
scrambled down the rock and proceeded to cross it.

Of all kinds of death, that which now menaced me was the most abhorred. To die
by disease, or by the hand of a fellow creature, was propitious and lenient in
comparison with being rent to pieces by the fangs of this savage. To perish, in
this obscure retreat, by means so impervious to the anxious curiosity of my
friends, to lose my portion of existence by so untoward and ignoble a destiny,
was insupportable. I bitterly deplored my rashness in coming hither unprovided
for an encounter like this.

The evil of my present circumstances consisted chiefly in suspense. My death
was unavoidable, but my imagination had leisure to torment itself by
anticipations. One foot of the savage was slowly and cautiously moved after the
other. He struck his claws so deeply into the bark that they were with
difficulty withdrawn. At length he leaped upon the ground. We were now
separated by an interval of scarcely eight feet. To leave the spot where I
crouched, was impossible. Behind and beside me, the cliff rose perpendicularly,
and before me was this grim and terrific visage. I shrunk still closer to the
ground and closed my eyes.

From this pause of horror I was roused by the noise occasioned by a second
spring of the animal. He leaped into the pit, in which I had so deeply
regretted that I had not taken refuge, and disappeared. My rescue was so
sudden, and so much beyond my belief or my hope, that I doubted, for a moment,
whether my senses did not deceive me. This opportunity of escape was not to be
neglected. I left my place, and scrambled over the trunk with a precipitation
which had liked to have proved fatal. The tree groaned and shook under me, the
wind blew with unexampled violence, and I had scarcely reached the opposite
steep when the roots were severed from the rock and the whole fell thundering
to the bottom of the chasm.

My trepidations were not speedily quieted. I looked back with wonder on my
hair-breadth escape, and on that singular concurrence of events, which had
placed me, in so short a period, in absolute security. Had the trunk fallen a
moment earlier, I should have been imprisoned on the hill or thrown headlong.
Had its fall been delayed another moment I should have been pursued; for the
beast now issued from his den, and testified his surprise and disappointment by
tokens the sight of which made my blood run cold.

He saw me, and hastened to the verge of the chasm. He squatted on his hindlegs
and assumed the attitude of one preparing to leap. My consternation was excited
afresh by these appearances. It seemed at first as if the rift was too wide for
any power of muscles to carry him in safety over; but I knew the unparalleled
agility of this animal, and that his experience had made him a better judge of
the practicability of this exploit than I was.

Still there was hope that he would relinquish this design as desperate. This
hope was quickly at an end. He sprung, and his forelegs touched the verge of
the rock on which I stood. In spite of vehement exertions, however, the surface
was too smooth and too hard to allow him to make good his hold. He fell, and a
piercing cry, uttered below, showed that nothing had obstructed his descent to
the bottom.

Thus was I again rescued from death. Nothing but the pressure of famine could
have prompted this savage to so audacious and hazardous an effort; but, by
yiedling to this impulse, he had made my future visits to this spot exempt from
peril. Clithero was, likewise, relieved from a danger that was imminent and
unforeseen. Prowling over these grounds the panther could scarcely have failed
to meet with this solitary fugitive.

Had the animal lived, my first duty would have been to have sought him out,
and assailed him with my Tom-hawk; but no undertaking would have been more
hazardous. Lurking in the grass, or in the branches of a tree, his eye might
have descried my approach, he might leap upon me unperceived, and my weapon
would be useless.

With an heart beating with unwonted rapidity, I once more descended the cliff,
entered the cavern, and arrived at Huntly farm, drenched with rain, and
exhausted by fatigue.

By night the storm was dispelled; but my exhausted strength would not allow me
to return to the mountain. At the customary hour I retired to my chamber. I
incessantly ruminated on the adventures of the last day, and inquired into the
conduct which I was next to pursue.

The bridge being destroyed, my customary access was cut off. There was no
possibility of restoring this bridge. My strength would not suffice to drag a
fallen tree from a distance, and there was none whose position would abridge or
supersede that labor. Some other expedient must, therefore, be discovered to
pass this chasm.

I reviewed the circumstances of my subterranean journey. The cavern was
imperfectly explored. Its branches might be numerous. That which I had hitherto
pursued, terminated in an opening at a considerable distance from the bottom.
Other branches might exist, some of which might lead to the foot of the
precipice, and thence a communication might be found with the summit of the
interior hill.

The danger of wandering into dark and untried paths, and the commodiousness of
that road which had at first been taken, were sufficient reasons for having
hitherto suspended my examination of the different branches of this labyrinth.
Now my customary road was no longer practicable, and another was to be
carefully explored. For this end, on my next journey to the mountain, I
determined to take with me a lamp, and unravel this darksome maze: This project
I resolved to execute the next day.

I now recollected what, if it had more seasonably occurred, would have taught
me caution. Some months before this a farmer, living in the skirts of Norwalk,
discovered two marauders in his field, whom he imagined to be a male and female
panther. They had destroyed some sheep, and had been hunted by the farmer, with
long and fruitless diligence. Sheep had likewise been destroyed in different
quarters; but the owners had fixed the imputation of the crime upon dogs, many
of whom had atoned for their supposed offenses by their death. He who had
mentioned his discovery of panthers, received little credit from his
neighbors; because a long time had elapsed since these animals were supposed
to have been exiled from this district, and because no other person had seen
them. The truth of this seemed now to be confirmed by the testimony of my own
senses; but, if the rumor were true, there still existed another of these
animals, who might harbor in the obscurities of this desert, and against whom
it was necessary to employ some precaution. Henceforth I resolved never to
traverse the wilderness unfurnished with my tom-hawk.

These images, mingled with those which the contemplation of futurity
suggested, floated, for a time, in my brain; but at length gave place to sleep.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XIII.
SINCE my return home, my mind had been fully occupied by schemes and
reflections relative to Clithero. The project suggested by thee, and to which I
had determined to devote my leisure, was forgotten, or remembered for a moment
and at wide intervals. What, however, was nearly banished from my waking
thoughts, occurred, in an incongruous and half-seen form, to my dreams. During
my sleep, the image of Waldegrave flitted before me. Methought the sentiment
that impelled him to visit me, was not affection or complacensy, but inquietude
and anger. Some service or duty remained to be performed by me, which I had
culpably neglected: to inspirit my zeal, to awaken my remembrance, and incite
me to the performance of this duty, did this glimmering messenger, this half
indignant apparition, come.

I commonly awake soon enough to mark the youngest dawn of the morning. Now, in
consequence perhaps of my perturbed sleep, I opened my eyes before the stars
had lost any of their luster. This circumstance produced some surprise, until
the images that lately hovered in my fancy, were recalled, and furnished
somewhat like a solution of the problem. Connected with the image of my dead
friend, was that of his sister. The discourse that took place at our last
interview; the scheme of transcribing, for thy use, all the letters which,
during his short but busy life, I received from him; the nature of this
correspondence, and the opportunity which this employment would afford me of
contemplating these ample and precious monuments of the intellectual existence
and moral pre-eminence of my friend, occurred to my thoughts.

The resolution to prosecute the task was revived. The obligation of
benevolence, with regard to Clithero, was not discharged. This, neither duty
nor curiosity would permit to be overlooked or delayed; but why should my whole
attention and activity be devoted to this man. The hours which were spent at
home and in my chamber, could not be more usefully employed than in making my
intended copy.

In a few hours after sunrise I purposed to resume my way to the mountain.
Could this interval be appropriated to a better purpose than in counting over
my friend's letters, setting them apart from my own, and preparing them for
that transcription from which I expected so high and yet so mournful a
gratification.

This purpose, by no violent union, was blended with the recollection of my
dream. This recollection infused some degree of wavering and dejection into my
mind. In transcribing these letters I should violate pathetic and solemn
injunctions frequently repeated by the writer. Was there some connection
between this purpose and the incidents of my vision. Was the latter sent to
enforce the interdictions which had been formerly imposed?

Thou art not fully acquainted with the intellectual history of thy brother.
Some information on that head will be necessary to explain the nature of that
reluctance which I now feel to comply with thy request, and which had formerly
so much excited thy surprise.

Waldegrave, like other men, early devoted to meditation and books, had
adopted, at different periods, different systems of opinion, on topics
connected with religion and morals. His earliest creeds, tended to efface the
impressions of his education; to deify necessity and universalize matter; to
destroy the popular distinctions between soul and body, and to dissolve the
supposed connection between the moral condition of man, anterior and subsequent
to death.

This creed he adopted with all the fullness of conviction, and propagated with
the utmost zeal. Soon after our friendship commenced, fortune placed us at a
distance from each other, and no intercourse was allowed but by the pen. Our
letters, however, were punctual and copious. Those of Waldegrave were too
frequently devoted to the defense of his favorite tenets.

Thou art acquainted with the revolution that afterward took place in his
mind. Placed within the sphere of religious influence, and listening daily to
the reasonings and exhortations of Mr. S......., whose benign temper and
blameless deportment was a visible and constant lesson, he insensibly resumed
the faith which he had relinquished, and became the vehement opponent of all
that he had formerly defended. The chief object of his labors, in this new
state of his mind, was to counteract the effect of his former reasonings on my
opinions.

At this time, other changes took place in his situation, in consequence of
which we were once more permitted to reside under the same roof. The
intercourse now ceased to be by letter, and the subtle and laborious
argumentations which he had formerly produced against religion, and which were
contained in a permanent form, were combatted in transient conversation. He was
not only eager to subvert those opinions, which he had contributed to instill
into me, but was anxious that the letters and manuscripts, which had been
employed in their support, should be destroyed. He did not fear wholly or
chiefly on my own account. He believed that the influence of former reasonings
on my faith would be sufficiently eradicated by the new; but he dreaded lest
these manuscripts might fall into other hands, and thus produce mischiefs which
it would not be in his power to repair. With regard to me, the poison had been
followed by its antidote; but with respect to others, these letters would
communicate the poison when the antidote could not be administered.

I would not consent to this sacrifice. I did not entirely abjure the creed
which had, with great copiousness and eloquence, been defended in these
letters. Beside, mixed up with abstract reasonings, were numberless passages
which elucidated the character and history of my friend. These were too
precious to be consigned to oblivion, and to take them out of their present
connection and arrangement, would be to mutilate and deform them.

His entreaties and remonstrances were earnest and frequent, but always
ineffectual. He had too much purity of motives to be angry at my stubbornness,
but his sense of the mischievous tendency of these letters, was so great, that
my intractability cost him many a pang.

He was now gone, and I had not only determined to preserve these monuments,
but had consented to copy them for the use of another: for the use of one whose
present and eternal welfare had been the chief object of his cares and efforts.
Thou, like others of thy sex, art unaccustomed to metaphysical refinements. Thy
religion is the growth of sensibility and not of argument. Thou art not
fortified and prepossessed against the subtleties, with which the being and
attributes of the deity have been assailed. Would it be just to expose thee to
pollution and depravity from this source? To make thy brother the instrument of
thy apostasy, the author of thy fall? That brother, whose latter days were so
ardently devoted to cherishing the spirit of devotion in thy heart?

These ideas now occurred with more force than formerly. I had promised, not
without reluctance, to give thee the entire copy of his letters; but I now
receded from this promise. I resolved merely to select for thy perusal such as
were narrative or descriptive. This could not be done with too much expedition.
It was still dark, but my sleep was at an end, and, by a common apparatus, that
lay beside my bed, I could instantly produce a light.

The light was produced, and I proceeded to the cabinet where all my papers and
books are deposited. This was my own contrivance and workmanship, undertaken by
the advice of Sarsefield, who took infinite pains to foster that mechanical
genius, which displayed itself so early and so forcibly in thy friend. The key
belonging to this, was, like the cabinet itself, of singular structure. For
greater safety, it was constantly placed in a closet, which was likewise locked.

The key was found as usual, and the cabinet opened. The letters were bound
together in a compact form, lodged in a parchment case, and placed in a secret
drawer. This drawer would not have been detected by common eyes, and it opened
by the motion of a spring, of whose existence none but the maker was conscious.
This drawer I had opened before I went to sleep and the letters were then safe.

Thou can not imagine my confusion and astonishment, when, on opening the
drawer, I perceived that the packet was gone. I looked with more attention,
and put my hand within it, but the space was empty. Whither had it gone, and by
whom was it purloined? I was not conscious of having taken it away, yet no
hands but mine could have done it. On the last evening I had doubtless removed
it to some other corner, but had forgotten it. I tasked my understanding and my
memory. I could not conceive the possibility of any motives inducing me to
alter my arrangements in this respect, and was unable to recollect that I had
made this change

What remained? This invaluable relic had disappeared. Every thought and
every effort must be devoted to the single purpose of regaining it. As yet I
did not despair. Until I had opened and ransacked every part of the cabinet in
vain, I did not admit the belief that I had lost it. Even then this persuasion
was tumultuous and fluctuating. It had vanished to my senses, but these senses
were abused and depraved. To have passed, of its own accord, through the pores
of this wood, was impossible; but if it were gone, thus did it escape.

I was lost in horror and amazement. I explored every nook a second and a third
time, but still it eluded my eye and my touch. I opened my closets and cases. I
pryed every where, unfolded every article of clothing, turned and scrutinized
every instrument and tool, but nothing availed.

My thoughts were not speedily collected or calmed. I threw myself on the bed
and resigned myself to musing. That my loss was irretreivable, was a
supposition not to be endured. Yet ominous terrors haunted me. A whispering
intimation that a relic which I valued more than life was torn forever away
by some malignant and inscrutable destiny. The same power that had taken it
from this receptacle, was able to waft it over the ocean or the mountains, and
condemn me to a fruitless and eternal search.

But what was he that committed the theft? Thou only, of the beings who live,
wast acquainted with the existence of these manuscripts. Thou art many miles
distant, and art utterly a stranger to the mode or place of their concealment.
Not only access to the cabinet, but access to the room, without my knowledge
and permission, was impossible. Both were locked during this night. Not five
hours had elapsed since the cabinet and drawer had been opened, and since the
letters had been seen and touched, being in their ordinary position. During
this interval, the thief had entered, and despoiled me of my treasure.

This event, so inexplicable and so dreadful, threw my soul into a kind of
stupor or distraction, from which I was suddenly roused by a foot-step, softly
moving in the entry near my door. I started from my bed, as if I had gained a
glimpse of the robber. Before I could run to the door, some one knocked. I did
not think upon the propriety of answering the signal, but hastened with
tremulous fingers and throbbing heart to open the door. My uncle, in his
night-dress, and apparently just risen from his bed, stood before me!

He marked the eagerness and perturbation of my looks, and inquired into the
cause. I did not answer his inquiries. His appearance in my chamber and in this
guise, added to my surprise. My mind was full of the late discovery, and
instantly conceived some connection between this unseasonable visit and my lost
manuscript. I interrogated him in my turn as to the cause of his coming.

Why, said he, I came to ascertain whether it was you or not who amused himself
so strangely at this time of night. What is the matter with you? Why are you up
so early?

I told him that I had been roused by my dreams, and finding no inclination to
court my slumber back again, I had risen, though earlier by some hours than the
usual period of my rising.

But why did you go up stairs? You might easily imagine that the sound of your
steps would alarm those below, who would be puzzled to guess who it was that
had thought proper to amuse himself in this manner.

Up stairs? I have not left my room this night. It is not ten minutes since I
awoke, and my door has not since been opened.

Indeed! That is strange. Nay, it is impossible. It was your feet surely that I
heard pacing so solemnly and indefatigably across the long-room for near an
hour. I could not for my life conjecture, for a time, who it was, but finally
concluded that it was you. There was still, however, some doubt, and I came
hither to satisfy myself.

These tidings were adapted to raise all my emotions to a still higher pitch. I
questioned him with eagerness as to the circumstances he had noticed. He said
he had been roused by a sound, whose power of disturbing him arose, not from
its loudness, but from its uncommonness. He distinctly heard some one pacing to
and fro with bare feet, in the long room: This sound continued, with little
intermission, for an hour. He then noticed a cessation of the walking, and a
sound as if some one were lifting the lid of the large cedar chest, that stood
in the corner of this room. The walking was not resumed, and all was silent. He
listened for a quarter of an hour, and busied himself in conjecturing the cause
of this disturbance. The most probable conclusion was, that the walker was his
nephew, and his curiosity had led him to my chamber to ascertain the truth.

This dwelling has three stories. The two lower stories are divided into
numerous apartments. The upper story constitutes a single room whose sides are
the four walls of the house, and whose ceiling is the roof. This room is
unocupied, except by lumber, and imperfectly lighted by a small casement at one
end. In this room, were footsteps heard by my uncle.

The staircase leading to it terminated in a passage near my door. I snatched
the candle, and desiring him to follow me, added, that I would ascertain the
truth in a moment. He followed, but observed that the walking had ceased long
enough for the person to escape.

I ascended to the room, and looked behind and among the tables, and chairs,
and casks, which, were confusedly scattered through it, but found nothing in
the shape of man. The cedar chest, spoken of by Mr. Huntly, contained old
books, and remnants of maps and charts, whose worthlessness unfitted them for
accommodation elsewhere. The lid was without hinges or lock. I examined this
repository, but there was nothing which attracted my attention.

The way between the kitchen door, and the door of the long-room, had no
impediments. Both were usually unfastened but the motives by which any stranger
to the dwelling, or indeed any one within it, could be prompted to choose this
place and hour, for an employ- of this kind, were wholly incomprehensible.

When the family rose, inquiries were made but no satisfaction was obtained.
The family consisted only of four persons, my uncle, my two sisters, and
myself. I mentioned to them the loss I had sustained, but their conjectures
were no less unsatisfactory on this than on the former incident.

There was no end to my restless meditations. Waldegrave was the only being,
beside myself, acquainted with the secrets of my cabinet. During his life these
manuscripts had been the objects of perpetual solicitude; to gain possession,
to destroy, or secret them, was the strongest of his wishes. Had he retained
his sensibility on the approach of death, no doubt he would have renewed, with
irresistible solemnity, his injunctions to destroy them.

Now, however, they had vanished. There were no materials of conjecture; no
probabilities to be weighed, or suspicions to revolve. Human artifice or power
was unequal to this exploit. Means less than preternatural would not furnish a
conveyance for this treasure.

It was otherwise with regard to this unseasonable walker. His inducements
indeed were beyond my power to conceive, but to enter these doors and ascend
these stairs, demanded not the faculties of any being more than human.

This intrusion, and the pillage of my cabinet were contemporary events. Was
there no more connection between them than that which results from time? Was
not the purloiner of my treasure and the wanderer the same person? I could not
reconcile the former incident with the attributes of man, and yet a secret
faith, not to be outrooted or suspended, swayed me, and compelled me to imagine
that the detection of this visitant, would unveil the thief.

These thoughts were pregnant with dejection and reverie. Clithero, during the
day, was forgotten. On the succeeding night, my intentions, with regard to this
man, returned. I derived some slender consolation from reflecting, that time,
in its long lapse and ceaseless revolutions, might dissipate the gloom that
environed me. Meanwhile I struggled to dismiss the images connected with my
loss and to think only of Clithero.

My impatience was as strong as ever to obtain another interview with this man.
I longed with vehemence for the return of day. I believed that every moment
added to his sufferings, intellectual and physical, and confided in the
efficacy of my presence to alleviate or suspend them. The provisions I had left
would be speedily consumed, and the abstinence of three days was sufficient to
undermine the vital energies. I, some times, hesitated whether I ought not
instantly to depart. It was night indeed, but the late storm had purified the
air, and the radiance of a full moon was universal and dazzling.

From this attempt I was deterred by reflecting that my own frame needed the
repairs of sleep. Toil and watchfulness, if prolonged another day, would deeply
injure a constitution by no means distinguished for its force. I must,
therefore, compel, if it were possible, some hours of repose. I prepared to
retire to bed, when a new incident occurred to divert my attention for a time
from these designs.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XIV.
WHILE sitting alone by the parlour fire, marking the effects of moonlight, I
noted one on horseback coming toward the gate. At first sight, methought his
shape and guise were not wholly new to me; but all that I could discern was
merely a resemblance to some one whom I had before seen. Presently he stopped,
and, looking toward the house, made inquiries of a passenger who chanced to be
near. Being apparently satisfied with the answers he received, he rode with a
quick pace, into the court and alighted at the door. I started from my seat,
and, going forth, waited with some impatience to hear his purpose explained.

He accosted me with the formality of a stranger, and asked if a young man, by
name Edgar Huntly, resided here. Being answered in the affirmative, and being
requested to come in, he entered, and seated himself, without hesitation, by
the fire. Some doubt and anxiety were visible in his looks. He seemed desirous
of information upon some topic, and yet betrayed terror lest the answers he
might receive should subvert some hope, or confirm some foreboding,

Meanwhile I scrutinized his features with much solicitude. A nearer and more
deliberate view convinced me that the first impression was just; but still I
was unable to call up his name or the circumstances of our former meeting. The
pause was at length ended by his saying, in a faltering voice:

My name is Weymouth. I came hither to obtain information on a subject in which
my happiness is deeply concerned.

At the mention of his name, I started. It was a name too closely connected
with the image of thy brother, not to call up affecting and vivid
recollections. Weymouth thou know, was thy brother's friend. It is three
years since this man left America, during which time no tidings had been heard
of him, at least, by thy brother. He had now returned, and was probably
unacquainted with the fate of his friend.

After an anxious pause, he continued....Since my arrival I have heard of an
event which has, on many accounts, given me the deepest sorrow. I loved
Waldegrave, and know not any person in the world whose life was dearer to me
than his. There were considerations, however, which made it more precious to me
than the life of one whose merits might be greater. With his life, my own
existence and property were, I have reason to think, inseparably united.

On my return to my country, after a long absence, I made immediate inquiries
after him. I was informed of his untimely death. I had questions, of infinite
moment to my happiness, to decide with regard to the state and disposition of
his property. I sought out those of his friends who had maintained with him the
most frequent and confidential intercourse, but they could not afford me any
satisfaction. At length, I was informed that a young man of your name, and
living in this district, had enjoyed more of his affection and society than any
other, had regulated the property which he left behind, and was best qualified
to afford the intelligence which I sought. You, it seems, are this person, and
of you I must make inquiries to which I conjure you to return sincere and
explicit answers.

That, said I, I shall find no difficulty in doing. Whatever questions you
shall think proper to ask, I will answer with readiness and truth.

What kind of property and to what amount was your friend possessed of at his
death?

It was money, and consisted of deposits at the bank of North America. The
amount was little short of eight thousand dollars?

On whom has this property devolved?

His sister was his only kindred, and she is now in possession of it?

Did he leave any will by which he directed the disposition of his property?
While thus speaking, Weymouth fixed his eyes upon my countenance, and seemed
anxious to pierce into my inmost soul. I was somewhat surprised at his
questions, but much more at the manner in which they were put. I answered him,
however, without delay.....He left no will, nor was any paper discovered, by
which we could guess at his intentions. No doubt, indeed, had he made a will
his sister would have been placed precisely in the same condition in which she
now is. He was not only bound to her by the strongest ties of kindred, but by
affection and gratitude.

Weymouth now withdrew his eyes from my face, and sunk into a mournful reverie.
He sighed often and deeply. This deportment and the strain of his inquiries
excited much surprise. His interest in the fate of Waldegrave ought to have
made the information he had received, a source of satisfaction rather than of
regret. The property which Waldegrave left was much greater than his mode of
life, and his own professions had given us reason to except, but it was no more
than sufficient to insure to thee an adequate subsistence. It ascertained the
happiness of those who were dearest to Waldegrave, and placed them forever
beyond the reach of that poverty which had hitherto beset them. I made no
attempt to interrupt the silence, but prepared to answer any new interrogatory.
At length, Weymouth resumed:

Waldegrave was a fortunate man, to amass so considerable a sum in so short a
time. I remember, when we parted, he was poor. He used to lament that his
scrupulous integrity precluded him from all the common roads to wealth. He did
not contemn riches, but he set the highest value upon competence; and imagined
that he was doomed forever to poverty. His religious duty compelled him to seek
his livelihood by teaching a school of blacks. The labor was disproportioned
to his feeble constitution, and the profit was greatly disproportioned to the
labor. It scarcely supplied the necessities of nature, and was reduced
sometimes even below that standard by his frequent indisposition. I rejoice to
find that his scruples had somewhat relaxed their force, and that he had
betaken himself to some more profitable occupation. Pray, what was his new way
of business?

Nay, said I, his scruples continued as rigid, in this respect, as ever. He was
teacher of the Negro free school when he died.

Indeed! How then came he to amass so much money? Could he blend any more
lucrative pursuit with his duty as a schoolmaster?

So it seems.

What was his pursuit?

That question, I believe, none of his friends are qualified to answer. I
thought myself acquainted with the most secret transactions of his life, but
this had been carefully concealed from me. I was not only unapprised of any
other employment of his time, but had not the slightest suspicion of his
possessing any property beside his clothes and books. Ransacking his papers,
with a different view, I lighted on his bank-book, in which was a regular
receipt for seven thousand five hundred dollars. By what means he acquired this
money, and even the acquisition of it, till his death put us in possession of
his papers, was wholly unknown to us.

Possibly he might have held it in trust for another. In this case some
memorandums or letters would be found explaining this affair.

True. This supposition could not fail to occur, in consequence of which the
most diligent search was made among his papers, but no shred or scrap was to be
found which countenanced our conjecture.

You may reasonably be surprised, and perhaps offended, said Weymouth, at these
inquiries; but it is time to explain my motives for making them. Three years
ago I was, like Waldegrave, indigent, and earned my bread by daily labor.
During seven years service in a public office, I saved, from the expenses of
subsistence, a few hundred dollars. I determined to strike into a new path,
and, with this sum, to lay the foundation of better fortune. I turned it into a
bulky commodity, freighted and loaded a small vessel, and went with it to
Barcelona in Spain. I was not unsuccessful in my projects, and, changing my
abode to England, France and Germany, according as my interest required, I
became finally possessed of sufficient for the supply of all my wants. I then
resolved to return to my native country, and, laying out my money in land, to
spend the rest of my days in the luxury and quiet of an opulent farmer. For
this end I invested the greatest part of my property in a cargo of wine from
Madeira. The remainder I turned into a bill of exchange for seven thousand five
hundred dollars. I had maintained a friendly correspondence with Waldegrave
during my absence. There was no one with whom I had lived on terms of so much
intimacy, and had boundless confidence in his integrity. To him therefore I
determined to transmit this bill, requesting him to take the money into safe
keeping until my return. In this manner I endeavored to provide against the
accidents that might befall my person or my cargo in crossing the ocean.

It was my fate to encounter the worst of these disasters. We were overtaken by
a storm, my vessel was driven ashore on the coast of Portugal, my cargo was
utterly lost, and the greater part of the crew and passengers were drowned. I
was rescued from the same fate by some fishermen. In consequence of the
hardships to which I had been exposed, having labored for several days at the
pumps, and spent the greater part of a winter night, hanging from the rigging
of the ship, and perpetually beaten by the waves, I contracted a severe
disease, which bereaved me of the use of my limbs. The fishermen who rescued
me, carried me to their huts, and there I remained three weeks helpless and
miserable.

That part of the coast on which I was thrown, was, in the highest degree,
sterile and rude. Its few inhabitants subsisted precariously on the produce of
the ocean. Their dwellings were of mud, low, filthy, dark, and comfortless.
Their fuel was the stalks of shrubs, sparingly scattered over a sandy desert.
Their poverty scarcely allowed them salt and black bread with their fish, which
was obtained in unequal and sometimes insufficient quantities, and which they
ate with all its impurities and half cooked.

My former habits as well as my present indisposition required very different
treatment from what the ignorance and penury of these people obliged them to
bestow. I lay upon the moist earth, imperfectly sheltered from the sky, and
with neither raiment or fire to keep me warm. My hosts had little attention or
compassion to spare to the wants of others. They could not remove me to a more
hospitable district, and here, without doubt, I should have perished had not a
monk chanced to visit their hovels. He belonged to a convent of St. Jago, some
leagues farther from the shore, who used to send one of its members annually to
inspect the religious concerns of those outcasts. Happily this was the period
of their visitations.

My abode in Spain had made me somewhat conversant with its language. The
dialect of this monk did not so much differ from Castilian, but that, with the
assistance of Latin, we were able to converse. The jargon of the fishermen was
unintelligible, and they had vainly endeavored to keep up my spirits by
informing me of this expected visit.

This monk was touched with compassion at my calamity, and speedily provided
the means of my removal to his convent. Here I was charitably entertained, and
the aid of a physician was procured for me. He was but poorly skilled in his
profession, and rather confirmed than alleviated my disease. The Portuguese of
his trade, especially in remoter districts, are little more than dealers in
talismans and nostrums. For a long time I was unable to leave my pallet, and
had no prospect before me but that of consuming my days in the gloom of this
cloister.

All the members of this convent, but he who had been my first benefactor, and
whose name was Chaledro, were bigoted and sordid. Their chief motive for
treating me with kindness, was the hope of obtaining a convert from heresy.
They spared no pains to subdue my errors, and were willing to prolong my
imprisonment, in the hope of finally gaining their end. Had my fate been
governed by those, I should have been immured in this convent, and compelled,
either to adopt their fanatical creed or to put an end to my own life, in order
to escape their well meant persecutions. Chaledro, however, though no less
sincere in his faith and urgent in his entreaties, yet finding me invincible,
exerted his influence to obtain my liberty.

After many delays, and strenuous exertions of my friend, they consented to
remove me to Oporto. The journey was to be performed in an open cart over a
mountainous country, in the heats of summer. The monks endeavored to dissuade
me from the enterprise, for my own sake, it being scarcely possible that one in
my feeble state, should survive a journey like this; but I despaired of
improving my condition by other means. I preferred death to the imprisonment of
a Portuguese monastery, and knew that I could hope for no alleviation of my
disease, but from the skill of Scottish or French physicians, whom I expected
to meet with in that city. I adhered to my purpose with so much vehemence and
obstinacy, that they finally yielded to my wishes.

My road lay through the wildest and most rugged districts. It did not exceed
ninety miles, but seven days were consumed on the way. The motion of the
vehicle racked me with the keenest pangs, and my attendants concluded that
every stage would be my last. They had been selected without due regard to
their characters. They were knavish and inhuman, and omitted nothing, but
actual violence, to hasten my death. They purposely retarded the journey, and
protracted to seven, what might have been readily performed in four days. They
neglected to execute the orders which they had received, respecting my lodging
and provisions, and from them, as well as from the peasants, who were sure to
be informed that I was an heretic, I suffered every species of insult and
injury. My constitution, as well as my frame, possessed a fund of strength of
which I had no previous conception. In spite of hardship and exposure and
abstinence, I, at last, arrived at Oporto.

Instead of being carried, agreeably to Chaledro's direction, to a convent of
St. Jago, I was left, late in the evening, in the porch of a common hospital.
My attendants, having laid me on the pavement and loaded me with imprecations,
left me to obtain admission by my own efforts. I passed the live-long night in
this spot, and in the morning was received into the house, in a state which
left it uncertain whether I was alive or dead.

After recovering my sensibility, I made various efforts to procure a visit
from some English merchant. This was no easy undertaking for one in my
deplorable condition. I was too weak to articulate my words distinctly, and
these words were rendered by my foreign accent, scarcely intelligible. The
likelihood of my speedy death made the people about me more indifferent to my
wants and petitions.

I will not dwell upon my repeated disappointments, but content myself with
mentioning that I gained the attention of a French gentleman, whose curiosity
brought him to view the hospital. Through him, I obtained a visit from an
English merchant, and finally gained the notice of a person, who formerly
resided in America, and of whom I had imperfect knowledge. By their kindness I
was removed from the hospital to a private house. A Scottish surgeon was
summoned to my assistance, and in seven months, I was restored to my present
state of health.

At Oporto, I embarked, in an American ship, for New York. I was destitute of
all property, and relied, for the payment of the debts which I was obliged to
contract, as well as for my future subsistence, on my remittance, to
Waldegrave. I hastened to Philadelphia, and was soon informed that my friend
was dead. His death had taken place a long time since my remittance to him,
hence this disaster was a subject of regret chiefly on his own account. I
entertained no doubt but that my property had been secured, and that either
some testamentary directions, or some papers had been left behind respecting
this affair

I sought out those who were formerly our mutual acquaintance, I found that
they were wholly strangers to his affairs. They could merely relate some
particulars of his singular death, and point out the lodgings which he formerly
occupied. Hither I forthwith repaired, and discovered that he lived in this
house with his sister, disconnected with its other inhabitants. They described
his mode of life in terms that showed them to be very imperfectly acquainted
with it. It was easy indeed to infer, from their aspect and manners, that
little sympathy or union could have subsisted between them and their
co-tenants, and this inference was confirmed by their insinuations, the growth
of prejudice and envy. They told me that Waldegrave's sister had gone to live
in the country, but whither or for how long, she had not condescended to inform
them, and they did not care to ask. She was a topping dame whose notions were
much too high for her station. Who was more nice than wise, and yet was one who
could stoop, when it most became her to stand upright. It was no business of
theirs, but they could not but mention their suspicions that she had good
reasons for leaving the city, and for concealing the place of her retreat. Some
things were hard to be disguised. They spoke for themselves, and the only way
to hinder disagreeable discoveries, was to keep out of sight.

I was wholly a stranger to Waldegrave's sister. I knew merely that he had such
a relation. There was nothing therefore to outbalance this unfavourable report,
but the apparent malignity and grossness of those who gave it. It was not,
however, her character about which I was solicitous, but merely the place where
she might be found, and the suitable inquiries respecting her deceased brother,
be answered. On this head, these people professed utter ignorance and were
either unable or unwilling to direct me to any person in the city who knew more
than themselves. After much discourse they, at length, let fall an intimation
that if any one knew her place of retreat, it was probably a country lad, by
name Huntly, who lived near the Forks of Delaware. After Waldegrave's death,
this lad had paid his sister a visit, and seemed to be admitted on a very
confidential footing. She left the house, for the last time, in his company,
and he, therefore, was most likely to know what had become of her.

The name of Huntly was not totally unknown to me. I myself was born and
brought up in the neighboring township of Chetasco. I had some knowledge of
your family, and your name used often to be mentioned by Waldegrave, as that of
one who, at a maturer age, would prove himself useful to his country. I
determined therefore to apply to you for what information you could give. I
designed to visit my father who lives in Chetasco and relieve him from that
disquiet which his ignorance of my fate could not fail to have inspired, and
both these ends could be thus, at the same time, accomplished.

Before I left the city, I thought it proper to apply to the merchant on whom
my bill had been drawn. If this bill had been presented and paid, he had
doubtless preserved some record of it, and hence a clue might be afforded,
though every other expedient should fail. My usual ill fortune pursued me upon
this occasion, for the merchant had lately become insolvent, and, to avoid the
rage of his creditors, had fled, without leaving any vestige of this or similar
transactions behind him. He had, some years since, been an adventurer from
Holland, and was suspected to have returned thither.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XIV.
I CAME hither with an heart desponding of success. Adversity had weakened my
faith in the promises of the future, and I was prepared to receive just such
tidings as you have communicated. Unacquainted with the secret motives of
Waldegrave and his sister, it is impossible for me to weigh the probabilities
of their rectitude. I have only my own assertion to produce in support of my
claim. All other evidence, all vouchers and papers, which might attest my
veracity, or sanction my claim in a court of law, are buried in the ocean. The
bill was transmitted just before my departure from Madeira, and the letters by
which it was accompanied, informed Waldegrave of my design to follow it
immediately. Hence he did not, it is probable, acknowledge the receipt of my
letters. The vessels in which they were sent, arrived in due season. I was
assured that all letters were duly deposited in the post office, where, at
present, mine are not to be found.

You assure me that nothing has been found among his papers, hinting at any
pecuniary transaction between him and me. Some correspondence passed between us
previous to that event. Have no letters, with my signature, been found? Are you
qualified, by your knowledge of his papers, to answer me explicitly? Is it not
possible for some letters to have been mislaid?

I am qualified, said I, to answer your inquiries beyond any other person in
the world. Waldegrave maintained only general intercourse with the rest of
mankind. With me his correspondence was copious, and his confidence, as I
imagined, without bounds. His books and papers were contained in a single
chest, at his lodgings, the keys of which he had about him when he died. These
keys I carried to his sister, and was authorized by her to open and examine the
contents of this chest. This was done with the utmost care. These papers are
now in my possession. Among them no paper, of the tenor you mention, was found,
and no letter with your signature. Neither Mary Waldegrave nor I are capable of
disguising the truth or committing an injustice. The moment she receives
conviction of your right she will restore this money to you. The moment I
imbibe this conviction, I will exert all my influence, and it is not small, to
induce her to restore it. Permit me, however, to question you in your turn. Who
was the merchant on whom your bill was drawn, what was the date of it, and when
did the bill and its counterparts arrive?

I do not exactly remember the date of the bills. They were made out, however,
six days before I myself embarked which happened on the tenth of August 1784.
They were sent by three vessels, one of which was bound to Charleston and the
others to New York. The last arrived within two days of each other, and about
the middle of November in the same year. The name of the payer was Monteith.

After a pause of recollection, I answered, I will not hesitate to apprise you
of every thing which may throw light upon this transaction, and whether
favorable or otherwise to your claim. I have told you among my friends' papers
your name is not to be found. I must likewise repeat that the possession of
this money by Waldegrave was wholly unknown to us till his death. We are
likewise unacquainted with any means by which he could get possession of so
large a sum in his own right. He spent no more than his scanty stipend as a
teacher, though this stipend was insufficient to supply his wants. This
Bank-receipt is dated in December 1784, a fortnight, perhaps, after the date
that you have mentioned. You will perceive how much this coincidence, which
could scarcely have taken place by chance, is favorable to your claim.

Mary Waldegrave resides, at present, at Abingdon. She will rejoice, as I do,
to see one who, as her brother's friend, is entitled to her affection. Doubt
not but that she will listen with impartiality and candor to all that you can
urge in defense of your title to this money. Her decision will not be
precipitate, but it will be generous and just, and founded on such reasons
that, even if it be adverse to your wishes, you will be compelled to approve it.

I can entertain no doubt, he answered, as to the equity of my claim. The
coincidences you mention are sufficient to convince me, that this sum was
received upon my bill, but this conviction must necessarily be confined to
myself. No one but I can be conscious to the truth of my own story. The
evidence on which I build my faith, in this case, is that of my own memory and
senses; but this evidence cannot make itself conspicuous to you. You have
nothing but my bare assertion, in addition to some probabilities flowing from
the conduct of Waldegrave. What facts may exist to corroborate my claim, which
you have forgotten, or which you may think proper to conceal, I cannot judge. I
know not what is passing in the secret of your hearts; I am unacquainted with
the character of this lady and with yours. I have nothing on which to build
surmises and suspicions of your integrity, and nothing to generate unusual
confidence. the frailty of your virtue and the strength of your temptations I
know not. However she decides in this case, and whatever opinion I shall form
as to the reasonableness of her decision, it will not become me either to
upbraid her, or to nourish coffeehouse and repinings.

I know that my claim has no legal support: that, if this money be resigned to
me, it will be the impulse of spontaneous justice, and not the coercion of law
to which I am indebted for it. Since, therefore, the justice of my claim is to
be measured not by law, but by simple equity. I will heartily acknowledge, that
as yet it is uncertain whether I ought to receive, even should Miss Waldegrave
be willing to give it. I know my own necessities and schemes, and in what
degree this money would be subservient to these; but I know not the views and
wants of others, and cannot estimate the usefulness of this money to them.
However I decide upon your conduct in withholding or retaining it, I shall make
suitable allowance for my imperfect knowledge of your motives and wants, as
well as for your unavoidable ignorance of mine.

I have related my sufferings from shipwreck and poverty, not to bias your
judgment or engage your pity, but merely because the impulse to relate them
chanced to awake; because my heart is softened by the remembrance of
Waldegrave, who has been my only friend, and by the sight of one whom he loved.

I told you that my father lived in Chetasco. He is now aged, and I am his only
child. I should have rejoiced in being able to relieve his gray hairs from
labor to which his failing strength cannot be equal. This was one of my
inducements in coming to America. Another was, to prepare the way for a woman
whom I married in Europe, and who is now awaiting intelligence from me in
London. Her poverty is not less than my own, and by marrying against the wishes
of her kindred, she has bereaved herself of all support but that of her
husband. Whether I shall be able to rescue her from indigence, whether I shall
alleviate the poverty of my father or increase it by burthening his scanty
friends by my own maintenance as well as his, the future alone can determine.

I confess that my stock of patience and hope has never been large, and that my
misfortunes have nearly exhausted it. The flower of my years has been consumed
in struggling with adversity, and my constitution has received a shock from
sickness and mistreatment in Portugal, which I cannot expect long to
survive....But I make you sad (he continued.) I have said all that I meant to
say in this interview. I am impatient to see my father, and night has already
come. I have some miles yet to ride to his cottage and over a rough road. I
will shortly visit you again, and talk to you at greater leisure on these and
other topics. At present I leave you.

I was unwilling to part so abruptly with this guest, and entreated him to
prolong his visit, but he would not be prevailed upon. Repeating his promise of
shortly seeing me again, he mounted his horse and disappeared. I looked after
him with affecting and complex emotions. I reviewed the incidents of this
unexpected and extraordinary interview, as if it had existed in a dream. An
hour had passed, and this stranger had alighted among us as from the clouds, to
draw the veil from those obscurities which had bewildered us so long, to make
visible a new train of disastrous consequence flowing from the untimely death
of thy brother, and to blast that scheme of happiness on which thou and I had
so fondly meditated.

But what will thou think of this new born claim? The story, had thou
observed the features and guize of the relater, would have won thy implicit
credit. His countenance exhibited deep traces of the afflictions he had endured
and the fortitude which he had exercised. He was sallow and emaciated, but his
countenance was full of seriousness and dignity. A sort of ruggedness of brow,
the token of great mental exertion and varied experience, argued a premature
old age.

What a mournful tale! Is such the lot of those who wander from their rustic
homes in search of fortune. Our countrymen are prone to enterprise, and are
scattered over every sea and everyland in pursuit of that wealth which will not
screen them from disease and infirmity, which is missed much oftener than
found, and which, when gained, by no means compensates them for the hardships
and vicissitudes endured in the pursuit.

But what if the truth of these pretentions be admitted? The money must be
restored to its right owner. I know that whatever inconveniences may follow the
deed, thou will not hesitate to act justly. Affluence and dignity, however
valuable, may be purchased too dear. Honesty will not take away its keenness
from the winter blast, its ignominy and unwholesomeness from servile labor, or
strip of it charms the life of elegance and leisure; but these, unaccompanied
with self-reproach, are less deplorable than wealth and honor, the possession
of which is marred by our own disapprobation.

I know the bitterness of this sacrifice. I know the impatience with which your
poverty has formerly been borne, how much your early education is at war with
that degradation and obscurity to which your youth has been condemned, How
earnestly your wishes panted after a state, which might exempt you from
dependence upon daily labor and on the caprices of others, and might secure to
you leisure to cultivate and indulge your love of knowledge and your social and
beneficent affections.

Your motive for desiring a change of fortune has been greatly enforced since
we have become known to each other. Thou have honored me with thy affection,
but that a union, on which we rely for happiness, could not take place while
both of us were poor. My habits, indeed, have made labor and rustic obscurity
less painful than they would prove to my friend, but my present condition is
wholly inconsistent with marriage. As long as my exertions are insufficient to
mantain as both, it would be unjustifiable to burden you with new cares and
duties. Of this you are more thoroughly convinced than I am. The love of
independence and ease, and impatience of drudgery, are woven into your
constitution. Perhaps they are carried to an erroneous extreme, and derogate
from that uncommon excellence by which your character is, in other respects,
distinguished, but they cannot be removed.

This obstacle was unexpectedly removed by the death of your brother. However
justly to be deplored was this catastrophe, yet like every other event, some of
its consequences were good. By giving you possession of the means of
independence and leisure, by enabling us to complete a contract which poverty
alone had thus long delayed, this event has been, at the same time, the most
disastrous and propitious which could have happened.

Why thy brother should have concealed from us the possession of this money;
why, with such copious means of indulgence and leisure, he should still pursue
his irksome trade, and live in so penurious a manner, has been a topic of
endless and unsatisfactory conjecture between us. It was not dfficult to
suppose that this money was held in trust for another, but in that case it was
unavoidable that some document or memorandum, or at least some claimant would
appear. Much time has since elapsed, and you have thought yourself at length
justified in appropriating this money to your own use.

Our flattering prospects are now shut in. You must return to your original
poverty, and once more depend for precarious subsistence on your needle You
cannot restore the whole, for unavoidable expenses, and the change of your mode
of living, has consumed some part of it. For so much you must consider yourself
as Weymouth's debtor.

Repine not my friend, at this unlooked-for reverse. Think upon the merits and
misfortunes of your brother's friend, think upon his aged father whom we shall
enable him to rescue from poverty; think upon his desolate wife, whose merits
are, probably, at least equal to your own, and whose helplessness is likely to
be greater. I am not insensible to the evils which have returned upon us with
augmented force, after having, for a moment, taken their flight. I know the
precariousness of my condition, and that of my sisters, that our subsistence
hangs upon the life of an old man. My uncle's death will transfer this property
to his son, who is a stranger and an enemy to us, and the first act of whose
authority will unquestionably be to turn us forth from these doors. Marriage
with thee was anticipated with joyous emotions, not merely on my own account,
or on thine, but likewise for the sake of those beloved girls, to whom that
event would enable me to furnish an asylum.

But wedlock is now more distant than ever. My heart bleeds to think of the
sufferings which my beloved Mary is again fated to endure, but regrets are only
aggravations of calamity. They are pernicious, and it is our duty to shake them
off.

I can entertain no doubts as to the equity of Weymouth's claim. So many
coincidences could not have happened by chance. The nonappearance of any
letters or papers connected with it is indeed a mysterious circumstance, but
why should Waldegrave be studious of preserving these? They were useless paper,
and might, without impropriety, be cast away, or made to serve any temporary
purpose. Perhaps, indeed, they still lurk in some unsuspected corner. To wish
that time may explain this mystery in a different manner, and so as to permit
our retention of this money is, perhaps, the dictate of selfishness. The
transfer to Weymouth will not be productive of less benefit to him and to his
family, than we should derive from the use of it.

These considerations, however, will be weighed when we meet. Meanwhile I will
return to my narrative.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XV.
HERE, my friend, thou must permit me to pause. The following incidents are of
a kind to which the most ardent invention has never conceived a parallel.
Fortune, in her most wayward mood, could scarcely be suspected of an influence
like this. The scene was pregnant with astonishment and horror. I cannot, even
now, recall it without reviving the dismay and confusion which I then
experienced.

Possibly, the period will arrive when I shall look back without agony on the
perils I have undergone. That period is still distant. Solitude and sleep are
now no more than the signals to summon up a tribe of ugly phantoms. Famine, and
blindness, and death, and savage enemies, never fail to be conjured up by the
silence and darkness of the night. I cannot dissipate them by any efforts of
reason. My cowardice requires the perpetual consolation of light. My heart
droops when I mark the decline of the sun, and I never sleep but with a candle
burning at my pillow. If, by any chance, I should awake and find myself
immersed in darkness, I know not what act of desperation I might be suddenly
impelled to commit.

I have delayed this narrative, longer than my duty to my friend enjoined. Now
that I am able to hold a pen, I will hasten to terminate that uncertainty with
regard to my fate, in which my silence has involved thee. I will recall that
series of unheard of and disastrous vicissitudes which has constituted the
latest portion of my life.

I am not certain, however, that I shall relate them in an intelligible manner.
One image runs into another, sensations succeed in so rapid a train, that I
fear, I shall be unable to distribute and express them with sufficient
perspicuity. As I look back, my heart is sore and aches within my bosom. I am
conscious to a kind of complex sentiment of distress and forlornness that
cannot be perfectly pourtrayed by words; but I must do as well as I can. In the
utmost vigor of my faculties, no eloquence that I possess would do justice to
the tale. Now in my languishing and feeble state, I shall furnish thee with
little more than a glimpse of the truth. With these glimpses, transient and
faint as they are, thou must be satisfied.

I have said that I slept. My memory assures me of this: It informs of the
previous circumstances of my laying aside my clothes, of placing the light upon
a chair within reach of my pillow, of throwing myself upon the bed, and of
gazing on the rays of the moon reflected on the wall, and almost obscured by
those of the candle. I remember my occasional relapses into fits of incoherent
fancies, the harbingers of sleep: I remember, as it were, the instant when my
thoughts ceased to flow, and my senses were arrested by the leaden wand of
forgetfulness.

My return to sensation and to consciousness took place in no such tranquil
scene. I emerged from oblivion by degrees so slow and so faint, that their
succession cannot be marked. When enabled at length to attend to the
information which my senses afforded, I was conscious, for a time, of nothing
but existence. It was unaccompanied with lassitude or pain, but I felt
disinclined to stretch my limbs, or raise my eyelids. My thoughts were
wildering and mazy, and though consciousness were present, it was disconnected
with the loco-motive or voluntary power.

From this state a transition was speedily effected. I perceived that my
posture was supine, and that I lay upon my back. I attempted to open my eyes.
The weight that oppressed them was too great for a slight exertion to remove.
The exertion which I made cost me a pang more acute than any which I ever
experienced. My eyes, however, were opened; but the darkness that environed me
was as intense as before.

I attempted to rise, but my limbs were cold, and my joints had almost lost
their flexibility. My efforts were repeated, and at length I attained a sitting
posture. I was now sensible of pain in my shoulders and back. I was universally
in that state to which the frame is reduced by blows of a club, mercilessly and
endlessly repeated; my temples throbbed and my face was covered with clamy and
cold drops, but that which threw me into deepest consternation was, my
inability to see. I turned my head to different quarters, I stretched my
eyelids, and exerted every visual energy, but in vain. I was wrapped in the
murkiest and most impenetrable gloom.

The first effort of reflection was to suggest the belief that I was blind;
that disease is known to assail us in a moment and without previous warning.
This surely was the misfortune that had now befallen me. Some ray, however
fleeting and uncertain, could not fail to be discerned, if the power of vision
were not utterly extinguished. In what circumstances could I possibly be
placed, from which every particle of light should, by other means, be excluded.

This led my thoughts into a new train. I endeavored to recall the past, but
the past was too much in contradiction to the present, and my intellect was too
much shattered by external violence, to allow me accurately to review it.

Since my sight availed nothing to the knowledge of my condition, I betook
myself to other instruments. The element which I breathed was stagnant and
cold. The spot where I lay was rugged and hard. I was neither naked nor
clothed, a shirt and trossars composed my dress, and the shoes and stockings,
which always accompanied these, were now wanting, What could I infer from this
scanty garb, this chilling atmosphere, this stony bed?

I had awakened as from sleep. What was my condition when I fell asleep? Surely
it was different from the present. Then I inhabited a lightsome chamber, and
was stretched upon a down bed. Now I was supine upon a rugged surface and
immersed in palpable obscurity. Then I was in perfect health; now my frame was
covered with bruises and every joint was racked with pain. What dungeon or den
had received me, and by whose command was I transported hither?

After various efforts I stood upon my feet. At first I tottered and staggered.
I stretched out my hands on all sides but met only with vacuity. I advanced
forward. At the third step my foot moved something which lay upon the ground, I
stooped and took it up, and found, on examination, that it was an Indian
Tom-hawk. This incident afforded me no hint from which I might conjecture my
state.

Proceeding irresolutely and slowly forward, my hands at length touched a wall.
This, like the flooring, was of stone, and was rugged and impenetrable. I
followed this wall. An advancing angle occurred at a short distance, which was
followed by similar angles. I continued to explore this clue, till the
suspicion occurred that I was merely going round the walls of a va^^ and
irregular apartment.

The utter darkness disabled me from comparing directions and distances. This
discovery, therefore, was not made on a sudden and was still entangled with
some doubt. My blood recovered some warmth, and my muscles some elasticity, but
in proportion as my sensibility returned my pains augmented. Overpowered by my
fears and my agonies I desisted from my fruitless search, and sat down,
supporting my back against the wall.

My excruciating sensations for a time occupied my attention. These, in
combination with other causes, gradually produced a species of delirium. I
existed as it were in a wakeful dream. With nothing to correct my erroneous
perceptions, the images of the past occurred in capricious combinations, and
vivid hues. Methought I was the victim of some tyrant who had thrust me into a
dungeon of his fortress, and left me no power to determine whether he intended
I should perish with famine, or linger out a long life in hopeless
imprisonment: Whether the day was shut out by insuperable walls, or the
darkness that surrounded me, was owing to the night and to the smallness of
those cranies through which daylight was to be admitted, I conjectured in vain.

Sometimes I imagined myself buried alive. Methought I had fallen into seeming
death and my friends had consigned me to the tomb, from which a resurrection
was impossible. That in such a case, my limbs would have been confined to a
coffin, and my coffin to a grave, and that I should instantly have been
suffocated, did not occur to destroy my supposition: Neither did this
supposition overwhelm me with terror or prompt my efforts at deliverance. My
state was full of tumult and confusion, and my attention was incessantly
divided between my painful sensations and my feverish dreams,

There is no standard by which time can be measured, but the succession of our
thoughts, and the changes that take place in the external world. From the
latter I was totally excluded. The former made the lapse of some hours appear
like the tediousness of weeks and months. At length, a new sensation, recalled
my rambling meditations, and gave substance to my fears. I now felt the
cravings of hunger, and perceived that unless my deliverance were speedily
effected. I must suffer a tedious and lingering death.

I once more tasked my understanding and my senses, to discover the nature of
my present situation and the means of escape. I listened to catch some sound. I
heard an unequal and varying echo, sometimes near and sometimes distant,
sometimes dying away and sometimes swelling into loudness. It was unlike any
thing I had before heard, but it was evident that it arose from wind sweeping
through spacious halls and winding passages. These tokens were incompatible
with the result of the examination I had made. If my hands were true I was
immured between walls through which there was no avenue.

I now exerted my voice, and cried as loud as my wasted strength would admit.
Its echoes were sent back to me in broken and confused sounds and from above.
This effort was casual, but some part of that uncertainty in which I was
involved, was instantly dispelled by it. In pssing through the cavern on the
former day, I have mentioned the verge of the pit at which I arrived. To
acquaint me as far as was possible, with the dimensions of the place, I had
hallooed with all my force, knowing that sound is reflected according to the
distance and relative positions of the substances from which it is repelled.

The effect produced by my voice on this occasion resembled, with remarkable
exactness, the effect which was then produced. Was I then shut up in the same
cavern? Had I reached the brink of the same precipice and been thrown headlong
into that vacuity? Whence else could arise the bruises which I had received but
from my fall? Yet all remembrance of my journey hither was lost. I had
determined to explore this cave on the ensuing day, but my memory informed me
not that this intention had been carried into effect. Still it was only
possible to conclude that I had come hither on my intended expedition and had
been thrown by another, or had, by some ill chance, fallen into the pit.

This opinion was conformable to what I had already observed. The pavement and
walls were rugged like those of the footing and sides of the cave through which
I had formerly passed.

But if this were true, what was the abhorred catastrophe to which I was now
reserved? The sides of this pit were inaccessible: human footsteps would never
wander into these recesses. My friends were unapprised of my forlorn state.
Here I should continue till wasted by famine. In this grave should I linger out
a few days, in unspeakable agonies, and then perish forever.

The inroads of hunger were already experienced, and this knowledge of the
desperateness of my calamity, urged me to phrenzy. I had none but capricious
and unseen fate to condemn. The author of my distress and the means he had
taken to decoy me hither, were incomprehensible. Surely my senses were fettered
or depraved by some spell. I was still asleep, and this was merely a tormenting
vision, or madness had seized me, and the darkness that environed and the
hunger that afflicted me, existed only in my own distempered imagination.

The consolation of these doubts could not last long. Every hour added to the
proofs that my perceptions were real. My hunger speedily became ferocious. I
tore the linen of my shirt between my teeth and swallowed the fragments. I felt
a strong propensity to bite the flesh from my arm. My heart overflowed with
cruelty, and I pondered on the delight I should experience in rending some
living animal to pieces, and drinking its blood and grinding its quivering
fibers between my teeth.

This agony had already passed beyond the limits of endurance. I saw that time,
instead of bringing respite or relief, would only aggravate my wants, and that
my only remaining hope was to die before I should be assaulted by the last
extremes of famine. I now recollected that a Tom-hawk was at hand, and rejoiced
in the possession of an instrument by which I could so effectually terminate my
sufferings.

I took it in my hand, moved its edge over my fingers, and reflected on the
force that was required to make it reach my heart. I investigated the spot
where it should enter, and strove to fortify myself with resolution to repeat
the stroke a second or third time, if the first should prove insufficient. I
was sensible that I might fail to inflict a mortal wound, but delighted to
consider that the blood which would be made to flow, would finally release me,
and that meanwhile my pains would be alleviated by swallowing this blood.

You will not wonder that I felt some reluctance to employ so fatal though
indispensable a remedy. I once more ruminated on the possibility of rescuing
myself by other means. I now reflected that the upper termination of the wall
could not be at an immeasurable distance from the pavement. I had fallen from
an height, but if that height had been considerable, instead of being merely
bruised, should I not have been dashed into pieces?

Gleams of hope burst anew upon my soul. Was it not possible, I asked, to reach
the top of this pit. The sides were rugged and uneven. Would not their
projectures and abruptnesses serve me as steps by which I might ascend in
safety. This expedient was to be tried without delay. Shortly my strength would
fail and my doom would be irrevocably sealed.

I will not enumerate my laborious efforts, my alternations of despondency and
confidence, the eager and unwearied scrutiny with which I examined the surface,
the attempts which I made, and the failures which, for a time, succeeded each
other. An hundred times, when I had ascended some feet from the bottom, I was
compelled to relinquish my undertaking by the untenable smoothness of the
spaces which remained to be gone over. An hundred times I threw myself,
exhausted by fatigue and my pains, on the ground. The consciousness was
gradually restored that till I had attempted every part of the wall, it was
absurd to despair, and I again drew my tottering limbs and aching joints to
that part of the wall which had not been surveyed.

At length, as I stretched my hand upward, I found somewhat that seemed like a
recession in the wall. It was possible that this was the top of the cavity, and
this might be the avenue to liberty. My heart leaped with joy, and I proceeded
to climb the wall. No undertaking could be conceived more arduous than this.
The space between this verge and the floor was nearly smooth. The verge was
higher from the bottom than my head. The only means of ascending that were
offered me were by my hands, with which I could draw myself upward so as, at
length, to maintain my hold with my feet.

My efforts were indefatigable, and at length I placed myself on the verge,
when this was accomplished my strength was nearly gone. Had I not found space
enough beyond this brink to stretch myself at length, I should unavoidably have
fallen backward into the pit, and all my pains had served no other end than to
deepen my despair and hasten my destruction.

What impediments and perils remained to be encountered I could not judge. I
was now inclined to forbode the worst. The interval of repose which was
necessary to be taken, in order to recruit my strength, would accelerate the
ravages of famine, and leave me without the power to proceed.

In this state, I once more consoled myself that an instrument of death was at
hand. I had drawn up with me the Tom-hawk, being sensible that should this
impediment be overcome others might remain that would prove insuperable. Before
I employed it, however, I cast my eyes wildly and languidly around. The
darkness was no less intense than in the pit below, and yet two objects were
distinctly seen.

They resembled a fixed and obscure flame. They were motionless. Though
lustrous themselves they created no illumination around them. This
circumstance, added to others, which reminded me of similar objects, noted on
former occasions, immediately explained the nature of what I beheld. These were
the eyes of a panther.

Thus had I struggled to obtain a post where a savage was lurking, and waited
only till my efforts should place me within reach of his fangs. The first
impulse was to arm myself against this enemy. The desperateness of my condition
was, for a moment, forgotten. The weapon which was so lately lifted against my
own bosom, was now raised to defend my life against the assault of another.

There was no time for deliberation and delay. In a moment he might spring from
his station and tear me to pieces. My utmost speed might not enable me to reach
him where he sat, but merely to encounter his assault. I did not reflect how
far my strength was adequate to save me. All the force that remained was
mustered up and exerted in a throw.

No one knows the powers that are latent in his constitution. Called forth by
imminent dangers, our efforts frequently exceed our most sanguine belief.
Though tottering on the verge of dissolution, and apparently unable to crawl
from this spot, a force was exerted in this throw, probably greater than I had
ever before exerted. It was resistless and unerring. I aimed at the middle
space between these glowing orbs. It penetrated the skull and the animal fell,
struggling and shrieking, on the ground.

My ears quickly informed me when his pangs were at an end. His cries and his
convulsions lasted for a moment and then ceased. The effect of his voice, in
these subterranean abodes, was unspeakably rueful.

The abruptness of this incident, and the preternatural exertion of my
strength, left me in a state of languor and sinking from which slowly and with
difficulty I recovered. The first suggestion that occurred was to feed upon the
carcass of this animal. My hunger had arrived at that pitch where all
fastidiousness and scruples are at an end. I crept to the spot....I will not
shock you by relating the extremes to which dire necessity had driven me. I
review this scene with loathing and horror. Now that it is past I look back
upon it as on some hideous dream. The whole appears to be some freak of
insanity. No alternative was offered, and hunger was capable to be appeased,
even by a banquet so detestable.

If this appetite has sometimes subdued the sentiments of nature, and compelled
the mother to feed upon the flesh of her offspring, it will not excite
amazement that I did not turn from the yet warm blood and reeking fibers of a
brute.

One evil was now removed, only to give place to another. The first sensations
of fullness had scarcely been felt when my stomach was seized by pangs whose
acuteness exceeded all that I ever before experienced. I bitterly lamented my
inordinate avidity. The excruciations of famine were better than the agonies
which this abhorred meal had produced. Death was now impending with no less
proximity and certainty, though in a different form. Death was a sweet relief
for my present miseries, and I vehemently longed for its arrival. I stretched
myself on the ground. I threw myself into every posture that promised some
alleviation of this evil. I rolled along the pavement of the cavern, wholly
inattentive to the dangers that environed me. That I did not fall into the pit,
whence I had just emerged, must be ascribed to some miraculous chance.

How long my miseries endured, it is not possible to tell. I cannot even form a
plausible conjecture. Judging by the lingering train of my sensations, I should
conjecture that some days elapsed in this deplorable condition, but nature
could not have so long sustained a conflict like this.

Gradually my pains subsided and I fell into a deep sleep. I was visited by
dreams of a thousand hues. They led me to flowing streams and plenteous
banquets, which, though placed within my view, some power forbade me to
approach. From this sleep I recovered to the fruition of solitude and darkness,
but my frame was in a state less feeble than before. That which I had eaten had
produced tomporary distress, but on the whole had been of use. If this food had
not been provided for me I should scarcely have avoided death. I had reason
therefore to congratulate myself on the danger that had lately occured.

I had acted without foresight, and yet no wisdom could have prescribed more
salutary measures. The panther was slain, not from a view to the relief of my
hunger, but from the self-preserving and involuntary impulse. Had I fore-known
the pangs to which my ravenous and bloody meal would give birth, I should have
carefully abstained, and yet these pangs were a useful effort of nature to
subdue and convert to nourishment the matter I had swallowed.

I was now assailed by the torments of thirst. My invention and my courage were
anew bent to obviate this pressing evil. I reflected that there was some recess
from this cavern, even from the spot where I now stood. Before, I was doubtful
whether in this direction from this pit any avenue could be found, but since
the panther had come hither there was reason to suppose the existence of some
such avenue.

I now likewise attended to a sound, which, from its invariable tenor, denoted
somewhat different from the whistling of a gale. It seemed like the murmur of a
running stream. I now prepared to go forward, and endeavored to move along in
that direction in which this sound apparently came.

On either side and above my head, there was nothing but vacuity. My steps were
to be guided by the pavement, which, though unequal and rugged, appeared, on
the whole, to ascend. My safety required that I should employ both hands and
feet in exploring my way.

I went on thus for a considerable period. The murmur, instead of becoming more
distinct, gradually died away. My progress was arrested by fatigue, and I began
once more to despond. My exertions, produced a perspiration, which, while it
augmented my thirst, happily supplied me with imperfect means of appeasing it.

This expedient would, perhaps, have been accidentally suggested, but my
ingenuity was assisted by remembering the history of certain English prisoners
in Bengal, whom their merciless enemy imprisoned in a small room, and some of
whom preserved themselves alive merely by swallowing the moisture that flowed
from their bodies. This experiment I now performed with no less success.

This was slender and transitory consolation. I knew that, wandering at random,
I might never reach the outlet of this cavern, or might be disabled, by hunger
and fatigue, from going farther than the outlet. The cravings which had lately
been satiated, would speedily return, and my negligence had cut me off from the
resource which had recently been furnished. I thought not till now that a
second meal might be indispensable.

To return upon my footsteps to the spot where the dead animal lay was an
heartless project. I might thus be placing myself at an hopeless distance from
liberty. Besides my track could not be retraced. I had frequently deviated from
a straight direction for the sake of avoiding impediments. All of which I was
sensible was, that I was traveling up an irregular acclivity. I hoped sometime
to reach the summit, but had no reason for adhering to one line of ascent in
preference to another.

To remain where I was, was manifestly absurd. Whether I mounted or descended,
a change of place was most likly to benefit me. I resolved to vary my
direction, and, instead of ascending, keep along the side of what I accounted
an hill. I had gone some hundred feet when the murmur, before described, once
more saluted my ear.

This sound, being imagined to proceed from a running stream, could not but
light up joy in the heart of one nearly perishing with thirst. I proceeded with
new courage. The sound approached no nearer nor became more distinct, but as
long as it died not away, I was satisfied to listen and to hope.

I was eagerly observant if any the least glimmering of light, should visit
this recess. At length, on the right hand a gleam, infinitely faint, caught my
attention. It was wavering and unequal. I directed my steps toward it. It
became more vivid, and permanent. It was of that kind, however, which proceeded
from a fire, kindled with dry sticks, and not from the sun. I now heard the
crackling of flames.

This sound made me pause, or at least to proceed with circumspection. At
length the scene opened, and I found myself at the entrance of a cave. I
quickly reached a station when I saw a fire burning. At first no other object
was noted, but it was easy to infer that the fire was kindled by men, and that
they who kindled it could be at no great distance.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XVI.
THUS was I delivered from my prison and restored to the enjoyment of the air
and the light. Perhaps the chance was almost miraculous that led me to this
opening. In any other direction, I might have involved myself in an
inextricable maze, and rendered my destruction sure: but what now remained to
place me in absolute security? Beyond the fire I could see nothing; but since
the smoke rolled rapidly away, it was plain that on the opposite side the
cavern was open to the air.

I went forward, but my eyes were fixed upon the fire; presently, in
consequence of changing my station, I perceived several feet, and the skirts of
blankets. I was somewhat startled at these appearances. The legs were naked,
and scored into uncouth figures. The mocassins which lay beside them, and which
were adorned in a grotesque manner, in addition to other incidents, immediately
suggested the suspicion that they were Indians. No spectacle was more adapted
than this to excite wonder and alarm. Had some mysterious power snatched me
from the earth, and cast me, in a moment, into the heart of the wilderness? Was
I still in the vicinity of my paternal habitation, or was I thousands of miles
distant?

Were these the permanent inhabitants of this region, or were they wanderers
and robbers? While in the heart of the mountain I had entertained a vague
belief that I was still within the precincts of Norwalk. This opinion was
shaken for a moment by the objects which I now beheld, but it insensibly
returned; yet, how was this opinion to be reconciled to appearances so strange
and uncouth, and what measure did a due regard to my safety enjoin me to take?

I now gained a view of four brawny and terrific figures, stretched upon the
ground. They lay parallel to each other, on their left sides; in consequence of
which their faces were turned from me. Between each was an interval where lay a
musket. Their right hands seemed placed upon the stocks of their guns, as if to
seize them on the first moment of alarm.

The aperture through which these objects were seen, was at the back of the
cave, and some feet from the ground. It was merely large enough to suffer an
human body to pass. It was involved in profound darkness, and there was no
danger of being suspected or discovered as long as I maintained silence, and
kept out of view.

It was easily imagined that these guests would make but a short sojourn in
this spot. There was reason to suppose that it was now night, and that after a
short repose, they would start up and resume their journey. It was my first
design to remain shrouded in this covert till their departure, and I prepared
to endure imprisonment and thirst somewhat longer.

Meanwhile my thoughts were busy in accounting for this spectacle. I need not
tell thee that Norwalk is the termination of a sterile and narrow tract, which
begins in the Indian country. It forms a sort of rugged and rocky vein, and
continues upwards of fifty miles. It is crossed in a few places by narrow and
intricate paths, by which a communication is maintained between the farms and
settlements on the opposite sides of the ridge.

During former Indian wars, this rude surface was sometimes traversed by the
Red-men, and they made, by means of it, frequent and destructive inroads into
the heart of the English settlements. During the last war, notwithstanding the
progress of population, and the multiplied perils of such an expedition, a band
of them had once penetrated into Norwalk, and lingered long enough to pillage
and murder some of the neighboring inhabitants.

I have reason to remember that event. My father's house was placed on the
verge of this solitude. Eight of these assassins assailed it at the dead of
night. My parents and an infant child were murdered in their beds; the house
was pillaged, and then burnt to the ground. Happily, myself and my two sisters
were abroad upon a visit. The preceding day had been fixed for our return to
our father's house, but a storm occurred, which made it dangerous to cross the
river, and by obliging us to defer our journey, rescued us from captivity or
death.

Most men are haunted by some species of terror or antipathy, which they are,
for the most part, able to trace to some incident which befell them in their
early years. You will not be surprised that the fate of my parents, and the
sight of the body of one of this savage band, who, in the pursuit that was made
after them, was overtaken and killed, should produce lasting and terrific
images in my fancy. I never looked upon, or called up the image of a savage
without shuddering.

I knew that, at this time, some hostilities had been committed on the
frontier; that a long course of injuries and encroachments had lately
exasperated the Indian tribes; that an implacable and exterminating war was
generally expected. We imagined ourselves at an inaccessible distance from the
danger, but I could not but remember that this persuasion was formerly as
strong as at present, and that an expedition, which had once succeeded, might
possibly be attempted again. Here was every token of enmity and bloodshed. Each
prostrate figure was furnished with a rifled musket, and a leathern bag tied
round his waist, which was, probably, stored with powder and ball.

From these reflections, the sense of my own danger was revived and enforced,
but I likewise ruminated on the evils which might impend over others. I should,
no doubt, be safe by remaining in this nook; but might not some means be
pursued to warn others of their danger? Should they leave this spot, without
notice of their approach being given to the fearless and pacific tenants of the
neighboring district, they might commit, in a few hours, the most horrid and
irreparable devastation.

The alarm could only be diffused in one way. Could I not escape, unperceived,
and without alarming the sleepers, fom this cavern? The slumber of an Indian is
broken by the slightest noise; but if all noise be precluded, it is commonly
profound. It was possible, I conceived, to leave my present post, to descend
into the cave, and issue forth without the smallest signal. Their supine
posture assured me that they were asleep. Sleep usually comes at their bidding,
and if, perchance, they should be wakeful at an unseasonable moment, they
always sit upon their haunches, and, leaning their elbows on their knees,
consume the tedious hours in smoking. My peril would be great. Accidents which
I could not foresee, and over which I had no command, might occur to awaken
some one at the moment I was passing the fire. Should I pass in safety, I might
issue forth into a wilderness, of which I had no knowledge, where I might
wander till I perished with famine, or where my footsteps might be noted and
pursued, and overtaken by these implacable foes. These perils were enormous and
imminent; but I likewise considered that I might be at no great distance from
the habitations of men, and, that my escape might rescue them from the most
dreadful calamities, I determined to make this dangerous experiment without
delay.

I came nearer to the aperture, and had, consequently, a larger view of this
recess. To my unspeakable dismay, I now caught a glimpse of one, seated at the
fire. His back was turned toward me so that I could distinctly survey his
gigantic form and fantastic ornaments.

My project was frustrated. This one was probably commissioned to watch and to
awaken his companions when a due portion of sleep had been taken. That he would
not be unfaithful or remiss in the performance of the part assigned to him was
easily predicted. To pass him without exciting his notice, and the entrance
could not otherwise be reached, was impossible. Once more I shrunk back and
revolved with hopelessness and anguish, the necessity to which I was reduced.

This interval of dreary foreboding did not last long. Some motion in him that
was seated by the fire attracted my notice. I looked, and beheld him rise from
his place and go forth from the cavern. This unexpected incident led my
thoughts into a new channel. Could not some advantage be taken of his absence?
Could not this opportunity be seized for making my escape? He had left his gun
and hatchet on the ground. It was likely, therefore, that he had not gone far,
and would speedily return. Might not these weapons be seized, and some
provision be thus made against the danger of meeting him without, or of being
pursued?

Before a resolution could be formed, a new sound saluted my ear. It was a deep
groan, succeeded by sobs that seemed struggling for utterance, but were
vehemently counteracted by the sufferer. This low and bitter lamentation
apparently proceeded from some one within the cave. It could not be from one of
this swarthy band. It must then proceed from a captive, whom they had reserved
for torment or servitude, and who had seized the opportunity afforded by the
absence of him that watched, to give vent to his despair.

I again thrust my head forward, and beheld, lying on the ground, apart from
the rest, and bound hand and foot, a young girl. Her dress was the coarse
russet garb of the country, and bespoke her to be some farmer's daughter. Her
features denoted the last degree of fear and anguish, and she moved her limbs
in such a manner as showed that the ligatures by which she was confined,
produced, by their tightness, the utmost degree of pain.

My wishes were now bent not only to preserve myself, and to frustrate the
future attempts of these savages, but likewise to relieve this miserable
victim. This could only be done by escaping from the cavern and returning with
seasonable aid. The sobs of the girl were likely to rouse the sleepers. My
appearance before her would prompt her to testify her surprise by some
exclamation or shriek. What could hence be predicted but that the band would
start on their feet, and level their unerring pieces at my head!

I know not why I was insensible to these dangers. My thirst was rendered by
these delays intolerable. It took from me, in some degree, the power of
deliberation. The murmurs which had drawn me hither continued still to be
heard. Some torrent or cascade could not be far distant from the entrance of
the cavern, and it seemed as if one draught of clear water was a luxury cheaply
purchased by death itself. This, in addition to considerations more
disinterested, and which I have already mentioned, impelled me forward.

The girl's cheek rested on the hard rock, and her eyes were dim with tears. As
they were turned toward me, however, I hoped that my movements would be
noticed by her gradually and without abruptness. This expectation was
fulfilled. I had not advanced many steps before she discovered me. This moment
was critical beyond all others in the course of my existence. My life was
suspended, as it were, by a spider's thread. All rested on the effect which
this discovery should make upon this feeble victim.

I was watchful of the first movement of her eye, which should indicate a
consciousness of my presence. I labored, by gestures and looks, to deter her
from betraying her emotion. My attention was, at the same time, fixed upon the
sleepers, and an anxious glance was cast toward the quarter whence the
watchful savage might appear.

I stooped and seized the musket and hatchet. The space beyond the fire was,
as I expected, open to the air. I issued forth with trembling steps. The
sensations inspired by the dangers which environed me, added to my recent
horrors, and the influence of the moon, which had now gained the zenith, and
whose luster dazzled my long benighted senses, cannot be adequately described.

For a minute I was unable to distinguish objects. This confusion was speedily
corrected, and I found myself on the verge of a steep. Craggy eminences arose
on all sides. On the left hand was a space that offered some footing, and
hither I turned. A torrent was below me, and this path appeared to lead to it.
It quickly appeared in sight, and all foreign cares were, for a time, suspended.

This water fell from the upper regions of the hill, upon a flat projecture
which was continued on either side, and on part of which I was now standing.
The path was bounded on the left by an inaccessible wall, and on the right
terminated at the distance of two or three feet from the wall, in a precipice.
The water was eight or ten paces distant, and no impediment seemed likely to
rise between us. I rushed forward with speed.

My progress was quickly checked. Close to the falling water, seated on the
edge, his back supported by the rock, and his legs hanging over the precipice,
I now beheld the savage who left the cave before me. The noise of the cascade
and the improbability of interruption, at least from this quarter, had made him
inattentive to my motions.

I paused. Along this verge lay the only road by which I could reach the water,
and by which I could escape. The passage was completely occupied by this
antagonist. To advance toward him, or to remain where I was, would produce the
same effect. I should, in either case, be detected. He was unarmed; but his
outcries would instantly summon his companions to his aid. I could not hope to
overpower him, and pass him in defiance of his opposition. But if this were
effected, pursuit would be instantly commenced. I was unacquainted with the
way. The way was unquestionably difficult. My strength was nearly annihilated:
I should be overtaken in a moment, or their deficiency in speed would be
supplied by the accuracy of their aim. Their bullets, at least, would reach me.

There was one method of removing this impediment. The piece which I held in my
hand was cocked. There could be no doubt that it was loaded. A precaution of
this kind would never be omitted by a warrior of this hue. At a greater
distance than this, I should not fear to reach the mark. Should I not discharge
it, and, at the same moment, rush forward to secure the road which my
adversary's death would open to me?

Perhaps you will conceive a purpose like this to have argued a sanguinary and
murderous disposition. Let it be remembered, however, that I entertained no
doubts about the hostile designs of these men. This was sufficiently indicated
by their arms, their guise, and the captive who attended them. Let the fate of
my parents be, likewise, remembered. I was not certain but that these very men
were the assassins of my family, and were those who had reduced me and my
sisters to the condition of orphans and dependants. No words can describe the
torments of my thirst. Relief to these torments, and safety to my life, were
within view. How could I hesitate?

Yet I did hesitate. My aversion to bloodshed was not to be subdued but by the
direst necessity. I knew, indeed, that the discharge of a musket would only
alarm the enemies which remained behind; but I had another and a better weapon
in my grasp. I could rive the head of my adversary, and cast him headlong,
without any noise which should be heard, into the cavern.

Still I was willing to withdraw, to re-enter the cave, and take shelter in the
darksome recesses from which I had emerged. Here I might remain, unsuspected,
till these detested guests should depart. The hazards attending my reentrance
were to be boldly encountered, and the torments of unsatisfied thirst were to
be patiently endured, rather than imbrue my hands in the blood of my fellow
men. But this expedient would be ineffectual if my retreat should be observed
by this savage. Of that I was bound to be incontestibly assured. I retreated,
therefore, but kept my eye fixed at the same time upon the enemy.

Some ill fate decreed that I should not retreat unobserved. Scarcely had I
withdrawn three paces when he started from his seat, and, turning toward me,
walked with a quick pace. The shadow of the rock, and the improbability of
meeting an enemy here, concealed me for a moment from his observation. I stood
still. The slightest motion would have attracted his notice. At present, the
narrow space engaged all his vigilance. Cautious footsteps, and attention to
the path, were indispensable to his safety. The respite was momentary, and I
employed it in my own defense.

How otherwise could I act? The danger that impended aimed at nothing less than
my life. To take the life of another was the only method of averting it. The
means were in my hand, and they were used. In an extremity like this, my
muscles would have acted almost in defiance of my will.

The stroke was quick as lightning, and the wound mortal and deep. He had not
time to descry the author of his fate; but, sinking on the path, expired
without a groan. The hatchet buried itself in his breast, and rolled with him
to the bottom of the precipice.

Never before had I taken the life of an human creature. On this head, I had,
indeed, entertained somewhat of religious scruples. These scruples did not
forbid me to defend myself, but they made me cautious and reluctant to decide.
Though they could not withhold my hand, when urged by a necessity like this,
they were sufficient to make me look back upon the deed with remorse and dismay.

I did not escape all compunction in the present instance, but the tumult of my
feelings was quickly allayed. To quench my thirst was a consideration by which
all others were supplanted. I approached the torrent, and not only drank
copiously, but laved my head, neck, and arms, in this delicious element.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XVII.
NEVER was any delight worthy of comparison with the raptures which I then
experienced. Life, that was rapidly ebbing, appeared to return upon me with
redoubled violence. My languors, my excruciating heat, vanished in a moment,
and I felt prepared to undergo the labors of Hercules. Having fully supplied
the demands of nature in this respect, I returned to reflection on the
circumstances of my situation. The path winding round the hill was now free
from all impediments What remained but to precipitate my flight? I might
speedily place myself beyond all danger. I might gain some hospitable shelter,
where my fatigues might be repaired by repose, and my wounds be cured. I might
likewise impart to my protectors seasonable information of the enemies who
meditated their destruction.

I thought upon the condition of the hapless girl whom I had left in the power
of the savages. Was it impossible to rescue her? Might I not relieve her from
her bonds, and make her the companion of my flight? The exploit was perilous
but not impracticable. There was something dastardly and ignominious in
withdrawing from the danger, and leaving an helpless being exposed to it. A
single minute might suffice to snatch her from death or captivity. The parents
might deserve that I should hazard or even sacrifice my life, in the cause of
their child.

After some fluctuation, I determined to return to the cavern, and attempt the
rescue of the girl. The success of this project depended on the continuance of
their sleep. It was proper to approach with wariness, and to heed the smallest
token which might bespeak their condition. I crept along the path, bending my
ear forward to catch any sound that might arise. I heard nothing but the
half-stifled sobs of the girl.

I entered with the slowest and most anxious circumspection. Every thing was
found in its pristine state. The girl noticed my entrance with a mixture of
terror and joy. My gestures and looks enjoined upon her silence. I stooped
down, and taking another hatchet, cut assunder the deer-skin thongs by which
her wrists and ancles were tied. I then made signs for her to rise and follow
me. She willingly complied with my directions; but her benumbed joints and
lacerated sinews, refused to support her. There was no time to be lost; I
therefore, lifted her in my arms, and, feeble and tottering as I was, proceeded
with this burden, along the perilous steep, and over a most rugged path.

I hoped that some exertion would enable her to retrieve the use of her limbs.
I set her, therefore, on her feet, exhorting her to walk as well as she was
able, and promising her my occasional assistance. The poor girl was not
deficient in zeal, and presently moved along with light and quick steps. We
speedily reached the bottom of the hill.

No fancy can conceive a scene more wild and desolate than that which now
presented itself. The soil was nearly covered with sharp fragments of stone.
Between these sprung brambles and creeping vines, whose twigs, crossing and
intertwining with each other, added to the roughness below, made the passage
infinitely toilsome. Scattered over this space were single cedars with their
ragged spines and wreaths of moss, and copses of dwarf oaks, which were only
new emblems of sterility.

I was wholly unacquainted with the scene before me. No marks of habitation or
culture, no traces of the footsteps of men, were discernible. I scarcely knew
in what region of the globe I was placed. I had come hither by means so
inexplicable, as to leave it equally in doubt, whether I was separated from my
paternal abode by a river or an ocean

I made inquiries of my companion* but she was unable to talk coherently. She
answered my questions with weeping, and sobs, and entreaties, to fly from the
scene of her distress. I collected from her, at length, that her father's house
had been attacked on the preceding evening, and all the family but herself
destroyed. Since this disaster she had walked very fast and a great way, but
knew not how far or in what direction.

In a wilderness like this, my only hope was to light upon obscure paths, made
by cattle. Meanwhile I endeavored to adhere to one line, and to burst through
the vexatious obstacles which encumbered our way. The ground was concealed by
the bushes, and we were perplexed and fatigued by a continual succession of
hollows and prominences. At one moment we were nearly thrown headlong into a
pit. At another we struck our feet against the angles of stones. The branches
of the oak rebounded in our faces or entangled our legs, and the unseen thorns
inflicted on us a thousand wounds.

I was obliged, in these arduous circumstances, to support not only myself but
my companion. Her strength was overpowered by her evening journey, and the
terror of being overtaken, incessantly harrassed her.

Sometimes we lighted upon tracks which afforded as an easier footing, and
inspired us with courage to proceed. These, for a time, terminated at a brook
or in a bog, and we were once more compelled to go forward at random. One of
these tracks insensibly became more beaten, and, at length, exhibited the
traces of wheels. To this I adhered, confident that it would finally conduct us
to a dwelling.

On either side, the undergrowth of shrubs and brambles continued as before.
Sometimes small spaces were observed, which had lately been cleared by fire. At
length a vacant space of larger dimensions than had hitherto occured, presented
itself to my view. It was a field of some acres, that had, apparently, been
upturned by the hoe. At the corner of this field was a small house.

My heart leaped with joy at this sight. I hastened toward it, in the hope that
my uncertainties, and toils, and dangers, were now drawing to a close. This
dwelling was suited to the poverty and desolation which surrounded it. It
consisted of a few unhewn logs laid upon each other, to the height of eight or
ten feet, including a quadrangular space of similar dimensions, and covered by
thatch. There was no window, light being sufficiently admitted into the
crevices between the logs. These had formerly been loosely plastered with clay,
but air and rain had crumbled and washed the greater part of this rude cement
away. Somewhat like a chimney, built of half-burnt bricks, was perceived at one
corner. The door was fastened by a leathern thong, tied to a peg.

All within was silence and darkness. I knocked at the door and called, but no
one moved or answered. The tenant, whoever he was, was absent. His leave could
not be obtained, and I, therefore, entered without it. The autumn had made some
progress, and the air was frosty and sharp. My mind and muscles had been, of
late, so strenuously occupied, that the cold had not been felt. The cessation
of exercise, however, quickly restored my sensibility in this respect, but the
unhappy girl complained of being half frozen.

Fire, therefore, was the first object of my search. Happily, some embers were
found upon the hearth, together with potatoe stalks and dry chips. Of these,
with much difficulty, I kindled a fire, by which some warmth was imparted to
our shivering limbs. The light enabled me, as I sat upon the ground, to survey
the interior of this mansion.

Three saplins, stripped of their branches, and bound together at their ends by
twigs, formed a kind of bedstead, which was raised from the ground by four
stones. Ropes srtetched across these, and covered by a blanket, constituted the
bed. A board, of which one end rested on the bedstead, and the other was thrust
between the logs that composed the wall, sustained the stale fragments of a
rye-loaf, and a cedar bucket kept entire by withs instead of hoops. In the
bucket was a little water, full of droppings from the roof, drowned insects and
sand, a basket or two neatly made, and an hoe, with a stake thrust into it by
way of handle, made up all the furniture that was visible

Next to cold, hunger was the most urgent necessity by which we were now
pressed. This was no time to give ear to scruples. We, therefore,
uncerimoniously divided the bread and the water between us. I had now leisure
to bestow some regards upon the future.

These remnants of fire and food convinced me that this dwelling was usually
inhabited, and that it had lately been deserted. Some engagement had probably
carried the tenant abroad. His absence might be terminated in a few minutes, or
might endure through the night. On his return, I questioned not my power to
appease any indignation he might feel at the liberties which I had taken. I was
willing to suppose him one who would readily afford us all the information and
succor that we needed.

If he should not return till sunrise, I meant to resume my journey. By the
comfortable meal we had made, and the repose of a few hours, we should be
considerably invigorated and refreshed, and the road would lead us to some more
hospitable tenement.

My thoughts were too tumultuous, and my situation too precarious, to allow me
to sleep. The girl, on the contrary, soon sunk into a sweet oblivion of all her
cares. She laid herself, by my advice, upon the bed, and left me to ruminate
without interruption.

I was not wholly free from the apprehension of danger. What influence his
boisterous and solitary life might have upon the temper of the being who
inhabited this hut, I could not predict. How soon the Indians might awake, and
what path they would pursue, I was equally unable to guess. It was by no means
impossible that they might tread upon my footsteps, and knock, in a few
minutes, at the door of this cottage. It behoved me to make all the preparation
in my power against untoward incidents.

I had not parted with the gun which I had first seized in the cavern, nor with
the hatchet which I had afterward used to cut the bands of the girl. These
were, at once, my trophies and my means of defense, which it had been rash and
absurd to have relinquished. My present reliance was placed upon these.

I now, for the first time, examined the prize that I had made. Other
considerations had prevented me till now, from examining the structure of the
piece, but I could not but observe that it had two barrels, and was lighter and
smaller than an ordinary musket. The light of the fire now enabled me to
inspect it with more accuracy.

Scarcely had I fixed my eyes upon the stock, when I perceived marks that were
familiar to my apprehension. Shape, ornaments, and ciphers, were evidently the
same with those of a piece which I had frequently handled. The marks were of a
kind which could not be mistaken. This piece was mine; and when I left my
uncle's house, it was deposited, as I believed, in the closet of my chamber.

Thou will easily conceive the inference which this circumstance suggested. My
hairs rose and my teeth chattered with horror. My whole frame was petrified,
and I paced to and fro, hurried from the chimney to the door, and from the door
to the chimney, with the misguided fury of a maniac.

I needed no proof of my calamity more incontestible than this. My uncle and my
sisters had been murdered; the dwelling had been pillaged, and this had been a
part of the plunder. Defenseless and asleep, they were assailed by these
inexorable enemies, and I, who ought to have been their protector and champion,
was removed to an immeasurable distance, and was disabled, by some accursed
chance, from affording them the succor which they needed.

For a time, I doubted whether I had not witnessed and shared this catastrophe.
I had no memory of the circumstances that preceded my awaking in the pit. Had
not the cause of my being cast into this abyss some connection with the ruin of
my family? Had I not been dragged hither by these savages, and reduced, by
their malice, to that breathless and insensible condition? Was I born to a
malignant destiny never tired of persecuting? Thus had my parents and their
infant offspring perished, and thus completed was the fate of all those to whom
my affections cleaved, and whom the first disaster had spared.

Hitherto the death of the savage, whom I had dispatched with my hatchet, had
not been remembered without some remorse. Now my emotions were totally changed:
I was somewhat comforted in thinking that thus much of necessary vengeance had
been executed. New and more vehement regrets were excited by reflecting on the
forbearance I had practiced when so much was in my power. All the miscreants
had been at my mercy, and a bloody retribution might, with safety and ease,
have been inflicted on their prostrate bodies.

It was now too late. What of consolation or of hope remained to me? To return
to my ancient dwelling, now polluted with blood, or perhaps, nothing but a
smoking ruin, was abhorred. Life, connected with remembrance of my misfortunes
was detestable. I was no longer anxious for flight. No change of the scene but
that which terminated all consciousness, could I endure to think of.

Amidst these gloomy meditations the idea was suddenly suggested of returning,
with the utmost expedition, to the cavern. It was possible that the assassins
were still asleep. He who was appointed to watch and to make, in due season,
the signal for resuming their march, was forever silent. Without this signal it
was not unlikely that they would sleep till dawn of day. But if they should be
roused, they might be overtaken or met, and, by choosing a proper station, two
victims might at least fall. The ultimate event to myself would surely be
fatal; but my own death was an object of desire rather than of dread. To die
thus speedily, and after some atonement was made for those who had already been
slain, was sweet.

The way to the mountain was difficult and tedious, but the ridge was
distinctly seen from the door of the cottage, and I trusted that auspicious
chance would lead me to that part of it where my prey was to be found. I
snatched up the gun and tom-hawk in a transport of eagerness. On examining the
former, I found that both barrels were deeply loaded.

This piece was of extraordinary workmanship. It was the legacy of an English
officer, who died in Bengal, to Sarsefield. It was constructed for the purposes
not of sport but of war. The the artist had made it a congeries of tubes and
springs, by which every purpose of protection and offense was effectually
served. A dagger's blade was attached to it, capable of being fixed at the end,
and of answering the destructive purpose of a bayonet. On his departure from
Solebury, my friend left it, as a pledge of his affection, in my possession.
Hitherto I had chiefly employed it in shooting at a mark, in order to improve
my sight; now was I to profit by the gift in a different way.

Thus armed, I prepared to sally forth on my adventurous expedition. Sober
views might have speedily succeeded to the present tempest of my passions. I
might have gradually discovered the romantic and criminal temerity of my
project, the folly of revenge, and the duty of preserving my life for the
benefit of mankind. I might have suspected the propriety of my conclusion, and
have admitted some doubts as to the catastrophe which I imagined to have
befallen my uncle and sisters. I might, at least, have consented to ascertain
their condition with my own eyes; and for this end have returned to the
cottage, and have patiently waited till the morning light should permit me to
resume my journey.

This conduct was precluded by a new incident. Before I opened the door I
looked through a crevice of the wall, and perceived three human figures at the
farther end of the field. They approached the house. Though indistinctly seen,
something in their port persuaded me that these were the Indians from whom I
had lately parted. I was startled but not dismayed. My thirst of vengeance was
still powerful, and I believed that the moment of its gratification was
hastening. In a short time they would arrive and enter the house. In what
manner should they be received?

I studied not my own security. It was the scope of my wishes to kill the whole
number of my foes; but that being done, I was indifferent to the consequences.
I desired not to live to relate or to exult in the deed.

To go forth was perilous and useless. All that remained was to sit upon the
ground opposite the door, and fire at each as he entered. In the hasty survey I
had taken of this apartment, one object had been overlooked, or imperfectly
noticed. Close to the chimney was an aperture, formed by a cavity partly in the
wall and in the ground. It was the entrance of an oven, which resembled, on the
outside, a mound of earth, and which was filled with dry stalks of potatoes and
other rubbish.

Into this it was possible to thrust my body. A sort of screen might be formed
of the brush-wood, and more deliberate and effectual execution be done upon the
enemy. I weighed not the disadvantages of this scheme, but precipitately threw
myself into this cavity. I discovered, in an instant, that it was totally unfit
for my purpose, but it was too late to repair my miscarriage.

This wall of the hovel was placed near the verge of a sand-bank. The oven was
erected on the very brink. This bank being of a loose and mutable soil, could
not sustain my weight. It sunk, and I sunk along with it. The height of the
bank was three or four feet, so that, though disconcerted and embarrassed, I
received no injury. I still grasped my gun, and resumed my feet in a moment.

What was now to be done? The bank screened me from the view of the savages.
The thicket was hard by, and if I were eager to escape, the way was obvious and
sure. But though single, though enfeebled by toil, by abstinence and by
disease, and though so much exceeded in number and strength, by my foes, I was
determined to await and provoke the contest.

In addition to the desperate impulse of passion, I was swayed by thoughts of
the danger which beset the sleeping girl, and from which my flight would leave
her without protection. How strange is the destiny that governs mankind! The
consequence of shrouding myself in this cavity had not been foreseen. It was an
expedient which courage, and not cowardice suggested? and yet it was the only
expedient by which flight had been rendered practicable. To have issued from
the door would only have been to confront, and not to elude the danger.

The first impulse prompted me to re-enter the cottage by this avenue, but this
could not be done with certainty and expedition. What then remained? While I
deliberated, the men approached, and, after a moment's hesitation, entered the
house, the door being partly open.

The fire on the hearth enabled them to survey the room. One of them uttered a
sudden exclamation of surprise. This was easily interpreted. They had noticed
the girl who had lately been their captive lying asleep on the blanket. Their
astonishment at finding her here, and in this condition, may be easily
conceived.

I now reflected that I might place myself, without being observed, near the
entrance, at an angle of the building, and shoot at each as he successively
came forth. I perceived that the bank conformed to two sides of the house, and
that I might gain a view of the front and of the entrance, without exposing
myself to observation.

I lost no time in gaining this station The bank was as high as my breast. It
was easy, therefore, to crouch beneath it, to bring my eye close to the verge,
and, laying my gun upon the top of it among the grass, with its muzzles pointed
to the door, patiently to wait their forthcoming.

My eye and my ear were equally attentive to what was passing. A low and
muttering conversation was maintained in the house. Presently I heard an heavy
stroke descend. I shuddered, and my blood ran cold at the sound. I entertained
no doubt but that it was the stroke of an hatchet on the head or breast of the
helpless sleeper.

It was followed by a loud shriek. The continuance of these shrieks proved that
the stroke had not been instantly fatal. I waited to hear it repeated, but the
sounds that now arose were like those produced by dragging somewhat along the
ground. The shrieks, meanwhile, were incessant and piteous. My heart faltered,
and I saw that mighty efforts must be made to preserve my joints and my nerves
steadfast. All depended on the strenuous exertions and the fortunate dexterity
of a moment.

One now approached the door, and came forth, dragging the girl, whom he held
by the hair, after him. What hindered me from shooting at his first appearance,
I know not. This had been my previous resolution. My hand touched the trigger,
and as he moved, the piece was levelled at his right ear. Perhaps the momentous
consequences of my failure, made me wait till his ceasing to move might render
my aim more sure.

Having dragged the girl, still piteously shrieking, to the distance of ten
feet from the house, he threw her from him with violence. She fell upon the
ground, and observing him level his piece at her breast, renewed her
supplications in a still more piercing tone. Little did the forlorn wretch
think that her deliverance was certain and near. I rebuked myself for having
thus long delayed. I fired, and my enemy sunk upon the ground without a
struggle.

Thus far had success attended me in this unequal contest. The next shot would
leave me nearly powerless. If that, however, proved as unerring as the first,
the chances of defeat were lessened. The savages within, knowing the intentions
of their associate with regard to the captive girl, would probably mistake the
report which they heard for that of his piece. Their mistake, however, would
speedily give place to doubts, and they would rush forth to ascertain the
truth. It behoved me to provide a similar reception for him that next appeared.

It was as I expected. Scarcely was my eye again fixed upon the entrance, when
a tawny and terrific visage was stretched fearfully forth. It was the signal of
his fate. His glances cast wildly and swiftly round, lighted upon me, and on
the fatal instrument which was pointed at his forehead. His muscles were at
once exerted to withdraw his head, and to vociferate a warning to his fellow,
but his movement was too slow. The ball entered above his ear: He tumbled
headlong to the ground, bereaved of sensation, though not of life, and had
power only to struggle and mutter.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XVIII.
THINK not that I relate these things with exultation or tranquillity. All my
education and the habits of my life tended to unfit me for a contest and a
scene like this. But I was not governed by the soul which usually regulates my
conduct. I had imbibed from the unparalleled events which had lately happened a
spirit vengeful, unrelenting, and ferocious.

There was now an interval for flight. Throwing my weapons away, I might gain
the thicket in a moment. I had no ammunition, nor would time be afforded me to
re-load my piece. My antagonist would render my poniard and my speed of no use
to me. Should he miss me as I fled, the girl would remain to expiate, by her
agonies and death, the fate of his companions.

These thoughts passed through my mind in a shorter time than is demanded to
express them. They yielded to an expedient suggested by the sight of the gun
that had been raised to destroy the girl, and which now lay upon the ground. I
am not large of bone, but am not deficient in agility and strength. All that
remained to me of these qualities was now exerted; and dropping my own piece, I
leaped upon the bank, and flew to seize my prize.

It was not till I snatched it from the ground, that the propriety of regaining
my former post, rushed upon my apprehension. He that was still posted in the
hovel would mark me through the seams of the wall, and render my destruction
sure. I once more ran toward the bank, with the intention to throw myself
below it. All this was performed in an instant; but my vigilant foe was aware
of his advantage, and fired through an opening between the logs. The bullet
grazed my cheek, and produced a benumbing sensation that made me instantly fall
to the earth. Though bereaved of strength, and fraught with the belief that I
had received a mortal wound, my caution was not remitted. I loosened not my
grasp of the gun, and the posture into which I accidentally fell enabled me to
keep an eye upon the house and an hand upon the trigger. Perceiving my
condition, the savage rushed from his covert in order to complete his work; but
at three steps from the threshold, he received my bullet in his breast. The
uplifted tom-hawk fell from his hand, and, uttering a loud shriek, he fell upon
the body of his companion. His cries struck upon my heart, and I wished that
his better fortune had cast this evil from him upon me.

Thus I have told thee a bloody and disastrous tale. When thou reflectest on
the mildness of my habits, my antipathy to scenes of violence and bloodshed, my
unacquaintance with the use of firearms, and the motives of a soldier, thou will scarcely allow credit to my story. That one rushing into these dangers,
unfurnished with stratagems or weapons, disheartened and enfeebled by hardships
and pain, should subdue four antagonists, trained from their infancy to the
artifices and exertions of Indian warfare, will seem the vision of fancy,
rather than the lesson of truth.

I lifted my head from the ground and pondered upon this scene. The magnitude
of this exploit made me question its reality. By attending to my own
sensations, I discovered that I had received no wound, or at least, none of
which there was reason to complain. The blood flowed plentifully from my cheek,
but the injury was superficial. It was otherwise with my antagonists. The last
that had fallen now ceased to groan. Their huge limbs, inured to combat and
war-worn, were useless to their own defense, and to the injury of others.

The destruction that I witnessed was vast. Three beings, full of energy and
heroism, endowed with minds strenuous and lofty, poured out their lives before
me. I was the instrument of their destruction. This scene of carnage and blood
was laid by me. To this havoc and horror was I led by such rapid footsteps!

My anguish was mingled with astonishment. In spite of the force and uniformity
with which my senses were impressed by external objects, the transition I had
undergone was so wild and inexplicable; all that I had performed; all that I
had witnessed since my egress from the pit, were so contradictory to precedent
events, that I still clung to the belief that my thoughts were confused by
delirium. From these reveries I was at length recalled by the groans of the
girl, who lay near me on the ground.

I went to her and endeavored to console her. I found that while lying in the
bed, she had received a blow upon the side, which was still productive of acute
pain. She was unable to rise or to walk, and it was plain that one or more of
her ribs had been fractured by the blow.

I knew not what means to devise for our mutual relief. It was possible that
the nearest dwelling was many leagues distant. I knew not in what direction to
go in order to find it, and my strength would not suffice to carry my wounded
companion thither in my arms. There was no expedient but to remain in this
field of blood till the morning.

I had scarcely formed this resolution before the report of a musket was heard
at a small distance. At the same moment, I distinctly heard the whistling of a
bullet near me. I now remembered that of the five Indians whom I saw in the
cavern, I was acquainted with the destiny only of four. The fifth might be
still alive, and fortune might reserve for him the task of avenging his
companions. His steps might now be tending hither in search of them.

The musket belonging to him who was shot upon the threshold, was still
charged. It was discreet to make all the provision in my power against danger.
I possessed myself of this gun, and seating myself on the ground, looked
carefully on all sides, to descry the aproach of the enemy. I listened with
breathless eagerness.

Presently voices were heard. They ascended from that part of the thicket from
which my view was intercepted by the cottage. These voices had something in
them that bespoke them to belong to friends and countrymen. As yet I was unable
to distinguish words.

Presently my eye was attracted to one quarter, by a sound as of feet trampling
down bushes. Several heads were seen moving in succession, and at length, the
whole person was conspicuous. One after another leaped over a kind of mound
which bordered the field, and made toward the spot where I sat. This band was
composed of ten or twelve persons, with each a gun upon his shoulder. Their
guise, the moment it was perceived, dissipated all my apprehensions.

They came within the distance of a few paces before they discovered me. One
stopped, and bespeaking the attention of his followers, called to know who was
there? I answered that I was a friend, who entreated their assistance. I shall
not paint their astonishment when, on coming nearer, they beheld me surrounded
by the arms and dead bodies of my enemies.

I sat upon the ground, supporting my head with my left hand, and resting on my
knee the stock of an heavy musket. My countenance was wan and haggard, my neck
and bosom were died in blood, and my limbs, almost stripped by the brambles of
their slender covering, were lacerated by a thousand wounds. Three savages, two
of whom were steeped in gore, lay at a small distance, with the traces of
recent life on their visages. Hard by was the girl, venting her anguish in the
deepest groans, and entreating relief from the new comers.

One of the company, on approaching the girl, betrayed the utmost perturbation.
"Good God!" he cried, "is this a dream? Can it be you? Speak!"

"Ah, my father! my father!" answered she, "it is I indeed."

The company, attracted by this dialogue, crowded round the girl, whom her
father, clasping in his arms, lifted from the ground, and pressed, in a
transport of joy to his breast. This delight was succeeded by solicitude
respecting her condition. She could only answer his inquiries by complaining
that her side was bruised to pieces. How came you here?....Who hurt
you?......Where did the Indians carry you? were questions to which she could
make no reply but by sobs and plaints.

My own calamities were forgotten in contemplating the fondness and compassion
of the man for his child. I derived new joy from reflecting that I had not
abandoned her, and that she owed her preservation to my efforts. The inquiries
which the girl was unable to answer, were now put to me. Every one interrogated
who I was, whence I had come, and what had given rise to this bloody contest.

I was not willing to expatiate on my story. The spirit which had hitherto
sustained me, began now to subside. My strength ebbed away with my blood.
Tremors, lassitude, and deadly cold, invaded me, and I fainted on the ground.

Such is the capricious constitution of the human mind. While dangers were at
hand, while my life was to be preserved only by zeal and vigilance, and
courage, I was not wanting to myself. Had my perils continued or even
multiplied, no doubt my energies would have kept equal pace with them, but the
moment that I was encompassed by protectors, and placed in security, I grew
powerless and faint. My weakness was proportioned to the duration and intensity
of my previous efforts, and the swoon into which I now sunk, was no doubt,
mistaken by the spectators, for death.

On recovering from this swoon, my sensations were not unlike those which I had
experienced on awaking in the pit. For a moment a mistiness involved every
object, and I was able to distinguish nothing. My sight, by rapid degrees, was
restored, my painful dizziness was banished, and I surveyed the scene before me
with anxiety and wonder.

I found myself stretched upon the ground. I perceived the cottage and the
neighboring thicket, illuminated by a declining moon. My head rested upon
something, which, on turning to examine, I found to be one of the slain
Indians. The other two remained upon the earth at a small distance, and in the
attitudes in which they had fallen. Their arms, the wounded girl, and the troop
who were near me when I fainted, were gone.

My head had reposed upon the breast of him whom I had shot in this part of his
body. The blood had ceased to ooze from the wound, but my dishevelled locks
were matted and steeped in that gore which had overflowed and choked up the
orifice. I started from this detestable pillow, and regained my feet.

I did not suddenly recall what had lately passed, or comprehend the nature of
my situation. At length, however, late events were recollected.

That I should be abandoned in this forlorn state by these men, seemed to argue
a degree of cowardice or cruelty, of which I should have thought them
incapable. Presently, however, I reflected that appearances might have easily
misled them into a belief of my death: on this supposition, to have carried me
away, or to have stayed beside me, would be useless. Other enemies might be
abroad, or their families, now that their fears were somewhat tranquilized,
might require their presence and protection.

I went into the cottage. The fire still burned, and afforded me a genial
warmth. I sat before it and began to ruminate on the state to which I was
reduced, and on the measures I should next pursue. Daylight could not be very
distant. Should I remain in this hovel till the morning, or immediately resume
my journey? I was feeble, indeed, but by remaining here should I not increase
my feebleness? The sooner I should gain some human habitation the better;
whereas watchfulness and hunger would render me, at each minute, less able to
proceed than on the former.

This spot might be visited on the next day; but this was involved in
uncertainty. The visitants, should any come, would come merely to examine and
bury the dead, and bring with them neither the clothing nor the food which my
necessities demanded. The road was sufficiently discernible, and would,
unavoidably, conduct me to some dwelling. I determined, therefore, to set out
without delay. Even in this state I was not unmindful that my safety might
require the precaution of being armed. Besides the fusil, which had been given
me by Sarsefield, and which I had so unexpectedly recovered, had lost none of
its value in my eyes. I hoped that it had escaped the search of the troop who
had been here, and still lay below the bank, in the spot where I had dropped it.

In this hope I was not deceived. It was found. I possessed myself of the
powder and shot belonging to one of the savages, and loaded it. Thus equipped
for defense, I regained the road, and proceeded, with alacrity, on my way. For
the wound in my cheek, nature had provided a styptic, but the soreness was
extreme, and I thought of no remedy but water, with which I might wash away the
blood. My thirst likewise incommoded me, and I looked with eagerness for the
traces of a spring. In a soil like that of the wilderness around me, nothing
was less to be expected than to light upon water. In this respect, however, my
destiny was propitious. I quickly perceived water in the ruts. It trickled
hither from the thicket on one side, and, pursuing it among the bushes, I
reached the bubbling source. Though scanty and brackish, it afforded me
unspeakable refreshment.

Thou will think, perhaps, that my perils were now at an end; that the blood I
had already shed was sufficient for my safety. I fervently hoped that no new
exigence would occur, compelling me to use the arms that I bore in my own
defense. I formed a sort of resolution to shun the contest with a new enemy,
almost at the expense of my own life. I was satiated and gorged with slaughter,
and thought upon a new act of destruction with abhorrence and loathing.

But though I dreaded to encounter a new enemy, I was sensible that an enemy
might possibly be at hand. I had moved forward with caution, and my sight and
hearing were attentive to the slightest tokens. Other troops, besides that
which I encountered, might be hovering near, and of that troop, I remembered
that one at least had survived.

The gratification which the spring had afforded me was so great, that I was in
no haste to depart. I lay upon a rock, which chanced to be shaded by a tree
behind me. From this post I could overlook the road to some distance, and, at
the same time, be shaded from the observation of others.

My eye was now caught by movements which appeared like those of a beast. In
different circumstances, I should have instantly supposed it to be a wolf, or
panther, or bear. Now my suspicions were alive on a different account, and my
startled fancy figured to itself nothing but an human adversary.

A thicket was on either side of the road. That opposite to my station was
discontinued at a small distance by the cultivated field. The road continued
along this field, bounded by the thicket on the one side, and the open space on
the other. To this space the being who was now descried was cautiously
approaching.

He moved upon all fours, and presently came near enough to be distinguished.
His disfigured limbs, pendants from his ears and nose, and his shorn locks,
were indubitable indications of a savage. Occasionally he reared himself above
the bushes, and scanned, with suspicious vigilance, the cottage and the space
surrounding it. Then he stooped, and crept along as before.

I was at no loss to interpret these appearances. This was my surviving enemy.
He was unacquainted with the fate of his associates, and was now approaching
the theater of carnage, to ascertain their fate.

Once more was the advantage afforded me. From this spot might unerring aim be
taken, and the last of this hostile troop be made to share the fate of the
rest. Should I fire or suffer him to pass in safety?

My abhorrence of bloodshed was not abated. But I had not foreseen this
occurrence. My success hitherto had seemed to depend upon a combination of
fortunate incidents, which could not be expected again to take place; but now
was I invested with the same power. The mark was near; nothing obstructed or
delayed; I incurred no danger, and the event was certain.

Why should he be suffered to live? He came hither to murder and despoil my
friends; this work he has, no doubt, performed. Nay, has he not borne his part
in the destruction of my uncle and my sisters? He will live only to pursue the
same sanguinary trade; to drink the blood and exult in the laments of his
unhappy foes, and of my own brethren. Fate has reserved him for a bloody and
violent death. For how long a time soever it may be deferred, it is thus that
his career will inevitably terminate.

Should he be spared, he will still roam in the wilderness, and I may again be
fated to encounter him. Then our mutual situation may be widely different, and
the advantage I now possess may be his.

While hastily revolving these thoughts I was thoroughly aware that one event
might take place which would render all deliberation useless. Should he spy me
where I lay, my fluctuations must end. My safety would indispensably require me
to shoot. This persuasion made me keep a steadfast eye upon his motions, and be
prepared to anticipate his assault.

It now most seasonably occurred to me that one essential duty remained to be
performed. One operation, without which fire arms are useless, had been
unaccountably omitted. My piece was uncocked. I did not reflect that in moving
the spring, a sound would necessarily be produced, sufficient to alarm him. But
I knew that the chances of escaping his notice, should I be perfectly mute and
still, were extremely slender, and that, in such a case, his movements would be
quicker than the light; it behoved me, therefore, to repair my omission.

The sound struck him with alarm. He turned and darted at me an inquiring
glance. I saw that forbearance was no longer in my power; but my heart sunk
while I complied with what may surely be deemed an indispensable necessity.
This faltering, perhaps it was, that made me swerve somewhat from the fatal
line. He was disabled by the wound, but not killed.

He lost all power of resistance, and was, therefore, no longer to be dreaded.
He rolled upon the ground, uttering doleful shrieks, and throwing his limbs
into those contorsions which bespeak the keenest agonies to which ill-fated man
is subject. Horror, and compassion, and remorse, were mingled into one
sentiment, and took possession of my heart. To shut out this spectacle, I
withdrew from the spot, but I stopped before I had moved beyond hearing of his
cries.

The impulse that drove me from the scene was pusillanimous and cowardly. The
past, however deplorable, could not be recalled; but could not I afford some
relief to this wretch? Could not I, at least, bring his pangs to a speedy
close? Thus he might continue, writhing and calling upon death for hours. Why
should his miseries be uselessly prolonged?

There was but one way to end them. To kill him outright, was the dictate of
compassion and of duty. I hastily returned, and once more levelled my piece at
his head. It was a loathsome obligation, and was performed with unconquerable
reluctance. Thus to assault and to mangle the body of an enemy, already
prostrate and powerless, was an act worthy of abhorrence; yet it was, in this
case, prescribed by pity.

My faltering hand rendered this second bullet ineffectual. One expedient,
still more detestable, remained. Having gone thus far, it would have been
inhuman to stop short. His heart might easily be pierced by the bayonet, and
his struggles would cease.

This task of cruel lenity was at length finished. I dropped the weapon and
threw myself on the ground, overpowered by the horrors of this scene. Such are
the deeds which perverse nature compels thousands of rational beings to perform
and to witness! Such is the spectacle, endlessly prolonged and diversified,
which is exhibited in every field of battle; of which, habit and example, the
temptations of gain, and the illusions of honor, will make us, not reluctant
or indifferent, but zealous and delighted actors and beholders!

Thus, by a series of events impossible to be computed or foreseen, was the
destruction of a band, selected from their fellows for an arduous enterprise,
distinguished by prowess and skill, and equally armed against surprise and
force, completed by the hand of a boy, uninured to hostility, unprovided with
arms, precipitate and timorous! I have noted men who seemed born for no end but
by their achievements to belie experience, and baffle foresight, and outstrip
belief. Would to God that I had not deserved to be numbered among these! But
what power was it that called me from the sleep of death, just in time to
escape the merciless knife of this enemy? Had my swoon continued till he had
reached the spot, he would have effectuated my death by new wounds and torn
away the skin from my brows. Such are the subtle threads on which hangs the
fate of man and of the universe!

While engaged in these reflections, I perceived that the moonlight had began
to fade before that of the sun. A dusky and reddish hue spread itself over the
east. Cheered by this appearance, I once more resumed my feet and the road. I
left the savage where he lay, but made prize of his tom-hawk. I had left my own
in the cavern; and this weapon added little to my burden. Prompted by some
freak of fancy, I stuck his musket in the ground, and left it standing upright
in the middle of the road.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XIX.
I MOVED forward with as quick a pace as my feeble limbs would permit. I did
not allow myself to meditate. The great object of my wishes was a dwelling
where food and repose might be procured. I looked earnestly forward, and on
each side, in search of some token of human residence; but the spots of
cultivation, the well-pole, the worm-fence, and the hay-rick, were no where to
be seen. I did not even meet with a wild hog, or a bewildered cow. The path was
narrow, and on either side was a trackless wilderness. On the right and left
were the waving lines of mountainous ridges which had no peculiarity enabling
me to ascertain whether I had ever before seen them.

At length I noticed that the tracks of wheels had disappeared from the path
that I was ^^^ding, that it became more narrow, and exhibited fewer marks of
being frequented. These appearances were discouraging. I now suspected that I
had taken a wrong direction, and instead of approaching, was receding from the
habitation of men.

It was wisest, however, to proceed. The road could not but have some origin as
well as end. Some hours passed away in this uncertainty. The sun rose, and by
noonday I seemed to be farther than ever from the end of my toils. The path
was more obscure, and the wilderness more rugged. Thirst more incommoded me
than hunger, but relief was seasonably afforded by the brooks that flowed
across the path.

Coming to one of these, and having slaked my thirst, I sat down upon the bank,
to reflect on my situation. The circuity of the path had frequently been
noticed, and I began to suspect that though I had traveled long, I had not
moved far from the spot where I had commenced my pilgrimage.

Turning my eyes on all sides, I noticed a sort of pool, formed by the rivulet,
at a few paces distant from the road. In approaching and inspecting it, I
observed the footsteps of cattle, who had retired by a path that seemed much
beaten; I likewise noticed a cedar bucket, broken and old, lying on the margin.
These tokens revived my drooping spirits, and I betook myself to this new
track. It was intricate; but, at length, led up a steep, the summit of which
was of better soil than that of which the flats consisted. A clover field, and
several apple trees, sure attendents of man, were now discovered. From this
space I entered a corn-field, and at length, to my inexpressible joy, caught a
glimpse of an house.

This dwelling was far different from that I had lately left. It was as small
and as low, but its walls consisted of boards. A window of four panes admitted
the light, and a chimney of brick, well burnt, and neatly arranged, peeped over
the roof. As I approached I heard the voice of children, and the hum of a
spinning-wheel.

I cannot make thee conceive the delight which was afforded me by all these
tokens. I now found myself, indeed, among beings like myself, and from whom
hospitable entertainment might be confidently expected. I compassed the house,
and made my appearance at the door.

A good woman, busy at her wheel, with two children playing on the ground
before her, were the objects that now presented themselves. The uncouthness of
my garb, my wild and weather-worn appearance, my fusil and tom-hawk, could not
but startle them. The woman stopped her wheel, and gazed as if a spectre had
started into view.

I was somewhat aware of these consequences, and endeavored to elude them, by
assuming an air of supplication and humility. I told her that I was a
traveller, who had unfortunately lost his way, and had rambled in this wild
till nearly famished for want. I entreated her to give me some food; any thing
however scanty or coarse, would be acceptable.

After some pause she desired me, though not without some marks of fear, to
walk in. She placed before me some brown bread and milk. She eyed me while I
eagerly devoured this morsel. It was, indeed, more delicious than any I had
ever tasted. At length she broke silence, and expressed her astonishment and
commiseration at my seemingly forlorn state, adding, that perhaps I was the man
whom the men were looking after who had been there some hours before.

My curiosity was roused by this intimation. In answer to my interrogations,
she said, that three persons had lately stopped, to inquire if her husband had
not met, within the last three days, a person of whom their description seemed
pretty much to suit my person and dress. He was tall, slender, wore nothing but
shirt and trowsers, and was wounded on the cheek.

What, I asked, did they state the rank or condition of the person to be?

He lived in Solebury. He was supposed to have rambled in the mountains, and to
have lost his way, or to have met with some mischance. It was three days since
he had disappeared, but had been seen, by some one, the last night, at Deb's
hut.

What and where was Deb's hut?

It was a hut in the wilderness, occupied by an old Indian woman, known among
her neighbors by the name of Old Deb. Some people called her Queen Mab. Her
dwelling was eight long miles from this house.

A thousand questions were precluded, and a thousand doubts solved by this
information. Queen Mab were sounds familiar to my ears; for they originated
with myself.

This woman originally belonged to the tribe of Delawares or Lennilennapee. All
these districts were once comprised within the dominions of that nation. About
thirty years ago, in consequence of perpetual encroachments of the English
colonists, they abandoned their ancient seats and retired to the banks of the
Wabash and Muskingum.

This emigration was concerted in a general council of the tribe, and obtained
the concurrence of all but one female. Her birth, talents, and age, gave her
much consideration and authority among her countrymen; and all her zeal and
eloquence were exerted to induce them to lay aside their scheme. In this,
however, she could not succeed. Finding them refractory, she declared her
resolution to remain behind, and maintain possession of the land which her
countrymen should impiously abandon.

The village inhabited by this clan was built upon ground which now constitutes
my uncle's barn yard and orchard. On the departure of her countrymen, this
female burnt the empty wigwams and retired into the fastnesses of Norwalk. She
selected a spot suitable for an Indian dwelling and a small plantation of
maize, and in which she was seldom liable to interruption and intrusion.

Her only companions were three dogs, of the Indian or wolf species. These
animals differed in nothing from their kinsmen of the forest, but in their
attachment and obedience to their mistress. She governed them with absolute
sway: they were her servants and protectors, and attended her person or guarded
her threshold, agreeable to her directions. She fed them with corn and they
supplied her and themselves with meat, by hunting squirrels, racoons, and
rabbits.

To the rest of mankind they were aliens or enemies. They never left the desert
but in company with their mistress, and when she entered a farm-house, waited
her return at a distance. They would suffer none to approach them, but attacked
no one who did not imprudently crave their acquaintance, or who kept at a
respectful distance from their wigwam. That sacred asylum they would not suffer
to be violated, and no stranger could enter it but at the imminent hazard of
his life, unless accompanied and protected by their dame.

The chief employment of this woman, when at home, besides plucking the weeds
from among her corn; bruising the grain between two stones, and setting her
snares, for rabbits and apossums, was to talk. Though in solitude, her tongue
was never at rest but when she was asleep; but her conversation was merely
addressed to her dogs. Her voice was sharp and shrill, and her gesticulations
were vehement and grotesque. An hearer would naturally imagine that she was
scolding; but, in truth, she was merely giving them directions. Having no other
object of contemplation or subject of discourse, she always found, in their
postures and looks, occasion for praise, or blame, or command. The readiness
with which they understood, and the docility with which they obeyed her
movements and words, were truly wonderful.

If a stranger chanced to wander near her hut, and overhear her jargon,
incessant as it was, and shrill, he might speculate in vain on the reason of
these sounds. If he waited in expectation of hearing some reply, he waited in
vain. The strain, always voluble and sharp, was never intermitted for a moment,
and would continue for hours at a time.

She seldom left the hut but to visit the neighboring inhabitants, and demand
from them food and clothing, or whatever her necessities required. These were
exacted as her due: to have her wants supplied was her prerogative, and to
withhold what she claimed was rebellion. She conceived that by remaining behind
her countrymen she succeeded to the government, and retained the possession of
all this region. The English were aliens and sojourners, who occupied the land
merely by her connivance and permission, and whom she allowed to remain on no
terms but those of supplying her wants.

Being a woman aged and harmless, her demands being limited to that of which
she really stood in need, and which her own industry could not procure, her
pretensions were a subject of mirth and good humor, and her injunctions obeyed
with seeming deference and gravity. To me she early became an object of
curiosity and speculation. I delighted to observe her habits and humor her
prejudices. She frequently came to my uncle's house, and I sometimes visited
her; insensibly she seemed to contract an affection for me, and regarded me
with more complacency and condescension than any other received.

She always disdained to speak English, and custom had rendered her
intelligible to most in her native language, with regard to a few simple
questions. I had taken some pains to study her jargon, and could make out to
discourse with her on the few ideas which she possessed. This circumstance,
likewise, wonderfully prepossessed her in my favor.

The name by which she was formerly known was Deb; but her pretensions to
royalty, the wildness of her aspect and garb, her shrivelled and diminutive
form, a constitution that seemed to defy the ravages of time and the influence
of the elements; her age, which some did not scruple to affirm exceeded an
hundred years, her romantic solitude and mountainous haunts suggested to my
fancy the appellation of Queen Mab. There appeared to me some rude analogy
between this personage and her whom the poets of old-time have delighted to
celebrate: thou perhaps wilt discover nothing but incongruities between them,
but, be that as it may, Old Deb and Queen Mab soon came into indiscriminate and
general use.

She dwelt in Norwalk upwards of twenty years. She was not forgotten by her
countrymen, and generally received from her brothers and sons an autumnal
visit; but no solicitations or entreaties could prevail on her to return with
them. Two years ago, some suspicion or disgust induced her to forsake her
ancient habitation, and to seek a new one. Happily she found a more convenient
habitation twenty miles to the westward, and in a spot abundantly sterile and
rude.

This dwelling was of logs, and had been erected by a Scottish emigrant, who
not being rich enough to purchase land, and entertaining a passion for solitude
and independence, cleared a field in the unappropriated wilderness, and
subsisted on its produce. After some time he disappeared. Various conjectures
were formed as to the cause of his absence. None of them were satisfactory; but
that which obtained most credit was, that he had been murdered by the Indians,
who, about the same period, paid their annual visit to the Queen. This
conjecture acquired some force, by observing that the old woman shortly after
took possession of his hut, his implements of tillage, and his corn-field.

She was not molested in her new abode, and her life passed in the same quiet
tenor as before. Her periodical rambles, her regal claims, her guardian
wolves, and her uncouth volubility, were equally remarkable, but her circuits
were new. Her distance made her visits to Solebury more rare, and had prevented
me from ever extending my pedestrian excursions to her present abode.

These recollections were now suddenly called up by the information of my
hostess. The hut where I had sought shelter and relief was, it seems, the
residence of Queen Mab. Some fortunate occurrence had called her away during my
visit. Had she and her dogs been at home, I should have been set upon by these
ferocious sentinels, and, before their dame could have interfered, have been,
together with my helpless companion, mangled or killed. These animals never
barked, I should have entered unaware of my danger, and my fate could scarcely
have been averted by my fusil.

Her absence at this unseasonable hour was mysterious. It was now the time of
year when her countrymen were accustomed to renew their visit. Was there a
league between her and the plunderers whom I had encountered?

But who were they by whom my footsteps were so industriously traced? Those
whom I had seen at Deb's hut were strangers to me, but the wound upon my face
was known only to them. To this circumstance was now added my place of
residence and name. I supposed them impressed with the belief that I was dead;
but this mistake must have speedily been rectified. Revisiting the spot,
finding me gone, and obtaining some intelligence of my former condition, they
had instituted a search after me.

But what tidings were these? I was supposed to have been bewildered in the
mountains, and three days were said to have passed since my disappearance.
Twelve hours had scarcely elapsed since I emerged from the cavern. Had two days
and an half been consumed in my subterranean prison?

These reflections were quickly supplanted by others. I now gained a sufficient
acquaintance with the region that was spread around me. I was in the midst of a
vale, included between ridges that gradually approached each other, and when
joined, were broken up into hollows and steeps, and spreading themselves over a
circular space, assumed the appellation of Norwalk. This vale gradually widened
as it tended to the westward, and was, in this place ten or twelve miles in
breadth. My devious footsteps had brought me to the foot of the southern
barrier. The outer basis of this was laved by the river, but, as it tended
eastward, the mountain and river receded from each other, and one of the
cultivable districts lying between them was Solebury, my natal township. Hither
it was now my duty to return with the utmost expedition.

There were two ways before me. One lay along the interior base of the hill,
over a sterile and trackless space, and exposed to the encounter of savages,
some of whom might possibly be lurking here. The other was the well frequented
road, on the outside and along the river, and which was to be gained by passing
over this hill. The practicability of the passage was to be ascertained by
inquiries made to my hostess. She pointed out a path that led to the rocky
summit and down to the river's brink. The path was not easy to be kept in view
or to be trodden, but it was undoubtedly to be preferred to any other.

A route, somewhat circuitous, would terminate in the river road. Thenceforward
the way to Solebury was level and direct; but the whole space which I had to
traverse was not less than thirty miles. In six hours it would be night, and,
to perform the journey in that time would demand the agile boundings of a
leopard and the indefatigable sinews of an elk.

My frame was in miserable plight. My strength had been assailed by anguish,
and fear, and watchfulness; by toil, and abstinence, and wounds. Still,
however, some remnant was left; would it not enable me to reach my home by
night-fall? I had delighted, from my childhood, in feats of agility and
perseverance. In roving through the maze of thickets and precipices, I had put
my energis both moral and physical, frequently to the test. Greater
achievements than this had been performed, and I disdained to be outdone in
perspicacity by the lynx, in his sure-footed instinct by the roe, or in
patience under hardship, and contention with fatigue, by the Mohawk. I have
ever aspired to transcend the rest of animals in all that is common to the
rational and brute, as well as in all by which they are distinguished from each
other.

END OF VOL. II.
EDGAR HUNTLY; OR, MEMOIRS OF A SLEEP-WALKER.

BY THE AUTHOR OF ARTHUR MERVYN, WIELAND, -- ORMOND, etc.

VOL. III.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY H. MAXWELL, No. 3 LETITIA COURT, AND SOLD BY THOMAS
DOBSON, ASBURY DICKINS, AND THE PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS.

1799.

EDGAR HUNTLY; OR, MEMOIRS OF A SLEEP-WALKER.
CHAPTER XX.
I LIKEWISE burned with impatience to know the condition of my family, to
dissipate at once their tormenting doubts and my own, with regard to our mutual
safety. The evil that I feared had befallen them was too enormous to allow me
to repose in suspense, and my restlessness and ominous forebodings would be
more intolerable than any hardship or toils to which I could possibly be
subjected during this journey.

I was much refreshed and invigorated by the food that I had taken, and by the
rest of an hour. With this stock of recruited force I determined to scale the
hill. After receiving minute directions, and returning many thanks for my
hospitable entertainment, I set out.

The path was indeed intricate, and deliberate attention was obliged to be
exerted in order to preserve it. Hence my progress was slower than I wished.
The first impulse was to fix my eye upon the summit, and to leap from crag to
crag till I reached it, but this my experience had taught me was impracticable.
It was only by winding through gullies, and coasting precipices and bestriding
chasms, that I could hope finally to gain the top, and I was assured that by
one way only was it possible to accomplish even this.

An hour was spent in struggling with impediments, and I seemed to have gained
no way. Hence a doubt was suggested whether I had not missed the true road. In
this doubt I was confirmed by the difficulties which now grew up before me. The
brooks, the angles and the hollows, which my hostess had described, were not to
be seen. Instead of these, deeper dells, more headlong torrents and wider
gaping rifts were incessantly encountered.

To return was as hoples as to proceed. I consoled myself with thinking that
the survey which my informant had made of the hill-side, might prove
inaccurate, and that in spite of her predictions, the heights might be reached
by other means than by those pointed out by her. I will not enumerate my
toilsome expedients, my frequent disappointments and my desperate exertions.
Suffice it to say that I gained the upper space, not till the sun had dipped
beneath the horizon.

My satisfaction at accomplishing thus much was not small, and I hied, with
renovated spirits, to the opposite brow. This proved to be a steep that could
not be descended. The river flowed at its foot. The opposite bank was five
hundred yards distant, and was equally towering and steep as that on which I
stood. Appearances were adapted to persuade you that these rocks had formerly
joined, but by some mighty effort of nature, had been severed, that the stream
might find way through the chasm. The channel, however, was encumbered with
asperities over which the river fretted and foamed with thundering impetuosity.

I pondered for a while on these stupendous scenes. They ravished my attention
from considerations that related to myself; but this interval was short, and I
began to measure the descent, in order to ascertain the practicability of
treading it. My survey terminated in bitter disappointment. I turned my eye
successively eastward and westward. Solebury lay in the former direction, and
thither I desired to go. I kept along the verge in this direction, till I
reached an impassable rift. Beyond this I saw that the steep grew lower, but it
was impossible to proceed farther. Higher up the descent might be practicable,
and though more distant from Solebury, it was better to reach the road, even at
that distance, than never to reach it.

Changing my course, therefore, I explored the spaces above. The night was
rapidly advancing, the gray clouds gathered in the south-east, and a chilling
blast, the usual attendent of a night in October, began to whistle among the
pigmy cedars that scantily grew upon these heights. My progress would quickly
be arrested by darkness, and it behoved me to provide some place of shelter and
repose. No recess, better than an hollow in the rock, presented itself to my
anxious scrutiny.

Meanwhile I would not dismiss the hope of reaching the road, which I saw some
hundred feet below, winding along the edge of the river, before daylight should
utterly fail. Speedily these hopes derived new vigor from meeting a ledge that
irregularly declined from the brow of the hill. It was wide enough to allow of
cautious footing. On a similar stratum, or ledge, projecting still further from
the body of the hill, and close to the surface of the river, was the road. This
stratum ascended from the level of the stream, while that on which I trod
rapidly descended. I hoped that they would speedly be blended, or at least
approach so near as to allow me to leap from one to the other without enormous
hazard.

This fond expectation was frustrated. Presently I perceived that the ledge
below began to descend, while that above began to tend upward, and was quickly
terminated by the uppermost surface of the cliff. Here it was needful to pause.
I looked over the brink and considered whether I might not leap from my present
station, without endangering my limbs. The road into which I should fall was a
rocky pavement far from being smooth. The descent could not be less than forty
or fifty feet. Such an attempt was, to the last degree, hazardous, but was it
not better to risque my life by leaping from this eminence, than to remain and
perish on the top of this inhospitable mountain. The toils which I had endured,
in reaching this height appeared to my panic-struck fancy, less easy to be
borne again than death.

I know not but that I should have finally resolved to leap, had not different
views been suggested by observing that the outer edge of the road was, in like
manner, the brow of a steep which terminated in the river. The surface of the
road, was twelve or fifteen feet above the level of the stream, which, in this
spot was still and smooth. Hence I inferred that the water was not of
inconsiderable depth. To fall upon rocky points was, indeed, dangerous, but to
plunge into water of sufficient depth, even from an height greater than that at
which I now stood, especially to one to whom habit had rendered water almost as
congenial an element as air, was scarcely attended with inconvenience. This
expedient was easy and safe. Twenty yards from this spot, the channel was
shallow, and to gain the road from the stream, was no difficult exploit.

Some disadvantages, however, attended this scheme. The water was smooth, but
this might arise from some other cause than its depth. My gun, likewise, must
be left behind me, and that was a loss to which I felt invincible repugnance.
To let it fall upon the road, would put it in my power to retrieve the
possession, but it was likely to be irreparably injured by the fall.

While musing upon this expedient, and weighing injuries with benefits, the
night closed upon me. I now considered that should I emerge in safety from the
stream, I should have many miles to travel before I could reach an house. My
clothes meanwhile would be loaded with wet. I should be heart-pierced by the
icy blast that now blew, and my wounds and bruises would be chafed into
insupportable pain.

I reasoned likewise on the folly of impatience and the necessity of repose. By
thus long continuance in one posture, my sinews began to stiffen, and my
reluctance to make new exertions to increase. My brows were heavy, and I felt
an irresistible propensity to sleep. I concluded to seek some shelter, and
resign myself, my painful recollections, and my mournful presages to sweet
forgetfulness. For this end, I once more ascended to the surface of the cliff.
I dragged my weary feet forward, till I found somewhat that promised me the
shelter that I sought.

A cluster of cedars appeared, whose branches over-arched a space that might be
called a bower. It was a slight cavity, whose flooring was composed of loose
stones and a few faded leaves blown from a distance, and finding a temporary
lodgement here. On one side was a rock, forming a wall rugged and projecting
above. At the bottom of the rock was a rift, somewhat resembling a coffin in
shape, and not much larger in dimensions. This rift terminated on the opposite
side of the rock, in an opening that was too small for the body of a man to
pass. The distance between each entrance was twice the length of a man.

This bower was open to the Southeast whence the gale now blew. It therefore
imperfectly afforded the shelter of which I stood in need; but it was the best
that the place and the time afforded. To stop the smaller entrance of the
cavity with a stone, and to heap before the other, branches lopped from the
trees with my hatchet, might somewhat contribute to my comfort.

This was done, and thrusting myself into this recess, as far as I was able, I
prepared for repose. It might have been reasonably suspected to be the den of
rattle-snakes or panthers; but my late contention with superior dangers and
more formidable enemies made me reckless of these, but another inconvenience
remained. In spite of my precautions, my motionless posture and slender
covering exposed me so much to the cold that I could not sleep.

The air appeared to have suddenly assumed the temperature of mid-winter. In a
short time, my extremeties were benumbed, and my limbs shivered and ached as if
I had been seized by an ague. My bed likewise was dank and uneven, and the
posture I was obliged to assume, unnatural and painful. It was evident that my
purpose could not be answered by remaining here.

I, therefore, crept forth, and began to reflect upon the possibility of
continuing my journey. Motion was the only thing that could keep me from
freezing, and my frame was in that state which allowed me to take no repose in
the absence of warmth; since warmth were indispensible. It now occurred to me
to ask whether it were not possible to kindle a fire.

Sticks and leaves were at hand. My hatchet and a pebble would enable me to
extract a spark. From this, by suitable care and perseverance, I might finally
procure sufficient fire to give me comfort and ease, and even enable me to
sleep. This boon was delicious and I felt as if I were unable to support a
longer deprivation of it.

I proceeded to execute this scheme. I took the dryest leaves, and endeavored
to use them as tinder, but the driest leaves were moistened by the dews. They
were only to be found in the hollows, in some of which were pools of water and
others were dank. I was not speedily discouraged, but my repeated attempts
failed, and I was finally compelled to relinquish this expedient.

All that now remained was to wander forth and keep myself in motion till the
morning. The night was likely to prove tempestuous and long. The gale seemed
freighted with ice, and acted upon my body like the points of a thousand
needles. There was no remedy, and I mustered my patience to endure it.

I returned again, to the brow of the hill. I ranged along it till I reached a
place where the descent was perpendicular, and, in consequence of affording no
sustenance to trees or bushes, was nearly smooth and bare. There was no road to
be seen, and this circumstance, added to the sounds which the ripling current
produced, afforded me some knowledge of my situation.

The ledge, along which the road was conducted, disappeared near this spot. The
opposite sides of the chasm through which flowed the river, approached nearer
to each other, in the form of jutting promontories. I now stood upon the verge
of that on the northern side. The water flowed at the foot, but, for the space
of ten or twelve feet from the rock, was so shallow as to permit the traveller
and his horse to wade through it, and thus to regain the road which the
receding precipice had allowed to be continued on the farther side.

I knew the nature and dimensions of this ford. I knew that, at a few yards
from the rock, the channel was of great depth. To leap into it, in this place,
was a less dangerous exploit, than at the spot where I had formerly been
tempted to leap. There I was unacquainted with the depth, but here I knew it to
be considerable. Still there was some ground of hesitation and fear. My present
station was loftier, and how deeply I might sink into this gulf, how far the
fall and the concussion would bereave me of my presence of mind, I could not
determine. This hesitation vanished, and placing my tom-hawk and fusil upon the
ground, I prepared to leap.

This purpose was suspended, in the moment of its execution, by a faint sound,
heard from the quarter whence I had come. It was the warning of men, but had
nothing in common with those which I had been accustomed to hear. It was not
the howling of a wolf or the yelling of a panther. These had often been
overheard by night during my last year's excursion to the lakes. My fears
whispered that this was the vociferation of a savage.

I was unacquainted with the number of the enemies who had adventured into this
district. Whether those whom I had encountered at Deb's hut were of that band
whom I had met with in the cavern, was merely a topic of conjecture. There
might be an half-score of troops, equally numerous, spread over the wilderness,
and the signal I had just heard might betoken the approach of one of these. Yet
by what means they should gain this nook, and what prey they expected to
discover, were not easily conceived.

The sounds, somewhat diversified, nearer and rising from different quarters,
were again heard. My doubts and apprehensions were increased. What expedient to
adopt for my own safety, was a subject of rapid meditation. Whether to remain
stretched upon the ground or to rise and go forward. Was it likely the enemy
would coast along the edge of the steep? Would they ramble hither to look upon
the ample scene which spread on all sides around the base of this rocky
pinnacle? In that case, how should I conduct myself! My arms were ready for
use. Could I not elude the necessity of shedding more blood? Could I not
anticipate their assault by casting myself without delay into the stream.

The sense of danger demanded more attention to be paid to external objects
than to the motives by which my future conduct should be influenced. My post
was on a circular projecture, in some degree, detached from the body of the
hill, the brow of which continued in a straight line, uninterrupted by this
projecture, which was somewhat higher than the continued summit of the ridge.
This line ran at the distance of a few paces from my post. Objects moving along
this line could merely be perceived to move, in the present obscurity.

My scrutiny was entirely directed to this quarter. Presently the treading of
many feet was heard, and several figures were discovered, following each other
in that straight and regular succession which is peculiar to the Indians. They
kept along the brow of the hill joining the promontory. I distinctly marked
seven figures in succession.

My resolution was formed. Should any one cast his eye hither, suspect, or
discover an enemy, and rush toward me, I determined to start upon my feet,
fire on my foe as he advanced, throw my piece on the ground, and then leap into
the river.

Happily, they passed unobservant and in silence. I remained, in the same
posture, for several minutes. At length, just as my alarms began to subside,
the hollows, before heard, arose, and from the same quarter as before. This
convinced me that my perils were not at an end. This now appeared to be merely
the vanguard, and would speedily be followed by others, against whom the same
caution was necessary to be taken.

My eye, anxiously bent the only way by which any one could approach, now
discerned a figure, which was indubitably that of a man armed, none other
appeared in company, but doubtless others were near. He approached, stood
still, and appeared to gaze steadfastly at the spot where I lay.

The optics of a Lennilennapee I knew to be far keener than my own. A log or a
couched fawn would never be mistaken for a man, nor a man for a couched fawn or
a log. Not only a human being would be instantly detected, but a decision be
unerringly made whether it were friend or foe. That my prostrate body was the
object on which the attention of this vigilant and steadfast gazer was fixed,
could not be doubted. Yet, since he continued an inactive gazer, there was
ground for a possibility to stand upon, that I was not recognized. My fate,
therefore, was still in suspense.

This interval was momentary. I marked a movement, which my fears instantly
interpreted to be that of leveling a gun at my head. This action was
sufficiently conformable to my prognostics. Supposing me to be detected, there
was no need for him to change his post. Aim might too fatally be taken, and his
prey be secured, from the distance at which he now stood.

These images glanced upon my thought, and put an end to my suspense. A single
effort placed me on my feet. I fired with precipitation that precluded the
certainty of hitting my mark, dropped my piece upon the ground, and leaped from
this tremendous height into the river. I reached the surface, and sunk in a
moment to the bottom.

Plunging endlong into the water, the impetus created by my fall from such an
height, would be slowly resisted by this denser element. Had the depth been
less, its resistance would not perhaps have hindered me from being mortally
injured against the rocky bottom. Had the depth been greater, time enough would
not have been allowed me to regain the surface. Had I fallen on my side, I
should have been bereaved of life or sensibility by the shock which my frame
would have received. As it was, my fate was suspended on a thread. To have lost
my presence of mind, to have forborne to counteract my sinking, for an instant,
after I had reached the water, would have made all exertions to regain the air,
fruitless. To so fortunate a concurrence of events, was thy friend indebted for
his safety!

Yet I only emerged from the gulf to encounter new perils. Scarcely had I
raised my head above the surface, and inhaled the vital breath, when twenty
shots were aimed at me from the precipice above. A shower of bullets fell upon
the water. Some of them did not fall further than two inches from my head. I
had not been aware of this new danger, and now that it assailed me continued
gasping the air, and floundering at random. The means of eluding it did not
readily occur. My case seemed desperate and all caution was dismissed.

This state of discomfiting surprise quickly disappeared. I made myself
acquainted, at a glance, with the position of surrounding objects. I conceived
that the opposite bank of the river would afford me most security, and thither
I tended with all the expedition in my power.

Meanwhile, my safety depended on eluding the bullets that continued
incessantly to strike the water at an arm's length from my body. For this end I
plunged beneath the surface, and only rose to inhale fresh air. Presently the
firing ceased, the flashes that lately illuminated the bank disappeared, and a
certain bustle and murmur of confused voices gave place to solitude and silence.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XXI.
I REACHED without difficulty the opposite bank, but the steep was
inaccessible. I swam along the edge in hopes of meeting with some projection or
recess where I might, at least, rest my weary limbs, and if it were necessary
to recross the river, to lay in a stock of recruited spirits and strength for
that purpose. I trusted that the water would speedily become shoal, or that the
steep would afford rest to my feet. In both these hopes I was disappointed.

There is no one to whom I would yield the superiority in swimming, but my
strength, like that of other human beings, had its limits. My previous fatigues
had been enormous, and my clothes, heavy with moisture, greatly incumbered and
retarded my movements. I had proposed to free myself from this imprisonment,
but I foresaw the inconveniences of wandering over this scene in absolute
nakedness, and was willing therefore, at whatever hazard, to retain them. I
continued to struggle with the current and to search for the means of scaling
the steeps. My search was fruitless, and I began to meditate the recrossing of
the river.

Surely my fate has never been paralleled! Where was this series of hardships
and perils to end? No sooner was one calamity eluded, than I was beset by
another. I had emerged from abhorred darkness in the heart of the earth, only
to endure the extremities of famine and encounter the fangs of a wild beast.
From these I was delivered only to be thrown into the midst of savages, to wage
an endless and hopeless war with adepts in killing; with appetites that longed
to feast upon my bowels and to quaff my heart's-blood. From these likewise was
I rescued, but merely to perish in the gulfs of the river, to welter on
unvisited shores or to be washed far away from curiosity or pity.

Formerly water was not only my field of sport but my sofa and my bed. I could
float for hours on the surface, enjoying its delicious cool, almost without the
expense of the slightest motion. It was an element as fitted for repose as for
exercise, but now the buoyant spirit seemed to have flown. My muscles were
shrunk, the air and water were equally congealed, and my most vehement
exertions were requisite to sustain me on the surface.

At first I had moved along with my wonted celerity and ease, but quickly my
forces were exhausted. My pantings and efforts were augmented and I saw that to
cross the river again was impracticable. I must continue, therefore, to search
out some accessible spot in the bank along which I was swimming.

Each moment diminished my stock of strength, and it behoved me to make good my
footing before another minute should escape. I continued to swim, to survey the
bank, and to make ineffectual attempts to grasp the rock. The shrubs which grew
upon it would not uphold me, and the fragments which, for a moment, inspired me
with hope, crumbled away as soon as they were touched.

At length, I noticed a pine, which was rooted in a crevice near the water. The
trunk, or any part of the root, was beyond my reach, but I trusted that I could
catch hold of the branch which hung lowest, and that, when caught, it would
assist me in gaining the trunk, and thus deliver me from the death which could
not be otherwise averted.

The attempt was arduous. Had it been made when I first reached the bank, no
difficulty had attended it, but now, to throw myself some feet above the
surface could scarcely be expected from one whose utmost efforts seemed to be
demanded to keep him from sinking. Yet this exploit, arduous as it was, was
attempted and accomplished. Happily the twigs were strong enough to sustain my
weight till I caught at other branches and finally placed myself upon the trunk.

This danger was now past, but I admitted the conviction that others, no less
formidable remained to be encountered and that my ultimate destiny was death. I
looked upward. New efforts might enable me to gain the summit of this steep,
but, perhaps, I should thus be placed merely in the situation from which I had
just been delivered. It was of little moment whether the scene of my
imprisonment was a dungeon not to be broken, or a summit from which descent was
impossible.

The river, indeed, severed me from a road which was level and safe, but my
recent dangers were remembered only to make me shudder at the thought of
incurring them a second time, by attempting to cross it. I blush at the
recollection of this cowardice. It was little akin to the spirit which I had
recently displayed. It was, indeed, an alien to my bosom, and was quickly
supplanted by intrepidity and perseverance.

I proceeded to mount the hill. From root to root, and from branch to branch,
lay my journey. It was finished, and I sat down upon the highest brow to
^^ditate on future trials. No road lay along this side of the river. It was
rugged and sterile, and farms were sparingly dispersed over it. To reach one of
these was now the object of my wishes. I had not lost the desire of reaching
Solebury before morning, but my wet clothes and the coldness of the night
seemed to have bereaved me of the power.

I traversed this summit, keeping the river on my right hand. Happily, its
declinations and ascents were by no means difficult, and I was cheered in the
midst of my vexations, by observing that every mile brought me nearer to my
uncle's dwelling. Meanwhile I anxiously looked for some tokens of an
habitation. These at length presented themselves. A wild heath, whistled over
by October blasts, meagrely adorned with the dry stalks of scented shrubs and
the bald heads of the sapless mullen, was succeeded by a fenced field and a
corn-stack. The dwelling to which these belonged was eagerly sought.

I was not surprised that all voices were still and all lights extinguished,
for this was the hour of repose. Having reached a piazza before the house, I
paused. Whether, at this drousy time, to knock for admission, to alarm the
peaceful tenants and take from them the rest which their daily toils and their
rural innocence had made so sweet, or to retire to what shelter an hay-stack or
barn could afford, was the theme of my deliberations.

Meanwhile I looked up at the house. It was the model of cleanliness and
comfort. It was built of wood; but the materials had undergone the plane, as
well as the axe and the saw. It was painted white, and the windows not only had
sashes, but these sashes were supplied, contrary to custom, with glass. In most
cases, the aperture where glass should be is stuffed with an old hat or a
petticoat. The door had not only all its parts entire, but was embellished with
mouldings and a pediment. I gathered from these tokens that this was the abode
not only of rural competence and innocence, but of some beings, raised by
education and fortune, above the intellectual mediocrity of clowns.

Methought I could claim consanguinity with such beings. Not to share their
charity and kindness would be inflicting as well as receiving injury. The
trouble of affording shelter, and warmth, and wholesome diet to a wretch
destitute as I was, would be eagerly sought by them.

Still I was unwilling to disturb them. I bethought myself that their kitchen
might be entered, and all that my necessities required be obtained without
interrupting their slumber. I needed nothing but the warmth which their kitchen
hearth would afford. Stretched upon the bricks, I might dry my clothes, and
perhaps enjoy some unmolested sleep. In spite of presages of ill and the horrid
remembrances of what I had performed and endured. I believed that nature would
afford a short respite to my cares.

I went to the door of what appeared to be a kitchen. The door was wide open.
This circumstance portended evil. Though it be not customary to lock or to
bolt, it is still less usual to have entrances unclosed. I entered with
suspicious steps, and saw enough to confirm my apprehensions. Several pieces of
wood half burned, lay in the midst of the floor. They appeared to have been
removed hither from the chimney, doubtless with a view to set fire to the whole
building.

The fire had made some progress on the floor, but had been seasonably
extinguished by pail's-full of water, thrown upon it. The floor was still
deluged with wet, the pail not emptied of all its contents stood upon the
hearth. The earthen vessels and plates whose proper place was the dresser, were
scattered in fragments in all parts of the room. I looked around me for some
one to explain this scene, but no one appeared.

The last spark of fire was put out, so that had my curiosity been idle, my
purpose could not be accomplished. To retire from this scene, neither curiosity
nor benevolence would permit. That some mortal injury had been intended was
apparent. What greater mischief had befallen, or whether greater might not, by
my interposition, be averted, could only be ascertained by penetrating further
into the house. I opened a door on one side which led to the main body of the
building and entered to a bedchamber. I stood at the entrance and knocked, but
no one answered my signals

The sky was not totally clouded, so that some light pervaded the room. I saw
that a bed stood in the corner, but whether occupied or not, its curtains
hindered me from judging. I stood in suspense a few minutes, when a motion in
the bed showed me that some one was there. I knocked again but withdrew to the
outside of the door. This roused the sleeper, who, half-groaning and puffing
the air through his nostrils, grumbled out in the hoarsest voice that I ever
heard, and in a tone of surly impatience.....Who is there?

I hesitated for an answer, but the voice instantly continued in the manner of
one half-asleep and enraged at being disturbed.....Is It you Peg? Damn ye, stay
away, now; I tell ye stay away, or, by God I will cut your throat.....I
will.....He continued to mutter and swear, but without coherence or
distinctness.

These were the accents of drunkenness, and denoted a wild and ruffian life.
They were little in unison with the external appearances of the mansion, and
blasted all the hopes I had formed of meeting under this roof with gentleness
and hospitality. To talk with this being, to attempt to reason him into
humanity and soberness, was useless. I was at a loss in what manner to address
him, or whether it was proper to maintain any parley. Meanwhile, my silence was
supplied by the suggestions of his own distempered fancy. Ay, said he, ye will,
will ye? well come on, let us see who is the better at the oak-stick. If I part
with ye, before I have bared your bones.....I Will teach ye to be always dipping
in my dish, ye devil's dam! ye!

So saying, he tumbled out of bed. At the first step, he struck his head
against the bed-post, but setting himself upright, he staggered toward the
spot where I stood. Some new obstacle occurred. He stumbled and fell at his
length upon the floor.

To encounter or expostulate with a man in this state was plainly absurd. I
turned and issued forth, with an aching heart, into the court before the house.
The miseries which a debauched husband or father inflicts upon all whom their
evil destiny allies to him were pictured by my fancy, and wrung from me tears
of anguish. These images, however, quickly yielded to reflections on my own
state. No expedient now remained, but to seek the barn, and find a covering and
a bed of straw.

I had scarcely set foot within the barn-yard when I heard a sound as of the
crying of an infant. It appeared to issue from the barn. I approached softly
and listened at the door. The cries of the babe continued, but were accompanied
by entreaties of a nurse or a mother to be quiet. These entreaties were mingled
with heartbreaking sobs and exclamations of.....Ah! me, my babe! Can thou
not sleep and afford thy unhappy mother some peace? Thou art cold, and I have
not sufficient warmth to cherish thee! What will become of us? Thy deluded
father cares not if we both perish.

A glimpse of the true nature of the scene seemed to be imparted by these
words. I now likewise recollected incidents that afforded additional light.
Somewhere on this bank of the river, there formerly resided one by name Selby.
He was an aged person, who united science and taste to the simple and laborious
habits of an husbandman. He had a son who resided several years in Europe, but
on the death of his father, returned home, accompanied by a wife. He had
succeeded to the occupation of the farm, but rumor had whispered many tales to
the disadvantage of his morals. His wife was affirmed to be of delicate and
polished manners, and much unlike her companion.

It now occured to me that this was the dwelling of the Selby's, and I seemed
to have gained some insight into the discord and domestic miseries by which the
unhappy lady suffered. This was no time to waste my sympathy on others. I could
benefit her nothing. Selby had probably returned from a carousal, with all his
malignant passions raised into phrensy by intoxication. He had driven his
desolate wife from her bed and house, and to shun outrage and violence she had
fled, with her helpless infant, to the barn. To appease his fury, to console
her, to suggest a remedy for this distress, was not in my power. To have sought
an interview would be merely to excite her terrors and alarm her delicacy,
without contributing to alleviate her calamity. Here then was no asylum for me.
A place of rest must be sought at some neighboring habitation. It was probable
that one would be found at no great distance, the path that led from the spot
where I stood, through a gate into a meadow, might conduct me to the nearest
dwelling, and this path I immediately resolved to explore.

I was anxious to open the gate without noise, but I could not succeed. Some
creaking of its hinges, was unavoidably produced, which I feared would be
overheard by the lady and multiply her apprehensions and perplexities. This
inconvenience was irremediable. I therefore closed the gate and pursued the
foot way before me with the utmost expedition. I had not gained the further end
of the meadow when I lighted on something which lay across the path, and which,
on being closely, inspected, appeared to be an human body. It was the corse of
a girl, mangled by an hatchet. Her head gory and deprived of its looks, easily
explained the kind of enemies by whom she had been assailed. Here was proof
that this quiet and remote habitation had been visited, in their destructive
progress by the Indians. The girl had been slain by them, and her scalp,
according to their savage custom, had been torn away to be preserved as a
trophy.

The fire which had been kindled on the kitchen floor was now remembered, and
corroborated the inferences which were drawn from this spectacle. And yet that
the mischief had been thus limited, that the besotted wretch who lay helpless
on his bed, and careless of impending danger, and that the mother and her
infant should escape, excited some degree of surprise. Could the savages have
been interrupted in their work, and obliged to leave their vengeance unfinished?

Their visit had been recent. Many hours had not elapsed since they prowled
about these grounds. Had they wholly disappeared and meant they not to return?
To what new danger might I be exposed in remaining thus guideless and destitute
of all defense?

In consequence of these reflections, I proceeded with more caution. I looked
with suspicious glances, before and on either side of me. I now approached the
fence which, on this side, bounded the meadow. Something was discerned or
immagined, stretched close to the fence, on the ground, and filling up the
pathway. My apprehensions of a lurking enemy, had been previously awakened,
and my fancy instantly figured to itself an armed man, lying on the ground and
waiting to assail the unsuspecting passenger.

At first I was prompted to fly, but a second thought showed me that I had
already approached near enough to be endangered. Notwithstanding my pause, the
form was motionless. The possibility of being misled in my conjectures was
easily supposed. What I saw might be a log or it might be another victim to
savage ferocity. This tract was that which my safety required me to pursue. To
turn aside or go back would be merely to bewilder myself anew.

Urged by these motives, I went nearer, and at least was close enough to
perceive that the figure was human. He lay upon his face, near his right hand
was a musket, unclenched. This circumstance, his death-like attitude and the
garb and ornaments of an Indian, made me readily suspect the nature and cause
of this catastrophe. Here the invaders had been encountered and repulsed, and
one at least of their number had been left upon the field.

I was weary of contemplating these rueful objects. Custom, likewise, even in
so short a period, had innured me to spectacles of horror. I was grown callous
and immovable. I staid not to ponder on the scene, but snatching the musket,
which was now without an owner, and which might be indispensable to my defense,
I hastened into the wood. On this side the meadow was skirted by a forest, but
a beaten road lead into it, and might therefore be attempted without danger.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XXII.
THE road was intricate and long. It seemed designed to pervade the forest in
every possible direction. I frequently noticed cut wood, piled in heaps upon
either side, and rejoiced in these tokens that the residence of men was near.
At length I reached a second fence, which proved to be the boundary of a road
still more frequented. I pursued this, and presently beheld, before me, the
river and its opposite barriers.

This object afforded me some knowledge of my situation. There was a ford over
which travelers used to pass, and in which the road that I was now pursuing
terminated. The stream was rapid and tumultuous, but in this place it did not
rise higher than the shoulders. On the opposite side was an highway, passable
by horses and men, though not carriages, and which led into the midst of
Solebury. Should I not rush into the stream, and still aim at reaching my
uncle's house before morning? Why should I delay?

Thirty hours of incessant watchfulness and toil, of enormous efforts and
perils, preceded and accompanied by abstinence and wounds, were enough to
annihilate the strength and courage of ordinary men. In the course of them, I
had frequently believed myself to have reached the verge beyond which my force
would not carry me, but experience as frequently demonstrated my error. Though
many miles, were yet to be traversed, though my clothes were once more to be
drenched and loaded with moisture, though every hour seemed to add somewhat to
the keenness of the blast: yet how should I know, but by trial, whether my
stock of energy was not sufficient for this last exploit?

My resolution to proceed was nearly formed, when the figure of a man moving
slowly across the road, at some distance before me, was observed. Here by this
ford lived a man by name ^^sset, of whom I had slight knowledge. He tended his
two hundred acres with a plodding and money-doating spirit, while his son
overlooked a Grist-mill, on the river. He was a creature of gain, coarse and
harmless. The man whom I saw before me might be he, or some one belonging to
his family. Being armed for defense, I less scrupled a meeting with any thing
in the shape of man. I therefore called. The figure stopped and answered me,
without surliness or anger. The voice was unlike that of Bisset, but this
person's information I believed would be of some service.

Coming up to him, he proved to be a clown, belonging to Bisset's habitation.
His panic and surprise on seeing me made (...). In my present garb I sho^^^ ^^t
have easily been recognized by my nearest kinsman, and much less easily by one
who had seldom met me.

It may be easily conceived that my thoughts, when allowed to wander from the
objects before me, were tormented with forebodings and inquietudes on account
of the ills which I had so much reason to believe had befallen my family. I had
no doubt that some evil had happened, but the full extent of it was still
uncertain. I desired and dreaded to discover the truth, and was unable to
interrogate this person in a direct manner. I could deal only in circuities and
hints. I shuddered while I waited for an answer to my inquiries.

Had not Indians, I asked, been lately seen in this neighborhood? Were they
not suspected of hostile designs? Had they not already committed some mischief?
Some passenger, perhaps, had been attacked; or fire had been set to some house?
On which side of the river had their steps been observed, or any devastation
been committed? Above the ford or below it? At what distance from the river?

When his attention could be withdrawn from my person and bestowed upon my
questions, he answered that some alarm had indeed been spread about Indians,
and that parties from Solebury and Chetasko were out in pursuit of them, that
many persons had been killed by them, and that one house in Solebury had been
rifled and burnt on the night before the last.

These tidings were a dreadful confirmation of my fears. There scarcely
remained a doubt: but still my expiring hope prompted me to inquire to whom did
the house belong?

He answered that he had not heard the name of the owner. He was a stranger to
the people on the other side of the river.

Were any of the inhabitants murdered?

Yes. All that were at home except a girl whom they carried off. Some said that
the girl had been retaken?

What was the name? Was it Huntly?

Huntly? yes. No. He did not know. He had forgotten.

I fixed my eyes upon the ground. An interval of gloomy meditation succeeded.
All was lost, all for whose sake I desired to live, had perished by the hands
of these assassins. That dear home, the scene of my sportive childhood, of my
studies, labors and recreations, was ravaged by fire and the sword: was
reduced to a frightful ruin.

Not only all that embellished and endeared existence was destroyed, but the
means of subsistence itself. Thou know that my sisters and I were dependants
on the bounty of our uncle. His death would make way for the succession of his
son, a man fraught with envy and malignity: who always testified a mortal
hatred to us, merely because we enjoyed the protection of his father. The
ground which furnished me with bread was now become the property of one, who,
if he could have done it with security, would gladly have mingled poison with
my food.

All that my imagination or my heart regarded as of value had likewise
perished. Whatever my chamber, my closets, my cabinets contained, my furniture,
my books, the records of my own skill, the monuments of their existence whom I
loved, my very clothing, were involved in indiscriminate and irretreivable
destruction. Why should I survive this calamity?

But did not he say that one had escaped? The only females in the family were
my sisters. One of these had been reserved for a fate worse than death; to
gratify the innate and insatiable cruelty of savages by suffering all the
torments their invention can suggest, or to linger out years of dreary bondage
and unintermitted hardship in the bosom of the wilderness. To restore her to
liberty; to cherish this last survivor of my unfortunate race was a sufficient
motive to life and to activity.

But soft! Had not rumor whispered that the captive was retaken? Oh! who was
her angel of deliverance? Where did she now abide? Weeping over the untimely
fall of her protector and her friend. Lamenting and upbraiding the absence of
her brother? Why should I not haste to find her? To mingle my tears with hers,
to assure her of my safety and expiate the involuntary crime of my desertion,
by devoting all futurity to the task of her consolation and improvement?

The path was open and direct. My new motives, would have trampled upon every
impediment and made me reckless of all dangers and all toils. I broke from my
reverie, and without taking leave or expressing gratitude to my informant, I
ran with frantic expedition toward the river, and plunging into it gained the
opposite side in a moment.

I was sufficiently acquainted with the road. Some twelve or fifteen miles
remained to be traversed. I did not fear that my strength would fail in the
performance of my journey. It was not my uncle's habitation to which I directed
my steps. Inglefield was my friend. If my sister had existence, or was snatched
from captivity, it was here that an asylum had been afforded to her, and here
was I to seek the knowledge of my destiny. For this reason having reached a
spot where the road divided into two branches, one of which led to Inglefield's
and the other to Huntly's, I struck into the former.

Scarcely had I passed the angle when I noticed a building, on the right hand,
at some distance from the road. In the present state of my thoughts, it would
not have attracted my attention, had not a light gleamed from an upper window,
and told me that all within were not at rest.

I was acquainted with the owner of this mansion. He merited esteem and
confidence, and could not fail to be acquainted with recent events. From him I
should obtain all the information that I needed, and I should be delivered from
some part of the agonies of my suspense. I should reach his door in a few
minutes, and the window-light was a pro^^ that my entrance at this hour would
not disturb the family, some of whom were stirring.

Through a gate, I entered an avenue of tall oaks, that led to the house. I
could not but reflect on the effect which my appearance would produce upon the
family. The sleek locks, neat apparel, pacific guise, sobriety and gentleness
of aspect by which I was customarily distinguished, would in vain be sought in
the apparition which would now present itself before them. My legs, neck and
bosom were bare, and their native hue were exchanged for the livid marks of
bruises and scarrifications. An horrid scar upon my cheek, and my uncombed
locks; hollow eyes, made ghastly by abstinence and cold, and the ruthless
passions of which my mind had been the theater, added to the musket which I
carried in my hand, would prepossess them with the notion of a maniac or
ruffian.

Some inconveniences might hence arise, which however could not be avoided. I
must trust to the speed with which my voice and my words should disclose my
true character and rectify their mistake.

I now reached the principal door of the house. It was open, and I
unceremoniously entered. In the midst of the room stood a German stove, well
heated. To thaw my half frozen limbs was my first care. Meanwhile, I gazed
around me, and marked the appearances of things.

Two lighted candles stood upon the table. Beside them were cyder-bottles and
pipes of tobacco. The furniture and room was in that state which denoted it to
have been lately filled with drinkers and smokers, yet neither voice, nor
visage, nor motion were any where observable. I listened but neither above nor
below, within or without, could any tokens of an human being be perceived.

This vacancy and silence must have been lately preceded by noise and concourse
and bustle. The contrast was mysterious and ambiguous. No adequate cause of so
quick and absolute a transition occured to me. Having gained some warmth and
lingered some ten or twenty minutes in this uncertainty, I determined to
explore the other apartments of the building. I knew not what might betide in
my absence, or what I might encounter in my search to justify precaution, and,
therefore, kept the gun in my hand. I snatched a candle from the table and
proceeded into two other apartments on the first floor and the kitchen. Neither
was inhabited, though chairs and tables were arranged in their usual order, and
no traces of violence or hurry were apparent.

Having gained the foot of the staircase, I knocked, but my knocking was
wholly disregarded. A light had appeared in an upper chamber. It was not,
indeed, in one of those apartments which the family permanently occupied, but
in that which, according to rural custom, was reserved for guests; but it
indubitably betokened the presence of some being by whom my doubts might be
solved. These doubts were too tormenting to allow of scruples and delay. -- I
mounted the stairs.

At each chamber door I knocked, but I knocked in vain. I tried to open, but
found them to be locked. I at length reached the entrance of that in which a
light had been discovered. Here, it was certain, that some one would be found;
but here, as well as elsewhere, my knocking was unnoticed.

To enter this chamber was audacious, but no other expedient was afforded me to
determine whether the house had any inhabitants. I, therefore, entered, though
with caution and reluctance. No one was within, but there were sufficient
traces of some person who had lately been here. On the table stood a traveling
escrutoire, open, with pens and inkstand. A chair was placed before it, and a
candle on the right hand. This apparatus was rarely seen in this country. Some
traveller it seemed occupied this room, though the rest of the mansion was
deserted. The pilgrim, as these appearances testified, was of no vulgar order,
and belonged not to the class of periodical and every-day guests.

It now occurred to me that the occupant of this appartment could not be far
off, and that some danger and embarrassment could not fail to accrue from being
found, thus accoutred and garbed, in a place sacred to the study and repose of
another. It was proper, therefore, to withdraw, and either to resume my
journey, or wait for the stranger's return, whom perhaps some temporary
engagement had called away, in the lower and public room. The former now
appeared to be the best expedient, as the return of this unknown person was
uncertain, as well as his power to communicate the information which I wanted.

Had paper, as well as the implements of writing, lain upon the desk, perhaps
my lawless curiosity would not have scrupled to have pryed into it. On the
first glance nothing of that kind appeared, but now, as I turned toward the
door, somewhat, lying beside the desk, on the side opposite the candle, caught
my attention. The impulse was instantaneous and mechanical, that made me leap
to the spot, and lay my hand upon it. Till I felt it between my fingers, till I
brought it near my eyes and read frequently the inscriptions that appeared upon
it, I was doubtful whether my senses had deceived me.

Few, perhaps, among mankind have undergone vicissitudes of peril and wonder
equal to mine. The miracles of poetry, the transitions of enchantment, are
beggarly and mean compared with those which I had experienced: Passage into new
forms, overleaping the bars of time and space, reversal of the laws of
inanimate and intelligent existence had been mine to perform and to witness.

No event had been more fertile of sorrow and perplexity than the loss of thy
brother's letters. They went by means invisible, and disappeared at a moment
when foresight would have least predicted their disappearance. They now placed
themselves before me, in a manner equally abrupt, in a place and by means, no
less contrary to expectation. The papers which I now seized were those letters.
The parchment cover, the string that tied, and the wax that sealed them,
appeared not to have been opened or violated.

The power that removed them from my cabinet, and dropped them in this house, a
house which I rarely visited, which I had not entered during the last year,
with whose inhabitants I maintained no cordial intercourse, and to whom my
occupations and amusements, my joys and my sorrows, were unknown, was no object
even of conjecture. But they were not possessed by any of the family. Some
stranger was here, by whom they had been stolen, or into whose possession, they
had, by some incomprehensible chance, fallen.

That stranger was near. He had left this apartment for a moment. He would
speedily return. To go hence, might possibly occasion me to miss him. Here then
I would wait, till he should grant me an interview. The papers were mine, and
were recovered. I would never part with them. But to know by whose force or by
whose stratagems I had been bereaved of them thus long, was now the supreme
passion of my soul, I seated myself near a table and anxiously awaited for an
interview, on which I was irresistably persuaded to believe that much of my
happiness depended.

Meanwhile, I could not but connect this incident with the destruction of my
family. The loss of these papers had excited transports of grief, and yet, to
have lost them thus, was perhaps the sole expedient, by which their final
preservation could be rendered possible. Had they remained in my cabinet, they
could not have escaped the destiny which overtook the house and its furniture.
Savages are not accustomed to leave their exterminating work unfinished. The
house which they have plundered, they are careful to level with the ground.
This not only their revenge, but their caution prescribes. Fire may originate
by accident as well as by design, and the traces of pillage and murder are
totally obliterated by the flames.

These thoughts were interrupted by the shutting of a door below, and by
footsteps ascending the stairs. My heart throbbed at the sound. My seat became
uneasy and I started on my feet. I even advanced half way to the entrance of
the room. My eyes were intensely fixed upon the door. My impatience would have
made me guess at the person of this visitant by measuring his shadow, if his
shadow were first seen; but this was precluded by the position of the light. It
was only when the figure entered, and the whole person was seen, that my
curiosity was gratified. He who stood before me was the parent and fosterer of
my mind, the companion and instructor of my youth, from whom I had been parted
for years; from whom I believed myself to be forever separated; -- Sarsefield
himself!

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XXIII.
MY deportment, at an interview so much desired and so wholly unforeseen, was
that of a maniac. The petrifying influence of surprise, yielded to the
impetuosities of passion. I held him in my arms: I wept upon his bosom, I
sobbed with emotion which, had it not found passage at my eyes, would have
burst my heart strings. Thus I who had escaped the deaths that had previously
assailed me in so many forms, should have been reserved to solemnize a scene
like this by.... dying for joy!

The sterner passions and habitual austerities of my companion, exempted him
from pouring out this testimony of his feelings. His feelings were indeed more
allied to astonishment and incredulity than mine had been. My person was not
instantly recognized. He shrunk from my embrace, as if I were an apparition or
impostor. He quickly disengaged himself from my arms, and withdrawing a few
paces, gazed upon me as on one whom he had never before seen.

These repulses were ascribed to the loss of his affection. I was not mindful
of the hideous guise in which I stood before him, and by which he might justly
be misled to imagine me a ruffian or a lunatic. My tears flowed now on a new
account, and I articulated in a broken and faint voice -- My master! my friend!
Have you forgotten! have you ceased to love me?

The sound of my voice made him start and exclaim -- Am I alive? am I awake?
Speak again I beseech you, and convince me that I am not dreaming or delirious.

Can you need any proof, I answered, that it is Edgar Huntly, your pupil, your
child that speaks to you?

He now withdrew his eyes from me and fixed them on the floor. After a pause he
resumed, in emphatic accents. Well, I have lived to this age in unbelief. To
credit or trust in miraculous agency was foreign to my nature, but now I am no
longer skeptical. Call me to any bar, and exact from me an oath that you have
twice been dead and twice recalled to life; that you move about invisibly, and
change your place by the force, not of muscles, but of thought, and I will give
it.

How came you hither? Did you penetrate the wall? Did you rise through the
floor?

Yet surely it is an error. You could not be he whom twenty witnesses affirmed
to have beheld a lifeless and mangled corpse upon the ground, whom my own eyes
saw in that condition.

In seeking the spot once more to provide you a grave, you had vanished. Again
I met you. You plunged into a rapid stream, from an height from which it was
impossible to fall and to live: yet, as if to set the limits of nature at
defiance; to sport with human penetration, you rose upon the surface: You
floated; you swam: Thirty bullets were aimed at your head, by marks-men
celebrated for the exactness of their sight. I myself was of the number, and I
never missed what I desired to hit.

My predictions were confirmed by the event. You ceased to struggle; you sunk
to rise no more, and yet after these accumulated deaths, you light upon this
floor: so far distant from the scene of your catastrophe; over spaces only to
be passed, in so short a time as has since elapsed, by those who have wings.

My eyes, my ears bear testimony to your existence now, as they formerly
convinced me of your death -- What am I to think; What proofs am I to credit?
-- There he stopped.

Every accent of this speech added to the confusion of my thoughts. The
allusions that my friend had made were not unintelligible. I gained a glimpse
of the complicated errors by which we had been mutually deceived. I had fainted
on the area before Deb's hut. I was found by Sarsefield in this condition, and
imagined to be dead.

The man whom I had seen upon the promontory was not an Indian. He belonged to
a numerous band of pursuers, whom my hostile and precipitate deportment caused
to suspect me for an enemy. They that fired from the steep were friends. The
interposition that screened me from so many bullets, was indeed miraculous. No
wonder that my voluntary sinking, in order to elude their shots, was mistaken
for death, and that, having accomplished the destruction of this foe, they
resumed their pursuit of others. But how was Sarsefield apprized that it was I
who plunged into the river? No subsequent event was possible to impart to him
the incredible truth.

A pause of mutual silence ensued. At length, Sarsefield renewed his
expressions of amazement at this interview, and besought me to explain why I
had disappeared by night from my Uncle's house, and by what series of unheard
of events this interview was brought about. Was it indeed Huntly whom he
examined and mourned over at the threshold of Deb's hut? Whom he had sought in
every thicket and cave in the ample circuit of Norwalk and Chetasco? Whom he
had seen perish in the current of the Delaware?

Instead of noticing his questions, my soul was harrowed with anxiety
respecting the fate of my uncle and sisters. Sarsefield could communicate the
tidings which would decide on my future lot, and set my portion in happiness or
misery. Yet I had not breath to speak my inquiries. Hope tottered, and I felt
as if a single word would be sufficient for its utter subversion. At length, I
articulated the name of my Uncle.

The single word sufficiently imparted my fears, and these fears needed no
verbal confirmation. At that dear name, my companion's features were overspread
by sorrow -- Your Uncle, said he, is dead.

Dead? Merciful Heaven! And my sisters too! Both?

Your Sisters are alive and well.

Nay, resumed I, in faultering accents, jest not with my feelings. Be not cruel
in your pity. Tell me the truth.

I have said the truth. They are well, at Mr. Inglefield's.

My wishes were eager to assent to the truth of these tidings. The better part
of me was then safe: but how did they escape the fate that overtook my uncle?
How did they evade the destroying hatchet and the midnight conflagration? These
doubts were imparted in a tumultuous and obscure manner to my friend. He no
sooner fully comprehended them, than he looked at me, with some inquietude and
surprise.

Huntly, said he, are you mad -- What has filled you with these hideous
prepossessions? Much havoc has indeed been committed in Chetasco and the
wilderness; and a log hut has been burnt by design or by accident in Solebury,
but that is all. Your house has not been assailed by either firebrand or
tom-hawk. Every thing is ^^fe and in its ancient order. The master indeed is
gone, but the old man fell a victim to his own temerity and hardihood. It is
thirty years since he retired with three wounds, from the field of Braddock;
but time, in no degree, abated his adventurous and military spirit. On the
first alarm, he summoned his neighbors, and led them in pursuit of the
invaders. Alas! he was the first to attack them, and the only one who fell in
the contest.

These words were uttered in a manner that left me no room to doubt of their
truth. My uncle had already been lamented, and the discovery of the nature of
his death, so contrary to my forebodings, and of the safety of my girls, made
the state of my mind partake more of exultation and joy, than of grief or
regret.

But how was I deceived? Had not my fusil been found in the hands of an enemy?
Whence could he have plundered it but from my own chamber? It hung against the
wall of a closet; from which no stranger could have taken it except by
violence. My perplexities and doubts were not at an end, but those which
constituted my chief torment were removed. I listened to my friend's entreaties
to tell him the cause of my elopement, and the incidents that terminated in the
present interview.

I began with relating my return to consciousness in the bottom of the pit; my
efforts to free myself from this abhorred prison; the acts of horror to which I
was impelled by famine, and their excruciating consequences; my gaining the
outlet of the cavern, the desperate expedient by which I removed the impediment
to my escape, and the deliverance of the captive girl; the contest I maintained
before Deb's hut; my subsequent wanderings; the banquet which hospitality
afforded me; my journey to the river-bank; my meditations on the means of
reaching the road; my motives for hazarding my life, by plunging into the
stream; and my subsequent perils and fears till I reached the threshold of this
habitation.

Thus, continued I, I have complied with your request. I have told all that I,
myself, know. What were the incidents between my sinking to rest at
Inglefield's, and my awaking in the chambers of the hill; by which means and by
whose contrivance, preternatural or human, this transition was effected, I am
unable to explain; I cannot even guess.

What has eluded my sagacity may not be beyond the reach of another. Your own
reflections on my tale, or some facts that have fallen under your notice, may
enable you to furnish a solution. But, meanwhile, how am I to account for your
appearance on this spot? This meeting was unexpected and abrupt to you, but it
has not been less so to me. Of all mankind, Sarsefield was the farthest from my
thoughts, when I saw these tokens of a traveller and a stranger.

You were imperfectly acquainted with my wanderings. You saw me on the ground
before Deb's hut. You saw me plunge into the river. You endeavored to destroy
me while swimming; and you knew, before my narrative was heard, that Huntly was
the object of your enmity. What was the motive of your search in the desert,
and how were you apprized of my condition? These things are not less wonderful
than any of those which I have already related.

During my tale the features of Sarsefield betokened the deepest attention. His
eye strayed not a moment from my face. All my perils and forebodings, were
fresh in my remembrance, they had scarcely gone by; their skirts, so to speak,
were still visible. No wonder that my eloquence was vivid and pathetic, that I
pourtrayed the past as if it were the present scene; and that not my tongue
only, but every muscle and limb, spoke.

When I had finished my relation. Sarsefield sunk into thoughtfulness. From
this, after a time, he recovered and said: Your tale, Huntly; is true, yet, did
I not see you before me, were I not acquainted with the artlessness and
rectitude of your character, and, above all, had not my own experience, during
the last three days, confirmed every incident, I should question its truth. You
have amply gratified my curiosity, and deserve that your own, should be
gratified as fully. Listen to me.

Much has happened since we parted, which shall not be now mentioned. I
promised to inform you of my welfare by letter, and did not fail to write, but
whether my letters were received, or any were written by you in return, or if
written were ever transmitted, I cannot tell; none were ever received.

Some days since, I arrived, in company with a lady who is my wife, in America.
You have never been forgotten by me. I knew your situation to be little in
agreement with your wishes, and one of the benefits which fortune has lately
conferred upon me, is the power of snatching you from a life of labor and
obscurity; whose goods, scanty as they are, were transient and precarious; and
affording you the suitable leisure and means of intellectual gratification and
improvement.

Your silence made me entertain some doubts concerning your welfare, and even
your existence. To solve these doubts, I hastened to Solebury, some delays upon
the road, hindered me from accomplishing my journey by daylight. It was night
before I entered the Norwalk path, but my ancient rambles with you made me
familiar with it, and I was not afraid of being obstructed or bewildered.

Just as I gained the southern outlet, I spied a passenger on foot, coming
toward me with a quick pace. The incident was of no moment, and yet the time
of night, the seeming expedition of the walker, recollection of the mazes and
obstacles which he was going to encounter, and a vague conjecture that,
perhaps, he was unacquainted with the difficulties that awaited him, made me
eye him with attention as he passed.

He came near, and I thought I recognized a friend in this traveller. The form,
the gesture, the stature bore a powerful resemblance to those of Edgar Huntly.
This resemblance was so strong, that I stopped, and after he had gone by,
called him by your name. That no notice was taken of my call proved that the
person was mistaken, but even though it were another, that he should not even
hesitate or turn at a summons which he could not but perceive to be addressed,
though erroneously, to him, was the source of some surprise. I did not repeat
my call, but proceeded on my way.

All had retired to repose in your uncle's dwelling. I did not scruple to rouse
them, and was received with affectionate and joyous greetings. That you allowed
your uncle to rise before you, was a new topic of reflection. To my inquiries
concerning you, answers were made that accorded with my wishes. I was told that
you were in good health and were then abed. That you had not heard and risen at
my knocking, was mentioned with surprise, but your uncle accounted for your
indolence by saying that during the last week you had fatigued yourself by
rambling night and day, in search of some maniac, or visionary who was supposed
to have retreated into Norwalk.

I insisted upon awakening you myself. I anticipated the effect of this sudden
and unlooked for meeting, with some emotions of pride as well as of pleasure.
To find, in opening your eyes, your old preceptor standing by your bedside and
gazing in your face, would place you, I conceived, in an affecting situation.

Your chamber door was open, but your bed was empty. Your uncle and sisters
were made acquainted with this circumstance. Their surprise gave way to
conjectures that your restless and romantic spirit, had tempted you from your
repose, that you had rambled abroad on some phantastic errand, and would
probably return before the dawn. I willingly acquiesced in this opinion, and my
feelings being too thoroughly aroused to allow me to sleep, I took possession
of your chamber, and patiently awaited your return.

The morning returned but Huntly made not his appearance. Your uncle became
somewhat uneasy at this unseasonable absence. Much speculation and inquiry, as
to the possible reasons of your flight was made. In my survey of your chamber,
I noted that only part of your clothing remained beside your bed. Coat, hat,
stockings and shoes lay upon the spot where they had probably been thrown when
you had disrobed yourself, but the pantaloons, which according to Mr. Huntly's
report, completed your dress, were no where to be found. That you should go
forth on so cold a night so slenderly appareled, was almost incredible. Your
reason or your senses had deserted you, before so rash an action could be
meditated.

I now remembered the person I had met in Norwalk. His resemblance to your
figure, his garb, which wanted hat, coat, stockings and shoes, and your absence
from your bed at that hour, were remarkable coincidences: but why did you
disregard my call? Your name, uttered by a voice that could not be unknown, was
surely sufficient to arrest your steps.

Each hour added to the impatience of your friends; to their recollections and
conjectures, I listened with a view to extract from them some solution of this
mystery. At length, a story was alluded to, of some one who, on the preceding
night, had been heard walking in the long room; to this was added, the tale of
your anxieties and wonders occasioned by the loss of certain manuscripts.

While ruminating upon these incidents, and endeavoring to extract from this
intelligence a clue, explanatory of your present situation, a single word,
casually dropped by your uncle, instantly illuminated my darkness and dispelled
my doubts. -- After all, said the old man, ten to one, but Edgar himself was
the man whom we heard walking, but the lad was asleep, and knew not what he was
about.

Surely said I, this inference is just. His manuscripts could not be removed by
any hands but his own, since the rest of mankind were unacquainted not only
with the place of their concealment, but with their existence. None but a man,
insane or asleep, would wander forth so slightly dressed, and none but a
sleeper would have disregarded my calls. This conclusion was generally adopted,
but it gave birth in my mind, to infinite inquietudes. You had roved into
Norwalk, a scene of inequalities, of prominences and pits, among which, thus
destitute of the guidance of your senses, you could scarcely fail to be
destroyed, or at least, irretreivably bewildered. I painted to myself the
dangers to which you were subjected. Your careless feet would bear you into
some whirlpool or to the edge of some precipice, some internal revolution or
outward shock would recall you to consciousness at some perilous moment.
Surprise and fear would disable you from taking seasonable or suitable
precautions, and your destruction be made sure.

The lapse of every new hour, without bringing tidings of your state, enhanced
these fears. At length, (...) propriety of searching for you occurred, Mr.
Huntly and I determined to set out upon this pursuit, as well as to commission
others. A plan was laid by which every accessible part of Norwalk, the
wilderness beyond the flats of Solebury, and the valey of Chetasco, should be
traversed and explored.

Scarcely had we equipped ourselves for this expedition, when a messenger
arrived, who brought the disastrous news of Indians being seen within these
precincts, and on the last night a farmer was shot in his fields, a dwelling in
Chetasco was burnt to the ground, and its inhabitants murdered or made
captives. Rumor and inquiry had been busy, and a plausible conjecture had been
formed, as to the course and number of the enemies. They were said to be
divided into bands, and to amount in the whole to thirty or forty wariors. This
messenger had come to warn us of danger which might impend, and to summon us to
join in the pursuit and extirpation of these detestable foes.

Your uncle, whose alacrity and vigor age had not abated, eagerly engaged in
this scheme. I was not averse to contribute my efforts to an end like this. The
road which we had previously designed to take, in search of my fugitive pupil,
was the same by which we must trace or intercept the retreat of the savages.
Thus two purposes, equally momentous, would be answered by the same means.

Mr. Huntly armed himself with your fusil; Inglefield supplied me with a gun;
during our absence the dwelling was closed and locked, and your sisters placed
under the protection of Inglefield, whose age and pacific sentiments unfitted
him for arduous and sanguinary enterprises. A troop of rustics was collected,
half of whom remained to traverse Solebury and the other, whom Mr. Huntly and I
accompanied, hastened to Chetasco.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XXIV.
IT was noon day before we reached the theater of action. Fear and revenge
combined to make the people of Chetasco diligent and zealous in their own
defense. The havoc already committed had been mournful. To prevent a
repetition of the same calamities, they resolved to hunt out the hostile
footsteps and exact a merciless retribution.

It was likely that the enemy, on the approach of day, had withdrawn from the
valley and concealed themselves in the thickets, between the parrallel ridges
of the mountain. This space, which, according to the object with which it is
compared is either a vale or the top of an hill, was obscure and desolate. It
was undoubtedly the avenue by which the robbers had issued forth, and by which
they would escape to the Ohio. Here they might still remain, intending to
immerge from their concealment on the next night, and perpetrate new horrors.

A certain distribution was made of our number, so as to move in all directions
at the same time. I will not dwell upon particulars. It will suffice to say
that keen eyes and indefatigable feet, brought us at last to the presence of
the largest number of these marauders. Seven of them were slain by the edge of
a brook, where they sat wholly unconscious of the danger which hung over them.
Five escaped, and one of these secured his retreat by wresting your fusil from
your uncle, and shooting him dead. Before our companion could be rescued or
revenged, the assassin, with the remnant of the troop, disappeared, and bore
away with him the fusil as a trophy of his victory.

This disaster was deplored not only on account of that life which had thus
been sacrificed, but because a sagacious guide and intrepid leader was lost.
His acquaintance with the habits of the Indians, and his experience in their
wars made him trace their footsteps with more certainty than any of his
associates.

The pursuit was still continued, and parties were so stationed that the escape
of the enemy was difficult, if not impossible. Our search was unremitted, but
during twelve or fourteen hours, unsuccessful. Queen Mab did not elude all
suspicion. Her hut was visited by different parties, but the old woman and her
dogs had disappeared.

Meanwhile your situation was not forgotten. Every one was charged to explore
your footsteps as well as those of the savages, but this search was no less
unsuccessful than the former. None had heard of you or seen you.

This continued till midnight. Three of us, made a pause at a brook, and
intended to repair our fatigues by a respite of a few hours, but scarcely had
we stretched ourselves on the ground when we were alarmed by a shot which
seemed to have been fired at a short distance. We started on our feet and
consulted with each other on the measures to be taken. A second, a third and a
fourth shot, from the same quarter, excited our attention anew. Mab's hut was
known to stand at the distance and in the direction of this sound, and hither
we resolved to repair.

This was done with speed but with the utmost circumspection. We shortly gained
the road that leads near this hut and at length gained a view of the building.
Many persons were discovered, in a sort of bustling inactivity, before the hut.
They were easily distinguised to be friends, and were therefore approached
without scruple.

The objects that presented themselves to a nearer view were five bodies
stretched upon the ground. Three of them were savages. The fourth was a girl,
who though alive seemed to have received a mortal wound. The fifth, breathless
and mangled and his features almost concealed by the blood that overspread his
face, was Edgar; the fugitive for whom I had made such anxious search.

About the same hour on the last night I had met you hastening into Norwalk.
Now were you, lying in the midst of savages, at the distance of thirty miles
from your home, and in a spot, which it was impossible for you to have reached
unless by an immense circuit over rocks and thickets. That you had found a rift
at the basis of the hill, and thus permeated its solidities, and thus precluded
so tedious and circuitous a journey as must otherwise have been made, was not
to be imagined.

But whence arose this scene? It was obvious to conclude that my associates had
surprised their enemies in this house, and exacted from them the forfeit of
their crimes, but how you should have been confounded with their foes, or
whence came the wounded girl was a subject of astonishment.

You will judge how much this surprise was augmented when I was informed that
the party whom we found had been attracted hither by the same signals, by which
we had been alarmed. That on reaching this spot you had been discovered, alive,
seated on the ground and still sustaining the gun with which you had apparently
completed the destruction of so many adversaries. In a moment after their
arrival you sunk down and expired.

This scene was attended with inexplicable circumstances. The musket which lay
beside you appeared to have belonged to one of the savages. The wound by which
each had died was single. Of the four shots we had distinguished at a distance,
three of them were therefore fatal to the Indians and the fourth was doubtless
that by which you had fallen, yet three muskets only were discoverable.

The arms were collected, and the girl carried to the nearest house in the arms
of her father. Her situation was deemed capable of remedy, and the sorrow and
wonder which I felt at your untimely and extraordinary fate, did not hinder me
from endeavoring to restore the health of this unfortunate victim. I reflected
likewise that some light might be thrown upon transactions so mysterious, by
the information which might be collected from her story. Numberless questions
and hints were necessary to extract from her a consistent or intelligible tale.
She had been dragged, it seems, for miles, at the heels of her conquerors, who
at length, stopped in a cavern for the sake of some repose; all slept but one,
who sat and watched. Something called him away, and, at the same moment, you
appeared at the bottom of the cave half naked and without arms. You instantly
supplied the last deficiency, by seizing the gun and tom-hawk of him who had
gone forth, and who had negligently left his weapons behind. Then stepping over
the bodies of the sleepers, you rushed out of the cavern.

She then mentioned your unexpected return, her deliverance and flight, and
arrival at Deb's hut. You watched upon the hearth and she fell asleep upon the
blanket. From this sleep she was aroused by violent and cruel blows. She looked
up: -- you were gone and the bed on which she lay was surrounded by the men
from whom she had so lately escaped. One dragged her out of the hut and
levelled his gun at her breast. At the moment when he touched the trigger, a
shot came from an unknown quarter, and he fell at her feet. Of subsequent
events she had an incoherent recollection. The Indians were successively slain,
and you came to her, and interrogated and consoled her.

In your journey to the hut you were armed. This in some degree accounted for
appearances, but where were your arms? Three muskets only were discovered and
these undoubtedly belonged to your enemies.

I now had leisure to reflect upon your destiny. I had arrived soon enough on
this shore merely to witness the catastrophe of two beings whom I most loved.
Both were overtaken by the same fate, nearly at the same hour. The same hand
had possibly accomplished the destruction of uncle and nephew.

Now, however, I began to entertain an hope that your state might not be
irretreivable. You had walked and spoken after the firing had ceased, and your
enemies had ceased to contend with you. A wound had, no doubt, been previously
received. I had hastily inferred that the wound was mortal, and that life could
not be recalled. Occupied with attention to the wailings of the girl, and full
of sorrow and perplexity I had admitted an opinion which would have never been
adopted in different circumstances. My acquaintance with wounds would have
taught me to regard sunken muscles, lividness and cessation of the pulse as
mere indications of a swoon, and not as tokens of death.

Perhaps my error was not irreparable. By hastening to the hut, I might
ascertain your condition and at least transport your remains to some dwelling
and finally secure to you the decencies of burial.

Of twelve savages, discovered on the preceding day, ten were now killed. Two,
at least remained, after whom the pursuit was still zealously maintained.
Attention to the wounded girl, had withdrawn me from the party, and I had now
leisure to return to the scene of these disasters. The sun had risen, and,
accompanied by two others, I repaired thither.

A sharp turn in the road, at the entrance of the field, set before us a
starting spectacle. An Indian, mangled by repeated wounds of bayonet and
bullet, was discovered. His musket was stuck in the ground, by way of beacon
attracting our attention to the spot. Over this space I had gone a few hours
before, and nothing like this was then seen. The parties abroad, had hied away
to a distant quarter. Some invisible power seemed to be enlisted in our defense
and to preclude the necessity of our arms.

We proceeded to the hut. The savages were there, but Edgar had risen and
flown! Nothing now seemed to be incredible. You had slain three foes, and the
weapon with which the victory had been achieved, had vanished. You had risen
from the dead, had assailed one of the surviving enemies, had employed bullet
and dagger in his destruction, with both of which you could only be supplied by
supernatural means, and had disappeared. If any inhabitant of Chetasco had done
this, we should have heard of it.

But what remained? You were still alive. Your strength was sufficient to bear
you from this spot. Why were you still invisible and to what dangers might you
not be exposed, before you could disinvolve yourself from the mazes of this
wilderness?

Once more I procured indefatigable search to be made after you. It was
continued till the approach of evening and was fruitless. Inquiries were twice
made at the house where you were supplied with food and intelligence. On the
second call I was astonished and delighted by the tidings received from the
good woman. Your person and demeanor and arms were described, and mention made
of your resolution to cross the southern ridge, and traverse the Solebury road
with the utmost expedition.

The greater part of my inquietudes were now removed. You were able to eat and
to travel, and there was little doubt that a meeting would take place between
us on the next morning. Meanwhile, I determined to concur with those who
pursued the remainder of the enemy. I followed you, in the path that you were
said to have taken, and quickly joined a numerous party who were searching for
those who, on the last night, had attacked a plantation that lies near this,
and destroyed the inhabitants.

I need not dwell upon our doublings and circuities. The enemy was traced to
the house of Selby. They had entered, they had put fire on the floor, but were
compelled to relinquish their prey. Of what number they consisted could not be
ascertained, but one, lingering behind his fellows, was shot, at the entrance
of the wood, and on the spot where you chanced to light upon him.

Selby's house was empty, and before the fire had made any progress we
extinguished it. The drunken wretch whom you encountered, had probably returned
from his nocturnal debauch, after we had left the spot.

The flying enemy was pursued with fresh diligence. They were found, by various
tokens, to have crossed the river, and to have ascended the mountain. We trod
closely on their heels. When we arrived at the promontory, described by you,
the fatigues of the night and day rendered me unqualified to proceed, I
determined that this should be the bound of my excursions. I was anxious to
obtain an interview with you, and unless I paused here, should not be able to
gain Inglefield's as early in the morning as I wished. Two others concurred
with me in this resolution and prepared to return to this house which had been
deserted by its tenants till the danger was past and which had been selected as
the place of rendezvous.

At this moment, dejected and weary, I approached the ledge which severed the
h^^^-land from the mountain. I marked the appearance of some one stretched upon
the ground where you lay. No domestic animal would wander hither and place
himself upon this spot. There was something likewise in the appearance of the
object that bespoke it to be man, but if it were man, it was, incontrovertibly,
a savage and a foe. I determined therefore to rouse you by a bullet.

My decision was perhaps absurd. I ought to have gained more certainty before I
hazarded your destruction. Be that as it will, a moments lingering on your part
would have probably been fatal. You started on your feet, and fired. See the
hole which your random shot made through my sleeve! This surely was a day
destined to be signalized by hair-breadth escapes.

Your action seemed incontestably to confirm my prognostics. Every one hurried
to the spot and was eager to destroy an enemy. No one hesitated to believe that
some of the shots aimed at you, had reached their mark, and that you had sunk
to rise no more.

The gun which was fired and thrown down was taken and examined. It had been my
companion in many a toilsome expedition. It had rescued me and my friends from
a thousand deaths. In order to recognize it, I needed only to touch and handle
it. I instantly discovered that I held in my hand the fusil which I had left
with you on parting, with which your uncle had equipped himself, and which had
been ravished from him by a savage. What was I hence to infer respecting the
person of the last possessor?

My inquiries respecting you of the woman whose milk and bread you had eaten,
were minute. You entered, she said, with an hatchet and gun in your hand. While
you ate, the gun was laid upon the table. She sat near, and the piece became
the object of inquisitive attention. The stock and barrels were described by
her in such terms as left no doubt that this was the Fusil.

A comparison of incidents enabled me to trace the manner in which you came
into possession of this instrument. One of those whom you found in the cavern
was the assassin of your uncle. According to the girl's report, on issuing from
your hiding place, you seized a gun that was unoccupied, and this gun chanced
to be your own.

Its two barrels was probably the cause of your success in that unequal contest
at Mab's hut. On recovering from deliquium, you found it where it had been
dropped by you, out of sight and unsuspected by the party that had afterward
arrived. In your passage to the river had it once more fallen into hostile
hands, or, had you missed the way, wandered to this promontory, and mistaken a
troop of friends for a band of Indian marauders?

Either supposition was dreadful. The latter was the most plausible. No motives
were conceivable by which one of the fugitives could be induced to post himself
here, in this conspicuous station: whereas, the road which lead you to the
summit of the hill, to that spot where descent to the river road was
practicable, could not be found but by those who were accustomed to traverse
it. The directions which you had exacted from your hostess, proved your
previous unacquaintance with these tracts.

I acquiesced in this opinion with an heavy and desponding heart. Fate had led
us into a maze, which could only terminate in the destruction of one or of the
other. By the breadth of an hair, had I escaped death from your hand. The same
fortune had not befriended you. After my tedious search, I had lighted on you,
forlorn, bewildered, perishing with cold and hunger. Instead of recognizing and
affording you relief, I compelled you to leap into the river, from a perilous
height, and had desisted from my persecution only when I had bereaved you of
life, and plunged you to the bottom of the gulf.

My motives in coming to America were numerous and mixed. Among these was the
parental affection with which you had inspired me. I came with fortune and a
better gift than fortune in my hand. I intended to bestow both upon you, not
only to give you competence, but one who would endear to you that competence,
who would enhance, by participating, every gratification.

My schemes were now at an end. You were gone, beyond the reach of my
benevolence and justice. I had robbed your two sisters of a friend and
guardian. It was some consolation to think that it was in my power to stand,
with regard to them, in your place, that I could snatch them from the poverty,
dependence and humiliation, to which your death and that of your uncle had
reduced them.

I was now doubly weary of the enterprise in which I was engaged, and returned,
with speed, to this rendezvous. My companions have gone to know the state of
the family who resided under this roof and left me to beguile the tedious
moments in whatever manner I pleased.

I have omitted mentioning one incident that happened between the detection of
your flight and our expedition to Chetasco. Having formed a plausible
conjecture as to him who walked in the Long-room, it was obvious to conclude
that he who purloined your manuscripts and the walker were the same personage.
It was likewise easily inferred that the letters were secreted in the Cedar
Chest or in some other part of the room. Instances similar to this have
heretofore occurred. Men have employed anxious months in search of that which,
in a freak of Noctambulation, was hidden by their own hands.

A search was immediately commenced, and your letters were found, carefully
concealed between the rafters and shingles of the roof, in a spot, where, if
suspicion had not been previously excited, they would have remained till the
vernal rains and the summer heats, had insensibly destroyed them. This packet
I carried with me, knowing the value which you set upon them, and there being
no receptacle equally safe, but your own cabinet, which was locked.

Having, as I said, reached this house, and being left alone, I bethought me of
the treasure I possessed. I was unacquainted with the reasons for which these
papers were so precious. They probably had some momentous and intimate
connection with your own history. As such they could not be of little value to
me, and this moment of inoccupation and regrets, was as suitable as any other
to the task of perusing them. I drew them forth, therefore, and laid them on
the table in this chamber.

The rest is known to you. During a momentary absence you entered. Surely no
interview of ancient friends ever took place in so unexpected and abrupt a
manner. You were dead. I mourned for you, as one whom I loved, and whom fate
had snatched forever from my sight. Now, in a blissful hour, you had risen, and
my happiness in thus embracing you, is tenfold greater than would have been
experienced, if no uncertainties and perils had protracted our meeting.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XXV.
HERE ended the tale of Sarsefield. Humiliation and joy were mingled in my
heart. The events that preceded my awakening in the cave were now luminous and
plain. What explication was more obvious? What but this solution ought to have
been suggested by the conduct I had witnessed in Clithero?

Clithero! Was not this the man whom Clithero had robbed of his friend? Was not
this the lover of Mrs. Lorimer, the object of the persecutions of Wiatte? Was
it not now given me to investigate the truth of that stupendous tale? To
dissipate the doubts which obstinately clung to my imagination respecting it?

But soft! Had not Sarsefield said that he was married? Was Mrs. Lorimer so
speedily forgotten by him, or was the narrative of Clithero the web of
imposture or the raving of insantiy?

These new ideas banished all personal considerations from my mind. I looked
eagerly into the face of my friend, and exclaimed in a dubious accent -- How
say you? Married? When? To whom?

Yes, Huntly, I am wedded to the most excellent of women. To her am I indebted
for happiness and wealth and dignity and honor. To her do I owe the power of
being the benefactor and protector of you and your sisters. She longs to
embrace you as a son. To become truly her son, will depend upon your own choice
and that of one, who was the companion of our voyage.

Heavens! cried I, in a transport of exultation and astonishment. Of whom do
you speak. Of the mother of Clarice? The sister of Wiatte? The sister of the
ruffian who laid snares for her life? Who pursued you and the unhappy Clithero,
with the bitterest animosity?

My friend started at these sounds as if the earth had yawned at his feet. His
countenance was equally significant of terror and rage. As soon as he regained
the power of utterance, he spoke -- Clithero! Curses light upon thy lips for
having uttered that detested name! Thousands of miles have I flown to shun the
hearing of it. Is the madman here? Have you set eyes upon him? Does he yet
crawl upon the face of the earth? Unhappy? Unparalleled, unheard of, thankless
miscreant! Has he told h^^ execrable falsehoods here? Has he dared to utter
names so sacred as those of Euphemia Lorimer and Clarice?

He has: He has told a tale, that had all the appearances of truth --

Out upon the villain! The truth! Truth would prove him to be unnatural;
develish* a thing for which no language has yet provided a name! He has called
himself unhappy? No doubt, a victim to injustice! Overtaken by unmerited
calamity. Say! Has he fooled thee with such tales?

No. His tale was a catalogue of crimes and miseries of which he was the author
and sufferer. You know not his motives, his horrors: --

His deeds were monstrous and infernal. His motives were sordid and flagitious.
To display all their ugliness and infamy was not his province. No: He did not
tell you that he stole at midnight to the chamber of his mistress: a woman who
astonised the world by her loftiness and magnanimity; by indefatigable
beneficence and unswerving equity; who had lavished on this wretch, whom she
snatched from the dirt, all the goods of fortune; all the benefits of
education; all the treasures of love; every provocation to gratitude; every
stimulant to justice.

He did not tell you that in recompense for every benefit, he stole upon her
sleep and aimed a dagger at her breast. There was no room for flight or
ambiguity or prevarication. She whom he meant to murder stood near, saw the
lifted weapon, and heard him confess and glory in his purposes.

No wonder that the shock bereft her, for a time, of life. The interval was
seized by the ruffian to effect his escape. The rebukes of justice, were
shunned by a wretch conscious of his inexpiable guilt. These things he has
hidden from you and has supplied their place by a tale specious as false.

No. Among the number of his crimes, hypocrisy is not to be numbered. These
things are already known to me: he spared himself too little in the narrative.
The excellencies of his lady; her claims to gratitude and veneration, were
urged beyond their true bounds. His attempts upon her life, were related. It is
true that he desired and endeavored to destroy her.

How? Has he told you this?

He has told me all. Alas! the criminal intention has been amply expiated --

What mean you? Whence and how came he hither. Where is he now? I will not
occupy the same land, the same world with him. Have this woman and her daughter
lighted on the shore haunted by this infernal and implacable enemy?

Alas! It is doubtful whether he exists. If he lives, he is no longer to be
feared; but he lives not. Famine and remorse have utterly consumed him.

Famine? Remorse? You talk in riddles.

He has immured himself in the desert. He has abjured the intercourse of
mankind. He has shut himself in caverns where famine must inevitably expedite
that death for which he longs as the only solace of his woes. To no imagination
are his offenses blacker and more odious than to his own. I had hopes of
rescuing him from this fate, but my own infirmities and errors have afforded me
sufficient occupation.

Sarsefield renewed his imprecations on the memory of that unfortunate man: and
his inquiries as to the circumstances that led him into this remote district.
His inquiries were not to be answered by one in my present condition -- My
languors and fatigues had now gained a pitch that was insupportable. The wound
in my face had been chafed, and inflamed by the cold water and the bleak air;
and the pain attending it, would no longer suffer my attention to stray. I sunk
upon the floor, and entreated him to afford me the respite of a few hours
repose.

He was sensible of the deplorableness of my condition, and chid himself for
the negligence of which he had already been guilty. He lifted me to the bed,
and deliberated on the mode he should pursue for my relief. Some molifying
application to my wound, was immediately necessary; but in our present lonely
condition, it was not at hand. It could only be procured from a distance. It
was proper therefore to hasten to the nearest inhabited dwelling, which
belonged to one, by name Walton, and supply himself with such medicines as
could be found.

Meanwhile there was no danger of molestation and intrusion. There was reason
to expect the speedy return of those who had gone in pursuit of the savages.
This was their place of rendezvous, and hither they appointed to re-assemble
before the morrow's dawn. The distance of the neighboring farm was small, and
Sarsefield promised to be expeditious. He left me to myself and my own
ruminations.

Harrassed by fatigue and pain, I had yet power to ruminate on that series of
unparalleled events, that had lately happened. I wept, but my tears flowed from
a double source; from sorrow, on account of the untimely fate of my uncle, and
from joy, that my sisters were preserved, that Sarsefield had returned and was
not unhappy.

I reflected on the untoward destiny of Clithero. Part of his calamity
consisted in the consciousness of having killed his patronness; but it now
appeared, though by some infatuation, I had not previously suspected, that the
first impulse of sorrow in the lady, had been weakened by reflection and by
time. That the prejudice persuading her that her life and that of her brother
were to endure and to terminate together, was conquered by experience or by
argument. She had come, in company with Sarsefield and Clarice to America. What
influence might these events have upon the gloomy meditations of Clithero. Was
it possible to bring them together; to win the maniac from his solitude, wrest
from him his fatal purposes, and restore him to communion with the beings whose
imagined indignation is the torment of his life.

These musings were interrupted by a sound from below which were easily
interpreted into tokens of the return of those with whom Sarsefield had parted
at the promontory, voices were confused and busy but not turbulent. They
entered the lower room and the motion of chairs and tables showed that they
were preparing to rest themselves after their toils.

Few of them were unacquainted with me, since they probably were residen^^ in
this district. No inconvenience, therefore, would follow from an interview,
though, on their part, wholly unexpected. Besides, Sarsefield would speedily
return and none of the present visitants would be likely to withdraw to this
apartment.

Meanwhile I lay upon the bed, with my face turned toward the door, and
languidly gazing at the ceiling and walls. Just then a musket was discharged
in the room below. The shock affected me mechanically and the first impulse of
surprise, made me almost start upon my feet.

The sound was followed by confusion and bustle. Some rushed forth and called
on each other to run different ways, and the words "That is he" -- "Stop him"
were spoken in a tone of eagerness, and rage. My weakness and pain were for a
moment forgotten, and my whole attention was bent to discover the meaning of
this hubbub. The musket which I had brought with me to this chamber, lay
across the bed. Unknowing of the consequences of this affray, with regard to
myself, I was prompted by a kind of self-preserving instinct, to lay hold of
the gun, and prepare to repel any attack that might be made upon me.

A few moments elapsed when I thought I heard light footsteps in the entry
leading to this room. I had no time to construe these signals, but watching
fearfully the entrance, I grasped my weapon with new force, and raised it so as
to be ready at the moment of my danger. I did not watch long. A figure
cautiously thrust itself forward. The first glance was sufficient to inform me
that this intruder was an Indian, and, of consequence, an enemy. He was
unarmed. Looking eagerly on all sides, he at last spied me as I lay. My
appearance threw him into consternation, and after the fluctuation of an
instant, he darted to the window, threw up the sash, and leaped out upon the
ground.

His flight might have been easily arrested by my shot, but surprise, added to
my habitual antipathy to bloodshed, unless in cases of absolute necessity, made
me hesitate. He was gone, and I was left to mark the progress of the drama. The
silence was presently broken by firing at a distance. Three shots, in quick
succession, were followed by the deepest pause.

That the party, recently arrived, had brought with them one or more captives,
and that by some sudden effort, the prisoners had attempted to escape, was the
only supposition that I could form. By what motives either (...) them could be
induced to seek concealment in my chamber, could not be imagined.

I now heard a single step on the threshold below. Some one entered the common
room. He traversed the floor during a few minutes, and then, ascending the
staircase, he entered my chamber. It was Sarsefield. Trouble and dismay were
strongly written on his countenance. He seemed totally unconscious of my
presence, his eyes were fixed upon the floor, and as he continued to move
across the room, he heaved forth deep sighs.

This deportment was mournful and mysterious. It was little in unison with
those appearances which he wore at our parting, and must have been suggested by
some event that had since happened. My curiosity impelled me to recall him from
his reverie. I rose and seizing him by the arm, looked at him with an air of
inquisitive anxiety. It was needless to speak.

He noticed my movement, and turning toward me, spoke in a tone of some
resentment -- Why did you deceive me? Did you not say Clithero was dead?

I said so because it was my belief. Know you any thing to the contrary? Heaven
grant that he is still alive, and that our mutual efforts may restore him to
peace.

Heaven grant, replied my friend, with a vehemence that bordered upon fury.
Heaven grant that he may live thousands of years, and know not, in their long
course, a moments respite from remorse and from anguish; but this prayer is
fruitless. He is not dead, but death hovers over him. Should he live, he will
live only to defy justice and perpetrate new horrors. My skill might perhaps
save him, but a finger shall not be moved to avert his fate.

Little did I think, that the wretch whom my friends rescued from the power of
the savages, and brought wounded and expiring hither was Clithero. They sent
for me in haste to afford him surgical assistance. I found him stretched upon
the floor below, deserted, helpless and bleeding. The moment I beheld him, he
was recognized. The last of evils was to look upon the face of this assassin,
but that evil is past, and shall never be endured again.

Rise and come with me. Accommodation is prepared for you at Walcots. Let us
leave this house, and the moment you are able to perform a journey, abandon
forever this district.

I could not readily consent to this proposal. Clithero had been delivered from
captivity but was dying for want of that aid which Sarsefield was able to
afford. Was it not inhuman to desert him in this extremity? What offense had he
committed that deserved such implacable vengeance? Nothing I had heard from
Sarsefield was in contradiction to his own story. His deed, imperfectly
observed, would appear to be atrocious and detestable, but the view of all its
antecedent and accompanying events and motives, would surely place it in the
list not of crimes, but of misfortunes.

But what is that guilt which no penitence can expiate? Had not Clithero's
remorse been more than adequate to crimes far more deadly and enormous than
this? This, however, was no time to argue with the passions of Sarsefield.
Nothing but a repetition of Clithero's tale, could vanquish his prepossessions
and mollify his rage, but this repetition was impossible to be given by me,
till a moment of safety and composure.

These thoughts made me linger, but hindered me from attempting to change the
determination of my friend. He renewed his importunities for me to fly with
him. He dragged me by the arm, and wavering and reluctant I followed where he
chose to lead. He crossed the common-room, with hurried steps and eyes averted
from a figure, which instantly fastened my attention.

It was, indeed, Clithero, whom I now beheld, supine, polluted with blood, his
eyes closed and apparently insensible. This object was gazed at with emotions
that rooted me to the spot. Sarsefield, perceiving me determined to remain
where I was, rushed out of the house, and disappeared.

EDGAR HUNTLY. CHAPTER XXVI.
I HUNG over the unhappy wretch whose emaciated form and rueful features,
sufficiently bespoke that savage hands had only completed that destruction
which his miseries had begun. He was mangled by the tom-hawk in a shocking
manner, and there was little hope that human skill could save his life.

I was sensible of nothing but compassion. I acted without design, when seating
myself on the floor I raised his head and placed it on my knees. This movement
awakened his attention, and opening his eyes he fixed them on my countenance.
They testified neither insensibility, nor horror nor distraction. A faint
emotion of surprise gave way to an appearance of tranquillity -- Having
perceived these tokens of a state less hopeless than I at first imagined, I
spoke to him: -- My friend! How do you feel? Can any thing be done for you?

He answered me, in a tone more firm and with more coherence of ideas than
previous appearances had taught me to expect. No, said he, thy kindness good
youth, can avail me nothing. The end of my existence here is at hand. May my
guilt be expiated by the miseries that I have suffered, and my good deeds only
attend me to the presence of my divine judge.

I am waiting, not with trembling or dismay, for this close of my sorrows. I
breathed but one prayer, and that prayer has been answered. I asked for an
interview with thee, young man, but feeling as I now feel, this interview, so
much desired, was beyond my hope. Now thou art come, in due season, to hear the
last words that I shall need to utter.

I wanted to assure thee that thy efforts for my benefit were not useless. They
have saved me from murdering myself, a guilt more inexpiable than any which it
was in my power to commit.

I retired to the innermost recess of Norwalk, and gained the summit of an
hill, by subterranean paths. This hill I knew to be on all sides inaccessible
to human footsteps, and the subterranean passages was closed up by stones. Here
I believed my solitude exempt from interruption and my death, in consequence of
famine, sure.

This persuasion was not taken away by your appearance on the opposite steep.
The chasm which severed us I knew to be impassable. I withdrew from your sight.

Some time after, awakening from a long sleep, I found victuals beside me. He
that brought it was invisible. For a time, I doubted whether some messenger of
heaven had not interpreted for my salvation. How other than by supernatural
means, my retreat should be explained, I was unable to conceive. The s^^ was
encompassed by dizzy and profound gulfs, and the subterranean passages was
still closed.

This opinion, though corrected by subsequent reflection, tended to change the
course of my desperate thoughts. My hunger, thus importunately urged, would not
abstain, and I ate of the food that was provided. Henceforth I determined to
live, to resume the path of obscurity and labor, which I had relinquished, and
wait till my God should summon me to retribution. To anticipate his call, is
only to redouble our guilt.

I designed not to return to Inglefield's service, but to choose some other and
remoter district. Meanwhile, I had left in his possession, a treasure, which my
determination to die, had rendered of no value, but which, my change of
resolu^^^^, restored. Enclosed in a box at ^^^^ield's, were the memoirs of
Euphemia Lorimer, by which in all my vicissitudes, I had been hitherto
accompanied, and from which I consented to part only because I had refused to
live. My existence was now to be prolonged and this manuscript was once more to
constitute the torment and the solace of my being.

I hastened to Inglefield's by night. There was no need to warn him of my
purpose. I desired that my fate should be an eternal secret to my ancient
master and his neighbors. The apartment, containing my box was well known, and
easily accessible.

The box was found but broken and rifled of its treasure. My transports of
astonishment, and indignation and grief yielded to the resumption of my fatal
purpose. I hastened back to the hill, and determined anew to perish.

This mood continued to the evening of the ensuing day. Wandering over rocks
and pits, I discovered the manuscript, lying under a jutting precipice. The
chance that brought it hither was not less propitious and miraculous than that
by which I had been supplied with food. It produced a similar effect upon my
feelings, and, while in possession of this manuscript I was reconciled to the
means of life. I left the mountain, and traversing the wilderness, stopped in
Chetasco. That kind of employment which I sought was instantly procured; but my
new vocation was scarcely assumed when a band of savages invaded our security.

Rambling in the desert, by moonlight, I encountered these foes. They rushed
upon me, and after numerous wounds which, for the present, neither killed nor
disabled me, they compelled me to keep pace with them in their retreat. Some
ho^^^ have passed since the troop was ov^^^^ken, and my liberty redeemed.
Hardships, and repeated wounds, inflicted at the moment when the invaders were
surprised and slain, have brought me to my present condition. I rejoice that my
course is about to terminate.

Here the speaker was interrupted by the tumultuous entrance of the party, by
whom he had been brought hither. Their astonishment at seeing me, sustaining
the head of the dying man, may be easily conceived. Their surprise was more
strongly excited by the disappearance of the captive whom they had left in this
apartment, bound hand and foot. It now appeared that of the savage troop who
had adventured thus far in search of pillage and blood, all had been destroyed
but two, who, had been led hither as prisoners. On their entrance into this
house, one of the party had been sent to Walcot's to summon Sarsefield to the
aid of the wounded man, while ^^^ers had gone in search of chords to ^^^^re the
arms and legs of the captives, who had hitherto been manacled imperfectly.

The chords were brought and one of them was bound, but the other, before the
same operation was begun upon him, broke, by a sudden effort, the feeble
ligatures by which he was at present constrained, and seizing a musket that
lay near him, fired on his enemies, and then rushed out of doors. All eagerly
engaged in the pursuit. The savage was fleet as a deer and finally eluded his
pursuers.

While their attention was thus engaged abroad, he that remained found means to
extricate his wrists and ancles from his bonds and betaking himself to the
stairs, escaped, as I before described, through the window of the room which I
had occupied. They pestered me with their curiosity and wonder, for I was known
to all of them; but waving the discussion of my own concerns I entreated their
assistance to carry Clithero to the chamber and the bed which I had just
deserted.

I now in spite of pain, fatigue and watchfulness, set out to go to Walton's.
Sarsefield was ready to receive me at the door, and the kindness and compassion
of the family were active in my behalf. I was conducted to a chamber and
provided with suitable attendance and remedies.

I was not unmindful of the more deplorable condition of Clithero. I
incessantly meditated on the means for his relief. His case stood in need of
all the vigilance and skill of a physician, and Sarsefield was the only one of
that profession whose aid could be seasonably administered. Sarsefield
therefore must be persuaded to bestow this aid.

There was but one mode of conquering his abhorrence of this man. To prepossess
my friend with the belief of the innocence of Clithero, or to soothe him into
pity by a picture of remorse and suffering. This could best be done, and in the
manner most conformable to truth, by a simple recital of the incidents that had
befallen, and by repeating the confession which had been extorted from Clithero.

I requested all but my friend to leave my chamber, and then, soliciting a
patient hearing, began the narrative of Waldegrave's death! of the detection of
Clithero beneath the shade of the elm! of the suspicions which were thence
produced; and of the forest interview to which these suspicions gave birth; I
then repeated, without variation or addition, the tale which was then told. I
likewise mentioned my subsequent transactions in Norwalk so far as they
illustrated the destiny of Clithero.

During this recital, I fixed my eyes upon the countenance of Sarsefield, and
watched every emotion as it rose or declined. With the progress of my tale, his
indignation and his fury grew less, and at length gave place to horror and
compassion.

His seat became uneasy, his pulse throbbed with new vehemence. When I came to
the motives which prompted the unhappy man to visit the chamber of his
mistress, he started from his seat, and sometimes strode across the floor in a
troubled mood, and sometimes stood before me, with his breath almost suspended
in the eagerness of his attention. When I mentioned the lifted dagger, the
shriek from behind, and the apparition that interposed, he shuddered and drew
back as if a dagger had been aimed at his breast.

When the tale was done, some time elapsed in mutual and profound silence. My
friend's thoughts were involved in a mournful and indefinable reverie. From
this he at length recovered and spoke.

It is true. A tale like this could never be the fruit of invention or be
invented to deceive. He has done himself injustice. His character was spotless
and fair: All his moral properties seemed to have resolved themselves into
gratitude fidelity and honor.

We parted at the door, late in the evening, as he mentioned, and he guessed
truly that subsequent reflection had induced me to return and to disclose the
truth to Mrs. Lorimer. Clarice relieved by the sudden death of her friend, and
unexpectedly by all, arrived at the same hour.

These tidings, astonished, afflicted, and delighted the lady. Her brother's
death had been long believed by all but herself. To find her doubts verified,
and his existence ascertained was the dearest consolation that he ever could
bestow. She was afflicted at the proofs that had been noted of the continuance
of his depravity, but she dreaded no danger to herself from his malignity or
vengeance.

The ignorance and prepossessions of this woman were remarkable. On this
subject only she was perverse, headlong, obstinate. Her anxiety to benefit this
arch-ruffian occupied her whole thoughts and allowed her no time to reflect
upon the reasonings or remonstrances of others. She could not be prevailed on
to deny herself to his visits, and I parted from her in the utmost perplexity.

A messenger came to me at midnight entreating my immediate presence. Some
disaster had happened, but of what kind the messenger was unable to tell. My
fears easily conjured up the image of Wiatte. Terror scarcely allowed me to
breathe. When I entered the house of Mrs. Lorimer, I was conducted to her
chamber. She lay upon the bed in a state of stupefaction, that rose from some
mental cause. Clarice sat by her, wringing her hands and pouring forth her
tears without intermission. Neither could explain to me the nature of the
scene. I made inquiries of the servants and attendants. They merely said that
the family as usual had retired to rest, but their lady's bell rung with great
violence, and called them in haste, to her chamber, where they found her in a
swoon upon the floor and the young lady in the utmost affright and perturbation.

Suitable means being used Mrs. Lorimer had, at length, recovered, but was
still nearly insensible. I went to Clithero's apartments but he was not to be
found, and the domestics informed me that since he had gone with me, he had not
returned. The doors between this chamber and the court were open; hence that
some dreadful interview had taken place, perhaps with Wiatte, was an
unavoidable conjecture. He had withdrawn, however, without committing any
personal injury.

I need not mention my reflections upon this scene. All was tormenting doubt
and suspense till the morning arrived, and tidings were received that Wiatte
had been killed in the streets: This event was antecedent to that which had
occasioned Mrs. Lorimer's distress and alarm. I now remembered that fatal
prepossession by which the lady was governed, and her frantic belief that her
death and that of her brother were to fall out at the same time. Could some
witness of his death, have brought her tidings of it: Had he penetrated,
unexpected and unlicensed to her chamber, and were these the effects produced
by the intelligence?

Presently I knew that not only Wiatte was dead, but that Clithero had killed
him. Clithero had not been known to return and was no where to be found. He
then was the bearer of these tidings, for none but he could have found access
or egress without disturbing the servants.

These doubts were at length at an end. In a broken and confused manner, and
after the lapse of some days the monstrous and portentous truth was disclosed.
After our interview, the lady and her daughter had retired to the same chamber;
the former had withdrawn to her closet and the latter to bed. Some one's
entrance alarmed the lady, and coming forth after a moment's pause, the
spectacle which Clithero has too faithfully described, presented itself.

What could I think? A life of uniform hypocrisy or a sudden loss of reason
were the only suppositions to be formed. Clithero was the parent of fury and
abhorrence in my heart. In either case I started at the name. I shuddered at
the image of the apostate or the maniac.

What? Kill the brother whose existence was interwoven with that of his
benefactress and his friend? Then hasten to her* chamber, and attempt her life?
Lift a dagger to destroy her who had been the author of his being and his
happiness?

He that could meditate a deed like this was no longer man. An agent from Hell
had mastered his faculties. He was become the engine of infernal malice against
whom it was the duty of all mankind to rise up in arms and never to desist
till, by shattering it to atoms, its power to injure was taken away.

All inquiries to discover the place of his retreat were vain. No wonder
methought that he wrapped himself in the folds of impenetrable secrecy. Curbed,
checked, baffled in the midst of his career, no wonder that he shrunk into
obscurity, that he fled from justice and revenge, that he dared not meet the
rebukes of that eye which, dissolving in tenderness or flashing with disdain,
had ever been irresistible.

But how shall I describe the lady's condition? Clithero she had cherished from
his infancy. He was the stay, the consolation, the pride of her life. His
projected alliance with her daughter, made him still more dear. Her eloquence
was never tired of expatiating on his purity and rectitude. No wonder that she
delighted in this theme, for he was her own work. His virtues were the
creatures of her bounty.

How hard to be endured was this sad reverse? She can be tranquil, but never
more will she be happy. To promote her forgetfulness of him, I persuaded her to
leave her country, which contained a thousand memorials of past calamity, and
which was lapsing fast into civil broils. Clarice has accompanied us, and time
may effect the happiness of others, by her means, though she can never remove
the melancholy of her mother.

I have listened to your tale, not without compassion. What would you have me
to do? To prolong his life, would be merely to protract his misery.

He can never be regarded with complacency by my wife. He can never be thought
of without shuddering by Clarice. Common ills are not without a cure less than
death, but here, all remedies are vain. Consciousness itself is the malady; the
pest; of which he only is cured who ceases to think.

I could not but assent to this mournful conclusion; yet, though death was
better to Clithero than life, could not some of his mistakes be rectified?
Euphemia Lorimer, contrary to his belief, was still alive. He dreamed that she
was dead, and a thousand evils were imagined to flow from that death. This
death and its progeny of ills, haunted his fancy, and added keenness to his
remorse. Was it not our duty to rectify this error?

Sarsefield reluctantly assented to the truth of my arguments on this head. He
consented to return, and afford the dying man, the consolation of knowing that
the being whom he adored as a benefactor and parent, had not been deprived of
existence, though bereft of peace by his act.

During Sarsefield's absence my mind was busy in revolving the incidents that
had just occured. I ruminated the last words of Clithero. There was somewhat in
his narrative that was obscure and contradictory. He had left the manuscript
which he so much and so justly prized, in his cabinet. He entered the chamber
in my absence, and found the cabinet unfastened and the manuscript gone. It was
I by whom the cabinet was opened, but the manuscript supposed to be contained
in it, was buried in the earth beneath the elm. How should Clithero be
unacquainted with its situation, since none but Clithero could have dug for it
this grave?

This mystery vanished when I reflected on the history of my own manuscript.
Clithero had buried his treasure with his own hands as mine had been secreted
by myself, but both acts had been performed during sleep. The deed was neither
prompted by the will, nor noticed by the senses of him, by whom it was done.
Disastrous and humiliating is the state of man! By his own hands, is
constructed the mass of misery and error in which his steps are forever
involved.

Thus it was with thy friend. Hurried on by phantoms too indistinct to be now
recalled, I wandered from my chamber to the desert. I plunged into some
unvisited cavern, and easily proceeded till I reached the edge of a pit. There
my step was deceived, and I tumbled headlong from the precipice. The fall
bereaved me of sense, and I continued breathless and motionless during the
remainder of the night and the ensuing day.

How little cognizance have men over the actions and motives of each other? How
total is our blindness with regard to our own performances! Who would have
sought me in the bowels of this mountain? Ages might have passed away, before
my bones would be discovered in this tomb, by some traveller whom curiosity had
prompted to explore it.

I was roused from these reflections by Sarsefield's return. Inquiring into
Clithero's condition; he answered that the unhappy man was insensible, but that
notwithstanding numerous and dreadful gashes, in different parts of his body,
it was possible that by submitting to the necessary treatment, he might recover.

Encouraged by this informntion, I endeavored to awaken the zeal and
compassion of my friend in Clithero's behalf. He recoiled with involuntary
shuddering from any task which would confine him to the presence of this man.
Time and reflection he said, might introduce different sentiments and feelings,
but at present he could not but regard this person as a maniac, whose disease
was irremediable, and whose existence could not be protracted, but to his own
misery and the misery of others.

Finding him irreconcilably averse to any scheme, connected with the welfare of
Clithero, I began to think that his assistance as a surgeon was by no means
necessary. He had declared that the sufferer needed nothing more than common
treatment, and to this the skill of a score of aged women in this district,
furnished with simples culled from the forest, and pointed out, of old time, by
Indian Leeches was no less adequate than that of Sarsefield. These women were
ready and officious in their charity, and none of them were prepossessed
against the sufferer by a knowledge of his genuine story.

Sarsefield, meanwhile, was impatient for my removal to Inglefield's
habitation, and that venerable friend was no less impatient to receive me. My
hurts were superficial, and my strength sufficiently repaired by a night's
repose. Next day, I went thither, leaving Clithero to the care of his immediate
neighbors.

Sarsefield's engagements compelled him to prosecute his journey into Virginia,
from which he had somewhat deviated, in order to visit Solebury. He proposed to
return in less than a month and then to take me in his company to New York. He
has treated me with paternal tenderness, and insists upon the previlege of
consulting for my interest, as if he were my real father. Meanwhile, these
views have been disclosed to Inglefield, and it is with him that I am to
remain, with my sisters, until his return.

My reflections have been various and tumultuous. They have been busy in
relation to you, to Weymouth, and especially to Clithero. The latter polluted
with gore and weakened by abstinence, fatigue and the loss of blood, appeared
in my eyes, to be in a much more dangerous condition than the event proved him
to be. I was punctually informed of the progress of his cure, and proposed in a
few days to visit him. The duty of explaining the truth, respecting the present
condition of Mrs. Lorimer, had devolved upon me. By imparting this
intelligence, I hoped to work the most auspicious revolutions in his feelings,
and prepared therefore, with alacrity, for an interview.

In this hope I was destined to be disappointed. On the morning on which I
intended to visit him, a messenger arrived from the house in which he was
entertained, and informed us that the family on entering the sick man's
apartment, had found it deserted. It appeared that Clithero, had, during the
night, risen from his bed, and gone secretly forth. No traces of his flight
have since been discovered.

But, O! my friend? The death of Waldegrave, thy brother, is at length divested
of uncertainty and mystery. Hitherto, I had been able to form no conjecture
respecting it, but the solution was found shortly after this time.

Queen Mab, three days after my adventure, was seized in her hut on suspicion
of having aided and counseled her countrymen, in their late depredations. She
was not to be awed or intimidated by the treatment she received, but readily
confessed and gloried in the mischief she had done; and accounted for it by
enumerating the injuries which she had received from her neighbors.

These injuries consisted in contemptuous or neglectful treatment, and in the
rejection of groundless and absurd claims. The people of Chetasco were less
obsequious to her humors than those of Solebury, her ancient neighborhood,
and her imagination brooded for a long time, over nothing but schemes of
revenge. She became sullen, irascible and spent more of her time in solitude
than ever.

A troop of her countrymen at length visited her hut. Their intentions being
hostile, they concealed from the inhabitants their presence in this quarter of
the country. Some motives induced them to withdraw and postpone, for the
present, the violence which they meditated. One of them, however, more
sanguinary and audacious than the rest would not depart, without some
gratification of his vengeance. He left his associates and penetrated by night
into Solebury, resolving to attack the first human being whom he should meet.
It was the fate of thy unhappy brother to encounter this ruffian, whose
sagacity made him forbear to tear away the usual trophy from the dead, least he
should afford grounds for suspicion as to the authors of the evil.

Satisfied with this exploit he rejoined his companions, and after an interval
of three weeks returned with a more numerous party, to execute a more extensive
project of destruction. They were councelled and guided, in all their
movements, by Queen Mab, who now explained these particulars, and boldly defied
her oppressors. Her usual obstinacy and infatuation induced her to remain in
her ancient dwelling and prepare to meet the consequences.

This disclosure awakened anew all the regrets and anguish which flowed from
that disaster. It has been productive, however, of some benefit. Suspicions and
doubts, by which my soul was harrassed, and which were injurious to the
innocent are now at an end. It is likewise some imperfect consolation to
reflect that the assassin has himself been killed and probably by my own hand.
The shedder of blood no longer lives to pursue his vocation, and justice is
satisfied.

Thus have I fulfilled my promise to compose a minute relation of my
sufferings. I remembered my duty to thee, and as soon as I was able to hold a
pen, employed it to inform thee of my welfare. I could not at that time enter
into particulars, but reserved a more copious narrative till a period of more
health and leisure.

On looking back I am surprised at the length to which my story has run. I
thought that a few days would suffice to complete it, but one page has
insensibly been added to another till I have consumed, weeks and filled
volumes. Here I will draw to a close; I will send you what I have written, and
discuss with you in conversation, my other immediate concerns, and my schemes
for the future. As soon as I have seen Sarsefield, I will visit you.

FAREWELL. E. H.

Solebury, November, 10.

LETTER I. TO MR. SARSEFIELD.
Philadelphia.
I CAME hither but ten minutes ago, and write this letter in the bar of the
Stagehouse. I wish not to lose a moment in informing you of what has happened.
I cannot do justice to my own feelings when I reflect upon the rashness of
which I have been guilty.

I will give you the particulars tomorrow. At present, I shall only say that
Clithero is alive, is apprised of your wife's arrival and abode in New York,
and has set out, with mysterious intentions to visit her.

May heaven avert the consequences of such a design. May you be enabled by some
means to prevent their meeting. If you cannot prevent it -- but I must not
reason on such an event, nor lengthen out this letter.

E. H.

LETTER II. TO THE SAME.
I WILL now relate the particulars which I yesterday promised to send you. You
heard through your niece of my arrival at Inglefield's in Solebury: My
inquiries, you may readily suppose, would turn upon the fate of my friend's
servant, Clithero, whose last disappearance was so strange and abrupt, and of
whom since that time, I had heard nothing. You are indifferent to his fate and
are anxious only that his existence and misfortunes may be speedily forgotten.
I confess that it is somewhat otherwise with me. I pity him: I wish to relieve
him, and cannot admit the belief that his misery is without a cure. I want to
find him out? I want to know his condition, and if possible to afford him
comfort, and inspire him with courage and hope.

Inglefield replied to my questions. O yes! He has appeared. The strange being
is again upon the stage. Shortly after he left his sick bed, I heard from
Philip Beddington, of Chetasco, that Deb's hut had found a new tenant. At
first, I imagined that the Scotsman who built it had returned, but making
closer inquiries, I found that the new tenant was my servant. I had no
inclination to visit him myself, but frequently inquired respecting him of
those, who lived or past that way, and find that he still lives there.

But how, said I. What is his mode of subsistence. The winter has been no time
for cultivation, and he found, I presume, nothing in the ground.

Deb's hut, replied my friend, is his lodging and his place of retirement, but
food and clothing he procures by laboring on a neighboring farm. This farm
is next to that of Beddington, who consequently knows something of his present
situation. I find little or no difference in his present deportment; and those
appearances which he assumed, while living with me, except that he retires
every night to his hut, and holds as little intercourse as possible with the
rest of mankind. He dines at his employers table, but his supper, which is
nothing but rye-bread, he carries home with him, and at all those times when
disengaged from employment, he secludes himself in his hut, or wanders nobody
knows whither.

This was the substance of Inglefield's intelligence. I gleaned from it some
satisfaction. It proved the condition of Clithero to be less deplorable and
desperate than I had previously imagined. His fatal and gloomy thoughts seemed
to have somewhat yielded to tranquillity.

In the course of my reflections, however, I could not but perceive, that his
condition, though eligible when compared with what it once was, was likewise
disastrous and humiliating, compared with his youthful hopes and his actual
merits. For such an one to mope away his life in this unsocial and savage
state, was deeply to be deplored. It was my duty, if possible, to prevail on
him to relinquish his scheme. And what would be requisite, for that end, but to
inform him of the truth?

The source of his dejection was the groundless belief that he had occasioned
the death of his benefactress. It was this alone that could justly produce
remorse or grief. It was a distempered imagination both in him and in me, that
had given birth to this opinion, since the terms of his narrative, impartially
considered, were far from implying that catastrophe. To him, however, the
evidence which he possessed was incontestable. No deductions from probability
could overthrow his belief. This could only be affected by similar and counter
evidence. To apprize him that she was now alive, in possession of some degree
of happiness, the wife of Sarsefield, and an actual resident on this shore,
would dissipate the sanguinary apparition that haunted him; cure his diseased
intellects, and restore him to those vocations for which his talents, and that
rank in society for which his education had qualified him. Influenced by these
thoughts, I determined to visit his retreat. Being obliged to leave Solebury
the next day, I resolved to set out the same afternoon, and stopping in
Chetasco, for the night, seek his habitation at the hour when he had probably
retired to it.

This was done. I arrived at Beddington's, at night-fall. My inquiries
respecting Clithero obtained for me the same intelligence from him, which I had
received from Inglefield. Deb's hut was three miles from this habitation, and
thither, when the evening had somewhat advanced, I repaired. This was the spot
which had witnessed so many perils during the last year, and my emotions, on
approaching it, were awful. With palpitating heart and quick steps I traversed
the road, skirted on each side by thickets, and the area before the house. The
dwelling was by no means in so ruinous a state as when I last visited it. The
crannies between the logs had been filled up, and the light within was
perceivable only at a crevice in the door.

Looking through this crevice I perceived a fire in the chimney, but the object
of my visit was no where to be seen. I knocked and requested admission, but no
answer was made. At length I lifted the latch and entered. Nobody was there.

It was obvious to suppose that Clithero had gone abroad for a short time, and
would speedily return, or perhaps some engagement had detained him at his
labor, later than usual. I therefore seated myself on some straw near the
fire, which, with a woollen rug, appeared to constitute his only bed. The rude
bedstead which I formerly met with, was gone. The slender furniture, likewise,
which had then engaged my attention, had disappeared. There was nothing capable
of human use, but a heap of faggots in the corner, which seemed intended for
fuel. How slender is the accommodation which nature has provided for man, and
how scanty is the portion which our physical necessities require.

While ruminating upon this scene, and comparing past events with the objects
before me, the dull whistling of the gale without gave place to the sound of
footsteps. Presently the door opened, and Clithero entered the apartment. His
aspect and guise were not essentially different from those which he wore when
an inhabitant of Solebury.

To find his hearth occupied by another, appeared to create the deepest
surprise. He looked at me without any tokens of remembrance! His features
assumed a more austere expression, and after scowling on my person for a
moment, he withdrew his eyes, and placing in a corner, a bundle which he bore
in his hand, he turned and seemed preparing to withdraw.

I was anxiously attentive to his demeanor, and as soon as I perceived his
purpose to depart, leaped on my feet to prevent it. I took his hand, and
affectionately pressing it, said, do you not know me? Have you so soon
forgotten me who is truly your friend?

He looked at me with some attention, but again withdrew his eyes, and placed
himself in silence on the seat which I had left. I seated myself near him, and
a pause of mutual silence ensued.

My mind was full of the purpose that brought me hither, but I knew not in what
manner to communicate my purpose. Several times I opened my lips to speak, but
my perplexity continued, and suitable words refused to suggest themselves. At
length, I said, in a confused tone;

I came hither with a view to benefit a man, with whose misfortunes his own
lips have made me acquainted, and who has awakened in my breast the deepest
sympathy. I know the cause and extent of his dejection. I know the event which
has given birth to horror and remorse in his heart. He believes that, by his
means, his patroness and benefactress has found an untimely death.

These words produced a visible shock in my companion, which evinced that I had
at least engaged his attention. I proceeded:

This unhappy lady was cursed with a wicked and unnatural brother. She
conceived a disproportionate affection for this brother, and erroneously
imagined that her fate was blended with his; that their lives would necessarily
terminate at the same period, and that therefore, whoever was the contriver of
his death, was likewise, by a fatal and invincible necessity, the author of her
own.

Clithero was her servant, but was raised by her bounty, to the station of her
son and the rank of her friend. Clithero, in self-defence took away the life of
that unnatual brother, and, in that deed, falsely but cogently believed, that
he had perpetrated the destruction of his benefactress.

To ascertain the truth, he sought her presence. She was found, the tidings of
her brother's death were communicated, and she sunk breathless at his feet.

At these words Clithero started from the ground, and cast upon me looks of
furious indignation -- And come you hither, he muttered, for this end; to
recount my offenses, and drive me again to despair?

No, answered I, with quickness, I come to out-root a fatal, but powerful
illusion. I come to assure you that the woman, with whose destruction you
charge yourself, is not dead.

These words, uttered with the most emphatical solemnity, merely produced looks
in which contempt was mingled with anger. He continued silent.

I perceive, resumed I, that my words are disregarded. Would to Heaven I were
able to conquer your incredulity, could show you not only the truth, but the
probability of my tale. Can you not confide in me? that Euphemia Lorimer is now
alive, is happy, is the wife of Sarsefield; that her brother is forgotten and
his murderer regarded without enmity or vengeance?

He looked at me with a strange expression of contempt -- Come, said he, at
length, make out thy assertion to be true. Fall on thy knees and invoke the
thunder of heaven to light on thy head if thy words be false. Swear that
Euphemia Lorimer is alive; happy; forgetful of Wiatte and compassionate of me
Swear that thou have seen her; talked with her; received from her own lips the
confession of her pity for him who aimed a dagger at her bosom. Swear that she
is Sarsefield's wife.

I put my hands together, and lifting my eyes to heaven, exclaimed: I comply
with your conditions; I call the omniscient God to witness that Euphemia
Lorimer is alive; that I have seen her with these eyes: have talked with her;
have inhabited the same house for months.

These asseverations were listened to with shuddering. He laid not aside,
however, an air of incredulity and contempt. Perhaps, said he, thou can point
out the place of her abode. Can guide me to the city, the street, the very
door of her habitation?

I can. She rises at this moment in the city of New York; in Broadway; in an
house contiguous to the..............

It Is well, exclaimed my companion, in a tone, loud, abrupt, and in the utmost
degree, vehement. It Is well. Rash and infatuated youth. Thou have ratified,
beyond appeal or forgiveness, thy own doom. Thou have once more let loose my
steps, and sent me on a fearful journey. Thou have furnished the means of
detecting thy imposture. I will fly to the spot which thou describest. I will
ascertain thy falsehood with my own eyes. If she be alive then am I reserved
for the performance of a new crime. My evil destiny will have it so. If she be
dead, I shall make thee expiate.

So saying, he darted through the door, and was gone in a moment, beyond my
sight and my reach. I ran to the road, looked on every side, and called; but my
calls were repeated in vain. He had fled with the swiftness of a deer.

My own embarrassment, confusion and terror were enexpressible. His last words
were incoherent. They denoted the tumult and vehemence of phrenzy. They
intimated his resolution to seek the presence of your wife. I had furnished a
clue, which could not fail to conduct him to her presence. What might not be
dreaded from the interview? Clithero is a maniac. This truth cannot be
concealed. Your wife can with difficulty preserve her tranquillity, when his
image occurs to her remembrance. What must it be when he starts up before her
in his neglected and ferocious guise, and armed with purposes, perhaps as
terrible as those, which had formerly led him to her secret chamber, and her
bed side?

His meaning was obscurely conveyed. He talked of a deed, for the performance
of which, his malignant fate had reserved him; which was to ensue their
meeting, and which was to afford disastrous testimony of the infatuation which
had led me hither.

Heaven grant that some means may suggest themselves to you of intercepting his
approach. Yet I know not what means can be conceived. Some miraculous chance
may befriend you; yet this is scarcely to be hoped. It is a visionary and
fantastic base on which to rest our security.

I cannot forget that my unfortunate temerity has created this evil. Yet who
could foresee this consequence of my intelligence. I imagined, that Clithero
was merely a victim of erroneous gratitude, a slave of the errors of his
education, and the prejudices of his rank, that his understanding was deluded
by phantoms in the mask of virtue and duty, and not as you have strenuously
maintained, utterly subverted.

I shall not escape your censure, but I shall, likewise, gain your compassion.
I have erred, not through sinister or malignant intentions, but from the
impulse of misguided, indeed, but powerful benevolence.

E. H.

LETTER III. TO EDGAR HUNTLY.
New York. EDGAR,
AFTER the fatigues of the day, I returned home. As I entered, my wife was
breaking the seal of a letter, but, on seeing me, she forbore and presented the
letter to me.

I saw, said she, by the superscription of this letter, who the writer was. So
agreeably to your wishes, I proceeded to open it, but you have come just time
enough to save me the trouble.

This letter was from you. It contained information relative to Clithero. See
how imminent a chance it was that saved my wife from a knowledge of its
contents. It required all my efforts to hide my perturbation from her, and
excuse myself from showing her the letter.

I know better than you the character of Clithero, and the consequences of a
meeting between him and my wife. You may be sure that I would exert myself to
prevent a meeting.

The method for me to pursue was extremely obvious. Clithero is a madman whose
liberty is dangerous, and who requires to be fettered and imprisoned as the
most atrocious criminal.

I hastened to the chief Magistrate, who is my friend, and by proper
representations, obtained from him authority to seize Clithero wherever I
should meet with him, and effectually debar him from the perpetration of new
mischiefs.

New York does not afford a place of confinement for lunatics, as suitable to
his case, as Pennsylvania. I was desirous of placing him as far as possible
from the place of my wife's residence. Fortunately there was a packet for
Philadelphia, on the point of setting out on her voyage. This vessel I engaged
to wait a day or two, for the purpose of conveying him to the Pennsylvania
hospital. Meanwhile, proper persons were stationed at Powels-hook, and at the
quays where the various stageboats from Jersey arrive.

These precautions were effectual. Not many hours after the receipt of your
intelligence, this unfortunate man applied for a passage at Elizabeth-town, was
seized the moment he set his foot on shore, and was forthwith conveyed to the
packet, which immediately set sail.

I designed that all these proceedings should be concealed from the women, but
unfortunately neglected to take suitable measures for hindering the letter
which you gave me reason to expect on the ensuing day, from coming into their
hands. It was delivered to my wife in my absence and opened immediately by her.

You know what is, at present, her personal condition. You know what strong
reasons I had to prevent any danger or alarm from approaching her. Terror could
not assume a shape, more ghastly than this. The effects have been what might
have been easily predicted. Her own life has been imminently endangered and an
untimely birth, has blasted my fondest hope. Her infant, with whose future
existence so many pleasures were entwined, is dead.

I assure you Edgar, my philosophy has not found itself lightsome and active
under this burden. I find it hard to forbear commenting on your rashness in no
very mild terms. You acted in direct opposition to my council, and to the
plainest dictates of propriety. Be more circumspect and more obsequious for the
future.

You knew the liberty that would be taken of opening my letters; you knew of my
absence from home, during the greatest part of the day, and the likelihood
therefore that your letters would fall into my wife's hands before they came
into mine. These considerations should have prompted you to send them under
cover to Whitworth or Harvey, with directions to give them immediately to me.

Some of these events happened in my absence, for I determined to accompany the
packet myself and see the madman safely delivered to the care of the hospital.

I will not torture your sensibility by recounting the incidents of his arrest
and detention. You will imagine that his strong, but perverted reason exclaimed
loudly against the injustice of his treatment. It was easy for him to outreason
his antagonist, and nothing but force could subdue his opposition. On me
devolved the province of his jailor and his tyrant; a province which required
an heart more steeled by spectacles of suffering and the exercise of cruelty,
than mine had been.

Scarcely had we passed The Narrows, when the lunatic, being suffered to walk
the deck, as no apprehensions were entertained of his escape in such
circumstances, threw himself overboard, with a seeming intention to gain the
shore. The boat was immediately manned, the fugitive was pursued, but at the
moment, when his flight was overtaken, he forced himself beneath the surface,
and was seen no more.

With the life of this wretch, let our regrets and our forebodings terminate.
He has saved himself from evils, for which no time would have provided a
remedy, from lingering for years in the noisome dungeon of an hospital. Having
no reason to continue my voyage, I put myself on board a coasting sloop, and
regained this city in a few hours. I persuade myself that my wife's
indisposition will be temporary. It was impossible to hide from her the death
of Clithero, and its circumstances. May this be the last arrow in the quiver of
adversity! Farewell.

END.

