AN ORATION, DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1799.

AT THE MEETING HOUSE, IN WESTON: IN COMMEMORATION OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF
AMERICA

BY JAMES BURNET, A. ^.

NEWFIELD: PRINTED BY LAZARUS BEACH.

AN ORATION, etc.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW COUNTRYMEN.
BY the goodness of God we are still continued in existence, and permitted once
more in common with our brethren, to assemble together to celebrate the
independence of our country, the birth day of our liberty. While many of the
nations of the earth have been deprived of their most invaluable blessings,
have had their governments subverted, their religion abolished, and an
experience of all the desolating horrors of War: We with a few exceptions have
had every endearing privilege secured, the pleasing satisfaction of beholding
the progression of the arts and sciences, the most important improvements in
agriculture, the advancement of the Christian Religion in spite of the
exertions of infidels, or the malevolence of athiests, and our country^^^
enriched by the streams of wealth conducted from the Eastern world, in various
and almost innumerable channels. Notwithstanding our currents of trade have
received some impediment in their courses, by the mounds and obstructions
thrown into them by a nation the most abandoned in principle, by a nation that
has disgraced humanity by excesses and rendered herself terrible to the world
by her conquests, yet we have been great gainers by our commerce -- The
exertions of individuals, united with the commendable vigilence of our rulers
in resisting the spoliations of French pirates, have in a great measure placed
us beyond the reach of their fraternal hugs, and in a situation where we have
little to apprehend from those picaroons of the earth.

THE benevolent mind must derive the most solid enjoyment from contemplating
the resources of America, and the rank which she must hold in a few years in
the scale of nations, if we enjoy an uninterrupted peace, and have the
happiness (...) uniformity to possess such men for our administrators of
justice as are at the present (with a few exceptions) a glory to our nation, a
light to our councils, and an honor to the world.

IT is common, my countrymen, on an occasion like the present for the Orator to
descant upon the excellences of patriotism -- to entertain his audience with an
eulogium upon the Heroes who have fought and have fallen, and to dress in the
fairest praises the undaunted Warrior who exposed his breast to the mouth of
the cannon, and received the bayonet in his bosom while advancing on the foe.

TO hold in grateful recollection the authors of our independence, the Worthies
who stepped forward in the face of danger, who with manly courage engaged with
the foes of our liberty, and who exerted themselves with unremitted ardor until
they erected the fair fabric of freedom, is a tribute due to their valor, and
will ever be cheerfully rendered by all the genuine sons of Columbia, who are
as much distinguished for their gratitude, as for those other traits which
serve to discriminate them from the nations of the earth.

BUT I concieve that the situation of our country calls for something more
important than panegric, and more substantial than eulogy. The antipathy which
many of our citizens display against a variety of the acts of our government,
the contempt which they cast upon the most excellent of our rulers, and their
systematized opposition to every measure of defense, combined with the
intrigues, the threats, and the inimical disposition of the French nation, call
upon every one who knows the value of our independence, who is charmed with the
beautiful symetry of our constitution, who relishes the sweets of liberty, and
who prefers the charms of peace to the horrors of blood and carnage to be upon
his guard, and to watch incessantly lest the demon of destruction, in an evil
hour should subvert the fair temple of freedom, and erect in its stead the
throne of despotism and oppression.

THE increase of our navy, together with the combination of powers with which
the Magnanimous Republic is contending will undoubtedly exempt us for a season
from the invasion, ravages, and slaughter, which we might naturally expect was
it not for this fortunate concurrence of circumstances.

THOUGH from this consideration we may at the present style ourselves happy,
though we may have a persuasion that the invaluable blessings of property
liberty and life will be protected, and though we may flatter ourselves that
our nation will long increase in wealth, in population, in respectability and
happiness, we ought not to let those things throw us into a stupid and fatal
security, (lest like the man in the gospel who looked with pleasure upon his
possessions and promised himself the enjoyment of many years yet to come) we be
deprived of our rights, robbed of our independence, and compelled to groan
under the iron rod of tyranny.

I shall therefore beg your attention while I point out to you the danger you
are in of being deprived of your present happiness, give you a faint picture of
the evils you must suffer if you acknowledge Frenchmen for your masters, direct
the means by which you may avoid Galic subjugation, and conclude with urging
you to cherish that glorious spirit of independence which burned in the breasts
of the heroes of '76, and which enabled them to bear unshocked the whole
artillery of British thunder.

IT is an unhappy circumstance for America that so many of her sons are
impressed with the idea that the services rendered by France in our late
glorious struggles for liberty has bound us to her by the bands of gratitude.
As long as this opinion is current in our nation (and receives the patronage of
our countrymen) we shall stand in a precarious situation, and our rights and
independence must be placed on the brink of nonentity. Palliatives will be
invented for all the enormities of the French nation, their blackest deeds will
be clothed in the whitest garments, and while their crimes are such as
barbarians themselves would shudder at -- the advocates of this opinion will
represent them as things which the exigences of the republic required, and
therefore perfectly justifiable. Time then will not be badly employed in
combatting this sentiment, and in showing that the opinion was conceived in
error, and that it owes its support to an ignorance of the true reason of
Louis's yielding us assistance. The causes which gave birth to our late
glorious revolution have been so often exhibited, and are so well known to the
generallity of my audience, that a minute detail of them would be wholly
superfluous -- suffice it to remark that Great Britain by a variety of acts
oppressive in their nature, and which had a direct tendency to deprive the
colonies of every security, irritated the minds of the colonists, -- By going
directly in the teeth of her constitution she assumed the right of taxing the
people of America without their consent and without being represented. She
claimed the prerogative of binding the people of these states in all cases
whatsoever, and thus abolished a maxim the most certain in politics, and the
most interesting to nations, a maxim that deserves to be written in letters of
gold, and engraven on tables of brass, That Representation and Taxation should
never be separated.

THESE measures were incompatible with the feelings of the freeborn sons of
America, incongruous with their ideas of justice, and the alarm which roused
them from their lethargy, which prompted them to call forth the latent energies
of the soul, which nerved their arm to oppose the unauthorized encroachments of
the British government, and which exhibited them to the world as an example of
what could be achieved by a nation determined to be free, and resolved to
prefer death to slavery.

IT is well known that France and Great Britain had for centuries been
unfriendly to each other, (had long been striving for the mastery in power) and
that a number of causes combined to engender a resentment mortal and implacable.

FRANCE had ever looked upon the colonies of Britain with an envious eye, and
apprehended that in a few years their increase in commerce and respectability,
would throw a weight in the scale of her enemy which would destroy its
equilibrium, and turn it in her favor.

FROM this circumstance alone it is not necessary for us to apply to a
Cassandra for the purpose of enquiring whether it would be pleasing to France
to behold a contest between the mother and her children? A knowledge of human
nature, and of the principles by which nations as well as individuals are
actuated will without the spirit of prophecy solve the question.

SHOULD the chance of war turn in favor af America, one of the richest gems in
the crown of George must have lost its luster, Great Britain must have been
humbled, and France herself materially benefited. Although she had all these
inducements to wish for our success, although it was decidedly for her interest
that a separation of the colonies from Britain should be effected, yet she did
not come forward in that friendly and generous manner to our assistance which
would confer an obligation.

WHILE our resources were few, our soldiery undisciplined, and the probability
was, that we should again be subjected to obedience by the acknowledged power
of Britain -- France stood aloof, afforded us no assistance, in the time which
tried men's souls, our Commissioners were delayed at her court for several
months unable to effect an alliance, or to accomplish the end of their mission,
while our country was groaning for succor.

LOUIS saw our danger, yet he was not the generous, the disinterested friend to
stretch out his arm to preserve us from falling, or to supply us with medicine
to heal our bleeding wounds.

IT was not until the capture of Burgoyne, it was not until he perceived that
the Americans were regaining their strength, that by their resolution and
bravery they were able to withstand the British forces in the field of battle,
it was not until he had the greatest persuasion of security that he should
receive not only a threefold but a tenfold return for his favors that he
offered us aid. When a conquest was accomplished which inspired the sons of
Columbia with more than mortal courage, and which nearly extinguished the
martial flame that burned in the breasts of the soldiery of George, then
Gallia's valiant and benevolent monarch; took pity upon the poor, weak, and
defenseless Americans and offered his assistance.

WITH what views my countrymen did he offer it? Was it for the purpose of
rendering us independent? Was it because he had an ardent desire for our
happiness? Was it because the commencement of British hostilities pierced his
tender and compassionate soul? Reason with a voice of thunder, and like an
angel trumpet tongued says

NO!

FRANCE entered into a treaty of alliance with the United States with far
different views -- the French Sovereign hoped that by the storm of war the
throne of the English Monarch would be made to totter to its base, that the
haughty crest of Britain would be depressed, and that the whole nation would be
compelled to mourn for many days in sackcloth and ashes.

IF there are any still so incredulous as to think differently from the
statement just made, such I would refer to the condition of the French nation
at that very instant.

THE power of the king was absolute -- the government in the highest degree
tyrannical and oppressive, and in consequence of this tyranny and oppression
the people wretched and unhappy.

IF then the slight oppression which the colonists received from the British
government was so repugnant to the exquisite sensibility of the French
Sovereign, and so inconsistent with his ideas of justice, that he thot' it a
duty incumbent upon him (though at an advanced stage of the contest) to
liberate the Americans from bondage, and to break in shivers the iron rod
raised over their heads: How comes it to pass that the same benevolent
disposition did not display itself in ameliorating more effectually the
condition of his own subjects, of those who were under his immediate
inspection, and whom he was bound by his office and station to treat as a
friend and protect as a father. IT is agreed on all hands that Louis XVI.
ameliorated in some measure the condition of his subjects -- yet
notwithstanding the mildness of his reign in comparison to that of many of his
predecessors, the circumstance of his doing not still more for his people, and
placing their rights on a still surer foundation, will operate as an
insurmountable argument in favor of the opinion, that he had some other
inducement in assisting us than merely the promotion of our happiness, and the
establishment of our independence.


LET the advocates of the idea I have been combatting reconcile if possible
this evident contradiction, and account for the capriciousness of the French
Monarch in preferring to soften the condition of strangers and foreigners to
that of his own people and children.

IN considering the assertion that we owe a debt of gratitude to France, I have
gone upon the supposition that nations do sometimes act disinterestedly. --
This however is not a fair representation of things, the idea is altogether
chimerical and fit only to be urged by theoretical philosophers whose province
it is to advance absurdities.

BUT allowing that is it possible for one nation to be bound to another by the
ties of gratitude, and that the conduct of France was wholly disinterested, and
of such a nature as to produce an obligation: Will it follow that the nation
who conferred a favor cannot by the most abominable outrage, and the most
flagrant impiety cancel the debt, or render herself unworthy of the friendship
of the nation upon whom the favor was conferred? Suppose my friends that your
neighbor should assist you when in prison, and freely and without your
solicitation ransom you by the payment of a trifling sum, must you for this
reason not be allowed to resent his destruction of your property, his murdering
your son, or the violation of the chastity of your wife or daughter? Apply the
same rule to nations and there will be no difficulty in calculating the quantum
of gratitude we owe to France.

BUT the prevalence of the idea whose absurdity I think I have sufficiently
exposed, is not our only source of danger. We are so unhappy as to have a class
of men in our country, who keep concealed from the public eye, who feed upon
the vitals of our constitution, and fatten upon their attempts to subvert our
government and holy religion.

IN the breasts of these Demagogues all the baneful passions concentre, which
are to be found among the infernals -- Envy, jealousy, revenge, backbiting, and
rage, are prominent features in their character, and render them fit
instruments to accomplish the task assigned them by their grand master the
DEVIL. These men are always unprincipled, and generally their property has been
squandered away in acts of lewdness, dissipation, nnd impiety.

OPPRESSED with debt accumulated by their irregularities, and extravagance,
like Cataline and his horde of robbers and assassins they have no hopes of
remedying their infamous and desperate situation, but by exciting uneasiness,
division, and anarchy.

THEY are men whose invention is sharpened by necessity, and whose schemes are
planed in conformity to the directions of BEELZEBUB.

NOT contented with superficial performances, they lay the ax to the root of
the tree and determine to make it surrender at a stroke. That virtue is the
basis of Republics, and the chief corner stone of the building, is a truth as
clear as the sunbeams, and coeval with eternity.

AND that the permanancy of governments will ever be dependent upon the respect
which the people have for the laws, and the reverence shown for their rulers is
not less apparent. We need not wonder then that these wretches in society
should make it their chief study to bring the religion of Jesus into contempt,
and to cover the rulers of the people with ridicule, slander and obliquy.

FROM men of this description and character you have every thing to fear --
Having made shipreck of faith, and viewing the religion of Jesus as a fable,
and not more worthy of regard than the Alcoran of Mahomet they are prepared for
the most dark and bloody attempts: The restraints which are laid on the
believer of the doctrines of the gospel, and which have the greatest tendency
to make him a dutiful son, an affectionate husband, a tender father, and a good
citizen, have no influence upon those opposers of government, those murderers
of the blessed IMMANUEL, and those deniers of JEHOVAH.

WHEREVER you see them let the seal of stigmatism be instamped; view them as
the sons of Ishmael whose hands are against every man, and consider that it is
a duty you owe to yourselves, your country, and your God, that your hands
should be against them.

HONOR them not with your suffrages, choose them not for your rulers, for they
will surely be the barriers betwixt you and your happiness. They will be a slow
poison which will diffuse itself throughout the body politic of your
constitution, weaken the system, and produce a dreadful and lamentable death.
The dissolution will not be an euthanasy, but the struggling of a dire
convulsion, by which every feature of the frame will be distorted and every
joint dislocated.

THE idea that we are bound to France by indissoluble ties of gratitude for her
assistance in our late revolution, and the strenuous and unremitted exertions
of infidels and atheists in subverting the ehristian religion, in exciting
confusion, uneasiness, and discord among us to overthrow our excellent
consttiution, are the two principal sources from which we have to apprehend the
loss of our liberties, and the imposition of shackles which Frenchmen alone can
forge and the DAMNED bear to sustain.

A representation of the woes and miseries under which we must labor if
burdened with the Gallic yoke must, I think appal the stoutest heart, and
strike terror into every man whose conscience is not feared as with a red hot
iron. The rulers of the French nation have perpetrated every crime which the
pen of the historian every recorded -- which ever stamped the mark of infamy on
a Tiberius, a Nero and a Caligula, or which ever pervaded the brain of the
grand enemy of mankind.

NOT satisfied with tearing children from their parents, husbands from their
wives, and seizing on the hard earned property of the peaceful citizen, the
honest mechanic and the industrious farmer: They have refined even upon cruelty
itself, racked their invention to discover new modes of torture, exulted in the
dying groans of thousands, and deemed the sight of rivers of blood a luxurious
repast.

CHARITY would gladly extend her silver wings, pity would fain throw her snowy
mantle over the detestable crimes of Carrier, who filled the Loire with the
bodies of his Countrymen. Over the cruelties of the hard hearted Collet de
Herbois who delighted in the miseries of the wretched victims, whom he shot
upon the Rhone, and over the horrid barbarities perpetrated at Nantz, at Lions,
and at Orleans, which deprived these unhappy cities of their most able and
respectable citizens, which destroyed their property and which dyed their
pavements with gore.

BUT History, the faithful translator of past events has enrolled them on her
page, to be transmitted to posterity for perusal, to make generations yet
unborn tremble at the recital, and men of honesty and virtue lift up their
hands, and wonder who could do them.

THE tyranny and despotism of the executive Directory exceed all our ideas of
the abuses of power, and would be incredible to credulity itself, were they not
declared by men of the greatest integrity, and confirmed by facts which will
bear the scrutiny of ages, and which to the consummation of the world, will
brand these monsters of the human race with infamy unsurpassed, and consign
them to the regions of woe "where the worm dies not and the fire is not
quenched."

TO enumerate all their excesses would exhaust the power of language. To give
you a complete description of their character is impossible; for no language
contains words of execration sufficiently nervous. You will have but a faint
idea of their enormities, when I inform you that they have attempted to
dethrone JEHOVAH by a decree, that they have written over the doors of their
Temples that "death is an eternal sleep," that with the true principles of
Illuminatism, they have declared `that the end will justify the means,' that by
their soldiery they have destroyed every Republic in Europe, deprived nations
of rational liberty, and bestowed upon them the liberty of Frenchmen, which is
the liberty of hell, broken down the land marks of property, banished the most
patriotic men in France, confined the unfortunate brave in loathsome prisons,
sentenced thousands and tens of thousands to be beheaded by the accursed
Guillotine, and wrested the tender infant from the arms of the affectionate
mother, while smiling in their faces, "plucked the nipples from its boneless
gums and dashed its brains out!"

HOW infamous then is the conduct of those men who murmer at our administration
and who with open arms would welcome an army dispatched by the five headed
monster. Their stubbornness keeps pace with their stupidity, and their
opposition to measures of defense discovers the depravity of their minds. Let
me ask the men who are bellowing out for France, for liberty and equallity,
what they expect to gain by being under French domination?

IF the Directory should establish themselves in this country, we should
experience every oppression which the unhappy Frenchman feels, and which
pierces to the heart. We should have exhibited constantly before our eyes those
scenes of violence at which humanity recoils, and be the instruments and slaves
of a lawless banditti, whose ambition is equalled only by their wickedness.

ANSWER me, ye democrats, is this condition to be preferred to your present,
where you are governed by rulers of your own choice? Is the tempestuous storm
of France possessed of greater charms, than the serene calm of America? Is a
situation in which you can have no security for your property, for the
continuation of your lives, for the chastity of your wives and daughters, more
eligible than the situation in which all these invaluable blessings are
secured? If you are men of principle -- if you are men in whose bosoms the
genial flame of philanthropy ever burned, I conjure you by the love you profess
to bear to your country -- by the love you bear to yourselves, to revolve these
things in your minds, to consider well the sentiments you have imbibed, to
forsake your system of opposition, and be convinced that you have the happiest
government on earth -- a government as far preferable to that of France, as the
verdure of Summer is to the dreariness of Winter, lest GOD in his wrath should
hurl you out of the highway to heaven into regions of endless woe, perdition
and despair. If my countrymen, GOD in his righteous providence should permit
this scourge of mankind to land upon our happy shores, and destroy our present
Constitution, which is the most beautiful edifice that genius could devise, or
art construct, and plant in its stead the tree of French liberty, whose leaves
are impregnated with poison, whose branches are covered with serpents, whose
sap is the blood of the unhappy brave whom bare suspicion murdered, whose fruit
"outvenoms all the worms of Nile," and whose roots are the strong holds which
guard these tyrants of the world, we must bid a long farewell to happiness, to
all those endearing scenes which give a taste to pleasure, and which render
virtue itself more pleasing.

"WE should find under every footstep a spring-gun, under every roof a spy, in
every family an informer, and on every bench of justice an assassin."

RELIGION the solace and staff of the Christian would be blasted by the
lethiferous breath of those nameless villians in iniquity, who with awful
audacity have turned their heel upon the Sovereign of the universe, and placed
the Savior of the world upon the catalogue of impostures.

"DEATH would then depute
Ambition to do the work of age,
And hanging up the quiver nature gave him
As slow of execution. For dispatch
Send forth imperial butchers, bid them slay
Their sheep (the silly sheep they fleeced before)
And toss him twice ten thousand at a meal."
YOUR wives and your daughters would be exposed to the brutal desires of a
soldiery fiercer than the Tiger, and more cruel than the Hyenna, and when they
are polluted by the deadly contagion you will exclaim too late with the poet,

"O fairest of Creation, last and best
Of all GOD's works, creatures in whom excelled
Whatever can to fight, or thought be formed
Holy, divine, good, amiable and sweet,
How art thou lost?"
IF you set a value upon your liberty, if you have any regard for your
families, if you wish for the promotion of Christianity, if you have any
reverence for your Savior and your God, resolve to oppose the intrigues and
encroachments of the French nation and flash your vengeance like the forked
lightning, on those enemies of man, for in Frenchmen is concentrated every
enormity. Enlightened by the bright beams of Illumination they have made the
wonderful discovery that the perfection of happiness consists in the subversion
of order, and in the abolishment of Religion, they have prepared the besom of
destruction to sweep every benificial and virtuous institution from the face of
the earth, and to substitute in their stead the temple of reason, and edifices
more destructive to human happiness than even the Bastile.

TO escape the mortal fangs of these whining Crocodiles and to preserve the
happy situation we now sustain, a particular attention must be paid to the men
whom we choose for our rulers, the blush of resentment crimsons my cheek when I
look upon our councils, and view the number of foreigners who are chosen as our
lawgivers, to the exclusion of our own citizens, renowned for wisdom, for
virtue and for patriotism.

MY heart bleeds for my country when I anticipate the evils she must sustain,
without the abolishment of so impolitic a custom. Open your eyes Americans
before it is too late -- before the thunderbolt of destruction shall close them
forever.

WHERE is that fire which burnt in the breast of your forefathers? That spirit
which preserved our Country -- where is the dignity of our nation, will you
submit to be ruled by men who have fled the rod of justice in their own country
uplifted to crush them into atoms? If you will you richly merit every curse
which they will pour upon you. But I am confident that the sons of Columbia
have not yet sunk to such a state of degradation, and I hope for the honor and
happiness of my county, that it shall not be said on another anniversary, that
the people of America are so abject, as to fill their highest departments of
government with foreigners.

NEXT to the exclusion of Aliens and men devoid of principle from offices of
state, I would enjoin it upon you in the strongest terms to pay all decent
(...) respect to those with whom you have entrusted the reins of Government,
they are men whom you have chosen for your rulers, men who owe their promotion
to your own act, men in whom you have reposed the most important trust, and of
course are men whom you ought to revere.

NOTHING can be more absurd, and but few things more injurous to society than
the unaccountable conduct of some men in delighting to find fault with the
proceedings of our rulers, and endeavoring to make them contemptible in the
eyes of the nation.

WHEN it is considered that a contempt for the law maker, produces a contempt
for the law, and that a contempt for the law is the fruitful parent of
confusion and disorder, I conceive that the good sense of the generality of my
countrymen will want no other argument to induce them, to treat their Rulers
with decency, with respect and with reverence.

TO ensure for any length of time our independence, and the numberless
blessings which are its concomitants, it is necessary that there should be a
general diffusion of knowledge.

THE mind enlightened with the divine rays of science, beholds with the
greatest horror, and detestation, those nefarious practices which set citizen
against citizen, and convert men who style themselves citizens into the most
ferocious barbarians.

AS it is the pride of tyrants, to bind their subjects in the chains of
ignorance, so let it be your glory to break in twain the bonds which confine
the powers of the soul, and cramp the dignity of man.

CONSIDER that a people well enlightened have too exalted ideas of liberty to
yield to the nod of a despot. As long as there is a general diffusion of
knowledge in our country, so long shall she be free. But if we become involved
in (...) ignorance -- Immorallity, superstition, irreligion, and an whole host
of evils will overrun the land. The advancement of Christianity is likewise
another circumstance which demands your serious regard. If the Bible is treated
with contempt, Religion regarded as a fable and the sabbath unobserved, we may
with the greatest rationallity expect all those evils which I have enumerated.

WE cannot with any propriety expect that men who laugh their Maker to scorn,
and who treat our holy religion as the invention of priests and impostures,
should be solicitous for the interest of mankind, the noble, generous and
social affections of the soul would all be banished, and man void of
benevolence coil himself up, in the nut-shell of self-love.

LET me urge you then by every motive to be strenuous in your exertions in
opposing infidelity and irreligion, inculcate the principles of Christianity on
the minds of your children and dependents, train them up in the fear of the
Lord, inspire them with a respect for his laws, make them punctual in their
attendance upon public worship, expound to them the baneful nature of sin, and
replenish their minds with those divine doctrines and precepts, which will
render them a blessing to their country and an honor to their God.

IF your patience is not already exhausted, I will request your attention a
little longer, while I warn you to shun division.

IF you unite as a band of brothers in sentiment and exertion, you need not
fear the combined forces of the world, but if you separate yourselves in
parties, excite commotions, and strive to stir up animosities, this will be the
rock on which you will split.

IT is the voice of reason, as well as the voice of inspiration, that a kingdom
divided against itself cannot stand, your division will be an invitation to
your enemies to ravage your country, to subvert your laws and to destroy your
happiness.

THE many insults you have already received from the French nation have been
produced, in a great measure by the idea of your being a divided people.
Resolve then now to show by your actions that they have been mistaken in their
opinion, and that you are ready not only to spend but to be spent for your
country. Oppose with a manly firmness the intrigues of the French, and of every
other nation unfriendly to your liberties, fired with the spirit which blazed
in the breast of your forefathers, and which lighted them through the dark
valley of oppression, to the fair temple of Freedom, glory and independence.
Let your language be "millions for defense, but not a cent for tribute."
Resolve to unite in the support of the laws of your country in protecting your
wives and your children, and in preserving your Religion inviolate.

THE independence you enjoy is a boon you have received from the benevolent
Author of Nature, it is a talent he has entrusted to your charge, and it is at
your peril if you loose it, through negligence, or inattention.

COME range yourselves then about Liberty's Pole,
With heart, and with hand, and with purses unite,
Resolve not to fear the thunders that roll,
But determine to conquer or die in the fight.
FINIS.
BETWEEN THE TRANSCRIBER AND THE PRINTER THE FOLLOWING ERRATA HAS TAKEN PLACE.
Page 3 -- line 4 from the bottom, between the words by and excesses add her.

-- 4 -- lines 10 and 11, for happiness and uniformity to possess such men for
our administration, read, happiness uniformly to possess such men for our
administrators.

-- 5 -- line 1, for panegric, read panegyric.

Voted that Samuel B. Sherwood and Nathan Wheeler, Esquires, be appointed a
Committee to wait on Mr. BURNET, with the thanks of the audience for his
Oration, and to request of him a copy for the press.

SAMUEL B. SHERWOOD, Com'te.
NATHAN WHEELER, Com'te.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF WESTON, THIS ORATION DELIVERED AND PUBLISHED AT THEIR
REQUEST IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY THEIR FRIEND AND FELLOW-COUNTRYMAN,

JAMES BURNET,


