MR. COFFIN's ELECTION SERMON.

MAY 29, 1799.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE His Honor MOSES GILL, ESQUIRE. LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, The
Honorable the COUNCIL, SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COMMONWEALTH
OF MASSACHUSETTS.

MAY 29, 1799, BEING THE DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

BY REV. PAUL COFFIN, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN BUXTON.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY YOUNG and MINNS, STATE PRINTERS.

MDCCXCIX.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.
IN SENATE, May 29, 1799.
ORDERED, That ISAAC THOMPSON, SIMON FRYE, and DANIEL DAVIS, Esq'rs. be a
Committee to wait on the Rev. PAUL COFFIN, and in the name of the Senate, thank
him for the Sermon this day delivered by him before His Honor the Lieut.
Governor, the Honorable Council, and the two Branches of the General Court, and
also to request of him a copy for the Press.

Attest, EDWARD McLANE, Clerk.

The Address to his Excellency was omitted in the delivery, by reason of his
lamented sickness and absence. -- A few other sentences also are here inserted,
which were not delivered; and vice versa.

A SERMON.
II. SAMUEL, xxi. 17. THEN THE MEN OF DAVID SWEAR UNTO HIM, SAYING, THOU SHALL
GO NO MORE OUT WITH US TO BATTLE, THAT THOU QUENCH NOT THE LIGHT OF ISRAEL.
"TRULY light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the
sun." This great source of light was early formed by the Creator's hand. "He
saw that it was good." It has ever since been the beauty and the glory of its
system. Its most extensive beneficence is as necessary, as its splendour is
illustrious. It is essential to the gladness, the guidance, and the support of
the various inhabitants of the globe. It is peculiarly the life and the beauty
of the vegetative creation. By this the enamelled meads are dressed in their
richest robes, "surpassing SOLOMON in all his glory."

With great wisdom then and propriety, did the men of Israel use the delicate
and strong figure of light, to give an idea of the splendour and benignity of
their ruling Sovereign. The two principal ideas contained in this metaphor, are
beams to guide, and rays to cheer; or, guidance and comfort. When applied to a
just and good thing, it signifies that he governs with wisdom and
righteousness; and to the joy and felicity of his subjects. DAVID himself uses
the same splendid figure, in the sense of the text. "He that rules over men
must be just, ruling in the fear of GOD; and he shall be as the light of the
morning, when the sun rises, even a morning without clouds; as the tender
grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain."

The men of Israel, wiser than many in this day, duly appreciated the blessings
of good government, and highly tendered the precious life of their sovereign.
They trembled at his personal danger. They blodly opposed his design of going
to battle against his rebellious son, and prevented his exposure of himself.
They answered with all the fervor of love, and the firmness of patriotism:
"Thou shall not go forth: For if we flee away, they will not care for us:
Neither if half of us die, will they care for us: But thou art worth ten
thousand of us." What noble sentiments are these! And what sterling worth! It
was for a like cause, and on a similar occasion, that they spoke the words of
our text.

DAVID had wearied himself in battle, and spent his strength. A gigantic foe
saw his advantage, and had nearly improved it, and taken his life. ABISHAI, one
of his Generals, possessed of presence of mind, stepped in a moment between his
prince and death; saved him from the hands of his huge antagonist, and gave the
monster the fatal thrust. On that great occasion, "his men," with equal reason,
"Swear to him," saying, "Thou shall go no more out with us to battle, that thou
quench not the light of Israel." How happy is such a prince! How blessed is
such a People! Could I do any thing, which should promote such happiness, I
should surely be happy too.

I suppose I should do but little to this purpose, were I to spend time to
prove that civil government is a necessary institution, evident from the nature
and circumstances of mankind; that it is agreeable to the will of the Supreme
Ruler of the world; and that it may be administered in such a manner as to be
of very various and extensive benefit to society. There is, I conceive, as
little reason to induce me to show the comparative excellencies and defects of
the several forms of government, which different nations have adopted. By the
help of all these, the union has formed constitutions, perhaps, the most
excellent and eligible of any yet thought of. To offer to our Rulers of this
State, with modesty, and yet with zeal, some plain directions for an happy
administration of our public affairs, is the business before us; with the
resulting duties of the People.

If Rulers would be the light and joy of the People, it is essential that they
bear a kind and parental affection to them. This is a principle animating and
persevering, and essential to a joyful activity in duty. Civil Rulers are in a
station exalted and important. The consequences of their conduct are of a very
serious and weighty nature, deeply affecting the interests of the community;
while they are seeking the welfare of the People, affairs may come before them
of a very perplexed and intricate nature, calling for their united wisdom,
probity and patience. At the same time, their unwearied and laboring services
may not receive from the People that approbation, which they merit. The best
measures of their administration may be disapproved and blamed, and censured as
wrong; neither calculated, nor even designed for the public good.

Under these and similar circumstances, how necessary is that love of the
People, which flows from a regard to GOD, and christian principles! Here Rulers
must rise above present considerations, and act agreeably to their stations,
and as accountable to GOD. They must view themselves as the Fathers of the
People appointed by GOD, and reason to take care of their interests, and
promote their welfare; although they should prove unthankful children,
perverted by ignorant men; or such as are restless, discontented and seditious.
Knowing that they are "ministers of GOD for good" to the People, they must
attend to that very thing. And a sincere aim to promote that, animated by
benevolence, should never be neglected a moment. A desire to be useful, and
bless mankind, should rule in the hearts of all; men possessing the station and
influence of Rulers, should greatly cherish it. They cannot rule us in the fear
of GOD without it.

But, animated by this, and guided by wisdom, they will shine in their
influence, as the sun in the firmament; and enlighten and cheer all who have
eyes to see, and sensibility to feel. And they may always hope this number will
be large, notwithstanding all the jealous and uneasy men, who grow up
spontaneously in free governments. Many will say of such Rulers, "They are the
glory and stability of our times." Even in this day of jarring politics, we
have Rulers of whom we say, "Ye are worth ten thousand of us." We have our
NEHEMIAHS, for whom we pray, "LORD blot not out all their good deeds which they
have done for thy people, and for the houses of our GOD." We have our
MORDECAI's, who are "great in the nation, and accepted of the multitude of
their brethren, seeking the wealth of the People, and speaking peace to all
their feed." All Rulers should be like these, and become the light and gladness
of the People.

Great knowledge of the nature and duties of government is another part of that
genial light, by which Rulers shine, and give the People joy. This, with a
connected and competent acquaintance with human nature, is essential, if they
would rule with honor to themselves, and advantage to the People. Should the
People see that they are ignorant, or neglectful, of the Constitution, and the
principal rules of administration, they would view them as a luminary under an
eclipse, shedding a tenebrious and portentous light. But, while they duly
regard both these with a prudent reference to the genius and sentiments of the
People, they will shine with a pleasing and acceptable splendour. For while they
wisely and faithfully attend to that Constitution, which the united wisdom and
care of the whole People have formed and chosen, and which is admirably adapted
to the security and promotion of the general welfare, how can the People
complain? How can they refuse either approbation, or gratitude? They must see,
that such conduct secures their liberties and possessions; and in many ways
renders the enjoyment of them greatly enhanced. Laws made by such Rulers, must
be, not only constitutional, but wise and wholesome. They must be agreeable to
all good citizens; and offensive only to "the lawless and disobedient," for
whom they are especially needful. Such rulers will shine in their orbits with
bright and cheering rays. They must see, in a thousand instances, which people
in the mass overlook, such measures as will favor the general welfare. They
must be supposed to know the most equitable and easy way of levying taxes, the
most wise and necessary laws, the most worthy and suitable men for all civil
offices, the most eligible ways of promoting discoveries and improvements in
arts and sciences, and in the comforts and conveniences of life; the most
efficacious means of checking vice, and aiding virtue; and, in general, the
best ways of promoting the public welfare. Such Rulers will be viewed by all
the wise and good, as the Light and Happiness of the People. And if one among
them could be found alone to wish the light quenched, that the blessings of
anarchy might succeed, he alone would deserve to have his choice, and to "be
filled with his own ways."

If Rulers would shine with a genial splendour, and give solid joy to the
people, they must attend with much care to the Laws which they make to govern
them. The basis of these should ever be justice and mercy. These virtues should
always be encouraged, and the opposite vices checked. Rulers in their design
"are not a terror to good works, but to evil." And no good and quiet man should
be slavishly "afraid of the power;" but assured, that, "doing well he should
have praise of the same." Justice is, perhaps, the brightest gem in the crown
of a Ruler. He should ever be able to say, "I put on righteousness, and it
clothed me: and my judgment was a robe and a diadem." This should be the robe
of every Magistrate, in every department of government. For how can a People be
happy when this is not the case? If iniquity be framed by law, what will become
of the peace and felicity of the People? And if the course of justice be
stopped among a People by the corruption or intimidation of the judicial
powers, "where can the righteous seek redress?" And how can the guilty be made
afraid? Justice is so essential to the welfare of communities!

It is in itself an exalted and divine virtue. In this we peculiarly resemble
the Deity. Almost all other virtues have a reference to ourselves. This is
generous and benevolent, extending to all mankind. GOD alone is just to
perfection, and able to distribute it entire and without defect. His
omniscience gives him the most complete view of all moral beings; and his
almighty arm enables him to render to all according to their deeds.

The nearer Civil Rulers (who are gods below) approach to the Divine Model, the
more truly are they the light of the People: And by a wise mixture of mercy and
justice, in their administrations, they resemble the Deity in that ravishing
glory which is seen "in the face of JESUS CHRIST." Let our laws partake of
these heavenly ingredients; and let them be truly and faithfully executed. On
these two pillars hang all the wealth and quietness of the People. At least
they are essential to their virtue and happiness, their ease and tranquillity.

Sumptuary and economical laws might aid the cause of virtue, and so far as the
powers of government reach that way, they will be well employed to check a rage
for extravagant diversions and amusements of all kinds. These things are
injurious to young Republics, and Christian Republics. I am aware the subject
is delicate, and the spirit of the times backward to restraint; yet we venture
to say, "A land of levity is a land of guilt." A People devoted to
high-seasoned pleasures, and showy diversions, improved by the flowers of
eloquence, are apt to form romantic ideas of happiness, to lose a relish for
the solid duties and comforts of life, and to contract a growing distaste to
the better pleasures of virtue, and the elevating hopes of religion. We are apt
in this way to "seek a Heaven below the skies," and to neglect that which is
above. The natural effect is, a carnal and worldly temper. To oppose the steps
which lead to this, and to remove the temptations to it, are labors worthy of
all Ministers, civil or sacred. Encouraging frugality, industry and temperance
in pleasure, and opposing the opposite evils, Magistrates do well. In thus
regarding justice and mercy, and seeking also the promotion of beneficial and
virtuous habits of living, they will shine to approbation; and it will be the
duty of the People to "lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and
honesty."

If Rulers would be the light of the People, they must attend closely to the
characters of men whom they put into authority. Every man in office should be
possessed of probity and firmness, and a friend to mankind and to
righteousness. The laws of a country may be wise and good; yet, when the
actions of men are tried by them, they may be twisted and perverted, so that
the innocent shall suffer, and the guilty be acquitted. The laws shall have "a
meaning never meant," owing to some vague expressions in the frame of them; or
some other handle will be made use of to the same purpose. Hence the importance
of integrity in the judicial departments.

Men in office, designed to keep the peace of society, and promote justice and
union among neighbors, may do eminent service, acting well, and keeping the
end of their appointment in view. By advising parties to peace and friendship,
and sometimes relaxing their fees, they may prevent much mischief, and promote
much happiness. All "our officers should be peace, and our exactors
righteousness;" that "our peace may be as a river." "Righteousness exalts a
nation." It tends to happiness, and procures the blessing of GOD, "which makes
rich." "When he gives quietness who then can make trouble? And when he hides
his face who then can behold him? Whether it be done against a nation, or
against a man only." Righteous men in office shine and allure to right conduct
by their example. Under them government is beloved and honored. Beside, when
it is well known that government is just, and that unworthy men are excluded
from posts of honor and profit, this very thing will be an incentive to a fair
and good character. And men ever known to have been selfish, and never to have
served the interests of society, will be afraid to be candidates for important
offices. The idea of disappointment will check them; and they will dread to
have their characters held up to public view, lest they should become doubly
scandalous to them. This care to fill offices with worthy men, will then turn
out greatly advantageous to the public: For good men also would as readily come
forward, in this case, as the base would hide themselves.

In order to prove that the Deity is on the side of virtue, and that it will
finally prevail, an eminent author has supposed a nation to be wholly
righteous. The fame, the nature and the government of this nation, are imagined
to make it the greatest and the most happy nation on earth. One step, and an
important one toward this singular felicity of a people, would be an exclusive
introduction of worthy men into places of authority.

Sensible of this, even the unenlightened PHARAOH was wholly influenced by it
in the choice of a very important officer. He said to his servants, "Can we
find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of GOD is?" on which
ROLLIN makes this good reflection: "In talking thus he entirely reformed a
false policy, which considers virtue and religion as unserviceable in the
government of a State, and finds an exact probity too great a check upon its
views and projects. This stupid impiety is exposed to eternal shame by an
infidel King. He is convinced that the more of the Spirit of GOD a Minister
has, the more capable he is of governing a kingdom. And the least attention
suffices to discover, that the opposite principle flows from the utter want of
human understanding."

When therefore, in any government, the vilest men may rise, either by
servility or secondary influence, we may say, there is a radical defect in
administration. So far such a government is reduced to infamy and misery.

And as, in our happy country, the People possess the privilege of choosing
their Rulers, in the first instance it is of mighty importance that they should
have that knowledge and that virtue which will enable them to make a just and
wise use of it. To this end the increase of virtue and general knowledge, is
greatly to be desired and promoted. For what is a Free Republic, and what is it
soon like to be, without its essential pillars? Even since the days of our
independence, although a People never had greater privileges, or made more
rapid strides in prosperity, it has cost the nation large sums to quell
insurrections and rebellions. But, could these have risen, had the nation
possessed a due share of knowledge and virtue? Let us all then exert ourselves
to promote these; and let no man rise to posts of honor without them. For,
When impious men bear sway,
The post of honor is the private station.


But this will not be the only misfortune of such men bearing sway. The body
will receive detriment, and in more ways than one. The national interests will
be neglected; merit will be discouraged, and vile men will rejoice, and do
mischief without fear.

As the light and support of the People, Rulers must defend them in their
enjoyments, by keeping peace at home and abroad, as far as may be.

In this weighty business, I confess, more wisdom is required, than I have any
claim to; but that internal and external peace is a blessing of the first
magnitude, and accordingly to be sought, no one will deny.

To secure it at home, and to promote all the blessings to which it is
favorable, is the duty of Rulers; and if these ends can be obtained by the
wise and prudent conduct of government, it will be happy. And, in general, we
may hope for this. But if unreasonable men will, notwithstanding, rise up
against the government, and disturb the public peace, force is then justly
resorted to.

To secure us from foreign wars, it is plainly the duty of Rulers to be just in
their conduct toward the other nations with whom they have connexions. And if
misunderstanding take place between us and any such nation, it seems truly just
and wise, and a part of commendable policy, to try the event of upright and
honorable negotiation. And the importance of preventing an open rupture with
such a nation may be so great as to justify all the steps of an amicable and
persevering negotiation. Such steps will vindicate our national character in
the eyes of all nations; bring down the blessing of GOD upon us; fill the
people with love to government, and animate them firmly to defend their country
against the hostile attempts of such a nation, when negotiation shall have
proved inefficient.

We rejoice and bless GOD, that the conduct of our Rulers, to keep peace at
home and abroad, is the exact resemblance of all that we have said.

As the calamities of war are devoutly to be deprecated; so we pray GOD, that
the measures taken for our just defense may turn out, under a benign
Providence, the prevention of them. And as this is the aim and good design of
our Rulers; so, I doubt not, they cordially approve of the spirit of that
prayer which was offered by a great prince and warrior after a decisive battle:
Make wars, O LORD, by wars to cease;
And let this conquest lead to peace.
But should we, after all, be called to put the harness on, the justice of our
cause would lead us to hope in that GOD who has ever been "the hope of our
Israel and the Savior of it in times of trouble."

I only add, rulers will be eminently the light of the people by aiding the
cause and promotion of learning, virtue and religion.

These are so essential to the real and lasting welfare of the body, and have
been so truly the glory of our country, that our civil heads cannot promote or
esteem them to excess. To encourage, and still maintain, schools for youth, is,
doubtless, one good means of answering these great purposes. And here we may
also reckon the encouragement of useful discoveries and inventions. And if they
can do any thing by authority or example, to bring into a more just esteem, a
learned and pious Christian Ministry, the times too lou^dly call for it. People
are sadly indifferent, in many places, or even averse to the settlement and
improvement of such pastors. With large numbers, the peace, the order, the
union and edification of the churches of CHRIST, are small things; and the
increase of infidelity, or vain and imported philosophy, on the one hand, and
of disorder in churches, and angry separations and delusions, on the other,
calls aloud to our Zion. With me, these are the most portentous appearances of
the day. If any men, or order of men, can be the happy instruments of promoting
more light and love among Christians, they will be eminently honored of GOD,
and equally dear to the friends of CHRIST's peaceful kingdom.

Our University, which has given so many ornaments and blessings both to Church
and State, will receive the fostering care of our Civil Fathers.

And as they profess the religion of CHRIST, we hope with the greater
confidence, that they will esteem its heavenly doctrines, and observe its pure
precepts, and be lovely examples of so divine a religion, in all their private
deportment.

As Rulers, they will act for CHRIST, who has raised them to seats of dignity;
and who possesses "all power in heaven and earth." As they can serve the
community so well in no other way, in honoring religion, this duty will be
obvious to them. And as the works of Providence, in all ages, are designed to
promote the Redeemer's kingdom and the salvation of souls, we all, and Rulers
eminently, should concur in that best design.

And, as Christians, they may, perhaps, advance religion as much by their
private life and example, as by bending all the power of their governmental
stations that way. By firmly believing the inspiration of the sacred books, and
defending it by its own standing and convincing evidence; by honoring and
comforting the Ministers of CHRIST, many of whom want comfort; by attending
public worship, and revering our holy Sabbaths; by manifesting the pure and the
benevolent temper of the Gospel in their daily life; by promoting the peace,
union and edification of the respective Churches to which they belong; and by
discountenancing all loose principles and practices, and encouraging things
opposite, they may do much to aid the best cause in the world, and "to
strengthen the things of religion which remain, and are ready to die." Behaving
thus gloriously, they will be the light of our Israel, and remind us with joy
of that better day of Zion, in which "Kings will be its nursing fathers, and
Queens its nursing mothers," directing all their powers that way.

From this view of the duties of Rulers, however cursory and imperfect, we yet
infer those of the People.

If our Rulers govern us in love and wisdom, by good laws, truly executed, and
attend to our peace, and guard against the calamities of war; if they light the
lamps of science, virtue and religion, and keep them burning, we should rejoice
in their light, and say, "Blessed be you, and blessed be your fidelity, and
blessed be GOD." Such a government is an eminent instrument to restrain the
excesses of bad men, and to defend the good. If instances had never been given,
who could form an idea of those crying enormities and transcendent cruelties,
into which men would run, unrestrained by an efficient and just government? But
were men, for any length of time, to "do what is right in their own eyes," we
could surely expect "no peace to him that goes out, or to him that comes in."
To restrain lawless men, and prevent the eruption of conceived mischief, is one
grand design and happy effect of government. According to some men, and good
judges too, this is a principal end of all civil authority. This is an engine
in the hands of GOD, by which he prevents such a deluge of inhuman and ungodly
deeds, as would otherwise make the world a more complete bedlam, than ever yet
it has been. Now the righteous have some tranquillity; otherwise "their souls
would be vexed from day to day by the conversation and deeds of the wicked:"
And they would, probably, be so distressed as to "rejoice exceedingly, and be
glad to find the grave."

How thankful then should we be for an efficient and just government! And how
much should we prize and honor the Light of our Israel, and pay tribute to
government gladly! For is not that the security, not only of our farms and
merchandise, but of our liberty and lives? And we should obey them from the
united principles of interest and religion. The voice of inspiration to the
People, even under infidel Rulers, is, "Submit yourselves to every ordinance of
man for the LORD's sake: for so is the will of GOD, that with well-doing ye may
put to silence the ignorance of foolish men." With what irresistible motives is
this obedience pressed on us, whose Rulers are Christians, and whose "Nobles
are of ourselves; and whose Governor proceeds from the midst of us;" and by our
own glad choice too! I am not surely pleading for "passive obedience and
non-resistance;" but for a rational and easy obedience to a government of our
own, and Rulers of our own.

"But if our Rulers will not please us, and guide the political ship according
to our better judgment, must we press our lips close, nor dare condemn a
mal-administration?" Let us first be sure this is the case; and then use
peaceful modes of obtaining redress. If need be, let us not again choose such
Rulers. And, while we examine public measures with entire freedom, let us avoid
all bad temper, and a desire to find fault. Let us shun that jealousy, which is
a baneful excrescence of envy and discontent; otherwise we may be hurried by a
"trifle light as air" to censure the best measures of the best man; whose
wisdom, integrity and patriotism have been proved and honored a thousand
times. And let us not be "unstable as water," carried about by every wind of
"seditious doctrine." Let us be candid and quiet till there is a cause of
complaint. For, under government, have we not the most forcible call to this,
and the best means of "leading quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and
honesty?" SOLOMON's advice was once good: "My son, fear the LORD and the King,
and meddle not with those that are given to change."

It is surely our reproach, if we are ever ready to complain of government, and
to fret under every duty, as if a strange and oppressive thing had happened to
us. We have prospered, above other People, under a mild and equitable
government; and shall we be peevish and ever uneasy with it? This is beneath
the wisdom and magnanimity of free men. It is too much like fretful children,
who cannot be pleased by all the tenderness of their too indulgent parents. At
this time it peculiarly becomes us to be the friends of government, and the
support of our Rulers. Let us not make their cares heavier, when the defense
and happiness of our common country call for all their attention, and the most
steady exertions. And, in the room of complaints and murmurs, let us bless GOD
for good governments; and that we may well hope we shall yet be continued free
from oppression and despotism on the one hand; and on the other, from the
terrible effects of anarchy and unbounded licentiousness.

Indeed, we can hardly set bounds to our national hopes, if we will but
honestly and generally seek the public weal, acting well in our several
stations. No doubt there are real difficulties and obstructions in the way. But
what nation was ever free from them?

Let us mention some of the principal ones, and then see if we cannot raise an
hopeful prospect of national happiness, notwithstanding.

Some persons are very jealous, that our Rulers will become despotic; and that
they are actually taking the previous steps. But will not these pains be
removed as soon as they realize the checks and balances of our governments; the
circumstances of our Rulers as being the same with their own; and the change
and frequency of their elections?

A spirit of licentiousness and anarchy, so much spread among us, is another
enemy to public happiness. But was not this to be expected, for a time, in such
a nation as this, and in our circumstances? Having dearly bought our liberty,
and possessed the precious boon, it was natural to expect, that many would run
wild with the idea, and not suddenly distinguish between governmental liberty,
and licentiousness. But are we not coming to our senses, and regarding this
distinction more and more? And as we grow cool, and increase in knowledge, and
experience the blessings of good government, shall we not soon, and generally,
drop this abuse of liberty, and be willing to be happy? Let all good patriots
and intelligent men teach their connexions this wisdom, and join in advancing
political information and solid virtue. Thus, we may hope, the People will see
their real interests, and avoid a restless and seditious spirit, which is its
own tormentor.

The abuse of religious liberty, it is granted, is another obstruction of
public prosperity. This liberty is a precious part of our singular privileges.
It should be employed to promote love and good works: These are its sweet
effects, when guided by wisdom and piety. But when it is made "an occasion to
the flesh," an instrument of mischief, it becomes an engine fatal to the best
pleasures and blessings of society. Has it not thus opened a door to
infidelity, and the corruption of Christian doctrines, worship and manners? It
is believed to have led the way to injurious divisions and angry separations
among Christians, and much enthusiasm. By these means the peace and edification
of Churches have been greatly injured; and many places have probably been thus
retarded in their desires and pursuits of stated and faithful pastors.

I desire not that men should be deprived of the right of private judgment in
religion. I would not wound the feelings of pious persons, however weak and
misled; but it is grievous to wise Christians, to see souls turned from the
truth to fables; from the simplicity that is in CHRIST, to human fancies; from
pure inspiration, to its fatal counterfeit.

But has not this evil always taken place in times of civil commotions and
revolutions? And, may we not hope, that time and consideration will remove it?
We have the happiest means of knowing true religion from all its counterfeits.
We have colleges, academies and schools, designed to promote general
information and religious science. We have many excellent teachers in the
Christian Ministry, workmen who need not to be ashamed. Under such eminent
means of instruction, let us cheerfully hope the time will soon come when
seducers and novices in divinity shall be easily discovered and discarded; when
the peace of the Churches shall be prized and maintained; and the solid virtue
and piety of Holy Writ be preferred to superstition and enthusiasm. Let us all
duly esteem and improve a learned, faithful and pious Ministry; and acquaint
ourselves fully with the scriptural marks and arts of seducers, and avoid them.
Let great care be taken in the introduction of men into the Gospel Ministry;
and let the peace and order of the Churches be sacredly regarded, and such as
would break them be shunned. And who can tell how soon the abuse of religious
liberty, with all its ruinous effects, shall give way to the increase of love
and peace, regularity and holiness?

We have also too much reason to believe, foreign intrigue has done much to
divide us as a nation, and obstruct the public weal. We have, indeed, great
reason to believe, that this has been a capital machine, employed against our
peace; a principal wedge, driven with strong and repeated blows, to split us
into pieces, to the ruin of our happy Union. An excellent and patriotic writer
of our own has made this matter plain; "The blessings of good government," says
he, "have been most imminently and immediately endangered by foreign intrigue.
From this source have arisen our greatest perils. This bane of our
independence, peace and prosperity, has been operating in various ways for more
than twenty years past, in insidious efforts to diminish our national limits,
importance and resources; in keeping alive national prejudices; in attempts to
prevent our having an efficient government; in artful stratagems to diminish
and weaken the powers vested in the Executive; to destroy the checks and
balances, and to consolidate the distinct and well-defined powers of the Three
Branches established in the Constitution; in frequent interferences in the
management of our national concerns; in fomenting divisions among us; and in
patronizing and circulating publications, calculated to cherish and increase
them; by calumniating our Rulers, misrepresenting their measures, and exciting
murmurs, prejudices, and open and direct opposition against the laws. In these,
and many other ways, too numerous to detail, has foreign intrigue discovered
itself among us, and attempted to check our national growth, and to deprive us
of the blessings of a free and independent government.

It was by intrigues and artifices, like those we have mentioned, that all the
Republics of Europe have been prostrated at the feet of France. It was in the
same way that the free States of Greece were ruined, and their liberty lost."
DOCTOR MO^^Y.
Let us bless GOD for this discovery; and be thankful that all our opposition
to government, and a fatal spirit of disorganization, are not the spontaneous
growth of the American soil. It was through art and deception, and not from
native corruption, that many, otherwise good, citizens among as have done
wron^^, and injured their country. When the growing light shall bless their
heads, it will be seen that their hearts have not erred.

Gratitude is an amiable virtue; but when we see with open eyes, that it has
been ignorantly directed to a foreign nation, we shall exchange it for justice
to ourselves. Converts, of this happy sort, are daily made; and, for the honor
of America, we will hope and believe, their number will be enlarged; and that
our union, patriotism and firmness will render our name excellent in the earth.

We only add; a spirit of infidelity, immorality and ungodliness, spreading
among us, is another obstruction of the public welfare, and an enemy to it.
But, for our comfort, we say, neither is this of our own soil, but a foreign
production. The laborious and critical author, before cited, has said, "The
Philosophists and Revolutionists of France appear to have acted upon the maxim
of THOMAS PAIN, 'that an army of principles will penetrate where an army of
soldiers cannot. It is neither the Rhine (he says) the Channel, nor the Ocean,
that can arrest its progress. It will march to the horizon of the world, and it
will conquer.' In conformity to this maxim, that infamous book, styled, The Age
of Reason, was written in France (and, it is said, in the house and under the
patronage of Mr. MUNROE) printed there in the English language, and a cargo of
15,000 copies, at one time, sent into these United States, and disposed of by
sale at a cheap rate, or given away. Besides these imported copies, numerous
editions of the same work (shame on our country!) have been printed here. The
effects produced by the extensive circulation of these books, and others of the
same cast and tendency, in the evident spread of infidel and atheistical
principles, and the consequent deterioration of morals, evince that these
Apostles of Illuminatism have not been unsuccessful in their labors."

It thus appears, we must allow, that we were too ready to receive the fatal
plant, and to cherish it. But will a People, always used to reverence the GOD
of Heaven, and among whom many pious souls remain, long be guilty of this
madness? Rather let us hope, that, in an exchange of circumstances, we shall,
through grace, come to ourselves; honor the GOD of our Fathers; and confess,
with deep contrition, that we have erred, and played the fool exceedingly.

These are our diseases. Let us hope, through GOD, they are curable; lest we
mourn, in accents of untried sorrow, "Is there no balm in Gilead? No Physician
there? Why then is not the health of the People recovered?"

We will spend a few moments, however, in viewing the brighter side of our
prospects; that we may raise our hopes still higher of the nation's prosperity.

The Providence of GOD to our Fathers, and to us, have been favorable, next
to a miracle. Within our remembrance, he has done great things for us; for
which we should be glad, and offer due praise. Our revolution turned up events
so truly gracious, that the blind see, and the inconsiderate adore the hand of
Him "who works in all, yet who alone seems not to work." And since that day his
blessings have descended in showers. If I be not deceived, never was there
before a People so numerous and so well-informed as this, who had entire
leisure and full opportunity, and the most happy means of forming Constitutions
of Government for themselves, and then of receiving them, after the most mature
deliberation. And our happiness, under their administration, has surpassed even
our own sanguine expectations. And this has been the case, notwithstanding the
many and peculiar embarrassments which have attended said administration.
Never, it seems, was there before a young Republic so exceedingly harrassed in
the management of its affairs. Eternal honor to our firm and patriotic Rulers,
who have borne the burden and heat of the day. Some, better informed than
myself, think their vigorous and firm measures have saved the Constitution
itself from shipwreck! If so, what thanks are due to them, and to GOD! And what
joyful hopes arise from hence, of our future felicity!

Blessed be GOD, our present circumstances are so good and promising! Hitherto
has the LORD saved us, in the midst of great and pressing trials. We hope he
will yet save us. While the State Governments, so generally, move happily in
their respective stations, the Federal one, like the sun in the center of its
system, gives light and strength, union and stability to them all. And the
nation appears to be emerging from the darkness of trouble to the light of joy
and independent felicity. A spirit of patriotism and zeal for government, have
become general. A sense of the public weal, as depending on ourselves, and not
on any other nation, has nobly spread and honored the union. The firm and
truly American spirit of this great Commonwealth, is a joyful consideration.
And the preservation of the life, and eminent usefulness of the PRESIDENT of
the Union, and the appearance of a WASHINGTON once more at the head of our
army, are matters of profound gratitude to JEHOVAH, and of high joy and hope to
us. Being myself an American, and loving the happiness and honor of my
country, I cannot easily omit, in this place, an eulogy, laconic and
transcendant, said to have been pronounced by a foreigner on these two great
Personages of America. A gentleman said to his friend, with much seriousness,
"Do you believe there is a man on earth really possessed of all those
excellencies which are ascribed to President WASHINGTON?" "I never did till I
saw JOHN ADAMS."

These, and similar facts, justly raise our hopes of national felicity, and
waft our thoughts forward on the wings of delightful anticipation. Many things,
to the same purpose, might be added; we might enlarge on the situation,
richness and resources of this favored country; the vigor and firmness with
which our means of defense have been adopted, and the success crowning them
etc. but I dare presume no further on the patience of this honored assembly.

Let us then, in our several spheres, be animated in our duty. Let the People
study to be quiet, and to do their own business; fear GOD, and honor
Government, and meddle not with them who are given to change. Let our Rulers
prove themselves the light of our Israel. Let these, and the Ministers of
Religion, act in sweet agreement; let them look on each other with a benevolent
eye, not mixing their powers and their interests with unjust or oppressive
views; but imbibing a spirit of love and esteem mutually; and aiding each other
in the great and godlike design of making an happy nation. So will the LORD
fulfill all our desires, leading his chosen people by the hands of MOSES and
AARON.

If any thing has been delivered, unsuitable to this important and joyful
occasion, or injurious to the public weal, the candor of this intelligent
audience will cover it. And may GOD bless a sincere endeavor to serve my
country, to fulfill my duty, and to aid the Redeemer's cause, so generally and
so unhappily neglected.

Your Excellency will accept of our congratulations on the repeated suffrages
of your country, by which you are again the first light of this part of our
Israel. To pay you, Sir, an unmeaning or painful compliment, I am not willing.
But to rejoice in a man beloved and approved in so exalted a station, and whom
an intelligent People have so often called to the Chief Seat of Government, is
both my pleasant duty and gratified ambition.

It is our sweet hope, that you will still attend faithfully, with advice of
Council, to the defense, and happiness of your country. Their wisdom and
firmness, we trust, will be a seasonable aid to your Excellency. Your own
judgment will naturally be confirmed by their's, enabling you to act with
fuller satisfaction, and more animating hopes. That modesty which attends merit
will gladly receive concurring advice. And thus acting, you will do honor to
yourself, and verify the remark of SOLOMON: "The words of wise men are heard in
quiet, more than the cry of him that rules among fools."

We presume not to instruct your Excellency; but it is agreeable to our subject
to say, you will tenderly love the People; pay a sacred regard to the
Constitution in your conduct; see that governmental proceedings are guided by
wisdom and justice; regard merit in placing men in office; seek the peace of
the nation; and aid the progress of learning, virtue and religion. You will
attend, Sir, to the removal of the cruel obstructions, which are thrown in the
way of the public welfare; and as readily improve the seasons and means of
advancing the proper and direct happiness of the body. Your urbanity and moral
virtues will eminently serve the general cause; as the manners of the great
descend to the lower grades of men, and are caught with avidity. And as "a
Christian is the highest style of man," you, Sir, will shine with redoubled
luster, having sincerely joined that to "His Excellency." With this mingled
glory, Sir, we pray, that you may long be a light and a blessing on earth; and
finally shine, as the sun in the firmament, and as a star for ever and ever.

The Two Branches of the General Court receive our respect, and our cordial
wishes for them, as men, and as Rulers. That part of them, who have long served
their country, and honored their stations, deserve our thanks; as they receive
the approbation of their constituents in a light the most unequivocal in their
repeated elections. May the elections of the day be attended to with that
deliberation, wisdom and regard to merit, which the importance of the matter
demands. As affairs of great moment may come before you in the course of the
year, we pray GOD to give you that knowledge, integrity and firmness, which
will render you equal to them. And as real worth is proved in arduous and
trying services, and shines the more, we trust you will be prepared to manifest
that worth, should the trial come. The post of honor is often the post of
danger. Let your genuine patriotism, and your resolution in duty, make you
equal to every trial.

Be united in your love of the country, that, with the more ease you may be
united also in the means of its preservation and happiness. Put on candor and
patience in your deliberations; and let no partial views bias your judgments,
or corrupt your affections. And let me say, with the fairest intention, and
with all due respect, "Take heed, Honored Fathers, that ye fall not out by the
way." "A kingdom divided against itself cannot stand." You will do all in your
power to prevent such ruin.

The times are difficult. A good old Minister of this country in such a day,
made this caution the ground of a public discourse: "When we do not know what
to do, we should be careful not to do we know not what." Your knowledge and
prudence, I hope, will save you always from such rashness. Many causes, and
some of them forcible, have perplexed and divided the minds of good citizens in
their ideas of government and politics. It will be your duty and honor to see
through those things which grieve and divide others; and by a conduct uniformly
wise, constitutional and benevolent, to open their eyes; and thus to convince
them also, that our government and administration are, as they ought to be,
eminently for the good of the People; and that there is a mighty difference
between government, and no government; between a good one, and a corrupt one;
and between their real friends, and insidious foes. By such a conduct may you
greatly serve the State.

And may this government, and every State government so concur with a wise,
firm and righteous administration of the Federal Government, as that the Union
shall be safely guided through its present sea of perplexity and fear, to the
haven of entire peace with itself. And may this internal peace be accompanied
with peace abroad, and not disturbed with foreign wars or foreign politics. And
we also pray, that, on their own account, all the nations of Europe may be
guided to an equitable and lasting peace; in which the peace of Zion, and the
welfare of mankind may also be great and lasting. In all your efforts to shine,
and be useful in your high stations, may GOD guide you by unerring wisdom, and
crown them with the desired success. And all the people who are wise and good,
will receive your services with gratitude; and, for your sakes, as well as
their own, they will pray, that the light of Israel may not be quenched. May
you all be faithful in a few things, and finally be made Rulers over many
things, and be welcomed to your Great Master's joy.

A principle of piety is so essential to the discharge of all relative duties,
as well as all others, that I shall be justified in closing this discourse by
an inculcation of it.

Men and Brethren, whether Rulers or ruled, we have all a part to act in this
short life, of importance, beyond all conception great. A future and an eternal
scene awaits us; full of joy and glory on the one hand, and of shame and
contempt on the other. We shall escape the latter and obtain the former, if the
grace which brings salvation teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously and godly in the present world. Thus serving
GOD, and our generation by the will of GOD, we shall receive the end of our
course, the salvation of our souls.

The worth of this is learned by one consideration, taken by itself, without
addition. The Ministers, whom GOD has provided for human happiness, and for
this eminently, afford this instruction. The great REDEEMER came into the world
as our servant; "not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his
life a ransom for many." The Angels of Heaven are sent forth to "minister to
the heirs of salvation." Christian Rulers, are "ministers of GOD to us for
good." The Ministers of the Gospel are, in a peculiar sense, "our servants for
JESUS' sake." They are the gift of our ascended Head, appointed and continued
"for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the Ministry, and the
edifying of the body of CHRIST, till we come to the stature of perfect men." To
render this Ministry thus glorious and successful, the HOLY SPIRIT is also sent
into the world. In this view he is, in the highest sense, a Minister of GOD for
our good. And as all Heaven is for us, rejoicing at the repentance and
salvation of one sinner: So all Hell is against us, the prince of it, with his
legions, walking about, seeking whom he may devour.

If such be the combat, and such the combatants, what must the prize of the
warfare be! Is our salvation of such amazing import? Then let us so esteem it!
Let us adore the GOD who has made the wondrous provision for it.

What a creature is man, for whom the GOD of Heaven has done so much! I do not
know that we can think too highly of ourselves, even in the depths of our
humility, for our crimes.

Of human nature never too high
Are our ideas wrought;
Of human merit never too low
Depressed the daring thought."
Can we act agreeably to the dignity of this nature, and our future prospects,
unless we become the willing followers of CHRIST, the Light of our world, and
the Savior of our souls? May his healing word dwell in us richly, and guide us
in our duty to GOD, to society, and to ourselves, and make us harmless and
blameless, the children of GOD, without rebuke, shining as lights in the world.
Then, with the assurance of hope, we may long for that day, in which the
righteous shall shine as the sun, in the kingdom of their Father.

To that blessedness and glory may we all at last be brought, through JESUS
CHRIST, our Divine Redeemer.


