WAR, Necessary, Just and Beneficial: AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED ON COMMENCEMENT AT
RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE, SEPTEMBER 4th, A. D. 1799.

BY TRISTAM BURGES, A CANDIDATE FOR THE SECOND DEGREE.

PROVIDENCE: (...)

AN ORATION.
"BE READY FOR THINE ADVERSARY."

A Mother to her Son,

SHAKESPEARE.
THIS day is consecrated to academical exercises. The beauties of science, and
the charms of philosophy, are doubtless the most apposite themes for classical
declamation. In this respect, however, the speakers of today have always had
their choice. If propriety and decorum be consulted, they are not confined to
any particular description of subjects. He, who now addresses you, would not
advance a principle, or anticipate a possible juncture of circumstances, which
might diminish the hilarity, or violate the solemnities of the present
occasion. If his theme, or his sentiments, should be unpleasant to a single
individual in hearing, that individual may be assured, that, neither the one
was chosen, nor shall the others be exhibited, with any reference to any
occasion, or any description of citizens.

THIS festive anniversary, this civick and classical parade, the concourse, the
splendor, and even the very countenances of this numerous assembly, are so
many testimonials of the felicity of our country. But there are truths which
tell us all these delights of peace may be violated. When we see yonder ensign,
unfolding its red bosom to the winds of heaven, we feel the possibility of war.
"Steel may glitter in the muses shade."

The first monitions of philosophy teach us to enjoy with moderation, and hope
rationally; to familiarize the idea of probable calamities, and, if possible,
deduce beneficial consequences from them. Influenced by this consideration, I
have chosen War for the present theme. Let us, for a few moments, contemplate
the necessity, the justice, the effects of war; and observe what reference they
may, now have, to our own country.

REASONING from analogy, we shall be persuaded that war is inevitable. The two
first brothers made war; one slew the other. Since then, individuals and
nations, have conducted in the same manner; so that the history of the world is
but the narration of war -- a story of battle -- stratagem -- blockade --
capitulation -- conquest -- and pillage. War has become an art. Its disciples
are taught its precepts, and initiated into its mysteries; they become soldiers
by profession, and follow the trade of arms to purchase the means of daily
subsistence. If, from the birth of time, till now, war has, very frequently
happened, will it not, in all probability, very frequently, happen again? We
believe rivers will continue to roll toward the ocean, because they have ever
rolled that way; and that the dews, and the showers of heaven, will always
descend. For the same reason, war is just as inevitable. -- If war be
inevitable, it is also necessary.

THE necessity of it may be illustrated and further evinced, by a momentary
view of our own nature and situation. Men have many relations, and these
relations originate many rights. The eye of reason is not, at all times,
sufficiently clear to perceive the line of separation between the rights of one
man, and those of another. -- Mental vision is often obscured, either by
passion, or prejudice, or malevolence. From one or other of these causes,
aggressions are constantly made. In a society, when one individual violates the
rights of another, the arm of law compels remuneration. Among nations, it
cannot be so. They have no common arbiter in whose decisions they will
acquiesce; or whose power can force from the aggressor a reparation of injury.
The wronged nation must tamely endure it, or else demand redress by war. So
long, therefore, as nations, either by error, or by malevolence, will infract
the laws of reciprocal righteousness, so long will war be inevitable, be
necessary.

A WAR of aggression has not that kind of necessity which can render it just.
It is indeed a polluted stream from the fountain of injustice. But if a war of
defense be necessary, from that necessity, its justice is demonstrated. If one
part of mankind will make aggressions on the other, why may not those
aggressions be repelled by arms? If we may not make war, we may not resist
injury. If that resistance, which terminates in war, may not be made, no
restraint will be left on the licentiousness of the profligate. Resistance is
the only mound, opposed to that ocean of oppression, which, if this were broken
down, must rush in and deluge the moral world. If resistance be not made, where
will aggression terminate? "Injustice must sweep the wide earth, and trample
down mankind."

IF resistance be unjust, why do we sympathize with the injured; or why do we
feel the same resentment at our own wrongs? God Almighty, the Omniscient, the
All Good, knew that the felicity of his creatures depended on free will, and
that with free will, they must be liable to transgression. To oppose this
liability, he gave us resentment, that spirit of divinity which swells our
hearts with indignation, sparkles in our eye, and nerves our arm against the
wretch who dares abuse the freedom bestowed upon us by our common Creator.

A CERTAIN equilibrium is the preservation of all being. In the material world
this equilibrium is maintained by repulsion. By repulsion each particle of
matter drives back, and excludes from its own place, all its fellow atoms. If
repulsion were destroyed, one atom would be constantly rushing into the
habitation of another, and I know not what ceaseless motations might fluctuate
the universe. Resentment is the repulsion of the moral world. Take away
resentment, take away resistance its offspring, and not only society would be
destroyed, but even the human race itself would very nigh become extinguished.
Battle, it is true, would be excluded from the earth; but the good must fall a
prey to the wicked; and the world be transformed into one wide realm of
unresisted rapine, pillage and massacre.

IF a war of defense be unjust, why have we a principle of self preservation?
Why do we love our country, our friends, our own being, if we are forbidden to
raise our arm in their defense? Did God warm our hearts with these endearing
attachments merely to increase our wretchedness, and sharpen our agony at the
destruction of their objects? He did, unless he has commanded us to spill our
blood in their defense. What, must I see my country laid waste, my parents
butchered, and the sword reeking with the blood of my mother, plunged at my own
naked bosom, not lift a hand against the ruffian aggressor? I must, or a war of
defense is a war of justice.

IF I may not resist, he, who would take my life, may, justly, take it. I may
take it myself. For surely I, or any other, may justly destroy what, neither I,
nor any other, without injustice can preserve. This doctrine of non-resistance
goes to the utter destruction of all virtue. If we may not defend our friends,
our country, our brother-men, then friendship, and patriotism, and
philanthropy, and benevolence are vices. Nay more, vice is transformed to
virtue, parricide becomes piety, the stain of guilt is washed from the forehead
of murder, and suicide itself canonized.

THERE was war in heaven, Michael and his angels fought against the spirits of
perdition. Jesus, the meek and immaculate friend of humanity, Jesus said, he
who takes the weapons of aggression, shall perish by them, but let him who has
no sword of defense sell his coat and buy one.

THE intention of a just war is preservation. This ever is the effect of it, if
the arm of violence be not too powerful for the arm of justice. Tho millions
have fallen in battle; tho thousands of hills have smoked with blood; and the
flame of many a conflagrant city reddened on the dark bosom of midnight; yet
often are nations preserved by war alone. War has once been the salvation of
our country. It wrested us, not from the parental embrace of a mother state,
but from the iron arms of tyranny; gave us independence, and in a manner
prepared for us the first nutriment by which we have grown to our present
athletic, national maturity. War demolished the Roman Empire, that stupendous
fabric of despotism, built from the plunder, and trophied with the conquests,
of a world. The Feudal System, a complication of servitude and domination, more
base and ferocious, than any known to elder time has been, by the influence of
repeated wars, meliorated down to the mildness of modern British jurisprudence.

WAR has given the world its most illustrious characters. It furnished Homer a
theme for deathless verse; and opened to Achilles a field for immortal
achievements. It raised Green, my Fellow-Citizens, your beloved Green, it
raised to the glory of the second in defense of his country. Had War never
been, Washington had never been. The world had forever lost the model, and the
admiration of all succeeding time.

WAR gives men the ineffable delight of defending all that is dear to them.
There are those, whom to redeem from danger, we would die with extacy. I, this
moment, behold men who have marched barefoot, many a winter midnight, and
amidst the storm of many a battle, wished no greater joy than to throw their
naked bosoms between their country and her foes. What then must they have felt
on that day, when glad millions raised loud shouts of triumph to the God of
armies, who extended his Almighty hand over the fields of Columbia, and frowned
the tempest of battle from our hemisphere? When they saw their country safe?
When they beheld parental age, extending the hands of benediction, while
infancy smiled, (...) conscious of their kindness, and the eye of beauty beamed
on them suffused with tears of gratitude?

IF, therefore, war be inevitable, if, urged by injustice, nations will violate
our rights; if a war of defense be justified by our own feelings the eternal
principles of self preservation, the example of heaven, and the awful mandates
of him who has all power in all worlds; if war save nations, demolish
despotism, throw open the portals of immortal renown, and bestow the ineffable
delight of defending all that can endear the possession of life; if it do all
these things, let us banish all reluctance, and all temerity at the approach of
battle; magnanimosly give ourselves up to the voice of our nature, and our God,
regarding the tempest in which we may be engaged, as we do those elemental
contentions, which, for a while, seem to blot out the light and frown the
universe into convulsions; but, when their fury is exhausted, pass off, leaving
a sun brightened with additional luster, and young creation laughing with
renovated loveliness.

IF at any time, in any region of the earth, any nation might apply these
principles to themselves, this is the time, this is the country, we, my
fellow-citizens, are that nation. The war between the United States and France
is not merely necessary, and just, and beneficial; a war not only for our
property, our independence and sovereignty; but for our manners, our morality,
our religion; for all we enjoy, for all we hope. French rapacity, ambition, and
demoralization aim to encircle in their all devouring, all contaminating
embrace, whatever of wealth, or liberty, or virtue, may be found under the
whole heaven. The war, therefore, is a war of humanity, moderation, and
decency, against cruelty, profligacy, and impunity; a war of all the virtues
against all the vices; in a word, a war of the principle of all good against
the principle of all evil. To the French not even vice itself is pleasant
unless it be audacious and cruel; unless it has in it something of perjured
treachery, some violation of compact, or destruction of ancient institutions,
or subversion of liberty and religion. Grown fastidious by a reiteration of
common pillage, nothing can now satiate their unhallowed rapacity but spoils
plundered from the cabinets of the learned, and the altars of the Almighty.

AMERICANS, you will think on Flanders and Italy. You will not suffer Gallick
pollution to step over the threshold of your temples. You have parents and
wives, and daughters, and the hallowed tombs of those who stood between your
infant bosoms and the point of British steel. Round these you will form
battalions, dark, terrible and resistless, as the cloud of the North fraught
with the spiky artillery of heaven. Let the sons of Gaul beware. Let them step
a hostile foot over the last wave of the Atlantic -- not one shall escape.
Their bones shall be left bleaching on our mountains; the scattered fragments
of their ships shall mingle with the sea-weed that drifts upon our shores. What
though they grasp at unlimited domination; what though they have nurtured to a
gigantick stature a soul and fiend-like tyranny; who lifts his bloody forehead
toward the stars of heaven; who tramples Europe under his feet, lays hold of
Africa and Asia with one hand, and is reaching the other toward America; yet
shall the monster soon be prostrated and the hallelujahs of triumph re-echo
from Good-Hope to Nova Zembla, from Missisippi to the Ganges.

FINIS.

