AN ESTIMATE OF COMMERCIAL ADVANTAGES BY WAY OF THE MISSISSIPPI AND MOBILE
RIVERS, to the Western Country.

PRINCIPLES of a COMMERCIAL SYSTEM, and the Commencement and Progress of a
SETTLEMENT on the OHIO RIVER, to Facilitate the Same; with a STATEMENT OF FACTS.

NASHVILLE: Printed by J. M'LAUGHLIN. M,DCC,XCIX.

PREFACE.
The unfriendly reports that have been industriously circulated, by certain
malevolent characters, respecting a settlement lately established at the mouth
of Cumberland on the Ohio river: and the late military abuses, offered to my
friends and self, on our late route down the Mississippi, has induced me to
submit the following pages to the impartial circle of my fellow citizens: and
to my friends in particular: As a justice due them: and as a duty I owe myself,
it becomes me now to declare most solemnly, that no part of my proceedings,
negociations, or correspondance, has ever been intended, or designed, directly
or indirectly, to be immicalto my country: the constitution or laws of it: to
prove this my assertion: should it be neces^ary: hundr^ds of citizens equally
as respectable as any in the western country will appear, who have been, and
still are, intimately acquainted with my intentions, and objects.

I further defy any man, or men on earth with truth to say that any part of my
transactions, negociations, or correspondance, ever was, or can possibly with
propriety, be construed inimical to the true interest of my country; the
constitution or laws of it: but to the contrary, as much as any man on earth, I
have ever respected and reverenced them. If upon impartial investigation I am
wrong (it is not wilful) I wish to be convinced of it: if in the right, a legal
remedy, so as to prevent a future evil of the same nature: is all I ask: I am
content to bear my losses with fortitude: it is beyond human reach to repair
the injury.

ZACHARIAH COX

AN ESTIMATE of commercial advantages, by way of the Mississippi and Mobile;
unto various parts of Western North America. From a Pamphlet published by the
auther at Knoxville, in the year 1797; No XV, Page 98, corrected from late
observation, and experience.

The Mobile Bay, is situate between the latitude of 30 degrees 20 minutes and
31 d. 10 m North; and between the longitude of 87 degrees 35 minutes, and 87
degrees 55 minutes West from the meridian of London; it makes an excellent and
safe harbor; the inlet is formed by Dauphin Island on the west -- and a
peninsula, or point of land extending from the main on the east; -- through
which may be carried three fathom water into the Bay.

Into this Bay falls Tombigby River, descending from N. N. W. and Allabamma
River descending from N E. and although intersected with Islands, sea vessels
can pass up the former to latitude 31 degrees. 30 minutes, being the North point of
the flowing tide. Into Tombigby falls Sipseys River, descending from N N. E.
which as well as Tombigby, is navigable for boats of fifty tons burden, as
high as the latitude of 33 degrees. 45 min. from the two last points to the main
river Tennessee, is about fifty five miles, and to the nearest navigable
branches of Tennessee (extending from the lower and upper end of the Muscle
Shoals) about thirtyfive miles: the country between the two points is level and
well calculated for carriage.

From the head of Mobile Bay to the head navigation of Tombigby and Sipseys
river is about three hundred miles by water. A boat of twenty-five tons
burden, can pass and repass in thirty days with the assistance of ten hands,
at one dollar per day each, is 300 dollars.

The distance from the head navigation of Mobile waters to the nearest
navigable branches of Tennessee river, being but thirty-five miles: a to^
weight carried to and from the two points, will cost about 20 dollars; 25 tons
weight, will amount to 500 dollars.

X

Total expense on the carriage of 25 tons, from the most Southern navigable
branches of Tennessee to Mobile bay 800 dollars.

From Knoxville on Holstein river to the head navigation of the South streams
of Tennessee, nearest Mobile Bay by water, is about 350 miles: time of passage
to and from the two points, with a boat of 25 tons burden, will be about 33
days, with the assistance of ten hands, at one dollar per day each, is 330
dollars.

Total expense on 25 tons weight from Mobile bay to Knoxville and back again
1,330 dolllars.

W

From Philadelphia to Knoxville is computed to be 750 miles; carriage of 25
tons weight, to and from the two points, will cost the sum of 10,714 dollars.

In favor of the Mobile commerce on every 25 tons weight to Knoxville 9,384
doll.

From Nashville on Cumberland river, to the head navigation of the South
streams of Tennessee, nearest Mobile Bay, is about 460 miles, by water; time of
passage to and from sa^d ports with a boat of 25 tons burden, will be about 45
days; with the assistance of ten hands, at one dollar per day each, is 450
dollars.

From Mobile Bay to the nearest navigable waters of Tennessee river as per
letter X 800 dollars.

Total expense on 25 tons weight from Mobile Bay to Nashville, 1,250 dolls.

Y

From the nearest atlantic ports to Pittsburgh, is about 300 miles; the
carriage of 25 tons weight to and from the two points, will cost 5,000 dolls.

From Pittsburgh to Nashville on Cumber and by water; estimated to be about
1,300 miles; a boat of 25 tous burden, will pass to and from the said ports in
about 130 days; with the assistance of ten hands at one dollar per day each, is
1,300 dolls.

R

Total expense on 25 tons weight, from the nearest atlantic port to (...) 6,300
dolls.

In favor of the Mobile commerce on every 25 tons burden to Nashville, 5,050
dolls.

From the Rapids of Ohio river, to the head navigation of the South streams of
Tennessee, nearest Mobile Bay, is about 670 miles by water; time of passage to
and from said ports, with a boat of 25 tons burden. will be about 66 days;
with the assistance of ten hands, at one dollar per day each, is 660 dollars.

To the navigable branches of Tennessee, as per letter X 800 dollars.

Total expense on 25 tons weight, from Mobile Bay, to the falls of Ohio, and
back again, is 1,460 dolls.

S

From the falls of Ohio, to Pittsburgh, is about 700 miles -- time of passing
to and from the said ports, with a boat of 25 tons burden, will be about 70
days -- with the assistance of ten hands, at one dollar per day each, is 700
dollars.

To Pittsburgh as per letter Y 5,000 dolls.

Total expense on 25 tons weight from the nearest atlantic ports, to the falls
of Ohio and back, 5.700 dolls.

In favor of the Mobile commerce 4,340 dolls.

V

From the mouth of Mississippi, to the mouth of Ohio by water; is computed to
be about 1,000 miles -- time of passage to and from said ports, with a boat of
25 tons burden, will be about 100 days -- with the assistance of 20 hands, at
one dollar per day each, is 2,000 dolls.

From the junction of the Obio and Mississippi, to the head navigation of the
South streams of Tennessee river, nearest Mobile Bay, is about 300 miles, time
of passage to and from said points, will be about 30 days; with the assistance
of 10 hands, at one dollar per day, is 300 dollars.

From Mobile Bay, to the nearest navigable waters of Tennessee, as per letter X
800 dollars.

Total expense on 25 tons weight, from Mobile Bay to the mouth of Ohio and back
again. 1,100 dolls.

In favor of the Mobile commerce; owing to the turbulency, of the Mississippi
current. 900 dollars.

From the mouth of Ohio river to Knoxville, in the State of Tennessee, is about
650 miles -- time of passing to and from the said ports, with a boat of 25 tons
burden, will be about sixty five days; with the assistance of ten hands at one
dollar per day each, is 650 dollars.

From the mouth of Mississippi, as per letter V 2,000 dolsl.

Total expense from the mouth of Mississippi, to Knoxville, on 25 tons weig^^,
(...) 2,650 (...)

Expenses on 25 tons weight, from Philadelphia to Knoxville, as per letter W
10714 dols.

In favor of the Mississippi commerce, on 25 tons weight 8,064 dolls.

From the mouth of Ohio river, to Nashville on Cumberland, in the State of
Tennessee, is about 250 miles -- time of passing to and from the said ports,
with a boat of 25 tons burden, will be about 25 days; with the assistance of
10 hands at one dollar per day, is 250 dollars.

To the mouth of the Mississippi, as per letter V 2,000 dolls.

Total expense, on 25 tons weight, from the mouth of Mississippi to Nashville,
is 2,250 dolls.

From Phila. to Nashville as per letter R 6,300 dolls

In favor of the Mississippi commerce on every 25 tons weight. 4,050 dolls.

From the mouth of Ohio river, to the rapids, is about 475 miles -- time of
passage to and from said ports, with a boat of 25 tons burden, will be about
4^ days; with the assistance of ten hands, at one dollar per day each, is 470
dollars

To the mouth of Mississippi, as per letter V 2,000 dolls

Total expense from the mouth of Mississippi, to the rapids of Ohio and back
again, will be 2,470 dolls

From Philadelphia, to the rapids of Ohio, as per letter S 5700 dolls.

In ^avor of the Mississippi commerce 3,230 dolls.

T

From the mouth of Ohio to Fort Pit; distance about 1,200 miles -- time of
passing to and from said ports, with a boat of 25 tons burt^en, will be about
120 days: with the assistance of 10 hands, at one d^lar per day each, is 1,200
dolls.

From the mouth of Ohio, to the n^^^h of Mississippi, and back ag^n, as per
letter V 2,000 dolls.

Total expense from the mouth of Mississippi, to Fort Pit, and back on 25 tons
weight, is 3,200 dolls.

From Philadelphia, as per letter Y 5,000 dolls.

In favor of the Misissippi commerce on 25 tons burden, from the mouth of
Mississippi to Pittsburg and back ^gain. 1,800 dolls.

In the foregoing calculation, I have estimated the passage of boats down the
respective rivers, ^t but twenty miles per day; the common distance is from 50
to 75 miles per day; consequent^y there will be a great surplus of time, in
favor of the Mississippi, and Mobile commerce.

From the head navigation, of the South streams (...) T^nnessee; nearest Mobile
Bay; to Pittiburgh (...) w^ter, is about 1360 miles; a boat of 25 tons bur^e^,
will pase in about 68 days, with the ashstance of ^^^^^de, at one dollar per
day each, is 6^0 dolls. ^^p^^ce from Mobile Bay, to the head of the nearest
navigable branches of Tennessee, and back again as per letter X eight hundred
dollars: one half, 400 dollars.

Total expense on the carriage of 25 tons, weight, from Mobile Bay, to
Pittsburgh. 1,080 dolls.

Expense of carriage on 25 tons with. from Philadelphia, to Pittsburgh, and back
again, as per letter Y 5,000 dollars: -- one half 2,500 dolls.

In favor of Mobile commerce, on the carriage of 25 tons weight, to Pittsburgh;
against the Philadelphia commerce 1,420 dolls.

Expense on 25 tons weight, from the mouth of Mississippi, to Pittsburgh and
back again, as per letter V and T 3,200 dollars: one half for the total expense
to Pittsburgh 1,600 dolls.

In favor of the Mississippi commerce on the carriage of every 25 tons weight
against the Philadelphia commerce, to Pittsburgh. 900 dollars.

In this calculation, I have estimated the carriage from Philadelphia to
Pittsburgh, at 5 dollars per hundred weight -- but the general price has been
from seven to ten dollars per hundred with. which would be against the pittsburgh
commerce; greatly in favor of the Mississippi and Mobile -- consequently all
the Western country, South of Pittsburgh, must receive great advantages by the
Mississippi -- and particularly Mobile commerce.

The objection by mariners to commer^^al intercourse with New Orleans, has been
generally attributed, to the intricate navigation of their v^^ Mississippi --
but from late observation, I can venture to assert, that those obstacles will
be readily removed -- by an accurate knowledge of the river, and particular
seasons, calculated by nature for navigating of it.

From about the first of April, until the first of July -- the river
Mississippi, overflows its banks, which renders the navigation of sea vessels
up to New Orleans very intricate -- but in all other seasons of the year, the
current below Orlean is gentle -- and what will ever facilitate the ascent of
the river, are the continual South and Southeasterly winds which prevails,
during the Spring, summer, and autumn months; extending their influence,
considerably above the junction of Ohio and Mississippi.

The annual imports, and expor^s; to Washington or Ham^lton District, State of
Tennessee -- from the best information I have been able to collect; are about
250 tons: to Mero District, State of Tennessee, about 200 tons: and to
Kentucky, about 750 tons; consequently the annual revenue, to the Western
country would be; From the Mobile commerce.

To Mero District, State of Tennessee 40,400 dolls. To Washington District do.
93,840 dolls. To Kentucky, 130,200 dolls. Total revenue the Western country
would derive from Mobile commerce. 264, 440 dolls.

From the Mississippi commerce.
To Washington Destrict State of Tennessee, 80,640 dolls. To Mero Destrict do.
32,100 dolls. To Kentucky, 96,900 dolls. Total revenue the Western country
would derive from the Mississippi commerce 209,940 dolls.

All Western America, in the United States, South of latitude 41 degrees North
-- would in proportion, receive similar advantages, with these above stated --
independent of what, would naturally resuit, from the great object of
exportation -- which must be highly productive to any country, possessing the
advantages, of such immense sources of wealth, as are here found.

It is certain for many years, the exports will pass down the river Mississippi
-- but the imports, if the avenue was admitted to be opened, would now pass by
way of Mobile and Tennessee -- and the various streams with which the latter
communicates.

From correct information I am induced to believe that with but little expense,
the communication, between the navigable waters of Mobile and Tennessee, may be
shortened, at least 10, perhaps 15 miles: consequently it cannot be improbable
that the day will be, when the commerce of far greater part of Western America
-- North of the junction of Ohio and Mississippi, will concentre to this grand
mart, formed by nature.

To me it appears strange, that any government should deem it good policy, to
withhold from a part of her citizens, the use of streams formed for their
benefit; while the nations having claims on (...) borders, remain unopposed to
its exercise.

I he opening this avenue of commerce, could not be injurious to the natives;
but on the contrary they would be highly benefitted, and might soon be taught
to feel, the ma^y advantages resulting to them from the measure; he doubly
rewarded in the labor of their industry -- increase in wealth -- and grow into
the love of order.

Early as the year 1785, on my route through this Western country; I was struck
with the practicability of a Commercial Communication, by way of the Mobile and
Tennessee, as well as the Mississippi -- these objects, together with a desire
of settling in a country, calculated as well to insure agricultural adventages,
as great commercial pursuits; has been the spur of my exertions to obtain the
lands, adjacent the m^^^ probable points, of commercial communication; to
facilitate the m^^^cre on legal and public principles; the following plan has
been suggested, and entered into by sundry citizens: which was enclosed to his
Excellency John Sevier Esquire the 31st of August, 1797, in answer to his
interrogatory letter to me, the 20th of said month: -- from a Pamphlet
published at Knoxville. A. D. 1797, by the auther. Page 8, marked letter H.

H Articles for the Establishment of the Mississippi, and Mobile Commercial
Company.
Article I.

THIS association shall be styled, and known, by the name of the Mississippi,
and Mobile, commercial company; and the proprietor, or proprietors thereof, to
be those, who shall first advance the company's stock of merchandise, or
capital; g^ving to all respetable citizens approved off by the company, an
equal privilege as a proprietor, to advance and hold in the said stock, an
interest to the full amount of money, goods, wares, merchandise, or produce, by
him or them respectively advanced; provided that always every

Dollars, and not a less sum, shall entitle the proprietor, or proprietors
thereof, to one vote or action in the said company.

Art. 2. The proprietors of the Mississippi and Mobile commercial company, or a
majority of them shall have the sole power of managing all the affairs and
business of the said company: until the stock, or capital shall amount to one
hundred thousand Dollars; when the proprietors shall elect from amongst
themselves five representatives, or members who shall, or a majority of them,
compose a house with full power to constitute the form of the Mississippi and
Mobile commercial company; to correspond and form connections with houses,
individual merchants, and citizens, foreign and at home; to establish ware
houses, and subordinate stores, wherever may appear most advantageous; to
contract for the receival and disposal of all moneys, goods, wares,
merchandise, and produce, that may become the property of said company; to
appoint all Factors. Agents, Secretaries, and Clerks, that may be necessary to
manage the company's business abroad, and at home to draw from the company's
capital, funds sufficient to manage, and carry on their business; to make such
rules, as may be necessary for the regulation of their own members; to call a
meeting of the proprietors, whenever necessary; to manage all the affairs and
business of the said company, and to adjourn from time to time.

Art. 3. For every 20.000 dollars, or the value thereof in goods, wares,
merchandise, or produce; delivered to the house of the Mississippi and Mobile
commercial company; and added to their capital, the proprietor, or proprietors
thereof: shall be entitled to one representative, or member in the said house,
who shall be reciprocal, and have equal power in every respect, with any one of
the members first chosen.

Art. 4. The house and capital, of the Mississippi and Mobile commercial
company, shall be established on the southeast side of Ohio, hetween the Rivers
Cumberland and Tennessee; where the members of the said company, shall annually
on the first monday in January and o^^ener if required convene, and there
transact all the business of the company, until such establishment be altered
by or er of the house. Art. 5. Any person, or persons who shall agreeable to
these articles, throw into the company's stock. momes, goods, wares,
merchandise, or produce; shall receive from the house a bill to the following
effect.

Seal and date of the Company.
The bearer hereof A B having delivered to us the sum of (...) dollars, This
our bill certifies, that the same at the request of the said A. B. is added to
the Mississippi and Mobile commercial company's stock' and shall entitle him
the said A. B. or his heirs, to all the profits, privileges, and advantages,
stipulated in the articles of the said company.

Art. 6 Cold, and silver coin, shall be the staple situation of all goods,
wares, merchandise, and induce, advanced to be added to the company's stock;
receivable at the current market prices.

Art. 7. All questions, and business of the company that may come before the
house, shall be determined by a majority of the members then present; which
decision shall be binding; and also all elections, and business that may
properly come before the proprietors, shall be determined by a majority of
votes or actions.

Art. 8. All Factors, Agents, Secretaries, Clerks, or other officers, employed
by the Mississippi and Mobile commercial company, to carry on their business,
shall previous to their entering into the employment of the company, be
qualified, and give to the house in behalf of the company, satisfactory bond
and security for the faithful performance of their duty; and shall be allowed
to continue in office during good behavior; as also shall the members of the
said company.

Art. 9. Any one of the Members, Factors, Agents, Secretaries, or Clerks, or
other officers of the company employed in their business neglecting their duty,
or acting improperly, shall be ^^ble to impeachment; and if on a fair trial
they are found guilty of the crime, or neglect, they so stand chared with,
shall ^e expelled from office; -- and not allowed to hold an interest, directly
or indirectly in said company; and shall be subject to such further punishment
as the civil law will inflict.

Art. 10. All impeahments shall be tried by the house of the Mississippi, and
Mobile commercial company; whose decision on any subject that properly comes
under their notice, shall be final.

Art. 11. I he proceedings of the house, and all mercantile books, shall
whenever required, be open, and subject to the perusal of share holders, in the
said company; except in such particular cases, where the private proceedings,
and negociations of the house, shall for the time present require secresy.

Art. 12. To prevent impositions, no transfer of hills, or shares in this
commercial company, shall be considered legal; unless ^t meets with the
approbation of the house; in which case the house shall take in the old bill,
or certificate for such share, or shares, and cause a new one to be issued, to
the person in whose favor such transfer is made.

Art. 13. At the expiration of twelve months from the time the house of this
company is established, they shall publish an accurate statement of the stock
on hand, the neat profits on shares -- and also a like publication, at the
expiration of every twelve months thereafter, at which periods, the
shareholders shall draw from the company's stock, their respective proportions
of profits.

Art. 14. Vacancies that may happen by death, or resignation, of any of the
members, shall be filled by an election of the house, of some one of the
proprietors of the said company -- until it shall be convenient for the
proprietors to elect a new member to fill such vacancy.

Art. 15. Neither the persons nor the private property of any of the
proprietors members or shareholders in this commercial company, shall in any
manner whatever be subject to, or liable for any losses or misfortunes of stock
or trade -- any further than allowing out of their respective proportions of
neat profits, a sufficiency to make good such loss or misfortune, to be
appropriated by the house.

Art. 16. At the expiration of (...) years, from the establishment of the
Mississippi and Mobile commercial company, the house shall have power to
dissolve the said company; provided it meets the approbation of a majority of
votes or actions.

Art. 17. Whenever the company dissolves, the stock on hand to be equally
divided amongst the s^^^^ holders, according to the number of shares by them
respectivly held.

Art. 18. There shall be a seal provided for the benefit in the company, with a
device suitable to the occasion.

Art. 19. If upon experience it shall be necessary, to alter, amend, add to, or
de^inish those articles, it shall be done in the following manner, and no
other, the person, or persons, wishing for an alteration, shall propose the
same to the house, by laying the proposed amendment, or alteration before them
in writing; and if such alteration, or amendment, or any part thereof, meets
the approbation of the House, the^ shall cause the some to be published; and if
a majority of votes, or actions, determ^ens in favor of such alteration, or
amendment; it shall become a part of these articles.

Art. 20. And l^sll^, nothing in this commercial system, shall ever extend, or
be construed to extend so far, as in any respect whatever to abridge, or
involve in any wise, the freedom or liberty of shareholders in it, or any other
person or persons, dated the 1st of January 1797.

Copy right secured according to law.

Subscribers Names.

No. Shares.

In pursuit of the foregoing commercial object, I set out from the state of
Georgia; and in april 1797, arrived at Knoxville state of Tenessee; where I
^^de publi^^^ my intentions, and offered generous (...) to those, who thought
proper to (...) the e^^^rp^ise of a se^t^ement at the ^^^th of (...) on Ch^^
river. At consilerable expense, in the year 1796, I ^^d the country on the Onto
mouth of Cam^er^^nd e^^^cred, and improved, by Capt. John Smith T; (...)
purpose of a co^^ erc^^l ess^blishment; -- (...) i^formed that it was, a
g^neral resort of In^^^^, and and ^^gero (...), I thought ^rudent, (...) make
the nec^^s^ry p^ep^^a^o^s for ^e^ence.


Be app^obation o^ the executive of the state of (...), I made all the
ne^essa^y prep^rations (...) in end (...) ne^t (...).

(...) that j^^^ ^usies ex^^^ed with the fe^^^ (...) my in^e^ded route; I (...)
of every (...) power to remove (...); as ^ell by publi^^ d^^lara^on of my
^nten^^^, a^ by ^ff^ring to the executive of ^enness^e (...), or any (...) who
might require it (...) secu^ity tha^ no part of my conduct, or (...) along with
the, should be ^^proper or derog^^r, to any government. See in a pam^^let pub
sh^^d by the author, in (...), 1797, at Knoxville. Page 18, marked ^et. (...) O.


Notwith^tanding every effort in my power to love pr^j^lices, the federal
military on Holstein mer; thought proper to declare their disappro^^^^, to the
me^sure of myself and friends, de^^nding the river Tenness^e -- under pretext
that me ^^^er H^lstein above the junction of it and Tennes^ee, was Indian
water: -- see in a pamphlet published at K^oxville in antumn 1797, by the
auther, page 15, marked letter K.

Being st^ll anxious, to accomplish an object that had now cost me enormous
expe^ces, i^ making the necessary preparations to pursue: I thought proper to
pass by way of Kentucky, to the destined place of settlement -- with hopes that
in a short time, all prejudices would cease to exist; by which meats my^e^^ and
friends, could in peace pursue the commercial objects contemplated

On my way through the state of Kentucky in January 1798, when at Fra^kfort; I
commumcated to his Excellency James Garrard Esqr. Govern^r of sa^d state; my
intention to settle and fix a commercial establishment at or near the mouth of
Cumberland river above the Indian boundary soliciting his friendly advice on
the subject: and at the same time offering every assurance that no part of my
conduct, or of those who might unite with me in the settlement, should be
derogatory to the laws of that state or the United states, I received the
following verbal answer from his Excellency.

That unfavourable reports had circulated with respect to my intended
settlement, he was glad to be informed of the truth, and would render every
assistance in his power to the rising settlement consistant with the duties of
his office.

On the 10th of February ensuing I embarked from the falls of Ohio, and on the
18th instant arrived at the destined place of settlement.

I pitched on the spot best calculated for the commercial establishment
contemplated at the distance of about two miles below the mouth of Cumberland
river, I immediately dispatched a messenger to Captain Pike, commander a^ Fort
Mass^c, i^forming him the object I had in view, s^l^c^ting his approbation to
the measure, and friendly and in the new establishment.

On the arrival of the messenger and men who accompanied him, at Massac, they
fell in company with captain Thomas Lewis, who (by military power) co^^red the
messenger part of two days: -- he being at length set at liberty, without
knowing the charges against him (as he told me) returned on the (...) ^^st.
with the following verbal information:

Capt. Pike conceived the spot I had pitched upon not to be Indian lands; I was
auther^sed and could settle there with propriety, and he should always be harpy
to render me any services in his power consistant with his office.

I immediately Lotted off the ground, the fami. lies and men began their
improvements

On the 22d inst. I set out for Cumberland settlements (at the distance of
about 90 mile^) from whence I retured to the mouth of Cumberland, on the 10th
of March ensuing; with a small cargo of s^pp^^es to aid the rising settlement,
which we named Smithland.

On my return from Cumberland, our number consisted of about ten families, and
thirty-three men. Capt. Wm. L. Cox, who arrived in my absence, from Frankfort,
in company with several emigrants, had (with the assistance of the settlers)
erected a block house for defense, on account of the hostile appearance of the
Indians; who six days previous came in a formidable party, and absolutely
ordered the settlers all to quit their possessions in ten days, or they would
(as they express^d themselves) take hair. Capt. Wm. L. Cox immediately wrote
Capt Pike on the subject, soliciting his friendly advice and aid.

About the middle of March, Capt Pike with a military escort, made us a visit;
fifteen or twenty Indians attended on the occasion, after viewing the ground
and situation of the country -- finding us not on the Indian lands, the Captain
used his in fluence to satisfy their mu^ds with respect to our settlement.

The indians still continued to hover around us with marks of hostility,
collecting in number to the amount of about three hundred, well at med; fore of
them encamped West of the river On^o, and others South of the river Tennessee,
their spies and reconnoitring parties, twice every day, passed through our
sett^ement on their route from one camp to the other. Some of our emigrants
lest the settlement; others expressed alarm, and disposition to depart, whom I
encouraged and prevailed upon to continue; by informing them my hopes of the
arrival of Captain J^hn Smith from Holst^in with a large boat ^^aded with
provisions, mechamcal and farming utensi^s, and supplies for defense.

Soon after I received information from Captain John Smith, that the government
^ad denied him the privilege of descending the river Tennessee, with the boat
and supp^ies -- ^or what cause he could not ^^ll, but nothing soon could be
expected from that quarter; as he was obliged to want the pleasure of
government.

Thus our infant settlement was left without provisions or supplies for
defense; our ^um^er consisted of about forty-five women and chil^ren, and about
fifty men; the Indians still showing a hostile disposition -- had collected in
number to the amount of four hundred; their spies and reconnoitring parties
frequently made applications to us for ammunition; offering extravagant prices
-- being scarce of ammunition ourselves we took care not to divide what little
we had with the natives, particularly as we were in hopes their scarcity in
that article might prevent their general attack upon us which we had reason to
apprehend. The Indians frequently (in my presence) observed the ten days were
most gone, we must then go away.


I determined at every risk to support the rising settlement, and for that
purpose dispatched messengers to my friends in the settled country of
Kentuckey, Cumberland, and Hostein, to forward me supplies I also called on
those who were interested in our settlement. to aid us as much as in their
power; and to the active young men, I gave permits to collect and bring forward
emigrants on the following conditions: viz.

SIR,
You are hereby permited to raise a company of (...) emigrants to settle in the
town of Smithland, who shall each be entitled to a lot in this town
gratuitously, provided they shall improve, or cause the same to be improved,
and on their becoming citizens, or residents of said town for the space of one
year, the said emigrants shall each be entitled to one thousand and one acres
of la^d in the Tennessee purchase; in the tract of country set apart for the
emigrants; provided they shall settle upon or cause the same to be settled upon
and improved, the ensuing season after a settlement takes place, consistant
with the approbation of government.

Given under my hand etc. (Signed) ZACHARIAH COX.

In consequence of the foregoing encouragement, the emigration to Smithland
became very considerable in a few weeks; the industry of the citizens greatly
increased the value of their lots in town, who now began precipitately to enjoy
the reward of their labor, every prospect was flattering and wore the most
alluring features; amongst the citizens the greatest harmony and friendship
existed.

Having thus laid and secured the foundation of a rising lettlement, by
expensive improvements as well as much personal fatigue and trouble: I made a
declaration of my intended route down the river Mississippi, for the purpose of
making a commercial connection in Orleans, as well as a desire to explore the
country west of the ^iver Mississippi -- provided the approbation of the
Spanish government could be first obtained for that purpose.

The good citizens of Smithland being acquainted with my object, and informed,
on my route I intended to explore the country west of the river Mississippi,
(provided the approbation of the Spanish government could be first obtained)
expressed a desire to accompany me: and began their preperation for the
j^urney, about the first of June I was informed by a friend from Massac, that
the sederal officers of that post, had in contemplation to stop me by military
force, on my descent of the river Ohi^: this information appears to be
substantiated by the following letter, viz.

SIR Mass^c, June the 2d. 1798.
The bearer is a man who has been in my employ these four months, during which
time he has behaved himself with propriety, he is anxious to get a lot in your
settlement, and begs the favor of me to give him these few li^es of
introduction, I expect that the General's journey to this country is postponed.
If you should descend the Ohio please to make it convenient to call just to
subscribe to the usual forms of the place, as you are expected down and they
will not permit your Passing unless it is done clandestinely Mr. Pike's letter
not being in considence permits (...) publication of it.


I remain Sir. Your Humble Serv't. (Signed) Zebn. Monty. Pike. (True Copy)

Directed to Col. Cox.

The foregoing letter and information impressed he with some degree of
^stonishment; believing as I did at that time, the impracticability of an
arbitrary molestation of the free and independent navigation of the river Ohio,
which is guarranteed to every citizen by the constitution and laws of the
United States, as well as by treaties with all nations, touching upon, or
interested therein.

In company with eighty men, I embarked from south of Smithland, on the 17th of
July 1798, in pursuit of the journey contemplated, as before stated -- Maj.
Thomas Gist, at the request of the company, was kind enough to go in advance of
us on our descent of the river Ohio with information to the commander at
Massac, of our intended route and object.

On our arrival near Massac the following letter was handed me by a man from
galley Adams.

SIR,
You will put to shore with your boats before you get below THE where THE
Galley lays at anchor or I shall be under the necessity of firing at you.

(Signed) W. P. Smith Lt. 3d Regt. Comg. Galley Adams. True copy
July 17, '98, 15 m. after 3 o'clock.
Directed to Colo. Cox, or the officer Comg. the boats descending the river
from Smithland.

In conformity with the foregoing order from W. P. Smith, myself and company
made a halt; where we continued until the return of Major Those. Gist from
garrison Massac, by whom we received the following verbal order from Major
Kingsberry.

That myself and company must immediately ascend the river Ohio beyond the
distance of a six pounder or he, Kingsberry, should from an order fire on us.

Myself and company immediately ascended the river Ohio about three miles; and
encamped on the east shore Christian county state of Kentucky. from whence, I
wrote the following letter viz.

State of Kentucky July 17.th 1798. Major Kingsberry Comr. at Fort Massac.
SIR, for the purpose of exploring the Country to the Southward of this, my
friends with me are desirous to descend the river Ohio by your garrison not
being acquainted with the rules of the place has induced me to write you for
information how to act and whether we are to descend the river or not.

The information I received some weeks past which will be shown you per. Majr.
Gist the bearer of this appears to me not more extraordinary than that of your
order to me of this day, to ascend the river beyond the distance of a six
pounder; however I have thought proper to obey your orders, as it is now and
ever was my real desire, to conform to the rules and regulations of any
constituted authority derived from our government.

The emigration to Smithland has far surpassed the calculation of many;
provision being scarce necessity has measurably enforced us to draw some
assi^tance from the wood. The laws of the United States have prescribed the
boundary between us and the Indians over which we cannot pass without offense,
though the Indians have been pe^mitted to take the game from us.

We with to be permitted to pass to some place, where we can legally by
industry justly support many respectable families, who may otherwise be reduced
to want.

Your humble servant, (Signed) ZACHR. COX.


Fort Massac, 17th July 1798. SIR,
I received your letter of this date by Mr. Gist, and must inform you that no
armed party is permitted to pass this place, and should you presume to attempt
forcing by the galley, or garrison, you must expect to pass under a heavy fire,
from every piece of ordinance which can be brought to bear on you from the fort
and galley.

Your humble servant. (Signed) JACOB KINGSBERRY, Maj. About two weeks previous
to our descending the river Ohio; Captain Samuel Hancock, in company with ten
armed men descended the river, -- gave a manifest of his cargo and men, passed
Massac to New Madrid and back, witthout molestation, and by Kingsberry's
particular approbation.
2d, U. S. Regt. commanding fort Massac and its dependencies. [True copy]

Directed to Mr. Z. COX. by Mr. Gist.

On rece^ving the foregoing letter from Maj. Kings^erry, myself and company
thought proper to return to Sout^ Smithland, and to consult the civil
authority, and commander of the county in which we lived.

At the request of the company, Maj. Thomas Gist and myself, wrote the
following letters to Col. Moses Sheiby, Commander for the county of Christian.

Smithland, July 18., 1798. SIR,
After my compliments to your honor, I take the liberty to inform you, that on
the 16th day of this inst. at the request of Col Cox, and four captains, in
your Regiment from Smithland, I droped down in a perogue to fort Massac, and
made a candid statement of their intended route down the river, offering any
security for a proper conduct. Major Kingsberry told me that Col. Cox could
pass on his negoc^ations with a few men, but unarmed, the next morning we
droped down near the garrison, I were forward: -- told the Maj. that Col. Cox
had arrived near his garrison, wished him to come to his boats, or nominate
some officer to do so, view his situation and boats, pass as many as he
pleased, and in what manner he pleased, and the balance would return.

His answer was, that we must return immediately out of the reach of the shot
of a six pounder, or from an order he should fire on us, which Col. Cox and the
officers on my return thought proper to comply with; the other documents will
be enclosed in the colonel's letter.

Your humble servant, signed -- THOMAS GIST. (True copy)


State of Kentucky, 3 miles above fort Massas, the 18th July, 1798. Col. Moses
Shelby, Sir,
On my route down the river Ohio, in pursuit of the journey contemplated and
fully communitated to you when at Smithland -- there appears some difficulty
with the officers of the garrison Massac, in permitting our descending the
river as you will see per the enclosed documents. I have though it it my duty to
communicate you the circumstances, soliciting your friendly advice as commander
of the county, on a subject truly interesting to all the citizens of this
Western world.

If the free and independent navigation of those Western w^ters are to be thus
invaded, there is no longer use for civil authority; but all must bend to a
military prerogative.

I have ever supported the civil authority of my country and still hope to have
it in my power to do so; you are the only officer present on whom I can call or
look up to for justice; therefore hope you will do myself and friends the honor
of your presence, that a proper and legal investigation of the subject may take
place.

Your friend, and humble servant. (Signed) ZACHR. COX.


Several others; offi^ers of Col. Shelby's Pegt, also wrote him soliciting his
advice on the occ^sion.

On the 19 th of July 1798.

Myself and company ascended the river Ohio to South Smichland.

On the 20th of July

Col. moses shelby, in company with J. Ramsey Esqr (one of the civil officers
of Christian County) arrived at South Smithland, I fully communicated to them
the circumstance of myself and friends being stopped from descending the river
Ohio.

Colo. Moses Shelby J. Ramsey Esquire accompanied by M^jor Those, Gist, and several
other citizens of Smithland, thought advisable to wait on the commander at
Massac; in order if possible to know the cause why citizens were prohibited
from descending the river.

On Col. Shelby's arrival at Massac (as himself and J. Ramsey, on their return
informed me) he asked Major Kingsberry the cause that influenced him to prevent
the citizens of Kentucky from descending the river Ohio, and whether he
[Kingsberry] had any charges or partial orders against myself and company? --
answer -- That he [Kingsberry] had orders, not to admit armed men to descend
the river Ohio.

Col. Shelby ^sked Major Kingsberry for a sight of the foregoing order; which
was denied him; on his return from Massac he (Col. Shelby) wrote the following
letter. v^.

One mile above Massac, July 21st, 1798. Major Kingberry SIR,
Since my departure from your Garrison, on mature consideration as a citizen of
Kentucky; considering the si^uation of my fellow citizens, who have been
orderly and good men; and organized in any regiment by their own request, it
causes my feelings to bleed. But as an officer enquiring into these
grievancies, being denied a sight or a copy of your orders, in a case so
interesting to my fellow citizens and myself (as the uninterrupted navigation
of the river Ohio provided for and secured to us by treaties with all nations
touching thereon) causes me to think myself injured.

I now beg you if cosistant with your power and order; to admit the barge of
Col. COX, and one flat boat with five perogues, to pass with five men aboard of
each, or I suppose five less might do by getting hirelings to work up, I have
thought from the date of your order, corresponding with the date of the letter
that major Gist gave you a copy of a few days ago; they must in my opinion
originate with, and come from col. Hamtrammock; if not I ^ope you will on the
reception of this give me a true ^opy in order to enable me to inform my fellow
ci^izens, that for the future they may not depend upon treaties or civil
authority; but resign all to a ^^^^^ary prerogative, and to attempt any thing
to the contrary is not only risqueing their rights and property, but lives.
After acknowledging the great satisfaction I had in your company and other
officers I beg leave to subscribe myself with due esteem.

your sincere friend and Humble servant, signed -- Moses Shelby. (true copy)


In answer to the foregoing; Col. Shelby received the following letter directed
to me.

Fort Massac 21st. July 1798. Sir,
If you are desirous of descending the Ohio with six or seven boats and thirty
or thirty five men to work them and no more I have not the least objections
provided you have no ord^nance or mili^ary stores on board, and not more than
one third of your men armed. On your approach you will halt with your party one
mile from the garrison, where your boats and crews will be examined by the
officer of the day, who will report, and should you conform strictly to this
order, you will be permitted to pass unmolested.

I am sir, yours, (signed) Jacob Kingsberry, Maj. 2d U. S. Regiment, commanding
Fort Massac, and its dependencies. (True copy)

Directed to Mr. Z. Cox. per col. M. Shelby.

Colonel Moses Shelby, J. Ramsey Esquire and company, returned to south Smithland,
on the 21st. at night.

By approbation of col. M. Shelby and J. Ramsey Esqr myself and company
concluded to pursue our journey, for the preservation of peace, and harmony;
(...) as col Shelby and J Ramsey Esqr. advised I thought proper to observe the
rules laid down by Major Kingsberry; the remainder of the company passed by
land, under the care of capt. Samuel Hancock, who received the following
authority from col. M. Shelby. viz.

To Capt. Samuel Hancock,
SIR,
You are hereby permited to pass through any part in the bounds of Christian
County with any number of men you please paying due respect to our government,
and not to infringe on the liberties of any Indian tribe. Given under my hand
this 22d day of July 1798.

signed -- Moses Shelby col. 24.th regiment (True copy)

Col. Shelby also issued the following authority.

Mr. Zachariah Cox, SIR.
Your are hereby authorized to pass down the river. Ohio with your crafts and
Co. paying due respect to our government. Given under my hand this 22d July
1798.

signed Moses Shelby col. 24 regt. (true copy)

On the 22d instant myself and company proceeded on our journey down the Ohio,
we arrived near Massac, halted on the South side of the river, from whence I
wrote Major Kingsberry the following letter.

SIR,
It is our desire to subscribe to the rules of the Garrison, as per your
request, you will please to send an officer on board to take a manifest of our
cargo, that we may pass in peace agreeable to pe^mission derived from the
constituted authority of ou^ country.

signed Zachr. Cox. (true copy)

directed to Maj. Kingsberry Comg. at Ft. Massac By Capt. Clark

About 1 o'clock P. M. Mr. Theos. Elmer and Z. M. Pike, accompanied by a
military escort made us a visit from Ft. Massac, from whom I received a paper,
of which the following is a copy. Mr. Elmer and Pike took a manifest of our
cargo, and a list of the men who passed with me by Massac.


Col. Zachariah Cox has permission to pass the Garrison Massac with his company
consisting of himself and thirty two others now on their descen^ of the Ohio,
in one barge six perogues and two canoes.

signed -- Theos Elmer lieut. and officer of the day (true copy)
3 miles above Ft. Massac 22 d July 1798.
Myself and company proceeded on our journey some distance below Massac (in the
county of Christian State of Kentucky) we were joined by capt. Samuel Hancock
and company.

On the 23d of July captain Hancock in company with several others who passed
by land with him, ascended the river Ohio to Massac; for the purpose of
bringing on some provisions we had previously Captain Hancock on his return to
Massac conversed with the officers on the subject of his passing by land who
knew himself and men to be of tha^ company.
purchased; from whence he (Hancock and) retu^ned on the 24th instant to our
company about five miles below Massac.

The 24th. of July 17^8 we proceeded on our journey and arrived at New Madrid
on the 26th inst, we sent a messenger in advance, with information to the
commander, of our desire to descend the river by his Garrison; we received the
following verbal answer viz

That the navigation of the river Mississippi was free for all americans to
pass when they pleased ^^amolested.

On our arrival at New Madrid I immediately wa^ted on the commander and
informed him the objects we had in view.

The commander informed me that he could not authorize myself and company to
explore or settle in his catholic Majesty's Dominions, as that power was only
vested in his supe ^ors, the Governor General of the province of Lu^^iana would
probably authorize the object we had in view, to whom he recommended me, he
further observed that we could with propriety descend the river the navigation
being free, but gave it as his advice for myself in company with a few men
first to descend the river, see the Governor General and know his sentiments.

I returned to the company who descended the river with me, and informed them
as near as I could, the conversation that passed between the commander and
myself, on deliberation it appeared to be the general opinion of the company to
adopt the advice of the commander; and accordingly all ^^turned except myself
and thirteen others, with whom I descended the river Mississippi.

On the 11th day of August 1798, myself and company arrived at Natchez; I
immediately waited on the federal commanding officer -- capt. Guion to whom I
fully communicated the objects in view, and my desire to pass to Orlean for
that purpose.

I was immediately on my arrival at Natchez, informed by several citizens, that
the federal officers had in contemplation, by military power, to confine myself
and company.

we continued at Natchez several days, in peace and harmony with our friends.

On the 18th instant, about the hour of twelve o'clock at night, my lodging was
surrounded with probably some few less than a battalion of federal troops, with
fixed bayonets. A Mr. Scott, and a Mr Grag came into the house, and without
ceremony forced the room, where I was in bed with Capt. Wm. L. Cox: I asked
their business, they, told me they were the unwelcome messengers of bad news;
their business was to take me into custody.

I asked their authority, they told me it was from Governor Sergeant. I put on
my clothes, they forced me at the point of the bayonet to fort Panmuir of
Natchez; (as they call it) I demanded their authority -- Mr. Grag showed me
orders to the following effect -- viz.

You are ordered to take under your command a sufficient number of men, and to
take into custody the body of Zachariah Cox, if he is to be found in this
destrict, and in case of any opposition, you are to repel force by force,
treating him in every respect as a common enemy

The foregoing, is as near as I can recollect the purport of the order, the
original or a copy being den^ed me I cannot repeat it verbatim; but the words
to repel force by force, and stifing me a common enemy; as well as the
signature of Guion, I perfectly recollect; neither the signature of the
Governor, or any other civil officer was to the orders Mr. Grag showed me. See
in the evidence of captain George De^^^, on the trial of h^^^enant P. ^ope
con^^^med.


I was kept in fort Panmeur 29 days and nig^ts, great part of the time in close
confinement.

My friends made use of every legal e^^ort in their power to see me, or to know
the cause of my confinement, which was absolutely denied.

In the time of my confinement I wrote the following letters: -- viz.

His Excellency, Winthrop Sergeant Esquire SIR,
I am informed it is by your orders I have been fifteen days confined to this
fort -- being ignorant of the cause of my confinement, your information o^ the
subject, cannot be a deviation from the constitutional principles of the United
States.

To be granted a hearing on the subject of the accusation against me, in order
of possible, to re^ove the charges exhibited, is what I request and conceive
myself entitled to as a ci^izen of the Uti^ed States, and the partion^^r State
of Kentucky.

If I am innocent of the charges, to be relealed from my confinement, must
afford your Excellency as well as every hum^ne mind satisfaction -- i^ in ^e
wrong, I conceive it consistant with the admi^^^tration of justice.

My private affairs ^^ffer much for want of attention to be permited the
privilege of putting the (...) in the best possible situation in case of longer
confinement, will prevent an innocent man from inevitable ruin; any security
necessary to entitle ^^e the foregoing privileges can be given that your
Excellency may demand.

I have the honor to be, Your most obedient servant, ZACHR COX. (True copy)
September 3, 1798.

Fort ^^nmeur of Natchez His Excellency Winthrop Sergeant Esquire SIR,
Ha^ing received no answer to my letter of the 3d instant, induces me now to
address you as the supreme M^j^tr^te of this destrict requesting of you, the
privilege of the writ of Habeas Corpus, which i^ guaranteed to me; as well as
every other citiz^^ of the United States, by the federal constitution.

I hope sir, you will not construe this request from me ^^proper, as I conceive
it legal, and being ^^ll ignorant of the cause of my confinement, in a manner I
conceive contrary to the constitutional principles of my country.

I have the honor to be, SIR, Your most obedient humble serv^t. (Signed) ZACR.
COX. (True copy)
Dated 20th of September, 1798.
By (...) George Demler.

Fort Panmeur of Natchez The Hon. Peter Brewen Esquire SIR,
I wrote to his excellency the governor of the 3d and 20th inst. on the subject
of my confinement, of which I suppose you cannot be a stranger, having received
no answer from him, has induced me to address you as one of the federal Judges
of this destrict -- requesting of you the privilege of the writ of Habeas
Corpus, which is guaranteed to me, as well as every other citizen of the United
States, by the federal constitution.

I hope sir, you will not construe this request from me improper, as I conceive
it legal, and being ignorant of the cause of my confinement, in a manner I
conceive contrary to the constitutional principles of my country -- and also,
as the situation of my private affairs call for immediate attention

Capt George Demler, who will do me the honor of handing you this, I hope will
be enabled to satisfy me the probability of the success of my application --
and whether in case of longer confinement. I can have the privilege of an
interview with some of my friends, in order to place my private affairs (...)
the best situation possible.

I have the honor to be, Your most obedient humble serv't. (Signed) ZACHR.
COX. (True copy)
^4th September, 1798.

By Capt. Demler I received the following ver^al answer from judge Brewen.

H^ Brewen was then busy; after the arrival of General Wilkinson he would
probably write to me on the subject of my application.

General Geo. Mathews Doctor James White and Col Joseph Pannell, as well as
many others of my friends, and acquaintances made application to see me, or to
be informed what were the charges, they were absolutely refused either.

Capt. William L. Cox applied to Governor sergeant for leave to write me; with
some difficulty the request was admitted; on the following conditions.

1st. Captain W. L. Cox's letter, to me was to be handed to the commander col.
Hamtrammock the foregoing appears to differ a little from captain Demlers,
evidence, he says the letter was first to pass civil inspection; but I
recollect perfectly captain Demler told me our correspondance must be
consistant with military order that the letter must first be handed col.
Hamtrammock open.
for military inspection.

2d. The commanding officer or col. Hamtrammock to pass or hand the letter to
the Governor for civil inspection.

3d. After the foregoing ceremonies the officer of the Fort was permited as I
understood to give me the letter.

To this ungenerous procedure I measurably acceded, rather than not hear from
my friends.

Captain W. L. Cox was first permitted to open the correspondance, he
immediately wrote; (his letters having to pass all the forms of the new created
court) came to my view some few weeks after date, and to the best of my
recollection was as follows.

SIR,
^everal of the men who came in company with you are sick, and very uneasy,
they with to know what you want them to do or whether it is your d^ure for them
to return home or not, I wish to know what ^rrangments, you want m^de, with
your property here, and what service I can legally render you.

signed W. L. Cox.


The foregoing is the purport of W. L. Cox's letter as near as I can recollect:
the original or a ^^py being absolutely dented me; I cannot assert ^e contents
verbatim.

Some few days subsequent to my being admited a sight of W. L. Cox's letter as
aforesaid: the officer of the Fort asked me if I did not intend to ^^^er Mr.
Cox's letter.

My reply was.

The ungenerous mode of corresponding granted between myself and friends, I
con^^eved not to be for any satisfaction or advantage we could derive from it:
but the design was if possible to unjustly criminate us, consequently I should
not write, all I asked was the following privilege.

Will you permit ^e to send an open power of attorney to some friend to
negociate and settle my p^^^ate business, this request was denied me.

It was with difficulty I was permitted to keep copies of my letters wrote the
Governor and Judge. Capt George Demler observing that my publishing (...) them
might some day bring upon him trouble; capt. Demler as he told me waited on c^l
Hamtrammock on this occasion, whom he said had no rejections, to my keeping
copies of such letters as (...) approved of by the officers, and that all
letters written by me must positively be done in his presence. Some few days
previous to my departure from confinement I was informed by a friend (who
accidentally got an opportunity to speak with me) that every measure possible
was then pursuing, by General Wilkinson, and the Federal officers, to involve
me in inevitable ruin. The most ungerous reflections and unfavourable
representations were made to those who were unacquainted with us; in fact no
abuse with them was too nefarious to be prescribed, and that if I respected
myself or friends he advised me if possible to depart.

Under those impressions I determined at every risque to leave my confinement.

On the 25th. of Sept. I told the officers of the Fort in the care of whom I
was placed; that I would rather not exist than to be unjustly and illegally
confined, my friends would be injured, who had reposed implicit confidence in
me; and I must be involved in inevitable ruin; provided I was detained from
pursuing my lawful business.

All I asked was that justice the constitution and laws of my country entitled
me to, and rather than be denied that, I would cease to exist in this world.

Except some few contemptuous grins, the officers made little or no reply to my
observations and probably thought less of them.

On the 26th of September 1798 (with considerable risque) I departed from Fort
Panmeur of Natchez, on my way at the distance of fifteen leagues from New
Orleans, I met a report that myself with a considerable number of men was on
the way to plunder and harrass the Spanish settlers; and on my arrival at New
Orleans, on the 3d. of October 1798. I was informed of the fact, that a letter
from General Wilkinson had arrived some few days previous, the contents of
which will appear in the following orders, published by the Governor general of
the Province of Louisiana viz. I have just now received an unquestionable proof
of the faith of the U. S. in the observance of the treaty by which the interest
of our nations are so happily united.

General Wilkinson informs me that a very large number of people without law or
any nation all consideration have joined in the western part of the U. S. with
the perverse design of invading this province, and no other object than that of
plundering its inhabitants and committing such excesses as may be expected from
men without any discipline, whose existance is only supported as long as their
atrocities keep them out of the reach of deserved punishment.

The chief of those banditti has under various pretexts deceived the commander
of Fort Massac and was permitted to pass with a small party of his people,
having pursuaded him that they were going to hunting; but the main body went
through the woods out of sight of the Fort to embark about a league further;
said General supposes that these may be a part of the forces with which Blount
intended to invade this province.

He has given me this timely information to the end that I might take such
measures as can prevent so eminant a danger; the executive power of the U. S.
has been long pursuing that party of outlawed people so far as to send troops
against them.

The chief of those vagabonds has been lately arrested in Natchez and I make no
doubt but what the vigilence of that Government will continue to ^^op the
progress of those malefactors.

Although the measures which the government of the U. S. employs to that
purpose be efficacious I should be reproachable of negligence should I not do
my endeavors to preserve the tranquillity of this province and assure to its
inhabitants their lives honor and property the principal objects on which is
established the happiness of society, and which is the aim of the most
beneficent Government.

On seeing so eminent a danger I have taken the most convenient measures to
have stores of provisions, and amumtion at Batton Ro^ge, where in case of
necessity I intend to assemble the principal forces of this province with a
camp of observation at point Coupee, Col. Charles De Grand Pre, Governor of
the Districts of Fel^ciana and Batton Rouge has my instructions, and is to act
immediately under my orders, according to that at his first requisition, any
corpse of the militia of this province, will march on to the place that he will
point ou^, having given them the orders to meet with the regular troops and
free companies with which I will proceed on to the designed spot.

To the end that the said junction may be effected with all possible speed, you
will give the convenient orders to the mixed legion of the Mississippi to march
at the first warning

In all times the militia of this province have given the most convincing
proofs of their fidelity bravery and patriotism not only preserving, their own
tranquillity, but also crowning themselves with Glory and adding lau^els to the
arms of his Majesty; this fills me with the most flattering hopes, and makes me
beforehand confident of success.

The zeal activity and skill which you have shown in former occasions of
importance leaves me no (...) of what will be your conduct on the present one.

To send your orders, you will employ as couriers, such men as you will think
more apt for that purpose, and they will be paid out of the Royal Treasury, as
well as other extraordinary expenses w^^en may arise from the marching of the
region.

May God grant you a long life: --

Date New Orlean, Sept. the 27th, 1798. The foregoing (^s translated) are
public orders from under the Hand of Manuel Gayoso De-lemos, governor general,
for the province of Louisiana -- ^^erein paragraphs and particular substance of
general Wilkinson's communications appears to be ^^^ted.
[Signed] MANUEL GAYOSO DE-LEMOS.


On my route to New Orlean, I called on col. Charles De-Grand Pres, to whom the
governor. general had dispatched the orders stated in the foregoing -- I was
treated by the col. politely, and received from him a permit, of which the
following (...) copy.

Batton Rouge, 29th Sept 1798.
I grant a free passport to Mr. Zachariah Cox and Amos Edwards, that they may
pass to New Orleans by land.

(True copy) If my departure from Natchez had been pro^^^ na^ed two or three
days, or col. De Grand. (...) had received his orders previous to my arti^^ at
Batton Rouge, what must have been the ^^quences.
Signed -- GRAND PRES.

My arrival at New-Orlean the moment I did, gave no small degree of surprise to
the citizens, as well as the Spanish officers -- and as to my own part I can
only leave to my friends and fellow citizens to judge of the unpleasant
situation in which I was placed: a lone stranger, supported only by a conscious
rectitude of my actions, and the profound justice of the Spanish officers who
are disposed to be in amity with the United States, and to treat her citizens
with justice and respect.

On my arrival at New Orlean, I immediately waited on his excellency governor
Gayoso, to whom I stated heartily my situation, and the object I had in view
for making him a visit. --, -- The impartial can justly figure to themselves,
the estonishment with which I was received, and my embarrasment when the
unfavorable representations which had been officially communicated, was
pronounced to me; howeve truth as in all cases here, had its influence.
I was treated politely; and am happy to have it in my power, to inform the
world and my friends particularly; that in his excellency Manuel Gayoso
De-lemos, I have had the pleasure to find every principle that constitutes the
officer of justice, gentleman of honor, humanity and benevolence.

The men who descended the Mississippi with me, and now confined at Natchez,
were certainly as guilty of any crime previous to my departure from Natchez, as
they were afterward. Let me ask why were they not confined in the first
instance? but they being guilty of no crime since my departure, were seized
upon and confined for what motive let the world judge.


Since my departure from the Natchez, Wilkinson and Sergent, or one of them,
have ordered o^ influen^^^ the confinement of the company who descended the
river with me; some of whom I am told are put in irons.

Some short time after my arrival at New Orleans, Wilkinson, or Sergeant,
perhaps both of them, demanded of governor Gayoso the person of Zachr. Cox --
in this demand they were not gratified -- their communications not being so
much credited as in the former instance; the objects they had in view were too
plain, and began to awaken every impartial mind: a resort to some other
alternative to gratify and carry into effect their malevolence became neceslary.

After accomplishing my business much to my satisfaction with his excellency
Governor Gayoso; by his approbation I departed from New Orlean, on the 30th of
October for the United States, by way of Mobile, where I arrived in company
with Mr. Amos Edwards, on the 8th of November 1798; by the citizens, officers
and commander of Mobile ^e were politely treated.

On the 11th inst, we set out from Mobile for Samuel Mitchel's Esquire United
States agent in the Chactaw Nation -- where we arrived on the 18th inst. Mr.
Mitchel being from home, did not return until the 19th. I immediately
communicated to him my situation and desire to pass into the United States, to
impartially give that justice and satisfaction the constitution and laws of our
country demanded: I further requested of Mr. Mitchell (as an officer of the
United States) his protection and safe conveyance into the State of Tennesse,
to ^e honorable John M'Nairy Esquire to my request ^r. Mitchel acceded, and
promised to perform.

On the present instant about two hours subsequent to my conversation with Mr
Mitchell. J. S^e wart arrived express from Natchez, with a letter from governor
Sergeant to the following effect. Until my departure from New-Orlean, on the
30th of October, no person knew my intended route: from that date until the
arrival of Winthrop Sergeants message in the Chactaws was twenty days, in which
time a journey of six hundred miles was performed, being the distance from New
Orlean to Samuel Mitchell, Chactaw nation; this shows with what avidity my
liberty was pursued -- which ceased immediately I reached the line of civil
justice.


SIR,
Zachariah Cox, who made his escape from this in September last, I am informed
has left Orleans for the United Sta^es, by way of Mobile: he will, probably
pass through the Chactaw nation of Indians; should you hear of him, you will
have him confined and brought to this place; I will pay the expense be it what
it may: I have written to Welsh Said Welsh is a man of low character, who I am
informed, governor Sergeant has appointed one of his agents, to preside in the
Mobile
in the Mobile settlement to have him apprehended should he pass that way.


Not being able to obtain a copy of the letter, I cannot assert the whole
verbatim, but the contents was nearly as I have stated, to which was the
signature of Winthrop Sergeant.

Situated as I was, the impartial reader may figure to himself my
embarrassment, in the midst of an indian nation; having no other way to pass
into the United States, but through a tribe of savages -- whose enmity, and
prejudices, was now roused to extreme against my friends and myself.

And they employed by a reward to arbitrarily and illegally molest me, at a
time and place, where Mr. Amos Edwards and myself stood des^^tute of either
friends or acquaintanc^; except two or three humane citizens of the Indian
co^^ry, and Samuel Mitchel Esquire who in every respect conducted himself as an
officer of justice and a gentleman of integrity.

For some time past false representations have been industriously circulated;
as well amongst the several tribes of Indians, as with the citizens of the
United States -- that myself and friends intended to settle the Indian lands at
the Muscle Shoals in a forceable manner.

Those erroneous prejudices have been kept alive by the detention of a boat
[built on Holstein] under impressions that said bo^t was intended to convey
emigrants to the Muscle Shoals contrary to the approbation of government. Any
security would have been given which was repeatedly proposed by myself and
friends -- that the said boat should not be improperly or illegally employed
Notwithstanding, every legal effort made use of by myself and friends (to our
extreme injury) the boat was detained -- which if she had been admitted, would
have passed to Smithland; from thence to New Orleans, and proved to the
Indidians. and to the world at large, that these circula^^ng reports were as
false as the previous communication to the Spanish off^^^rs. Let me ask Maj.
Kingsberry what could be (...) motive, or design, in making the unprecedented
(...) quest, that (...) should descend the river Ohio and Mississippi with but
few me^, and them unarmed.

By false representations the Spanish subjects, as well as the several tribes
of Indians, were now routed to the highest prejudice against me. Had I acceded
to Kingsberry's prescription, by the former I must have been treated
contemptuously, if not harshly -- and to the latter I must have fallen a
Iacrasice, as several armed parties visited us on our route; Kingsberry well
knew the savages had but a few weeks previous, plundered a boat and crew, on
the Oh^o river, but a small distance below Mas. Iac.

I had every reason to believe, previous to my departure from Smithland, false
representations had been made.

But going to New Madrid in company with 80 men, and conducting ourselves in a
legal and proper manner; -- convinced that wise and just administration, the
purity of our intentions; and at once destroyed all confidence in malevolent
communications.

On the 21st of Oct I set out for Nashville, State-of Tennessee, under the care
of Mr. John Pitchlynn, whom Samuel Mitchell Esquire authorized and positively
ordered to pass the (...) into the United States. Mr John Pitchlynn, a man of
integrity, p^ssed us late through the whole nation and towns-of the Chickasaw
Indians by night totally u^^isscovered by them. To (...) appears strange that
any man or men could have a legal or honest design, in molesting or having a
citizen mo^ested by savages, when s^^^ing to j^stice. In flying from justice by
way of the Indian nation, the reward offered the^n might carry with it some
color of right; but in coming to justice it cannot be construed to have any.
-- When at Orleans, I was quite beyond the reach of the Laws of the United
States; -- and could have continued there if I pleased. My returning to the
United States, could to no in partial person, be construed a conviction of
error; but to the contrary, a conviction of right. Certainly in all the United
States the jurisdiction ought to be the same; if so, why not send a messenger
to the State of Tennesse, Kentucky, or any other of the States, offering a
reward to have me apprehended? I answer, because there is no savage or ^^^itary
prerogative in those States; there is law, and there i^ justice, where I inv^te
and challenge you Mr. Sergeant, Mr. W^^k^ns^n, or any other man (...) men to
co^s out me with such accusations, and ^^^ges as has been fals^ly represented.
Here ^^^e is impartial la^^s, and a government, which (...) a^m^^^ered and
unprejudiced; the wisest, ^^^p^^st, and the best.




We arrived at Nashville on the 2d of De. ce^aber 1798 -- it being Sunday, we
thought proper to postpone seeing Judge M'Nairy until early next morning; in
the in^erim, lieutenant W. Smith who was one day in advance of us, being at
Nashville, went to Judge M'Nairy's, made an oath, as will appear; by virtue of
which, the following warrant was issued: viz.

District of Tennesse. To wit.
The United States of America, To the Marshal of the destrict of Tennessee
aforesaid, To his deputies in the destrict aforesaid, and to all and singular
the United States officers of Justice in the Destrict aforesaid Greeting
Whereas William P. Smith lieutenant of the United States army, has this day
come before me John M'Nairy Judge of the destrict of Tennessee and has made
oath that Zachr. Cox now in the town of Nashville, on or about the 26th of
September last did make his escape from the Custody of the law, having been
committed for treasonable and illegal acts, by co^npetant authority at the
Natchez, and that he the said Smith is induced to believe from a variety of
circumstances, that the charges can be supported against the said Cox. These
are therefore to require you to apprehend the said Zachariah Cox. and bring him
before me to answer the premises, and further to be dealt with according to law.

Given under my hand and seal this 2d day of November, 1798. (A Copy) JOHN
M'NAIRY.

W. P. Smith's affidavit by virtue of which the foregoing warrant was issued.

Nashville December 2d. 1798. SIR.
As an officer in the service of the United States and one attached to its
interest, I conceive it my duty to inform you in your offic^^^ capacity of the
arrival of Zachariah Cox in this place an hour or two since. of his having been
confined by his excellency Governor Sergeant in August last at Natchez, of his
escape from confinement and such other circumstances attending those different
actions as have come within my knowledge

In August last his Excellency Brigadier general Wilkinson arrived at fort
Massac and was informed that Mr. Cox had descended the Ohio with a party of
armed men to the Spanish domin^ons without the approbation or knowledge of any
of the officers of the United States government, and contrary to its laws, and
that he had committed sundry treasonable and illegal acts shortly previous to
that period. He immediately dispatched an officer with this information to
governor Sergeant, who had Cox confined the night of the offi^ers arrival.

On the 20th of September I arrived at Natchez; and on that right Mr. Cox made
his escape, by climbing over the walls of the sort; to which place the governor
had sent him for safe keeping, there being no jail in the town; he went to New
Orleans in company with a Mr Amos Edwards who is yet with him. I left Natchez
on the 9th ^^^t. and was informed by good authority on my ^^urney here, that
about the 10th, a reward of three hundred dollars was ^ffered by the governor
for the apprehending of Mr. Cox. I know that the Chickasaw Indians have also
been offered a reward for apprehending him: having seen sundry official letters
to and from governor Sergeant on the subject of Cox's confinement, I know that
there are charges of magnitude, which will be brought forward against him, to
soon as his person can be obtained, he has I am informed to evade trial come
from New Orleans by way of Mobile

Men of high responsability stand pledged to support charges against him; and I
trust that you will use such means to bring him to trial as may appear to yon
proper, you will I hope pardon me for suggesting that if he is tried it must be
in the Destrict of Natchez as the witnesses who will appear against him are all
there, and cannot be brought here.

I stand ready should it be necessary, to make oath to the circumstances which
I have related, and have two gentlemen in company with me who are acquainted
with nearly all of them -- Please to communicate to me your sentiments on the
subject as soon as may be convenient to you, I had proposed setting out for
Kentucky to morrow morning but can want a day if it should be necessary.

I have the honor to be with much respect your Obt. sert. W. P. Smith Lieut. U.
S. Army.

The Honbl. ^odye M'Nairy
N. B I have heard that Mr. Cox offered to give the Govr. of Natchez security
for his appearance before any tribunal of the U. S. but that none would be
taken a^^edging that he had too bad an opinion of Mr. Cox; (...) conceived his
crimes of so ^en^ous a nature that bail was out of the question.

sworn to before the this ^d. Beer. ^3. W. P. Smith Lieut. U. S. army A copy.

John M'Nairy



On Sunday evening about 8 o'clock, by virtue of the previous warrant and
affidavit of W. P. Smith I was arrested by John Boyd, deputy Marshall -- I was
kept in confinement until Monday the 3d inst. about ten o'clock we waited on
the Hon. John M'Nairy Esquire W P Smith present, who on oath was inter^ogated --
questions and answers as follows: viz.

We whose names are hereunto subscribed, do certify, that we were present at
the examination of lieut. W. P. Smith. in his testimony against Zachariah Cox,
before the hon. Judge M'Nairy -- at which time, in addition to what appears in
the affidavit from under his hand; the following information was given by him
on oath, as we conceived; also, the following questions asked, and answers
given, viz.

Mr. Cox having observed that he conceived the treatment he had met with there
was arbitrary -- Mr. Smith addressed h^mself to the Judge, and said that he
conceived Mr. Cox had been arbitrarily ^eated there -- meaning at the Natche^.

1st Question by Judge M'Nairy.

Mr. Smith, how do you mean arbitrarily?

Answer. It appeared so to me.

2d. Question by Judge M'Nairy.

In what manner do you conceive Mr. Cox was treated arbitrarily?

Answer -- Because he was kept in confinement so long without having his
charges made known to (...), and refused a hearing, and liberty of giving b^^,
when offered as good as any in the country, and he thought by the laws of the
country Mr Cox, has entitled to it, or words to that p^^port.

3d. Question, by Mr. Z. Cox's council.

Do you of your own knowledge, know of any charge of a criminal nature against
Mr Cox?

Answer -- He knew nothing of a public nature, but that he was informed Mr.
Cox, and the settlers, had formed a committee, and had expelled a family from
his settlement, and sent them to the Spanish government.

Zachariah Cox then observed -- that he had always endeavored to support good
order, and had quarreled with some imprudent persons for speaking
disrespectfully of government; and that in new settlements some bad men would
be found -- upon which

Mr. Smith arose from his seat, and addressing himself to Judge M'Nairy, said;
that if ^t would be of any service to Mr Cox. that he would further observe,
that during Mr. Cox's residence at Smithland, there was frequent intercourse
between him and the officers at Massac, and the most perfect harmony subsisted
between them; and that he had frequently heard of Mr. Cox's checking of men for
speaking disrespectfully of government, and particularly knew he had differed
with one Mitchell on that subject, and threatened to drive him away for his
abuse of government.

4th. Question, by Zachariah Cox.

Mr. Smith, was not the Chickasaw Indians employed to apprehend me.

Answer, by Mr Smith:

Yes, I am informed they were, and that general Wilkinson had offered them a
reward of three hundred dollars; and I believe there is still a reward in the
Natchez and Chickasaw nation to apprehend you.

The above is the purport, and nearly the words of Mr. Smith, delivered in our
presence, and leaving at the before mentioned period; though not included in
the written copy from under his hand -- Mr Smith was then on oath before the
Judge -- and we have that confidence in Mr Smith, that if he did not then
conceive this to be a part of his testimony (which we cannot put any other
construction upon) that he would not hesitate to declare it again on oath.

Given under our hands this 20th day of January, 1799 HO. TATUM
JOHN GORDON.

Proceedings of the general court martial whereof lieut colonel commandant John
F. Hamtramck is President held at camp Lossies's hights on the Mississippi on
the 19th, October 1798, and continued by adjournment until the 22d, by order
of general James Wilkinson commanding general of the western army.

Lieutenant colonel Hamtramck President.

Major Kersy Members Major Ki^psberry Capt Bukard Members Cap^ S^^umburga Capt.
Wade Members Lieut, Butler.
Lieut. Hyde Judge advocate P. T. The court was duly sworn and on the 20th.
October Lieut. Percy Smith Pope of the corpse of arularists and engineers
appeared before it for trial upon the ^ol^^^ing charges exhibited against him
by Major of Bigade Lovill by order of General Wilkinson viz.

For neglect of duty in suffering Zachariah Cox ^sta^e prisoner to escap^ from
the Guard under his immediate command on the hight of the 26th. September 1798.

To which Lieut Pope pleaded not Guilty.

Captain Demler being sworn says on the 18^h. of August last between the hours
of twel^e and one O'clock at night lieutenant Gregg and ensign Scott brought
Zachariah Cox to Fort Pann^uire under my command, lieut. Gregg showed me his
orders for apprehending Cox and for commiting him to me to be put into
confinement -- Lieut. Pope was officer of the day and I directed him to go and
have the Block house immediately prepared for the reception of Cox, which was
immediately done and Cox confined in it.

My orders to the officer of the day respecting Cox were that no body should
see him or have any communications with him except the officer of the day, who
was always to examine the prisoners provi^i^ns or clothes that were sent to him
from Mrs. M'K^^bs previous to sending them to the Blockhouse which was always
done in presence of the officer of the day -- Cox was kept in this manner a
bout ten days, when his health began to impair and upon the recommendation of
the Doctors app^ication was made, and permission granted by Governor Sergeant
to allow Cox to walk in the Fort under the inspection of a commissioned officer
which to the best of my knowledge was duly and faithfully executed by the
respective officers of the day, or in their absence by me.

Quest. 1. by the Court; who was officer of the day when Cox made his escape.

Ans. Lieutenant Pope.

Quest. 2d where was lieutenant Pope when Cox made his escape.

Ans. from Mr. Popes own information and that of lieutenant C^uppell, he was in
the Fort.

Quest. 3d. In what manner did Cox escape.

Answer On the 26th Mr. Pope came to the cols. to pay h^s respects to the
General and was there a bout half an hour as he was going away I called hun
aside and told him I understood by some officers that cox's settlement was
broken up, and that several of his party was coming down in public employ with
the fleet -- and begged him to pay particular attention to Cox on that day; Mr.
Pope pro^^^ied to do so, and went away, as I supposed to the Fort -- I remained
and dined with the General at the colonels -- between seven and eight O'clock
in the evening lieut. campbell came to capt Hiths quarters, and informed me
that cox had made his escape, I immediately reported it to Capt. Hith, the ^^en
senior officer; col. Hamtramck and capt. Gui^^ having gone with the General to
his boats -- captain Hith immediately reported the circumstance to the colonel.

Quest 4th. Was Cox at large during the night in custody of the officer of the
day, or was he closely confined.

Ans He was closely confined in the upper part of the block house, and not
allowed the privilege of candle -- a trap door separated him from 6 or 7 horse
thieves, who was confined below.

Quest 5th. at what time was Cox usually returned to close confinement in the
block house.

Ans. Generally between 7 and 8 o'clock, some^^mes earlier and sometimes later
in the evening, (...) not suffered to go out of his sight.

Ques^ 6th. Had Cox any communication with (...) one by letter or otherwise
during his con^^ement,

Ans Yes, but always in presence of officers -- he ^^^e one letter to governor
Sergeant, and another to judge Bruin in my presence. That for governor sergeant
was given to col Hamtramck, and that for the judge was delivered by me to him
-- I know of no other, except a small note written to his cousin, recommending
some particular kind of medicine, he being sick.

6^h Did he ever receive any letter while in confinement, if so, in what manner
and from whom.

Ans. Yes, he received one from his relation which was in the first instance
sent to the govern. or, then to col. Hamtramck, and delivered to Cox by me: it
was read in my presence, and after wards returned by me to the colonel (as I
believe) he was denied the use of paper pen and ink during his confinement -- I
requested the officers frequently to lock up their pens and ink when they went
out, so that he could not use them.

Ques. 7th. From whom did lieut. Gregg receive his orders to apprehend and
confine cox.

Ans. From capt. Gu^on, the then commanding officer.

Ques 8^h. When Cox was brought to you to be confined was there any charge
against him in writing left with you, or any particular mode for keeping him
pointed out to you.

Ans. No -- all the orders I gave to the officers under my command were
de^cretionary, and such I believe were best calculated to secure him,

Quest. 9th. After you had by the Governor been permitted to let Cox walk a^
out in the Fort in charge of a commissioned officer -- did you ever receive any
orders to return him into close confinement --

Ans. no.

ABSTRACT.

To the proceed^ngs of the court martial (which was handed me by lieut. W. P.
Smith at Nas^ville) to which is the signature of Charies Hyde lieut. 1st.
Regiment of Infantry and Judge advocate by which it appears lieut. P. s. Pope
was honorably acquitted.

United States ^s Zachr. Cox
Destrict of Tennessee December 3d. 1798.
Warrant. to apprehend said Cox or high crimes and misdemeanors and for his
escape from an arrest in the Mississippi Destrict, Be it remembered that the
examination of said Cox is postponed until the 22d. day of Jan. '99, and that
the said Zachariah Cox together with Howel Tatum and John Gordon his securities
have entered into a recognizance, Cox in 6,000 dollars. and each of his
securities in the sum of 3,000, conditioned that the said Zachariah Cox shall
appear before me on the day last above mentioned, or at any day previous upon
having notice for further examination.

It is indorsed on the former reognizance thus:

"On the 22d. January 1799, Zachariah Cox appeared; and he Zachariah Cox and
Howel Tatum and John Gordon, his securities were again bound in the sum
mentioned in the within recognizance, that the said Zachariah cox shall appear
before me John M'Nairy at my house on or before the 25^^^ of Feby^ next and
upon the c^^ditions mentioned within"

Zachariah Cox seal Ho. Tatum seal John Gordon seal

Witness. John M'Nairy. A copy.

This day personally appeared before me John Smith T who deposes and says
that for seven or eight years past he has been intimately conversant with
Zachariah Cox Esquire, during which time he has supported the laws of his
country with integrity and ever held himself ameanable to them in all cases,
and although illegally treated, and many imbarrasments thrown in his way, by the
officers of the Federal Government, and advised by me to seek a more favorable
climate until the present persecution; he appeared determined to weather out
the storm of illegal opposition, in pursuit of a just and legal interprise,
with hopes that with the accomplishment of it, every ill founded prejudice
would cease to exist, in proof to his fellow citizens of his attahment to them
and his country to which his interest linked. To the best of my knowledge and
belief Mr. Cox did not contemplate a settlement at the Muscle Shoals without
the approbation of Government, as has been falsely represented -- Nor do I know
of, or believe Mr. Cox ever to have corresponded, or was conversant with
Government or any of the citizens of France, or any other, Power or citizens
inimical to this government, as has been erroniously reported and industriously
circulated -- Mr. Cox's object in coming into the western country was a
commercial establishment on principles since published by him. The lower
trading port of of the Muscle Shoals, was his object if the approbation of
Government could be obtained; if not his second object was on the Ohio below
the mouth of Cumberland, above the Indian boundary, which last mentioned spot
at considerable expense -- I explored, and improved for Mr. Cox in the year
1796. For a commercial establishment, which was to my knowledge contemplated as
early as that date, and further saves not.

signed J^o. Smith T.
January 28th. 1799. January 28th. 1799. sworn to before me. John M'Nairy. A
copy.



I arrived at Smithland about the 8th of April, 1798; when I first became
acquainted with Mr^ Zachariah Cox -- shortly after my arrival, there was a
party of riotous and bad characters collected in Smithland, who abused sundry
good citizens and travelers; no civil officer being at or near the place --
the orderly citizens collected and formed themselves into a society, for the
purpose of keeping the town clear of those vagabonds and disorderly men, and by
election appointed a committee for that purpose, and to arbitrate and determine
controversies between the citizens, who might see cause to abide thereby; by
which means the town was soon cleared of all infamous and riotous characters,
and the greatest harmony and friendship existed among the citizens, and the
strictest attention observed to strangers, particularly federal and all civil
officers. The citizens used weekly on Saturday evenings to associate and muster
for their own improvement, and to be prepared for defense, in case of an attack
from the savages, which for sometime we had reason to apprehend -- in such
cases they generally nominated some men to act as temporary officers. Some time
in the month of June, a man by the name of Medad Mitchel, without authority (as
I understood) made an attempt to organize the militia -- Zachariah Cox being
informed of the circumstance forbid the measure -- observing that he (Mitchel)
nor no other person there, was vested with that authority. Mr Mitchel
measurably persisting in his attempt, and frequently in all companies speaking
disrespectful of government, and the officers of it. Z Cox told Mitchel that he
was wrong, and ordered him to leave the settlement in consequence of his
improper conduct -- observing that such conduct would be injurious to the
settlement and settlers -- Mitchel was afterward restored to his citizenship,
on promise that he would in future observe a proper conduct; and on making
sundry acknowledgements to the citizens. About the last of June, col Shelby was
solicited by Z. Cox and the other citizens, to organize the militia of
Smithland agreeable to the laws ^f Kentu^ky.

On the 4th of July, col. Shelby made a visit to Smithland, appointed an
election of officers which was effected, and the militia organized agreeable to
the laws of the state. On the 15th of July, Z. Cox in company with sundry other
citizens of of Smithland, set out down the river Ohio, with a view (as I
understood) of exploring the country west of the river Mississippi -- the
company being stopped from passing Massac by the federal mil^tary; col. Shelby
was wrote on the subject, who came to Smithland in person, with J. Ramsey Esquire
and together with Maj Gift, in company with sundry other citizens went to
Massac, and obtained leave for Z Cox with his barge and crews to pass, which
was effected as well by col. Shelby's approbation as by that of the officer of
Massac; sundry others of the company at the same time passed the south east
side of Ohio by land, under the authority of col Shelby and the civil authority
of the county of Christian, who joined their respective boats and crews some
distance below Massac, from whence the company all proceeded on to New Madrid
-- but they not being able to procure a permit from the Spanish officer of that
post, to explore the country west of the Mississippi, all returned except Z.
Cox and 13 others who with myself descended the Mississippi in Cox's barge; on
our arrival at Natchez, there was a current report among the citizens of that a
lace, that the military troops intended to seize Z. Cox and co^ we continued at
Natchez from the 11th unti^l the 18th i^st on which night I was informed Z. Cox
was s^ized in his bed by the military troops, and c^s^ly confined -- his
f^^ends all made appl^c^tion to see him, or to know the charges against him,
they were dented either. Z. Cox at l^ngth foo^d means to make his escape from
militar^ oppression; I passed w^n him to New Orleans; l^c^ut^^ued in Z. Cox's
company until his arrival a^ N^shv^lle; during which time I was intimately
conversant with his neg^ciations and transactions -- generally saw, and copied
many of his corresponding letters, no part of which was to my knowledge
derogatory to the interest or laws of his country, but in all cases he has
protested the greatest love for his country and respect for the laws of it --
which he has as fa^ as comes to my knowledge ^^^ported with integrity and held
himself ameana^^^ to. Some distance above Orleans we met a repor^ that Z. Cox,
with a body of men was coming down the river, to plunder and harrass the
Spanish set ^^rs, and the Spanish citizens appeared much ala^med. On our
arrival at Orlean, the citizens told me that Genesis W^^kinson had wrote the
Spanish government that Cox, at the he^d of a large number of brigands, was on
the way to plunder the Spanish subjects; in consequence of which, the Spanish
government had issued orders for the militia to hold themselves in readiness --
soon after the arrival of Mr. Z Cox at New Orleans, the citizens were
reconciled that W^lkinsons information was fa^se: we were treated politely by
the citizens of Orleans, and the government -- from whence we departed for the
United States by way of the Mobile; on our arrival at Mobile, I was informed
that a man by the name of Welsh, who lives in the Mobile s^ttlements, had in
possession a rifle gun, that was stole from Z Cox by a Robert Cledsdale, in the
time of his confinement at Natchez; the said Cledsdale being persuaded by
Welsh, departed from Natchez (as I was informed) in company with him. Sometime
previous to their departure, said Welsh was looking at the guns that belonged
to the men who descended the river with Z Cox, and at the same time observed
that Cledsdale's was the handsomest he had ever seen; Mr. Church and myself
informed him that Cl^^sdale had no gun, but the gun he alluded to was the
property of Mr Z. Cox. The said Welsh as I was informed, acted as an agent for
Gov. Se^geant.

Signed -- AMOS EDWARDS. (A copy)
Sworn to before me, this 1st day of February, 1799. John M'Nairy.

About the 20th-day of April A. D* 1798. I arrived at the town of Smithland on
the Ohio river, when I first became acquainted with col. Z. Cox, to whom I had
sundry letters of introduction, being also interrested in the Tennessee
purchase in a small degree, I made enquiries of col. Cox, with respect to that
business, and what were his prospects respecting forming a settlement at the
Muscle Shoals; col. Cox told me that sundry applications made by himself, was
then before the President of the U. S* soliciting leave to extinguish the
Indian claim on a part of the Tennessee purchase, and to settle the same, the
fate of said application was not yet known but he was in hopes that at the
present treaty to be held with the Cherokee Indians, the President would grant
his petition, provided the Indians could be reconciled to the measure. I as^^ed
col. Cox the encouragement given to settlers at Smithland, he told me one lot
in town -- and on the citizen improving the same, and ^^^ing there 12 months,
they should each be entitled to a bounty of 1,001 acres of land in the
Tennessee purchase, in the tract of country set apart for emigrants, provided
the said citizen should settle upon, or cause the same to be fetled upon and
improved the ensuing season after a settlement could be effected consistant
with the approbation of Government; being at that time in no business, I joined
with col. Cox, to become one of the setlers at Smithland: and by my own request
I received a permit from col. Cox, to bring forward 25 emigrants, on the
conditions above stated; I never heard col. say, or intimate any thing like
forcing a settlemant at the Muscle Shoals, but to the contrary, that the
measure could nor would not be attempted, until the approbation of Government
was first obtained; and that if it was not the policy of government to admit
the measure at that time, it would come in some future day, the property would
then be good, in the mean while a lot in Smithland would reward the emigrants,
as they could then employ themselves to advantage during the year, which would
give a spring to the town, which was supposed would be a good commercial stand,
for which purpose, I understood col. Cox intended to settle at Sld. himself
until such time, as a settlement of the M. Shoals, could be carried into
effect, by consent of Government. The encouragement proposed by col. Cox in a
short time drew a considerable number of emigrants to Smithland, I carried
myself, about 30 men of good characters, all of whom received their lot
promised --, and most of them improved the same. The orderly ci^^^ens previous
to my last arrival at Sld. had formed themselves into an association, and
chosen a committee for the purpose of keeping out of town riotous and bad
characters, and settling controversies between such of the citizens as might
think proper to abide thereby -- sundry riotous and infamous characters was
expelled from the town, by which means the orderly citizens e^joyed the most
perfect peace and harmony. The citizens used on saturday evenings to associate
and muster for their own improvement, as well as to be prepared for defense in
case of an at^a^k from the Indians, which for sometime we had reason to
apprehend. Some time in the month of June, a man by the n^me of Medad Mitchel
made an attempt to organize the militia, and solicited me to join him for that
purpose -- I understood said Mit. chell that he was to stand as Maj of a
battalion -- he (Mitchel) in a remote part of the town, had a number of
citizens collected for that purpose, and was in the execution of the object --
I not being acquainted with the motives, went to col. Cox and informed him of
the circumstance, at which col. Cox appeared much irritated, observing that
Mitchel certainly had a design to destoy the peace and reputation of all the
citizens* The col. sent me requesting Mitchel to de^^ist in his pursuit, and to
come to him, which he Mitchel did.

col Z. Cox abused Mitchel very much for his conduct, told him the impropriety
of such a measure, and the improper use that might be made of it, and ordered
Mitchel in consequence there of to leave the ground, for the above conduct, and
his abuse of Government and the ossi^ers of it -- which he Mitchel repeatedly
exercised in all companies and places, although frequently checked by Z. Cox,
in my presence -- said Mitchel was again restored to citizenship on making
sundry acknowledgments to the citizens, and pledging himself most solemnly that
he would observe a proper conduct in future. The latter end of June col. Z. Cox
and sundry other citizens of Smithland, sent a messenger to col. Shelby,
requesting him to come to Smithland, and organize the militia, agreeable to the
laws of Kentucky: col. Shelby made us a visit the 4th of July, called a general
muster, and I believe legally organized as many as five companies, amongst the
number myself was one -- and from col. Shelby I received a certificate to stand
at the head of one company as capt. The regulations of the town and settlements
being now legally and well organized; col Cox made a proclamation of his
intended route to New Orleans for commercial objects (as I understood) and that
he intended on his route to spend the summer and fore part of the fall in
exploring the country West of the river Mississippi, provided the approbation
of the Spanish government could be obtained. Provisions being rather scarce at
Smithland, a number of citizens expressed a desire to accompany col. Cox, and
accordingly prepared for the route -- I being among the number, on our descent
of the river Ohio; the federal troops forbid Z. Cox and company passing the
garrison: col. Cox and several of the officers of Kentucky organized in colonel
Shelhy's regiment, wrote him, soliciting his advice; col. Shelby in company
with J. Ramsey Esquire made us a visit -- they went to Massac in company with Major
Gist and sundry other citizens, and obtained leave for col. Cox with his barge,
the boats and thirty odd men to pass, col. Cox accordingly passed Massac with
the boats; all the rest of the company passed by land on the East side of Ohio,
through Christian count by col. Shelby's order and request -- they joined col.
Cox some short distance below Massac -- we proceeded on to New M^d^id; col. Cox
waited on the Spanish officer of that place, who treated the company very
politely. The Spanish commander at New Madrid not being authorized to admit Z.
Cox and company to explore the country West of the river Mississippi (as I was
informed) the company all returned except col. Cox and 13 others, who descended
the river Mississippi: myself being one of the company who returned to
Smithland; on our arrival at Massac, we fell in company with General Wilkinson,
by whose orders we were arbitrarily disarmed -- our trunks and saddle bags
searched, one of which was out open, the owner not being present:

They also broke open sundry sealed letters, and our goods and property was
shamefully abused, our pocketts picked by military power -- my certificate as
captain, received from col. Shelby was taken out of my pocket, by Lieu. W. P.
Smith, with military force at the point of the bayonet.

I demanded the paper afterward which was denied and never returned to me; we
being at length liberated -- returned to Smithland. During the time of my
acquaintance with Z. Cox I never knew him speak, or suggest any thing inimical
to Government, but in all cases he has professed the highest love for his
country, and respect for the laws of it, which he has as far as comes to my
knowledge supported with integrity, and ever held himself ameanable to.

signed Wm. Cumpton.
Sworn to before me, this 1st day of February, 1799. John M'Nairy. (A copy)

(To be continued)

