AN ESSAY ON THE Malignant Pestilential Fever INTRODUCED INTO THE WEST INDIAN
ISLANDS FROM BOULLAM, ON THE COAST OF GUINEA, As it appeared in 1793 and 1794.

BY C. CHISHOLM, M. D. AND SURGEON TO HIS MAJESTY'S ORDNANCE IN GRENADA.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, A DESCRIPTION OF THE American Yellow Fever, WHICH
PREVAILED AT CHARLESTON IN 1748, In a Letter from DR. JOHN LINING.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH
SECOND STREET. 1799.

TO THE MEDICAL GENTLEMEN OF HIS MAJESTY'S NAVY AND ARMY.
GENTLEMEN,
THE uncommon mortality which marked the Epidemic, which is the subject of the
following Essay, among his Majesty's sea and land forces in the West Indies,
during the last eighteen months; and the total inefficacy which the usual
remedies, in similar circumstances, were found to possess; will, it is
presumed, render any attempt to throw light on the causes, nature, and
appropriate treatment of so dreadful a malady, at least not unacceptable to the
Public.

You, Gentlemen, are more particularly interested; as in the course of your
service you may be led into situations, wherein the feelings of humanity, and
the duties of your profession, will have urgent demands on you to exert your
abilities; but, in which it may happen, from the want of a guide, in
circumstances almost altogether new, that the latter may avail you little in
alleviating the misery of the sufferers entrusted to your care. To no body of
men can I therefore, with more propriety, offer the observations contained in
the following sheets, than the very respectable one which the Medical Gentlemen
of the British Navy and Army constitute. If they should prove advantageous, by
your adopting the means recommended, my utmost wish will be gratified; and that
they may, in your hands, the very extensive experience which my situation gave
rise to, leaves me no room to doubt.

Unknown as I am to the greatest part of you, Gentlemen, addressing you in this
manner, may be considered as a presumption totally unwarrantable. Conscious,
however, of the uprightness of my intentions, I hazard the attempt. And, permit
me to add, that I feel less reluctance in doing so, as no motive of private
interest, no wish to introduce myself to public notice, influence me; feeling
myself as indifferent, with respect to pecuniary considerations, as anxious to
contribute my mite to the public good.

I am, GENTLEMEN, With the greatest respect and esteem, Your most obedient and
very humble servant, C. CHISHOLM.
LONDON, OCT. 22, 1794.
PREFACE.
AN anxious wish to see the subject of the following sheets treated by an abler
pen, has hitherto prevented the Author from offering the Public this feeble
effort to promote their welfare. Finding, however, that nothing adequate to its
importance has appeared; and being conscious of the possession of perhaps more
extensive experience in the Malignant Pestilential Fever, than has fallen to
the lot of almost any practitioner in this country, he thinks it would be
acting contrary, to the principles of humanity, as well as the interest of the
medical profession, should he delay any longer a publication, which indeed
claims no other merit than truth with respect to the statement of facts, and
novelty with respect to the mode of treatment found successful.

That the Malignant Pestilential Fever is no rare occurrence in cold climates,
has been too fatally experienced. It is not so, however, in hot climates, if we
may judge from the writings of medical practitioners; for although symptoms of
malignancy have appeared in the Yellow Fever of the country, in its advanced
stage, seldom have those of pestilence shown themselves; and never has
contagion till now, rendered the usual precautions observed in Europe against
the introduction of the Plague, necessary.

Perhaps the following consideration may constitute a further apology for the
Author's intruding himself on the Public: It is evident that the most
respectable writers on the Malignant Fever have found infinite difficulty in
ascertaining an appropriate mode of cure: what but this are we to infer from
the following passages: "I have observed before, that a delirium would arise
from two opposite errors; one from large and repeated bleedings; and the other
from wine and the cordial medicines being taken too early. It appears therefore
how nice the principles are that regard the cure: thus, neither a hot nor a
cool regimen will answer with every patient, nor in every state of the
disease." -- "Yet were putrefaction the only change made in the body by
contagion, it might be easy to cure such fevers by the use of acids only, or
other antiseptics. But as the disease, when once formed, is not to be removed
by such means alone, it would therefore seem as if some parts of the brain, or
nervous system, were early inflamed, and the fever kept up by that
inflammation; as if to this circumstance most of the symptoms were owing; and,
as if in the advanced state, a cure could not be obtained until the obstructing
matter was resolved by suppuration or putrefaction." Sir John Pringle's
Observations on the Diseases of the Army, 7th ed. p. 316 and 337.
Nothing can more remarkably betray the uncertainty of this eminent physician
with respect to the true nature of Pestilential Fevers; nor can any thing more
directly point out the desideratum in their cure. The Author has not the
presumption to imagine that the happy medium, so much wanted, has been
discovered by him; but he has reason to believe, that the candid and
unprejudiced practitioner may find in the following little Essay, some
observations which may throw light on this very obscure subject. It may at
least excite the observing and ingenious to attend more to the peculiar nature
of pestilential inflammation; to the exhalation of serous fluid in the cavities
of the brain, and the consequent compression of that organ; and to the means
which resolve the former without inducing a dangerous state of debility, and
promote the absorption of the latter in fevers of a subsequent nature. No doubt
the means here recommended will appear bold, and perhaps empirical to an
European physician; but let prejudice be set aside, and let facts only be
attended to, and sure he is, a candid practitioner will find sufficient
encouragement to adopt them. What has been advanced, powerfully militates
against theory; but how seldom are the dogmata of theorists found free of
fallacy in practice!

Upon the whole: all the Author aims at, is to relate in a plain and unadorned
style, the result of his own experience in one of the most dangerous and
insidious diseases the human frame is subject to, with the sole view of
contributing his mite to the public good: if he succeeds, he will receive the
highest possible gratification. With the celebrated Dr. Lind, he may say,
"these observations claim the more attention, as not being only a few remarks
made in private, or on any one particular fever, which might prove an exception
to a general established principle in practice: They are the result of an
attention to some hundred patients, whose cases are still preserved."
Dissertation on Fevers and Infection, chapter II. sect. 1.


In excuse for the many inaccuracies of style, and for whatever other errors he
may have committed in the Introduction, and in the Essay itself; all he has to
plead is, his having written both on the spot, where he could not avail himself
of much assistance, either from men or books.

GRENADA, JUNE 1, 1794.
INTRODUCTION.
BEFORE I enter on the History of the Malignant Pestilential Fever, which so
generally prevailed in this and the neighboring islands, I think it may not be
improper to give some account of Grenada, as far as relates to the face of the
country, its productions, its diseases, and the state of the weather. On
settling in this island, I was convinced that a knowledge of the climate, and
of the various changes which take place in the weather throughout the year,
would be highly conducive to success in the practice of Medicine; and I was the
more strongly inclined to observe and record these, by finding that nothing of
the kind had been hitherto done. For this purpose I immediately began a diary
or journal of the weather; and have ever since continued it, with few
interruptions; but, as a journal of the whole period would be tedious and
unnecessary, I have given only that of the three first years; and to illustrate
my Observations on the Malignant Pestilential Fever, I have added the journal
of the weather for the year 1793. Dr. Hillary is the only medical writer I am
acquainted with, who has given the public any account of the weather of these
islands; but, although his very able account may be very useful to
practitioners in Barbados, and other islands whose surface is comparatively
level, and whose hills rise only to a trifling height, and in no instance
exhibit the wild and picturesque scenes of Grenada, St. Vincent, Dominica, and
a few others, it is not so here: and the reason is evident. The windings of the
innumerable hills in Grenada produce a change of temperature at the end of
every hundred yards; under their shelter the heat is often almost
unsupportable, and the body is bathed in the most profuse sweat: beyond this,
turning an angle, and being suddenly exposed to the prevailing winds, which
there blow with violence, proportioned to the narrow valleys which confine
them, the body is in an instant dried up: an aguish sensation takes place, and
not unfrequently topical pains and inflammations of a most dangerous nature,
are instantaneously produced. It is from this cause, as much as from any other
that hepatic and pulmonary inflammations are more frequent, and more violent in
these rugged mountainous islands than in Barbados, Antigua, and others of a
smoother and less divided surface: and this is the principal cause also that
topical inflammations, particularly those of the liver, are met with at all
seasons, during the hot and rainy as well as the cool and dry: a circumstance
otherwise inexplicable. It also accounts for the efficacy, as a preventative of
any medium between the shirt and skin, which may absorb the perspired fluid,
whilst it keeps up an equal temperature on the surface, whatever changes take
place in the surrounding atmosphere. Thus, a flannel-shirt, however strange it
may seem to an European not acquainted with the circumstance above mentioned,
is the best preservative of health in this island, and perhaps throughout the
torrid zone.

The atmosphere of Grenada differs widely from that of the low islands,
Barbados, Antigua, etc. The innumerable points and ridges of the two
mountains, which run nearly north and south, and separate the windward from the
leeward districts, arrest or attract the passing clouds. These, either falling
in rain, or giving rise to springs, whilst they fertilize the soil, fill the
atmosphere with watery particles. This moist state of the atmosphere exists
throughout the whole year; but is greater in proportion to the quantity and
density of the clouds. In the rainy season torrents of water rush down the
craggy sides of the higher regions of these mountains; and the rivulets, often
overflowing their banks by this addition, inundate the country below. In the
dry season, a considerable degree of moisture is always perceptible; but then
it falls during the night in the form of dew; and the streams and rivulets,
though plentifully supplied, run in their natural channels with a placid
current, except where their course is interrupted by precipitous rocks or large
stones. The atmosphere of the low islands, on the contrary, is generally
remarkably dry; nor are they blessed with the streams and rivers which beautify
and benefit Grenada. Hence the temperature in situations even not subject to
alternate cold and heat, is very irregular; and from this also it is seldom
possible to work an electrical machine with advantage, the fluid collected
continually flying off, attracted by the surrounding moisture. From this cause
too the island, seen from sea, is for ever obscured with clouds; the summits of
the mountains are almost never distinguishable; and even hills nearer the
coast, on account of the density of the medium through which they are viewed,
seldom exhibit their true shape, height, and colors. The low islands are never
thus enveloped in mist, never thus seem "ever-threat'ning storms;" their
atmosphere being less loaded, becomes a purer medium, and seldom lets fall the
deluges experienced here. From these considerations, the following Journal may
have its use.

Grenada is one of the most southern of the Caribbean islands: a situation
which exempts it from the dreadful hurricanes which frequently lay waste those
farther northward. It is composed of two immense mountains, which terminate in
peaks; but, being united a little below their summits by a gradual slope, the
division is not at first very perceptible. On the windward, or north-east side,
the descent is infinitely more gradual than on the leeward or southwest side;
nor is it there encumbered with the multitude of conical hills, and rocks of
various form and magnitude, which characterise the latter. So gradual is the
rise of the country in the district of Marquis and part of Seauteur, as to give
the idea of an extensive plain, most beautifully diversified by gentle slopes,
rivers, delightful vales, thickets and extensive cane-fields, and terminated by
wooded mountains, whose pointed tops are often hid in clouds. The leeward side,
on the contrary, is mountainous to the very sea; and the whole is thrown
together in the wildest and most picturesque manner. Magnitude and boldness of
design are the prevailing features. In general, excepting a part of the
windward side of the island, by supposing innumerable and distinct acclivities
of conical or angular figures, increasing in bulk as they are removed from the
sea, crowding on each other, and at length terminating in two enormous piles,
whose crags and ridges shagged with wood, and whose cliffs, often seen towering
above the floating clouds in august and gigantic forms, exhibit a most
stupendous background, -- we shall be able to conceive a tolerably just idea of
the grand outlines of the very singular scenery of this romantic country. On
more attentively viewing the picture, we find hills precipitous, acclivous, or
winding circularly in sharp inaccessible ridges, so as to form frightful
gullies, torn by torrents in the rainy season, or deep, dark glens and bounded
hollows, seldom trod by human foot; where streams, brawling over pebbly beds,
or often interrupted in their course, and falling over the surface of a rocky
scarp, and collected in stony basins underneath, form shady cool retreats; in
which alone -- Planxere sorores
Naiades --
Planxere et Dryades, Plangentibus assonat Echo.
OVID.

All round is a "woody theater, of stateliest view," and shrubbery and
flowering herbs of uncommon variety, beauty, and flavor. In many places the
scene is enlivened by cascades, sometimes fifty feet in height; but no living
creature, except the wood-pigeon; a few small birds, the dappled agootee, and
the armadilloe, inhabit these wilds. Where cultivation ends, little scattered
spots are seen diversifying this wilderness of wood, on which the industrious
hands of poor settlers, chiefly French, have formed small plantations of
coffee, intermixed with plantains, and sheltered from the rude shock of the
prevailing north-east wind, by hedges of the ever green calaba Calophyllum
Calaba, Linnaei.
, whose deep shade affords an interesting variegation from the surrounding
paler green. Alternating with these are seen neat but small patches, producing
all the kitchen can require in the vegetable kingdom; which, continual moisture
and coolness contributing to their production, are ever plentifully raised.
Beyond this, cultivation takes a larger sweep, and often with coffee, cacao,
cotton, are seen fields of sugar-cane, planted and flourishing on the steep
sides of hills, or in narrow winding valleys, frequently chequered by insulated
cones, or tusted craggs of grotesque figures; or overhanging cliffs matted over
with curious grassy plants Pitcarnia latefolia et angustefolia, a new genus of
the Hexandria Monogynia Linnaei. It covers the steepest rocks in a very
singular manner, resembling at a distance some species of grass; the leaves lap
over each other, and form a thick mat, by which precipices, on which no other
plant grows, are completely covered. From amidst these, beautiful ramous
clusters of coral-coloured flowers project.

My authority for the name, is my worthy friend Mr. Anderson, Botanist at St.
Vincent.


, ferns, or moss; or bare argillaceous rocks, disposed in inclining or
horizontal strata; or volcanic masses, distinct, loose, and black; or extended
terraces of soil, in culture or in wood, supported by majestic columns of the
basaltic kind. Here too are seen the stately mountain-cabbage, and the
wide-spreading silk cotton-trees, towering above all others, in majestic
preeminence: rivers are seen winding through every valley, and here and there
natural pastures are left, on which the cattle and stock of neighboring
plantations are seen feeding. Farther on, and even to the sea, where the
surface admits of cultivation, the whole is covered with the sugar-cane,
regularly planted in oblong fields, separated by hedges of the lime, the
logwood, the Angola-pea, the false acacia, the prickly pear, physic-nut, etc.
These are frequently diversified by irregular groupes of negroe-huts,
surrounded by and intermixed with groves of the banana, and arbours of the
grenadilla, water-lemon, and various viminious plants of the pea kind.
Adjoining these romantic groupes, are seen the dwelling-houses, and the works,
as they are called, or the buildings erected for the manufacture of the
cane-juice into sugar; to which not unfrequently are attached orchards
containing a great variety of indigenous and exotic fruit trees. In detached
corners also are seen the gardens or provision-grounds of the negroes, planted
according to the whim or taste of the temporary owner; and here and there the
tops of conical hills, too steep or too barren for culture, crowned with tufts
of natural wood, become interesting objects, from the variety of tints they
introduce.

The coast in many places terminates abruptly in rocky precipices, the face of
which is often curiously perforated into caverns, arches, etc. by the continual
dashing of the sea against it. The tops of these precipices are sometimes
fertile, but more generally either a bare soft rock, probably a volcanic
production, called by the inhabitants, Tuf, or producing a curious species of
cyperus, intermixed with trees of the erect prickly pear, or the Abyssinian
koll-quall of Mr. Bruce. In other places, it runs out into long narrow points,
frequently ending in high cliffs of tuf, but more frequently in curious rocks
or congeries of the Madripore coralline, the cells of which nearest the sea,
and occasionally overflowed by it, are inhabited by zoophytes, lithophytes, and
animals of the Mollusca-tribe. These points are seldom covered with much soil,
but generally serve well for sheep and goat pastures. They form small but
convenient and deep bays, particularly on the south-east coast. Some of these
bays insinuate themselves so far into the country, as, when seen in certain
points of view, to have all the ornamental effect of winding lakes; and at
Calivini, Bacaye, and a few other places, they have the additional beauty of
fine sloping woods, intermixed with lawns of the brightest green, and a back
ground of picturesque scenes in the interior country. Sometimes, however, the
coast trends circularly for several miles; low, sandy, without a single inlet,
and protected from the encroachments of the ocean, which beats against it with
all the additional force of the easterly or trade-wind, by a prodigious barrier
of corallines. Rivers being here frequently shut up by mounds of loose sand
thrown up in their mouths by the violence of the surf, much stagnant water and
marshy tracts are found, at all times corrupting the air to leeward of them for
several miles; these districts therefore, although incomparably the richest,
and in many respects the most beautiful, are the most inimical to health of any
of the island.

All along the coast, a prodigious variety of corallines, of every form,
stretch from the north-east round easterly to the south-west: the bottom almost
everywhere in that direction is formed of them, at least a league in breadth;
and in some places, particularly off the south-east, extensive submarine
groves, of a most beautiful muricated madripore, are seen, chiefly of a bright
pink-colour. These coralline-beds and groves are frequently extremely dangerous
to shipping. They are often fished up for the purpose of making lime, which
they answer tolerably well in temporary buildings; but the lime manufactured
from them, possesses by no means the strength of the stone-lime. The
transparency of the water over these corallines is so remarkably great, that
the bottom can be distinctly seen at the depth of ten and fifteen fathoms; and
on taking a view of the coast from any considerable adjoining height, the
whitish or light green color of the sea, clearly points out the limits of
these curious productions. Every where on their surface vast quantities of
echini and asterias are found; the former troublesome and even dangerous, by
their long and strong prickles, or spines. They constitute also the secure
abode, except in stormy weather, of innumerable crabs, sea cray-fish and
univalve shellfish: of the last of which there is a great and beautiful
variety. Many species of the sponge, particularly the flabelliform, the
festularis, the aculeata, and the nodosa, also, lodge on these lithophyte-beds.
Vast numbers of excellent small fish are always found within the limits of the
corallines, particularly where marine vegetables abound; but the larger kinds
resort to the sand-banks a few leagues to leeward of the island, or are caught
in deep water, where no corallines are found.

From the south-west to the north-east, along the western shore, no corallines
are ever seen, the coast being amazingly bold and precipitous; and the shore
where the bottom is shelving being covered with stones of the quartzose and
shorl kinds, quadrangular, prismatic, or oval, and of a bluish gray color;
either thrown up by the sea, or the produce of its encroachment on the
adjoining high rocky cliffs. These, on this part of the coast, are often
overhanging in an awful and tremendous manner, and (the road running
underneath) have been not unfrequently fatal to passengers, particularly after
very stormy weather; during which, the sea beating with dreadful violence
against their lower strata, has shaken the whole mass, and loosened and
disjoined large fragments. Together with these are frequently found some
beautiful species of the pyrites, chiefly of a yellow and dark blue. On two
parts of this coast, the most regular basaltes I ever saw, form two points,
exactly resembling at a distance the huge fluted columns of Gothic Churches.
Some of these are perpendicular, some are inclining; and where the points
terminate, masses composed of the broken ends of basaltic columns, run shelving
a considerable way into the sea. These are most perfect between Black Bay and
Grand Roy, where the inhabitants call them the "organs;" and though not so
extensive as the singular basaltes of Staffa, as represented by the celebrated
Sir Joseph Banks, are evidently similar in every respect.


Along the edges of bays, seldom ruffled by boisterous winds, or the pieces of
seawater, called Lagoons, whose situation screens them from the undulation of
bays, the action of the tides, or the agitation of winds, a curious species of
actinia, adhering to stones and corallines, is found; and that singular insect
of the mollusca kind, called by Linnaeus, Holothuria Priapus.

This species of holothuria, which, till of late, was almost unknown, inhabits
a membranaceous semi-transparent sheath, perhaps of its own construction,
always contained in a tubular hole in rocks, two or three feet under the
surface of the water. From this it pushes out and expands its tentacula in
quest of food; but draws all in on the slightest appearance of danger; so that
it is extremely difficult to procure one uninjured. The tentacula of this
species, when spread out by the animal, form a seeming flower, exactly
resembling the larger passeflora, or granadilla. The length of the body, which
has much the appearance of that of the larger scolopendra, is about five or six
inches, and marked with innumerable annular ridges, which near the mouth, or
tentacula, are more distinct and prominent. -- These annuli terminate on each
side in very minute claws or feet, which serve the animal in creeping out of
its sheath, to a limited length, in quest of food. The tentacula are of a most
singular structure, and variegated with a number of beautiful colors, the most
conspicuous of which are purple and yellow. Each tentaculum is about two or
three inches in length, and plumose, or formed in the manner of the plumae or
laminae, of feathers, the beards of which are endowed with exquisite feeling,
for on the slightest undulation of the water, or striking gently the vessel
containing it, they are instantly erected, and exhibit a singular and most
beautiful assemblage of colors. If the undulation of the water is increased,
or if any of the tentacula are slightly touched, the animal instantly, and with
astonishing quickness, withdraws into its sheath or habitation, and nothing is
apparently seen but a piece of ill-looking membranaceous seaweed.

The soil of Grenada may be divided into four kinds: 1st. A black rich mould,
found chiefly in low valleys, and on the gentle slopes of the more rounded
hills. 2d. A mixture of light sand and black mould, generally found near the
sea, and containing a large portion of sea salt. 3d. A mixture of black mould,
sand, and a metallic earth, of a reddish color, found in the steeper parts of
what may be called the second region of the island, or where cultivation is
extended with difficulty. 4th. A red earth, or ochre, frequently intermixed
with black shining metallic particles, sterile, and incapable of culture with
even the aid of the strongest manure. This is generally found in the higher
parts of the mountainous country, sometimes covered with wood and a coarse long
grass; but oftener naked, and producing a fine effect contrasted with the
surrounding green. The depth of these varies very much: in some places it is
only a few inches; in others, particularly in deep valleys, several feet, and
evidently there, the accumulation of the washings from the adjoining hills in
the rainy season: in other places, particularly where the soft rocky substance,
called Tuf, prevails (probably the tuffa In Sir William Hamilton's account of
the earthquakes which happened in Calabria, from February to May 1783, letter
of the 23d of May, mention is made of this volcanic substance. "I pushed on to
the town of Pezzo, in Calabria Ultra, where I landed on the evening of the 6th
of May. This town situated on the sea, and on a volcanic tuffa, had been
greatly damaged," etc. -- New Annual Register, 1783.
of the Italians) the depth of the soil is not more than half an inch; and to
be found only in chinks and fissures. In many places, where the eye can trace
no vestige of soil, shrubs and large (...) grow, insinuating their roots into
every cranny of the rock in search of food; or creeping on, or hanging down
naked and unconnected, the sides of rocky precipices, and at length drawing
their nourishment from soil forty or fifty feet below the trunk or stem of the
plant. Generally, under this coat of soil there is a rocky substance, soft
where it is connected to the soil, and hardening as it deepens. It is followed,
in many places, by curious strata of argillaceous rock, which are separated
from each other by strata or layers of black mould, frequently mixed with
shells of the cochlea kind, and some marine productions of the testaceous
tribe, particularly various turbines and bivalves. Alternate strata thus formed
are often found in excavated places many hundred feet under the surface. They
generally observe the inclination or angle which the hill or valley in which
they are found, makes with the horizon: thus, some are oblique, others
horizontal; and in proportion to the depth, the hardness of the argillaceous
strata increases. In other places, under the soil is a thick bed of stone, the
production probably of volcanic fire, of a deep brown or chocolate color, and
breaking into oblong, smooth, homogeneous quadrilateral masses, very regularly
formed. These, as they deepen, become more soft and crumbly; but always retain
their form, till at length they are so united with a yellowish earth, as
scarcely to be distinguishable from it. In places excavated perpendicularly,
and long exposed to the weather, these imperfect crystalizations, if they may
be called such, are seen separated from the earthy matter connecting them, and
hanging in the manner of isicles, and displaying their form with the utmost
exactness. In the yellowish earth underneath these quadrilateral masses,
several stones of a bright shining blue are found single, and of a depressed
oval shape. Many hills, particularly those which are of a conical form, have,
under the soil, strata of a substance much resembling calx at first sight; but
on examination, found to be calcined stones and ashes, compressed into laminae.
These laminae are separated from each other by a greyish earth, mixed with
innumerable small pebbles, much used in making mortar.

The district of St. George's parish, called Point Saline, forming an isosceles
triangle, the base of which may be four miles in length, is almost entirely
composed of the soft rocky substance, called Tuff; and fully a third of it is
destitute of soil, except here and there in little hollows and fissures; or
where the surface of the tuf, softened by the action of the air, has become a
kind of vegetative earth. The whole of this immense mass is made up of regular
layers, or laminae, inclining or horizontal, as the surface is acclivous or
flat. Three conical hills, of about five or six hundred feet perpendicular
height, situated in the midst of this, particularly those constituting what is
called Morn Rouge, or the red mountain, are entirely composed of vitrified
rocks and stones, of a black or brown color, and scoriae intermixed with an
earth exactly resembling iron rust, reduced to powder. No trace, however, of
the crater of a volcano can be perceived on any of them; but they are so
placed, with respect to each other, as to form a very deep circumscribed
hollow, which once perhaps was the crater of an immense volcano. The scoriae,
by the action of air, has been reduced in some patches of these hills, into a
very fertile purplish soil, producing in seasonable years abundant crops of
cotton.

None of these rocky substances effervesce with acids; so that they evidently
possess nothing of the calcareous nature. The first I have mentioned, or the
argillaceous strata, vary a good deal in color; some being of a pure white,
some yellowish, and others bluish: they are all smooth and soapy, or unctuous
to the touch, free of grit, and dissolve readily in water. They are called by
the Creole whites and negroes, Aboo and Caioo; probably corruptions of the two
French words boue, signifying dirt or clay; and craie, chalk: and by African
negroes, before they have acquired the language of their brethren in the West
Indies, Treing: an Ebo word, signifying a purer kind of pipe-clay, much used
with food by most of the inhabitants of the coast of Guinea. All these
varieties are eat with astonishing avidity by negroes of almost every
description, but particularly the females: a pernicious custom, originally
superstitious perhaps, and certainly introduced from Africa. It is the most
general cause of the fatal cacochymic complaint among negroes, called here Mal
d' Estomac.

Having thus given a general account of the appearance of the country, and its
soil, I should now describe the various productions of Grenada, and more
especially the medicinal plants, which abound everywhere; but although the
subject is extremely curious, and merits a distinct treatise, I confess myself
unequal to the task, Botany having never been my study, though frequently my
amusement. To no country is the observation of the celebrated Mr. Ray more
applicable than this, Tales plantarum species in quacunque regione a Deo
creantur quales hominibus et animalibus ibidem natis maxim convenient: imo ex
plantarum nascentium frequentia se fere animadvertere posse quibus morbis
quaelibet regio subjecta sit, etc. -- Every human want, except those introduced
by European luxury, is here amply provided for, almost without exertion. The
most wholesome food is the spontaneous production of the country. The various
species of the banana, of the potatoe, of the pea, of the bean, of the cassada,
stand unrivalled in salubrity and native elegance of taste. To these may be
added a variety of pot herbs and greens, unknown in Europe; and at least sixty
kinds of fruit, chiefly natives of the country, of the most delicious flavor
and taste. To strengthen and give tone to the stomach, diminished by
debilitating causes continually present, various peppers and grateful
stimulating plants spontaneously present themselves. Is the traveller in the
woods parched with heat, and languishing for diluting drink, the kindly
water-withe and wild pine, are on every tree ready to assuage his thirst. Do
the chilling northerly winds of winter check the perspiration and excite
catarrhal complaints, many hundred plants well suited to remove them, are
everywhere furnished by Nature. Do fevers prevail, the same kind Provider has
amply bestowed on us the means of relief. Are ever any afflicted with
dysenteries, certain means of cure are found in every field, in every wood, and
even climbing on the most sterile rocks. The bignonia capriolata, called by the
French Griffe a Chat, is of this tribe; is always found climbing on bare rocks,
and is even a specific in this very dangerous disease.
No people are more afflicted with worms than the inhabitants of this country;
nor are any more bountifully supplied by the hands of Nature with specifics
against them. Ulcers, so obstinate and troublesome in other regions, however
malignant, must here yield to the native detersives and incarnants of the
country. The loathsome yaws are cured by simples. The Venereal Virus has its
antidotes Among these may be mentioned euphorbia tithymaloides, the mal-nomme
of the French; that singular plant saururus cernuus, the herb a colet of the
French; lobelia syphilitica; and costus spicatus, a new species pointed out to
me by that ingenious and indefatigable botanist, Mr. Anderson of St. Vincent.
. The leprosy, the most dreadful of all diseases, is said to have its
indigenous remedy, known to few besides the aborigines of the islands This
remedy, I am informed, is the saururus cernuus of Linnaeus, the herb a colet,
and aguarima of M. Desportes. The Carribs are said to use it successfully,
externally and internally, in this deplorable disease.
. Although the inhabitants seldom require their aid, yet innumerable
antiscorbutics are prepared by nature for the soldier and the mariner, worn
down by long voyages and the scurvy. Every poisonous herb or tree have their
use; and are prevented from being mischievous, by an adjoining antidote. Nay
the baneful effects of the manchineal may be prevented by the liberal and kind
provision made by Nature. Does the imprudence or the ignorance of man lead him
to the dangerous experience of the deadly juice of this alluring fruit, the sea
is close at hand into which he instinctively plunges for relief, or the white
trumpet-flower tree extends its branches, and intermingling them with those of
its enemy, interposes its antidotal power. Nor is this most poisonous of all
plants without its medicinal use; for, by an easy and simple operation, its
juice in the state of vapor extirpates those troublesome and obstinate fungi,
the sequela of the yaws, called crabs and tubboes Seawater I have repeatedly
seen remove the dangerous effects of this poison; and the bignonia lucoxylon
(the white cedar of the country) is said to be also a certain antidote. The
operation I allude to is this: A hole large enough being dug in the sand,
alternate layers of charcoal and manchineal apples are laid in it. When the
charcoal is well lighted, and a thick smoke arises, the patient is made to
place the diseased foot over it; and a piece of thick Osnaburgh is laid over
all, to prevent the escape of the vapor. At the end of an hour the foot is
removed, and the crabs, which before the application of the steam were hard and
untractable, are now completely rotten, insomuch that without giving the least
pain, they are picked out with a small pointed knife.
. In short, whatever can contribute to the ease and comfort of man; to his
food, his drink, his medicine, his clothing, his dwelling, his utensils of
husbandry, his household utensils, his bedding; to the construction of his
boats and canoes, are here abundantly, and in most instances spontaneously
produced. "Ipsa quoque immunis rastroque intacta, nec ullis saucia vomeribus,
per se dabat omnia tellus." Nor is his food confined to the vegetable kingdom.
Horned cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, rabbits, agootees or Indian conies, and
guanas; dunghill-fowls, turkies, geese, ducks, Guinea-fowls, and house-pigeons,
are at all times to be procured. At certain seasons, particularly in the
autumnal months, there is not a scarcity of what may be called game,
wood-pigeons, or ramiers, ring-tailed pigeons, snipes, tales, water-hens, wild
ducks, plovers, blue and gray galdings, blackbirds, etc. But an inexhaustible
supply of fish, of uncommon variety and goodness, may be throughout the whole
year resorted to: all the rivers, bays, and sea teem with them; and being
easily procured, they constitute almost the only animal food of the lower
classes of people. Black, red, and gray snappers, rock-fish, groopers, Spanish
mackerel, king-fish, ten-pounder, porgie, barracuta and pargue cavalloe,
old-wife, sea-mullet, trunk, hog, bream, gar, ballahoo, jacks and sprats,
silver ballahoo, parrot, butter-fish, maid, flounder, soal, a kind of herring,
sun-fish, snook, carramaws, sting-ray and whip-ray, sennets, jew-fish (rare)
yellow tails, conger-eels, turtle of three kinds, and a multitude of
shellfish, are among the best of the seafish. River mullet, mud-fish, crapaud
or river toad-fish, silver eel, and innumerable cray-fish, the most esteemed of
the fresh water fish.

It is not therefore surprising that foreign luxuries too liberally used,
should shorten the lives of one description of inhabitants, whilst another,
confining themselves to the wholesome indigenous aliment of the country, with
occasionally the addition of the least injurious of the European delicacies,
live to an age uncommon even in the temperate regions of the old continent. The
old monastic rhyme is in all countries the best rule of diet: Pone gulae metas,
ut sit tibi longior aetas;
Ut medicus fatur, parcus de morte levatur. L'Ecole de Salerne, p. 87.

but it is more especially so here, where great efforts are made by Nature in
the assimilation of the European constitution to the tropic climate in the
first instance; and where diseases, mild among the indigenae, or the
assimilated of the country, become fatal to the imprudent stranger. In fact, it
is this circumstance which has given rise in Europe to the prevailing idea of
the unhealthfulness of these islands, and of Grenada in particular; for the
climate of Grenada, notwithstanding the variable temperature, occasioned by the
irregularity of its surface, and the moisture of its atmosphere, is certainly
healthy, compared to other countries in the same latitude; and would prove so
to every description of its inhabitants, were they all equally temperate, and
equally careful to avoid those excesses in diet, which in all climates are
dangerous, and often fatal. To prove this, no more is necessary than to attend
to the uninterrupted health and great age of many of the French and Creole
inhabitants of both sexes. Eighty, ninety, and an hundred years is by no means
an uncommon age among these; and females are in general longer lived than
males. One instance has occurred, of life being lengthened out to the 127th
year "James Forthon, Esquire. in the 127th year of his age, in Grenada. He was born
at Bourdeaux in 1645, settled in the West Indies in 1694, married at St.
Christopher, and removed to Martinique, where he remained thirty years, and has
resided in Grenada forty. He retained his eyesight till his 117th year, and
his health till within a few days of his death." -- Annual Register, 1773,
March.
: an age not very far short of the famed instances of longevity of our own
country; and, if the climates are considered, certainly more extraordinary. An
anecdote lately related to me of this aged person, is uncommonly singular. M.
Forthon lived on a coffee-state in that part of the parish of St. George,
called Foret Noire, or the black forest, about five miles from town. The
gentleman who related the anecdote to me, with another, visited this old
gentleman two or three years before his death. They found him employed in
having a negro-wench flogged: and as he was blind, he was led to the place
where the culprit lay, in order, by feeling, to know whether the punishment had
been properly inflicted or not. Being satisfied in this point, he returned with
a firm steady step to his seat. The cause of this punishment was still more
extraordinary. A Mr. Maly, Mr. Forthon's grandson-in-law, assured my informant,
that Forthon punished the wench, who acted as a kind of housekeeper to him, for
refusing to admit of his embraces. -- The French and Creole inhabitants are
never afflicted with the fatal topical inflammations, often epidemic among the
English and negroes; nor do fevers of a bad kind ever appear among them. Their
strength continues as unimpaired as their constitutions; so that it is no
uncommon thing to see a very old Frenchman walk and ride with all the firmness
and activity of youth. This does not appear to arise from their residence being
cooler and higher than that of the English inhabitants; for many, possessing
fine plantations on the coast, enjoy the same exemption from disease,
experienced by the coffee-settlers on the mountains, although the difference of
heat is as thirteen to rather more than seventeen.

Were we to exclude the effects of the miasma of the marshy districts, and
those proceeding from the irregular temperature of the air, we should find
that, in common years, there is by no means much sickness; and that in general
it is only in those places where marshes are abundant, as in Marquis, Seauteur,
and a few detached spots in other parts of the coast, diseases mali moris
prevail. There indeed, one year with another, fully an eighteenth part of the
inhabitants annually perish; but in other districts, where these dreadful
causes of disease do not exist, the mortality is not more than one in 37 or 38.

The endemic diseases are either bilious, putrid, or inflammatory, as the
seasons are hot and wet, or dry and cool. Thus, in the summer and autumnal
months, or that portion of the year which includes the rainy and warm season,
remittent fevers, dysenteries, slight colics, cholera morbus, phrenetic
complaints, or what the French call Coup de Soleil, occasioned by the intense
solar heat, ulcers of the legs, particularly those of the herpetic kind, are
the most prevalent disorders. And in the marshy districts at this time of the
year, obstinate and irregular intermittents, generally depending on glandular
obstruction and visceral inflammation, remittents of the worst kind, and
hepatic dysenteries, are very common, frequently epidemic, and too often fatal.
During the winter and spring, when northerly winds blow, and occasion an
uncommon and disagreeable chillness; but when the atmosphere is generally less
moist than at any other time of the year, pleurisies, often attended with
fever, catarrhal fevers, rheumatic fevers, ophthalmias, inflammatory anginas,
erysipelas frequently preceded by fever, chronic rheumatism, and the
Guinea-worm, It will appear singular to the European reader, that the
dracunculus, or Guinea-worm, should be classed among the epidemics of Grenada;
but however strange it may seem, it is nevertheless fully established by
innumerable facts. One very extraordinary instance will suffice to show the
propriety of considering this disease as one of the epidemics of the dry
season. On the estates of Edmund Thornton, Esquire. situated in the district of St.
George's parish, called Point Saline, already described, and at the farthest
extremity of it, the negroes are attacked regularly every year, about the
beginning of November, with symptoms of the Guinea-worm. In the month of
January the disease spreads throughout the greatest part of the gang; and in
the month of March it entirely disappears; and they continue exempted from it
till the following November. The cause of this singular disease on the estates
I have mentioned, seems to be confined to the water of some wells, which have
been dug in the substance, called Tuf, of which the whole gang drink; there
being no springs or rivulets in the district, and unfortunately no cisterns to
collect and preserve the rain water. This has been rendered evident by what has
happened on some neighboring estates; the negroes of which, till of late, were
as subject to this distressing complaint as those belonging to Mr. Thornton.
The wells were filled up, cisterns built, or wells dug in places not subject to
the influence of the flow and ebb of the tide; and at the return of the usual
period of the appearance of the Guinea-worm, nothing of the kind happened. They
have ever since (three years now) continued exempted from the disease. In the
water which contains the embryos of the dracunculi, the naked eye distinguishes
innumerable animalcules, darting in every direction with astonishing force and
rapidity: these, on being subjected to examination in a small microscope,
exhibit a very extraordinary figure, differing from any animalcules hitherto
described. Till within these few years, this disease was considered as peculiar
to that part of the coast of Guinea contained between Cape Coast Castle and
Acras, about ninety miles in extent: and it was believed that the slaves from
the Gold Coast were alone subject to it, and always brought it with them to the
West Indies, but never contracted it there. This however has been proved to be
without foundation; for the Creole-negroes are as subject to it as the
Africans. Infants have it as well as the most aged; and no part of the body or
extremities is exempted from it: the arms, legs, every part of the trunk, the
scrotum, penis, and even the pudenda muliebria, within the labia.
are the most common epidemics. At all seasons, hepatic inflammation is very
frequent; and when anomalous, always epidemic. Worms also are common throughout
the year, and frequently give rise to very extraordinary symptoms. The yellow
fever (properly so called) sometimes appears; but observes no particular
season. Ruptures, ringworms, elephantiasis, or the glandular disease of Dr.
Hendy, hydrocephalus, yaws, putrid or ulcerous fore throats, mortification of
the fingers and toes, chronic aphthae leprosy, and tetanus, may be ranked among
the sporadic endemics of this country, and are certainly not the least
tremendous of them; but fortunately they are either confined to the negro race,
or rarely occur. The species of tetanus peculiar to infants, and hence called
Trismus Nascentium, is an endemic of this island, and always a fatal one: it
prevails only in the marshy and moist parts of the island, and takes place any
time before the ninth day after birth; after which period it has never been
known to happen. It does not appear to arise from a retention of the meconium;
for however carefully infants have been evacuated, the disease has in no
instance been thereby prevented. From its prevalence in moist, cold, or marshy
situations, we may with more propriety attribute it to cold and impure air.
This dreadful malady admits of no cure; but we fortunately possess a most
certain preventive. It is with singular pleasure I assign the discovery of this
beneficial application to my worthy and experienced friend Dr. John Stewart, of
this island. About five or six years ago, on an estate which this gentleman had
the charge of, the manager frequently mentioned to him the unfavourable
circumstance of all the infants born on it dying of the locked jaw before the
ninth day, and that this had uniformly been the event in every instance for
many years, although every possible caution had been taken to prevent it. The
plantation was situated in a valley, and consequently damp; but in all other
respects healthy. Observing that the negro midwives were not very nice in their
choice of the instrument with which they cut the umbilical cord, he suspected
that the rubiginous particles might produce such irritation as to cause the
fatal disease in question. Having this in view, he directed the midwives to
dress the part with a folded piece of soft linen, well smoaked in spirit of
turpentine, instead of the common way. They attended to his directions; and not
a single infant has died on the estate since. The practice, in situations
wherein this disease has occurred, has become general, and has been attended
with success in every instance. It may not be useless to add, that several
planters, both here and in Tobago, make use of this application to lambs,
calves, and colts, with equal success. As many of these animals die soon after
they are dropped in moist and marshy situations of this country, the adoption
of this simple preventive may be a general benefit to the inhabitants.

The island is frequently visited by the small pox, sometimes of the confluent
or malignant kind. It has in almost every instance been introduced from the
coast of Africa, in the slave-ships; on board of which it frequently breaks
out, and commits dreadful ravages on the passage to the West Indies; but as
inoculation is always had recourse to at the time, or soon after this disease
appears, the mortality occasioned by it is seldom considerable. The chicken-pox
is common almost every year; and as it appears without any evident
introduction, it may be considered as more an endemic than a foreign disease.
It is always mild, and requires no other treatment than a laxative at the turn,
or when the pustules dry.

The measles and hooping cough seldom appear here; for in the course of ten
years I recollect only two instances of the former, and one of the latter: they
were of a very bad kind, and proved fatal to many children.

No instance, as far as I have been able to learn, has occurred of a bite or
sting of any poisonous reptile, snake, or serpent; and indeed of the latter
there are only two kinds found, both of which are said to be harmless.
Scorpions, scolopendras, a large species of spider called Tarantula, and two or
three species of wasps, are sometimes troublesome, and by their stings occasion
painful inflammations; but are never poisonous. The sting-rays very frequently
inflict very dangerous wounds; and the prickles of the sea-eggs, often
unperceived, give the unwary a shock as violent and unexpected as that of
electricity. The little wounds they inflict, though not dangerous, are
exceedingly troublesome and painful. The negroes make use of a very simple
method of extracting these prickles; they place the patient's foot over a fire
as close as possible, without burning, and when it is sufficiently heated, they
rub it well with candle-grease, and repeat the operation three or four times;
they then wrap it up, and a few hours after, the prickles fall out. The pain
ceases after the first application of the heat and grease.

I have already observed, that Grenada surpasses almost all the Windward and
Leeward islands in the abundance and goodness of its water. I may add, that it
also excels in its medicinal springs: some of these are hot, but the greatest
number are cold. Of the former the most noted are those of Duquesne Valley,
situated in the parish of St. Patrick. The temperature of the hottest of these
springs is 116 degrees; and from their habitudes with precipitants, compared
with Bergman's Analysis, Bergman's Chemical Essays, Vol. 1.
they appear to contain a considerable portion of iron, magnesia, a mineral
alkali, and common salt. Aerated acid is not indicated by limewater, or the
blue flowers of the vervein. Their smell is pretty much hepatised; from which,
and their heat, it is probable they contain a small portion of sulphur in a
very volatile state. They have been used frequently internally and externally,
with considerable advantage in chronic rheumatisms, herpetic complaints, old
ulcers, scrophula, and leprosy; but they rise in a country so extremely rugged,
and unfortunately so little attention has been paid to the road or path which
leads to them, that much general benefit cannot be expected from them. Of the
cold medicinal springs, the most remarkable are those of Montrose and the
Hermitage, in the parish of St. Patrick; and those of Beaugency, in St.
George's parish. The temperature of all these is 78 degrees; and from their
habitudes with precipitants, they appear (particularly the two former) to
contain a large portion of vitriolated magnesia and a mineral alkali. The
Beaugency water appears to be true Seltzer, containing a much larger proportion
of aerated acid than the former. Besides these springs, there are found in a
few places, particularly on the Hermitage, mephitic exhalations, of a most
pernicious nature. The Hermitage vapor issues from a small hole in the side of
a rising ground, within a few yards of the river Antoine; no water rises with
it, but in issuing it makes a singular hissing noise. Around the opening from
whence this stream of mephitic air comes, a number of birds, lizards, and other
small animals are found dead; and experiments have been made which prove its
deadly influence on dogs and fowls.

The year in the West Indies is divided into two portions; the one called the
Dry, the other the Wet season. Some divide each of these also into two; which
they call the Long and Short winter, and the Short and Long summer. The latter
division has been made by the French; but as it is not always observable, it
will be sufficient barely to have mentioned it. What is generally understood by
the expression Dry Season, is the portion of the year contained between the
beginning of December and the end of April. The commencement and termination
however of this season are not always observed to happen at those periods; for
the rains may continue till the beginning of January, recur frequently during
the vernal months, and set in again at the beginning of April; or not appear
till June or July. It is fortunate however for the planter, that these
deviations from the usual course of the season seldom occur; for, when they do,
their effects are often fatally experienced on the extent of the crops. The dry
season, in its ordinary course, is pleasant and healthy, the sky exhibiting a
vast expanse of azure, uninterrupted by clouds or any dense medium; and the
atmosphere being pure, dry, and-temperate. It is almost constantly ushered in
by northerly, or northwesterly winds, and these and north-easterly winds
prevail with little variation the whole of its continuance; but are most
chilly, dry, and boisterous in the months of December, January, and February.
If however the wind, during this season, should in the daytime blow from any
other point but those I have mentioned, it always toward the close of evening
returns to a northerly point. Thus it sometimes happens in extraordinary years,
that from 6 A. M. to 7 or 8 P. M. the wind is from a point between S. and E. or
S. and W. but, at the latter hour, it suddenly veers round to the northward,
and continues so till the following morning, when it again changes to the
southward. The total suspension of vegetation during this season is surprising,
and seems to be occasioned by the want of moisture, and the exsiccative
shrivelling quality of the northerly winds. That it is to be attributed chiefly
to the latter is evident, from the inefficacy of the rain which sometimes falls
very plentifully in the dry months, in exciting a spring in vegetables: when
however they are longer continued than usual, their vegetative power faintly
discovers itself; but is never permanent. All deciduous trees are striped of
their leaves; the pastures become parched and brown; the cane-fields lose their
vivid green, and assume the autumnal hue of northern climes. The latter months
of this season are the most pleasant of the year; Nature beginning to recover
from the torpor in which she had been sunk, gives new life to the whole
vegetable creation; and so great is the vegetative power displayed at this
period, that leaves and blossoms are seen shooting forth on the same tree, with
fruits already formed, and fast approaching to maturity. Nothing can equal the
delightful freshness of the mornings, and the softness of the evenings of April
and May, in this season. The atmosphere is dry, cool, and saturated with the
perfume of a thousand blossoms; verdure is universal, and tempered with the
softest tints of spring; the winds are gentle and soft, and never charged with
the sultry heats of July.

The rainy season includes the summer, autumn, and generally the first month of
winter; its approach is awful, and always indicated by thick fog resting on the
tops of the higher mountains; this is soon followed by heavy, black, watery
clouds, slowly rolling along from the north-east, in terrific volumes,
enveloping the mountains, and darting bright electric coruscations from their
edges. These clouds, sometimes bursting in the mountainous tracts, are suddenly
converted into torrents of water, which frequently, inundating the country
below, commit considerable devastation in their progress; a body of water, not
unfrequently six feet high, rolling down the beds of the rivulets, carries
every thing before it, and discolours the sea several miles in every direction
from their mouths, with the ochry earth of the interior country. But although
this portion of the year is called the rainy season, to distinguish it from
that just described, we are not to imagine that it is composed of a continued
series of rainy weather, comfortless, gloomy, and never brightened by the
cheerful-rays of the sun. Many successive days occur of dry weather; and it
sometimes happens, that the length of time without rain endangers the success
of the planters exertions. These dry tracts chiefly occur in August and
September, and are almost unsupportably sultry and close. The rains fall in
astonishing quantities; -- but as I unfortunately possessed no means of
measuring it, I cannot with precision say what the average quantity is: no idea
however can be formed of it from what falls in Europe. During the rainy season,
southerly, easterly, and westerly winds prevail, and are always hot and sultry.

The months of March and September, when the equinoxes happen, are particularly
stormy; the winds are uncommonly boisterous, but generally unaccompanied with
rain. Gusts such as are every autumn and spring experienced in the continent of
North America, are never known to happen here; and hurricanes, which often lay
waste the sister colonies to the northward, seldom occur in Grenada; or if they
do, they are little more violent than common gales of wind. The dreadful
hurricane of the year 1780, which proved so destructive in Jamaica, Barbados,
Antigua, Dominica, St. Vincent, and the French islands, did no other damage
here than throwing down some trees, and a few old buildings. A few neutral
vessels indeed were driven ashore in the carenage; but it was an event to be
attributed entirely to the negligence of their captains.

The regular succession of sea and land-breezes, so constantly observed in the
larger islands, and on the continent, never occurs here: but there are two
periods in the twenty-four hours, during which there is a perfect calm, and
consequently a very disagreeable oppressive heat, from eight till ten in the
morning, and from two till four in the afternoon.

That northerly and easterly winds are the most prevalent, is demonstrated by
the manner in which all the trees on the eastern side of the mountains are
bent: they are all, particularly those growing on the most exposed situations,
stinted and dwarf; and their branches are inclined to the southwest. Next to
these is the southerly; and the least frequent is the westerly.

Lightning, and its consequence thunder, are phenomena not so frequent in
Grenada as the situation of the island and its high conical mountains might
induce us to expect; nor are the flashes and the explosions so tremendous, by
any means, as they are in the southern states of North America. It seldom
happens that lightning is the cause of much mischief here; for in the course of
twelve years, I know of only two instances of its mischievous effects. In the
dry season they never occur: they are generally preceded by whitish clouds
hanging on the sides and tops of the mountains, in the form of huge bales; and
fleecy clouds dispersed in various forms throughout the sky. Southerly winds
accompany them generally.

The thermometer I used is a mercurial one, graduated by Fahrenheit's scale,
and mode by Fraser, London. The hall in which it hung is reckoned one of the
coolest rooms in St. George's, situated on the summit of the part of the town
called The Hill: it was almost constantly exposed to a current of air, which
passed between the door and one of the windward windows; and the height of the
mercury in the tube was almost always taken at 7 A. M. at 1 P. M. and at 10 P.
M. The choice of these periods in the twenty-four hours, arose from my
observation of the following fact: At 7 A. M. the heat begins to increase, and
continues to do so till 1 P. M.; from which time till 4 P. M. it is stationary;
it then begins to diminish, and continues to do so till about 10 P. M.; from
which till 7 A. M. it is again stationary. This routine of temperature is
disturbed only when any remarkable change takes place in the atmosphere, such
as much rain, attended with strong wind; and during some part of the dry
season, when, as I have already observed, south-easterly winds are succeeded at
night by northerly ones. Thus, from the latter cause, the thermometer sinks in
the course of the night two, three, or four degrees; so that when it is 80 at
10 P.M. it will be only 76, 77, or 78, at 7 of the following morning, in
January, February, and March. A fall of rain, accompanied with wind, has a very
remarkable effect on the thermometer. The greatest change I ever observed was
ten degrees; the least, four; so that the medium may be about seven degrees.
These changes are most frequent in the summer and autumnal months, when the
rains fall in greatest abundance: and when there is often an alternate
succession of rain with cold, and dry weather with heat. It may not be
unnecessary to observe, however, that during rain, should the atmosphere remain
still, the thermometer continues at the same height as before it began to rain.
I have repeatedly observed this, even when the quantity of rain has been very
considerable; and it is a phenomenon which should not surprise us, since we
know the great share which winds, or currents of air, have in evaporation, and
this in the production of cold. See Essays and Observations, Physical and
Literary, Vol. II. p. 159.


When I have exposed the thermometer to the direct rays of the sun, in an
enclosed yard, where the wind could have little effect upon it, the mercury has
risen in ten minutes to 130 degrees, or 42 degrees above its stationary point
at noon, in the hall where the instrument was before suspended; but as the
reflection from the walls of the yard might considerably increase the heat, I
did not consider this as a fair trial of the natural heat of the sun. I have
therefore frequently, on clear days, suspended the thermometer in a gallery,
directly exposed to the sun's rays, and found that the mercury rose to 113
degrees, and once to 120 degrees at noon, or generally about 30 degrees above
the usual height in the shade at noon.

Another thing to be observed, is the difference between the heat of the air at
the hottest time of the day, and during the night; or the periods during which
the thermometer is generally stationary. The medium of the heat in the shade at
noon, or 1 P. M. is about 83, 30; at night 74; so that in general the
difference is about 9 degrees. I have not found that the degree of heat in the
ground, and first floors of my house, differed much from that in the upper,
which was covered with a tiled roof: and consequently the air contained in it
we would expect should be more affected by the heat of the sun than the lower
floors. In general, this difference has never exceeded 1 degree.

I may here take notice of the difference of temperature produced in water, by
the heat of the atmosphere, during the day and night. It shows how extremely
sensible the human body is to the smallest deviation, from the usual heat it is
exposed to; and that our sense of cold, in this climate, is merely relative. At
10 P. M. into a Spanish unglazed earthen guglet (of that kind generally used
here for cooling water) full of water, I plunged a small thermometer: in five
minutes the mercury sunk 3 degrees, its stationary point then, in the open air,
being 82 degrees. I then placed the guglet in an open window, where it was left
till 6 A. M. On plunging the thermometer into the water, the mercury sunk to 72
degrees, or 10 degrees lower than its stationary point during the night. This
degree of coolness in the water was, to my taste, rather cold and chilling. At
1 P. M. I plunged the thermometer into a guglet of water which had been
standing in the shade all the forenoon, when the mercury fell to 82 degrees, or
2 degrees lower than the heat of the room at that time. It is to be observed,
that the guglets used here, for the purpose of cooling water, are brought from
South America, are porous, and of course a considerable evaporation takes place
from all their external surface.

It is not at all surprising that this country should be subject to
earthquakes. The conical hills and mountains into which the surface of the
island is divided; the lakes One of these, called the Grand Etang, or Great
Lake, to distinguish it from another on the windward side of the island, is
situated in a circular basin, cut out of the summit of the highest mountain of
the island. It is about a mile in circumference; and its depth is, in general,
about 14 feet. The other, called the Lake of the River Antoine, retains the
appearance of an extinguished volcano, much more perfectly than the Grand
Etang. The hollow which contains it is perfectly circular, and gradually slopes
from the brim to the edge of the water, which is of very considerable depth.
contained in what have every appearance of having been once the craters of
immense volcanos; the regular horizontal strata of the substance called Tuf,
which seems still to retain many of the distinguishing marks of lava; these and
several other peculiarities to be observed in the structure of this as well as
most of the windward islands, give us room to believe that volcanos did once
exist in them; and we know that where volcanos are, or have been, earthquakes
are very frequent. In the course of the three first years of my residence in
Grenada, there were five earthquakes. The first and most violent happened on
the 22d of December, 1784, about 2 P. M. In St. George's it continued about a
minute and a half, and ran from about N. N. W. to S. S. E. It shook the earth
in a violent manner, and when strongest, occasioned an undulating motion of the
surface. It was attended with a hollow rumbling noise, like distant thunder.
The atmosphere was still and close while it lasted; the thermometer 82. The sea
did not appear to be in the least agitated. The marshes at Calivini were much
agitated by it; (...) of their surface was perceived to be very great, and to
continue some time after the shock ceased. On the windward side of the island,
the shock continued about two minutes; and was much more violent than in town.
The captain of a ship, at that time off the coast of the island, said, the
sensation which the shock occasioned on board, was similar to that of the
ship's bottom rubbing against rocks; but that the sea was not agitated. The
same was observed by some gentlemen going to Cariacou. On the 24th of April,
1785, about 40 minutes past six A. M. a shock of an earthquake was felt, which
lasted only about two seconds; but about 20 seconds after, a second was felt,
which continued a little longer. It was very gentle, was not general, and
appeared to run from N. N. W. to S. S. E. The morning was calm. On the 26th of
May, about midnight, a shock was generally felt, running from about W. to E.;
it continued about 30 seconds, and shook the houses very considerably. On the
29th of the same month, about 10 P. M. another shock was generally felt, and
continued about 20 seconds. And on the 16th of January, 1786, in the morning,
three shocks were perceived running from N. N. W. to S. S. E. the two first
were very slight; but the third was violent. During the seven last years, not a
single shock has occurred: an extraordinary circumstance, considering their
frequency in the preceding years. In those islands, however, on which the
volcanic appearances are more perfect than they are here, such as St. Vincent,
St. Lucia, and Dominica, earthquakes are much more frequent and violent.

Water-spouts are very rarely seen around Grenada; for during the last ten
years, I recollect only two.

The barometer does not appear to be affected much in this climate. A moist
atmosphere, with southerly and westerly winds, makes the mercury to sink a
little; and northerly winds, with a dry cold atmosphere, make it rise. But
notwithstanding the irregularity of temperature, and the moisture which
(prevails more or less throughout the whole year here) of the atmosphere, the
greatest range of the barometer during any year, has not exceeded one inch and
five-tenths. This is, however, considerably greater than that which happens at
Barbados, where the greatest range is not more than half an inch. In uncommon
years, when a long continuance of northerly winds produces a degree of cold in
the atmosphere extremely disagreeable to our feelings, the barometer has stood
for a month together at 30 degrees. In the months of July and August, when much
rain falls, it has continued at 28: 5 several days successively; and the
atmosphere then is insufferably close.

I have already mentioned, that it was not in my power to determine the
quantity of rain, owing to my not being possessed of the proper instruments;
but with a view to remedy this defect, I have, following the example of the
late Dr. Cleghorn in his account of the weather at Minorca, marked the rainy
days, and the proportion they bore to each other, by dots. Thus, drizzling rain
is denoted by., showery by.., heavy rain by..., and excessive rain by....

Having premised these general observations on the face of the country, on the
productions, on the endemial diseases, and on the weather of Grenada, I shall
now proceed to describe the changes which took place in each month of the years
1784, 1785, 1786, and 1793; and subjoin a table of the highest, lowest, and
medium height of the thermometer during that time.

1784.
JANUARY. My observations on the weather commenced on the 22d, from which, till
the end of the month, the weather was in general dry; the atmosphere too was
clear, pure, and agreeably warm.

Rainy days, 25th, 30th, and 31st..

Wind, 8 days Northerly. Therm. H. 85 M. 83 2 days N. E. L. 81

FEBRUARY. Although this month began with heavy rain, yet it was generally dry,
and in temperature similar to the last.

Rainy days, 1st.... 3d, 4th, 12th, and 29th..

Wind, 10 days Southerly. Therm. H. 85 M. 83 19 days Northerly. L. 81

MARCH. The first week of this month was remarkable for the boisterous N.
Easterly wind which prevailed. The remainder of the month was in general dry;
sometimes calm and suffocating; but the atmosphere, though thus still and
sultry, was temperate with regard to heat.

Rainy days, 3d... 12th, and 22d..

Wind, 19 days Northerly. Therm. H. 86 M. 84 8 days Southerly. L. 83 4 days
Easterly.

APRIL. Several days of this month were rainy, and the certain presage of the
approach of the wet season, fog on the tops of the highest mountains began to
appear on the 2d. The atmosphere in general was loaded with vapor, and its
temperature became warmer.

Rainy days, 2, 3, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 30.. 8, 17, 19, and 27...

Wind, 3 days Northerly. Therm. H. 86 M. 83 18 days Southerly. L. 81 9 days
Easterly.

MAY. Almost the whole of this month was rainy, and, being windy at the same
time, the temperature of the atmosphere was generally cool, though the heat
indicated by the thermometer was much greater than during the preceding month.
Much thunder and lightning toward the middle and end of the month.

Rainy days, 1, 2, 3, and 4.. 10, 11, 12, and 15... from 19 to 30....

Wind, 23 days Southerly. Therm. H. 87 M. 84 7 days Easterly. L. 82

JUNE. Excepting a few days about the middle, the whole of this month was also
rainy, attended with considerable variations of the thermometer, the mercury
during rain falling to 76 as on the 25th, and rising afterward to 84.

Rainy days from 1 to 10.... from 11 to 17. 17, 18.... from 20 to 25.... 30....

Wind, 17 days N. E. Therm. H. 86 M. 85 14 days Easterly. L. 84

JULY. The greatest part of this month like the last, only toward the middle
much boisterous wind from S. E. E. and N. E. Several days atmosphere still and
suffocating. Some thunder and lightning.

Rainy days, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 30...12,
19, 25, 26, 27, 28..

Wind, 11 days N. E. Therm. H. 87 M. 84 12 days Southerly. L. 82 8 days
Easterly.

AUGUST. Except two or three days, this month was remarkably rainy, with
scarcely any wind, and consequently very great heat. Much thunder and lightning.

Rainy days, the whole except 5, 6, 21, 27,....

Wind, 27 days N. E. Therm. H. 88 M. 85 almost calm. L. 84 4 days S. E.

SEPTEMBER. This month, like August, had only a few days dry weather; and the
thunder and lightning were infinitely more tremendous. On the 2d the lightning,
being particularly frequent and sharp, struck the powder magazine of Richmond
Hill fort, damaged the work very considerably, and killed four soldiers of the
60th regiment.

Rainy days 2, 9, 11....3, 4, 5, 6, 10, and from 12 to 30..

Wind, 30 days Easterly. Therm. H. 86 M. 83 L. 81

OCTOBER -- Was rainy also, and in general calm. No thunder or lightning.

Rainy days, from 1 to 6, from 9 to 14, and from 21 to 25..7, and from 15 to
19...8, 20....

Wind, 11 days N. E. There. H. 88 M. 85 10 days Southerly. L. 82 10 days
Easterly.

NOVEMBER -- Was much the same, but without heavy rain.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Wind, 30 days Northerly. Therm. H. 84 M. 83 L. 82

DECEMBER. This month in general pleasant and temperate during the day; but the
sudden change in the temperature of the air during the night, rendered that
season disagreeable. Thermometer generally fell to 74 degrees in the night.
Earthquake on the 22d.

Rainy days, 4, 5, 12, 13, 14, 19, 22, 25, 28, 30, 31.. 23, 24...

Wind, 28 days N. E. Therm. H. 84 M. 82 6/32 3 days S. W. L. 78

1785.
JANUARY. This year began with rain: a circumstance very uncommon. The
atmosphere, though generally clear, was cool.

Rainy days, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30..

Wind, 31 days Northerly. Therm. H. 82 M. 80 L. 80

FEBRUARY. Except one day, the whole of February was dry, with sometimes a
sultriness in the daytime, and chill during the night, but especially toward
morning.

Rainy day, 8..

Wind, 26 days Northerly. There. H. 85 M. 82 22/28 2 days Westerly. L. 82

MARCH. The first ten days were dry and agreeable; the rest in general rainy,
with boisterous northerly winds toward the end. Atmosphere loaded with vapor.

Rainy days, 11, 14, 15, 16, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29.. 26...

Wind, 16 days N. E. Therm. H. 85 M. 83 19/31 11 days N. W. L. 83 4 days
Easterly.

APRIL -- Was in general dry, but excessively windy from the eastward.

Rainy days, 14, 30.... 19, 23, 24, 25, 26..

Wind, 3 days Northerly. There. H. 85 M. 81 1/30 27 days Easterly. L. 80

MAY -- Was generally rainy, with boisterous gales from N. E. and E. Atmosphere
loaded with vapor, and frequently hot and suffocating. Toward the end of the
month two earthquakes, and some thunder and lightning.

Rainy days, 1, 2, 3, 4, 24, 25, 26... 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22,
23..

Wind, 6 days Northerly. There. H. 87 M. 84 22 days Easterly. L. 83 3 days calm.

JUNE. This month was frequently wet, warm, and squally, particularly about the
middle, with some thunder and lightning.

Rainy days, 1, 4, 5, 10, 11, 16, 21, 30... 6, 7, 8, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24,
27..

Wind, 1 day Northerly. There. H. 87 M. 84/530 29 days Easterly. L. 81

JULY. For the most part rainy, calm, and sultry, with frequently thick fog.

Rainy days, 8, 11, 14... 4, 9, 10, 12, 15, 16, and from 21 to 31..

Wind, 2 days S. W. Therm. H. 86 M. 84 21/31 28 days Easterly. L. 84

AUGUST. Few days of this month were rainy. The weather particularly at the
beginning and toward the end, was remarkably dry, calm, and sultry, with a
great deal of thunder and lightning, unaccompanied with rain.

Rainy days, 6, 10, 25, 26... Therm. on the 24th, 88; on the 26th, 78.

Wind, 6 days S. W. There. H. 88 M. 80 25/31 15 days Easterly. L. 78 10 days
calm.

SEPTEMBER -- Began with dry serene weather; but after the first week it
suddenly changed to the most tempestuous since January, 1784, and continued so
till the end of the month. The wind frequently blew from almost every point of
the compass, attended with thunder and lightning, and such prodigious falls or
rather floods of rain, as overflowed the low lands, and did very considerable
damage. The thermometer too varied very much. It was twice at 89 degrees, and
once at 90, and, at one time, as low as 78 degrees at noon.

Rainy days, 9, 10, and from 12 to 27.... 28, 29, 30..

Wind, 11 days Easterly. There. H. 90 M. 86 4/30 19 extremely variable and
violent. L. 78

OCTOBER -- Was altogether rainy, cloudy, and chilly. On the 8th the mercury
sunk to 74 degrees at noon.

Rainy days 8.... the rest..

Wind, 12 days Northerly. There. H. 85 M. 80 2 days S. W. L. 74 17 days
Westerly.

NOVEMBER. This month was generally rainy also, and sometimes extremely
tempestuous. The low lands were often inundated.

Rainy days all, except 19, 20, 21...

Wind, 30 days N. E. There. H. 84 M. 80 1/2 L. 80

DECEMBER. Former part of the month dry and pleasant, with easterly winds;
latter part extremely rainy and stormy, with southerly winds.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Wind, 15 days Easterly. There. H. 88 M. 81 16 days Southerly. L. 75

1786.
JANUARY -- Was in general dry, and remarkable for the boisterous N. W. and
northerly winds which prevailed almost throughout the whole month, and the
uncommon chillness and dampness of the air during the night, the thermometer
being then almost uniformly at 74, a heavy dew, and the wind always northerly.
An earthquake on the 16th.

Rainy days, 13, 14, 15... 16, 17, 18..

Wind, 25 days N. W. There. H. 84 M. 83 6 days S. E. L. 82

FEBRUARY. The weather continued in the same state.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Wind, 28 days Northerly. There. H. 84 M. 83 L. 82

MARCH. The former part of the month much the same also; the latter warmer,
with the wind more southerly.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Wind, 14 days Northerly. There. H. 86 M. 84 17 days Southerly. L. 83

APRIL. The first part of the month rainy and windy; the latter warmer and
drier, but equally windy from N. W. W. and S. W.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Wind, 10 days Northerly. There. H. 86 M. 84 11 days Southerly. L. 83 9 days
Westerly.

MAY -- Began with dry pleasant weather; but in general it was very variable,
with lowering clouds from the N. E. and fog on the tops of the mountains.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Wind, 25 days Northerly. There. H. 86 M. 84 6 days Easterly. L. 85

JUNE. A few days of the beginning pleasant; from the 8th to the 17th,
variable; afterward till the 27th, almost constant heavy rain, with heavy
black clouds from the N. E. The rest of the month pleasant.

Rainy days, 9, 10, 12, 15, 16, 17.. from 18 to 27...

Wind, 16 days Easterly. Therm. H. 89 M. 83 14 days S. E. L. 77

JULY. Almost the whole of the month of July very rainy, warm, and sometimes
suffocating. On the 6th, in the morning, when dry, thermometer 86; at noon,
when very heavy rain fell, 76; soon after, 84; and, late in the evening,
stationary at 82.

Rainy days, from 1 to 4, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, and 31.. 6, 17, 18, 19, 22.... 5, 7...

Wind, 8 days Northerly. There. H. 88 M. 87 7/31 8 days Southerly. L. 76 15 days
Easterly.

AUGUST -- Was altogether rainy; but toward the end the rain fell in
prodigious quantity, and accompanied with a great deal of thunder and
lightning, and squalls of wind from S. E.

Rainy days, 1, 3, 4, and to 20.. 25, 26, 27.. 2, 21 to 24... 28, 29, 31....

Wind, 28 days Southerly. There. H. 87 M. 82 28/32; 3 days Easterly. L. 78

SEPTEMBER. The violence and long continuance of the heat, and the almost
constant dryness of the weather during this month were so uncommon, that men
who had lived upwards of forty years in Grenada, and the other West India
Islands, could not recollect any year equally remarkable. On six days the
thermometer rose to 90; on fifteen to 89; and on three to 88.

Rainy days, 2, 4, 13, 19, 30.. 3, 17...

Wind, 14 days Southerly. There. H. 90 M. 88 11/30 9 days Easterly. L. 84 5 days
Westerly. 2 days calm.

OCTOBER. The first week of this month was exactly similar to the whole of the
last; but afterward there was much rain, with gusts of wind, and sometimes
thunder and lightning. More rain fell during the night than at any other time;
and then, particularly toward the end of the month, we had excessively
boisterous south-easterly wind.

Rainy days, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14... 15 to 18, and 20 to 24.. 9, 24 to 31....

Wind, 1 day Northerly. Therm. H. 90 10 days Southerly. 11 days Easterly. 8
days Westerly.

NOVEMBER -- Began with heavy rain and boisterous south-easterly winds, which
were more particularly so during the night; and then accompanied with thunder
and lightning. The rest of the month, except a few days about the middle and
end, was dry and tolerably pleasant.

Rainy days, 1, 3, 4, 7, 16, 17, 25, 26, 27... 2, 5, 6....

Wind, 1 day Northerly. There. H. 88 M. 83 24/30 12 days Southerly. L. 78 13
days Easterly. 4 days Westerly.

DECEMBER -- Was in general rainy, and sometimes extremely tempestuous; N. W.
and N. E. winds chiefly prevailing, occasioned a disagreeable coolness in the
air, which was most remarkable during the nights and mornings.

No account kept of the rainy days.

Wind, 15 days Northerly. There. H. 86 M. 84 23/31 14 days Easterly. L. 77 2
days Westerly.

1793.
JANUARY. Generally rainy, with northerly winds.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 81 89 83 L. 77 83 78 M. 79 86 80;

FEBRUARY. Generally rainy (an uncommon circumstance) with north-easterly winds.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 82 88 82 L. 77 81 77 M. 79 84 79

MARCH. The first few days showery; afterward mild and pleasant, with easterly
and southerly winds.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 80 87 82 L. 79 80 76 M. 79 83 79

APRIL. Very little rain, and more mild than March.

No account taken of the rainy days.

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 82 87 82 L. 78 84 78 M. 80 85 80

MAY. Dry and dusty till the 16th, afterward rainy; and on the 30th thunder
and lightning for the first time. Wind generally S. E.

Rainy days, 16, 24.... from 16 to 24, and from 29 to 31...

Noon. Morn. Even. Therm. H. 82 87 84 L. 79 80 80 M. 80 83 82

JUNE -- Was, three or four days excepted, rainy throughout, with frequently
heavy squalls from the S. E. and much thunder and lightning.

Rainy days, 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 16, 17, 21, 27, 28... 3, 4, 5, 11, 13, 19, 20,
30.. 10, 14, 22, 26, 29....

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 82 87 82 L. 77 77 77 M. 79 82 79

JULY, -- Till about the 11th, was dry, but squally from the eastward. The rest
of the month rainy, with north-easterly winds, and much thunder and lightning;
mountains generally enveloped in fog, and atmosphere loaded with vapor.

Rainy days, 4, 5, 6, 15, 17, 22, 23.. 13, 16, 3... 11, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26,
27, 30....

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 81 88 83 L. 77 77 78 M. 79 82 80

AUGUST. Very little rain fell during this month; but the atmosphere was
generally excessively close, sultry, and loaded with vapor. The winds were
very variable; but for the most part a calm. Some thunder and lightning.

Rainy days, 21, 29.. 10, 11, 20, 26... 22....

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 82 89 85 L. 78 80 79 M. 80 84 82

SEPTEMBER. The greatest part of this month remarkably rainy, attended
frequently with most vivid lightning and tremendous thunder, and violent
squalls from the S. E. The heat was very variable; and on the 5th, greater than
I ever observed it. At 11 A. M. the mercury rose to 88; at 1 P. M. to 92; at 4
P. M. it fell to 89; and at 10 P. M. to 84. As this heat was not attended with
rain, and as no clouds interposed, every living creature was oppressed in an
uncommon degree by it. The wind generally southerly.

Rainy days, 4, 12, 20, 23.. 11, 16, 17, 30... 2, 3, 8, 13, 19, 27, 28, 29....

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 83 92 84 L. 79 80 78 M. 81 86 81

OCTOBER. Much rain fell this month also; but not in the violence of last
month. Squally from S. E.; and some thunder and lightning.

Rainy days, 16, 22, 24, 27.. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 23, 30... 17, 25, 30....

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 84 90 86 L. 77 80 78 M. 80 85 82

NOVEMBER. Five days excepted, the whole of this month uncommonly rainy; the
sky almost continually obscured by heavy, black clouds; and the mountains
enveloped in white clouds. A great deal of thunder and lightning. The wind
chiefly S. E.

Rainy days, 2, 15, 19, 20, 23.. 4, 7, 9, 10, 14, 17, 21, and from 24 to 29...
5, 6, 8, 11, 12, 13, 16, 22....

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 82 88 82 L. 76 78 78 M. 79 83 80

DECEMBER -- Was also very rainy; and, contrary to the usual course of the
seasons, southerly winds prevailed. No thunder or lightning.

Rainy days, 2, 3, 4, 12, 13, 17, 23, 26, 29.. 21, 22, 25, 28, 30...

Morn. Noon. Even. Therm. H. 81 88 82 L. 77 80 77 M. 79 84 79

A TABLE, showing the greatest, least, and medium Height of the Mercury in each
Month of the Years 1784, 1785, 1786, and 1793, at St. George's, Grenada.

Months. 1784. 1785. 1786. 1793. 7 A. M. 1 P. M. 10 P. M. January. H. 85 82 84
81 89 83 L. 81 80 82 77 83 78 M. 83 80 16/31 83 11/31 79 86 80 February. H. 85
85 84 82 88 82 L. 81 82 82 77 81 77 M. 83 82 22/28 83 79 84 79 March. H. 86 85
86 80 87 82 L. 83 83 83 79 80 76 M. 84 83 19/31 84 79 83 79 April. H. 86 85 86
82 87 82 L. 81 83 83 78 84 78 M. 83 81 1/30 84 80 85 80 May. H. 87 87 86 82 87
84 L. 82 83 85 79 80 80 M. 84 25/31 84 12/31 84 80 83 82 June. H. 86 87 89 82
87 82 L. 84 81 77 77 77 77 M. 85 84 5/30 83 79 82 79 July. H. 87 86 88 81 88 83
L. 82 84 76 77 77 78 M. 84 84 21/31 87 7/31 79 82 80 August. H. 88 88 87 82 89
85 L. 84 78 78 78 80 79 M. 85 80 25/31 82 28/31 80 84 82 September. H. 86 90 90
83 92 84 L. 81 78 84 79 80 78 M. 83 86 4/30 88 11/30 81 86 81 October. H. 88 85
90 84 90 86 L. 82 74 79 77 80 78 M. 85 80 87 24/31 80 85 82 November. H. 84 84 88
82 88 82 L. 82 80 78 76 78 78 M. 83 81 83 24/30 79 83 80 December. H. 84 88 86 81
88 82 L. 78 75 77 77 80 77 M. 82 6/31 81 84 23/31 79 84 79 A TABLE of the WINDS.
1784. 1785. 1786. Months. Northerly. Southerly. Easterly. Westerly. Northerly.
Southerly. Easterly. Westerly. Northerly. Southerly. Easterly. Westerly. Jan. 8
2 31 25 6 Feb. 19 10 26 2 28 Mar. 19 8 4 16 4 11 14 17 Apr. 3 18 9 3 27 10 11 9
May 23 7 6 22 25 6 June 17 14 1 29 15 16 July 11 12 8 28 2 8 8 15 Aug. 27 4 15
6 28 3 Sept. 30 6 7 11 6 14 9 5 Oct. 11 10 10 12 2 17 1 10 11 8 Nov. 30 30 1 12
13 4 Dec. 28 3 10 20 15 14 2 Tot. 173 85 84 3 141 29 136 44 127 115 93 28

From the foregoing Table of the Winds it appears, that, taking the average of
three years, the Northerly are to the Southerly and Easterly, as about 1 to 2;
and to the Westerly, as about 1 to 7. And from the foregoing Table of the
Height of the Mercury, it appears that the average heat of four years at Noon,
is exactly 84 degrees.

Grenada, June 1. 1794.
AN ESSAY, ON THE MALIGNANT PESTILENTIAL FEVER, etc. etc.
THE state of the atmosphere between the tropics, does not seem to admit of the
generation of a high degree of contagion; and wherever such exists, it must
arise from the most unpardonable neglect of cleanliness, and the retention of
contagious effluvia from a total want of ventilation. The heat and consequent
rarefaction of the air in hot climates, where due attention is paid to
cleanliness and ventilation, must prevent infection; and it is probable, that
it is only where there is not a sufficient number of people to render, by their
exertions, the places they inhabit, clean and sweet, that infection takes place
and is retained. The observation made by Dr. Blane on this subject, is, in many
respects, (...) and may be confirmed by that of every intelligent practitioner
in this country. He says, "there is reason to think that the open air very soon
dissipates, and renders inert all infections of the volatile kind; and of
course, the warmer the air is, the more readily it will have this effect. It is
accordingly observed, that infection is much less apt to be generated about the
persons of men, and that it adheres to them for a much less space of time in a
hot climate than in a cold or temperate one." Observations on the Diseases of
Seamen, p. 277.
If infection, or rather the contagion arising from accumulated human effluvia,
is produced only in situations wherein many are crowded together in a
comparatively small space, it becomes a question of no small importance, why
malignant and infectious fevers are never, or very seldom, generated on board
slave-ships. In these the number is much greater than transports, or ships
hired for the purpose of emigration, ever contain: the slaves, in order to
prevent insurrection, are generally kept below, sometimes in irons,
particularly during the night: the smell between decks is intolerably offensive
to those not accustomed to it. Infection, however, is prevented, where so many
causes combine to produce it, by the following means: The crew of a slave-ship
is generally very numerous; whereby the risk, should insurrection happen, is
much lessened, and the attention to the slaves is proportionally increased: the
space between decks is regularly washed every day, if the weather permits: the
slaves are, in parties of thirty or forty, taken on deck in fine weather, their
irons taken off, and they are encouraged, by every possible means, to exercise
themselves by dancing: they have no clothing to which infectious particles can
adhere: their persons are frequently washed: their diet is always composed of
vegetables, without any mixture of animal food, and seasoned highly with
capsicum: their drink is water: and scuttles are cut in the sides of the ship,
by means of which, and windsails when they can be used, there is kept up a
constant change of air, and as free a ventilation as the situation can admit
of. But in every situation wherein the generation of infection is possible, the
prevention of it is proportional to the degree of interest of those who have
the direction and command. In ships of war, in merchant ships, in transports,
and in ships hired for emigration, the interest of those who command extends
not beyond the operation of a sense of duty; of course we find it generally
weak: it is rare, indeed, to meet an instance of the contrary; but where we do,
the effect is conspicuous. In slave-ships, the profits of the captain and
surgeon are more or less, according to the number brought to market and
actually sold; hence their interest in their welfare is great, and their
exertions to maintain it are proportional. It is disgraceful that quaerenda
pecunia primum, virtus post nummos, should be in all ages the prevailing maxim
of mankind.

In ships therefore in which the captains are not urged to prevent infection by
motives of interest, fevers of a malignant and pestilential nature may be
generated, even in hot climates. A ship of this description introduced the very
fatal fever which raged in the port and town of St. George, during several
months of the year 1793. The circumstances of this ship are in many respects
singular. The following account I was favored with by a gentleman, Mr. J.
Paiba.
who was one of the adventurers in the Boullam Scheme, and who, despairing of
success, left the coast of Africa in this ship.

The Hankey sailed from England, in company with another ship, both chartered
by the Sierra Leona company, loaded with stores and adventurers for the
projected colony at Boullam, about the beginning of the month of April, 1792.
When these ships sailed, and during the voyage out, the crews and settlers were
all healthy; and as the latter were in general of the middling class of people,
and appeared to be induced to settle in this new country, more from the
delusive prospect of wealth held out to them, and the fanatic enthusiasm for
the Abolition of the Slave Trade of the moment, than by any deprivation of the
means of subsistence in their own country, no suspicion whatever can be
entertained of the existence of latent infection among them; nor can marsh
effluvia be supposed as the origin of the disease which afterward swept off so
many of those unhappy people. Boullam being surrounded by the sea, enjoys all
the advantages of the sea-breeze; and being dry, and not incommoded by any
marshy tracts, it is considered as the healthiest spot on the windward coast.
This part of Africa is allowed, by all who have visited it, to be uncommonly
healthy and pleasant. I have conversed with several intelligent captains of
slave-ships, who have uniformly agreed in this point: and indeed the appearance
of the slaves brought from the windward coast, part of which this is,
constitutes a convincing proof of the salubrity of the climate. Many travelers
have given their testimony to this effect: the Chevalier de Marchais, in
particular, is very full of its praise: "Le lit de cette riviere (Sierra Leona)
renferme quantite d'isles d'un terrein parfaitement bon, gras et profond qui
produit de lui-meme et presque sans culture tout ce-qui est necessaire a la vie
-- Mais ce qu'on ne scauroit estimer assez, c'est que l'air y est tres pur, et
qu'on n'y est point sujet a ces maladies violentes et dangereuses qui regnent a
la Cote de Guinee et qui ont fait perir tant d'Europeens. See Voyage du Chev.
Des Marchais en Guinee et isles voisines, par le R. Pere Labat. tom. I. p. 58.
-- Dr. Lind also speaks favorably of those islands, and the adjoining
continent. Diseases of Hot Climates, p. 56. Capt. Norris, in his African Pilot,
lately published, the most correct thing of the kind I ever saw, lays down
Boullam in lat. N. 11; and long. W. from Farro, 3; almost in the mouth of Rio
Grande, having Hen Island between it and the ocean. It appears to be nearly
circular, about 15 miles long, and 15 broad; and consequently about 45 round.
It is not inhabited, but occasionally visited by the natives of the adjoining
continent, who have small scattered patches of millet on it. It is, however,
destitute of fresh water; and that, procured by digging temporary wells on the
beech, is brackish, and consequently unwholesome. The negroes of this part of
Africa are ferocious in an extraordinary degree; and are even said to be
cannibals. This circumstance preventing the erection of any sort of
accommodation on shore, during the nine months the Hankey lay there, the
settlers were obliged to live on board; and the rainy season coming on almost
immediately after their arrival, and the heat being at the same time
excessively great, they endeavored to shelter themselves from both, by raising
the sides of the ship several feet, and covering her with a wooden roof.

Among upwards of two hundred people, of whom women and children constituted a
part, thus confined in a sultry, moist atmosphere, cleanliness could not be
well attended to, however well-inclined the people themselves might be. These
circumstances, joined to the depression of mind consequent upon their
disappointment, must certainly be considered as the causes of the malignant
fever which broke out among those unfortunate people, some time after their
arrival at Boullam. And no doubt can be entertained, that neglecting to sweeten
the ship, to ventilate her afterward, and to destroy the clothes, bedding,
etc. of those who died on board, was the sole cause of her retaining the seeds
of infection when she arrived at this port. The following facts will serve to
illustrate this: Capt. Coxe, finding the water at Boullam unwholesome,
proceeded with his ship to Bissao, where there is a Portuguese settlement, for
a supply. The ship was navigated by about twelve seamen, most of whom had not
experienced sickness, and had been probably procured from Sierra Leone: at any
rate they were then taken on board for the first time. Of these, before the
return of the Hankey to Boullam, nine died; and the remainder, with the
captain, were reduced to a deplorable state. The time for which the Hankey was
chartered being expired, Mr. Paiba, with his family, intended to return to
England in her; but as no seamen could be procured, they were obliged to
proceed to sea, having on board the captain sick, and only the mate, Mr. Paiba,
and two seamen to navigate the ship. With much difficulty they arrived at St.
Jago, where they fortunately found the Charon and Scorpion ships of war. Capt.
Dodd, of the former, humanely rendered them every service in his power; and on
leaving them, put two men of each ship on board the Hankey. With this aid they
proceeded to the West Indies; a voyage to England being impracticable in their
wretched state. On the third day after leaving St. Jago, the men they procured
from the ships of war were seized with the fever, which had carried off
three-fourths of those on board the Hankey at Boullam; and having no
assistance, two of the four died: the remaining two were put on shore here in
the most wretched state possible. Capt. Dodd, on his arrival at Barbados from
the coast of Africa, was ordered by Admiral Gardener to convoy the
homeward-bound fleet of merchantmen. In the execution of his orders, he came to
Grenada on the 27th of May, and hearing of the mischief which the Hankey had
been the cause of, mentioned that several of the Charon's and Scorpion's people
were sent on board the Hankey at St. Jago, to repair her rigging, etc. that
from this circumstance, and the communication which his barge's crew had with
that ship, the pestilence was brought on board both ships; and that of the
Charon's crew thirty died; and of the Scorpion's about fifteen. The Hankey
arrived at the Port of St. George on the 19th of February, in the most
distressed situation; and for a few days lay in the Bay, but was afterward
brought into the Carenage. Our Lieut. Governor, Ninian Home, Esquire. sometime
after the disease became epidemic, informed me, that in consequence of the
information he had received of the clothes, etc. of the victims of the sever at
Boullam being still on board the Hankey, he ordered Capt. Coxe to be brought
before him and some gentlemen of the council, etc. He then acknowledged that
all the effects of those who had died were then on board his ship; and said,
that he would not destroy them, unless he was indemnified for the loss he might
sustain, should the heirs of the deceased call on him for those effects. Every
argument was used to induce him to destroy the articles, but the only one which
influences a man of this description, Indemnification; and be of course carried
the seminium of the disease to England when the Hankey sailed with a convoy in
July. Mr. Hume was so impressed with the idea of the danger which Capt. Coxe's
conduct might be productive of on the arrival of the ship in England, that he
wrote to the Secretary of State, stating the danger. Proper notice of this
representation was taken by Government; for the Hankey, I understand, was
obliged to perform quarantine.


From this period are we to date the commencement of a disease before, I
believe, unknown in this country, and certainly unequalled in its destructive
nature.

-- Nova pestis adest: cui nec virtute resisti,
Nec telis, armisve potest --
OVID. The manner in which this disease was first communicated, and its
subsequent progress, too clearly evinced its malignant and pestilential nature.
A Capt. Remington, an intimate acquaintance of Capt. Coxe's, was the first
person who visited the Hankey, after her arrival in St. George's Bay. This
person went on board of her in the evening after she anchored, and remained
three days; at the end of which time he left St. George's, and proceeded in a
Drogher A coasting vessel.
to Grenville Bay, where his ship, the Adventure, lay. He was seized with the
malignant pestilential fever on the passage; and the violence of the symptoms
increased so rapidly, as, on the third day, to put an end to his existence. The
crew of the Defiance of Blythe port, near Newcastle, were the next who suffered
by visiting this ship: the mate, boatswain, and four sailors went on board the
day after her arrival: the mate remained either on deck or in the cabin, but
the rest went below, and staid all night there. All of them were immediately
seized with the fever, and died in three days. The mate was also taken ill,
but, probably from his having been less exposed to the virulence of the
infection, he recovered. The crew of the ship Baillies, from the same imprudent
civility or curiosity, were the next who suffered. These communicated the
infection to the ships nearest them; and it gradually spread from those nearest
the mouth of the Carenage, where the Hankey for some time lay, to those at the
bottom of it; not one escaping, in succession, whatever means the captains took
to prevent it; even the smell and smoke of coal-tar, which is uncommonly
pungent and penetrating, had no effect as a preventive; for the Hope of London,
then careening, and having her bottom paid with this bitumen, received the
infection as extensively as the others, although none of her crew died of it.
In the short space of time from the beginning of March to the end of May, 200
of about 500 sailors, who manned the ships in the regular trade, died of this
fever. If to these we add, those who suffered on board Guinea-ships, and other
transient vessels, the number cannot fall short of 250; which is nearly one in
three, or a third of all the sailors during about ten weeks in harbor. From
the beginning of June till the middle of August, when the disease had nearly
disappeared, the number of sailors was considerably diminished, by two fleets
having sailed for Europe, but the mortality was proportionably great. Although
so great a mortality naturally leads us to form a dreadful idea of the
virulence of the contagion which gave rise to it, it must not remain
unconsidered, that the predisposition of the class of men among whom it
happened, was very great. The sailors were men from the age of fifteen to
fifty; and the circumstances which appeared to predispose them more strongly
than other men to the action of the contagion, were violent exercise in the
sun; the immoderate use of undiluted new rum; bathing in a state of
intoxication, and often when violently heated; sleeping on deck during the
night. Other circumstances which did not depend so much on their own prudence,
no doubt, contributed very much to give the disease so very fatal a tendency:
the damp heat between decks; the excessive filth of most of the ships; and the
uncleanly state of the persons and clothes of the men themselves.

About the middle of April the disease began to appear on shore. The first
house it showed itself in, was that of Messrs. Stowe-wood and Co. situated
close to the (...) and the infection was evidently introduced by a negro-wench,
who took in sailors clothes to wash. The whole of the family were successively
afflicted with it; and by them communicated to all those with whom they had any
intercourse. The difference of temperature, and free circulation of air; the
temperament of the inhabitants, in general, less disposing them to be acted on
by the contagion; the superior care and attention to cleanliness, rendered the
fever infinitely milder when it appeared among the inhabitants. The manner,
however, in which it spread in town, clearly evinced its contagious nature; for
all who from friendship, business, or duty, communicated with the diseased,
were themselves infected: and no instance occurred wherein the contagion could
not be traced to its particular source. A few, who more sedulously avoided the
houses where the infected actually were, escaped: but all the means which come
under the general designation of Prophylactics, were, as may be readily
conceived, totally inefficacious. Of these, the celebrated "Vinaigre de quatre
Voleurs," or the Acetum Aromaticum of the Ed. Ph. was generally used, and
always without success. Camphor, sewed into a small linen bag, and hung round
the neck, was another of this tribe; but equally ineffectual. It will not
appear extraordinary, that the lower classes of men, and those more especially
of loose and debauched manners, should be the most subject to this disease;
their greater exposition to the influence of infection, which their business as
tradesmen rendered necessary, contributed also not a little. But the
description of men by far the most obnoxious to this contagion, and who
suffered most from it, were those lately arrived from Europe; and of them,
those who had never before been in a hot climate. In general, those possessed
of tense fibers and sanguineous temperament, were the most readily infected;
and among whom the disease was most fatal. It is impossible to ascertain with
precision the number of the infected among the inhabitants, and the proportion
of the deaths to that, or to the general number of white males and females in
St. George's; but where certainty is not, conjecture, on good grounds, may be
admitted. We may therefore say, that the proportion which the deaths bore to
the sick, might have been about one to five; and the sick to the total number
of white inhabitants, about one to about one and a half.

That part of the garrison quartered nearest to where the Hankey lay, were the
first of this class of men who received the infection. A barrack, containing
nearly one-half of the 45th regiment, was situated exactly to leeward of the
Hankey, and distant from her about two hundred yards. It is not to be supposed,
that this circumstance alone could be productive of a disease arising from
contagion; but it was so in a secondary manner, by exciting the curiosity of
some of the officers. One of these visited the Hankey, and, with two or three
soldiers who rowed his boat, remained on board some time. The consequence of
this imprudence was fatal to himself almost immediately after; and, in a little
time, to many of the men: all the officers and men were successively seized
with the disease; but it proved fatal only to recruits who had lately joined.
The strength of the regiment at this time was 280, and of these 24 died; so
that the proportion was one to something less than twelve. The smallness of
this proportion arose from the mode of treatment; as will be shown hereafter.

About the beginning of May, the disease made its appearance in the detachment
of Royal Artillery: a circumstance rather extraordinary, as that corpse were
quartered in a situation far removed from the focus of infection. It was
evidently produced, however, by the communication which the gunners, doing duty
in Fort George, had with the 45th regiment; and the predisposition of the men
to receive infection as far as that could be induced by excesses in drinking,
and other irregularities, was by no means less than that of the sailors and
soldiers of the 45th regiment. Of 84 people belonging to the ordnance
department at that time, about 56 were seized with the disease before the first
of July, and of these five died: a trifling mortality, considering the nature
of the complaint. All these men, however, had been about three years in the
country, and consequently suffered less from the disease, than about 27
recruits who joined the artillery in July. Of 26 of these unfortunate men who
were infected, 21 died before the middle of August: a dreadful instance of its
peculiar tendency to prove fatal to strangers to the climate.

About the first of June, the disease began to appear among the negroes of the
estates in the neighborhood of town; and the alarm this occasioned was in
proportion to the interest of those concerned in the safety and welfare of the
slaves; but our apprehensions were soon found groundless; for the disease did
not spread much among them, nor was it marked with the fatality which attended
it when it appeared among the whites. In the course of a month its progress was
so trifling, that only about one in four was seized with it; and the proportion
of its mortality was still more trifling, viz. one to 83. It is more than
probable, that had not this disease been superadded to the cacochymic
complaint, called in this country Mal d'Estomac, in the two cases which
terminated fatally, there would have been no mortality at all occasioned by it.

About the middle of June, the disease broke out in the 67th regiment; and
among the artificers and laborers on Richmond-hill. The infection was
communicated by some of the latter, who had visited their friends in town
laboring under it. All were successively seized with it; but it fell heavier
on the officers than the men, several of the former being young men lately
arrived from Europe. The proportion of deaths was about one to fifteen.

The disease in the course of the months of May, June, and July, appeared in
several distinct and distant parts of the country, whither the infection was
carried by persons who had imprudently visited infected houses in town.

But the infection was not confined to Grenada alone; from this, as a focus, it
spread to the other islands, to Jamaica, St. Domingo, and Philadelphia, by
means of vessels on board of which the infection was retained by the clothes,
more especially the woollen jackets of the deceased sailors.

I have been thus particular in stating the progress of this malignant
pestilential fever, chiefly with a view to demonstrate, 1st, That it was
uncommonly infectious. 2d, That it arose from human contagion, heightened by
various causes to a pestilential degree of violence. And 3d, That, like the
plague, it has been communicated, in every instance, either by actual contact
with an infected person; or, by breathing air charged with effluvia perspired
or discharged from the lungs of an infected person; or by touching the clothes
of or sleeping in a place where an infected person had been.

It is curious, and may be useful, to observe the gradation of this fatal
malady, with respect to the various descriptions of people exposed to its
infection. Neither age nor sex were exempted from its attack; but some were
more obnoxious to it than others; and the color had evidently much influence
in determining its violence. The scale of its violence, or the gradation it
observed with respect to the different classes of the inhabitants, appeared to
be the following:

1. Sailors, more especially the robust and young; those least accustomed to
the climate; and those most given to drinking new rum.

2. Soldiers, more especially recruits lately from Europe; and the most
intemperate.

3. White males in general lately arrived; more especially young men from
Europe.

4. All other white males, more especially the lower classes; and of them the
most intemperate; those debilitated by recent sickness.

5. White females, more especially those connected with the shipping; and those
lately from Europe.

6. People of color, from Mustees to Cabres.

7. Negro-men, more especially sailors and porters.

8. Negro-women, more especially house-wenches.

9. Children, more especially those of color.

The following Table will show at one view the prevalence of the Malignant
Pestilential Fever; and the proportion of its mortality in the town, garrison,
and neighborhood of St. George, from March to the end of August, 1793, when it
entirely disappeared.

Description of People. Of the general Number Sick. Of the Sick died. Sailors
One in about 1 One in about 3 45th Regiment 1 12 67th Regiment 1 15 Royal
Artillery 1 2/3 3 White Inhabitants 1 5 People of Color and Negroes This
calculation of the proportion of sick and mortality among the Negroes, arises
from the following detail. The following estates were those only on which the
Disease appeared; Point Maurice, or Molenier's, had a gang of 160; Grand-Mal,
179; Tempe, 147; Haut-Brion, 114. In all 600. Of these 165 had the Malignant
Pestilential Fever, consequently the proportion of sick was nearly as 1 to 4;
and of deaths, as only two died on Tempe, as 1 to about 83.
4 83 General Proportion 1 20

It had been urged by some, that the disease arose from the state of the
atmosphere; and that human contagion could not give rise to it, as it was so
prevalent in distant and distinct places at the same time. That this opinion
was without foundation, must evidently appear from the foregoing narrative: but
had there been no other proofs of its contagious nature, the state of the
weather alone during the months of February, March, April, May, June, July, and
August, will be sufficient to show that the temperature of the air could not
produce an epidemic of so uncommon a character. The weather, though previous to
the appearance of this disease much more wet and boisterous than is usual at
that season of the year, was, after it broke out, mild; and would rather have
tended to check than promote infection, if that had been of a nature to be
affected by such an agent. The two first months of the year were almost
constantly rainy. The latter part of March, all April, and the first fifteen
days of May, were dry, with the wind generally at east. The thermometer never
rose higher than 87, nor fell lower than 85. Almost all the remainder of May
was rainy, with sometimes thunder and lightning. In June the quantity of rain
was much greater. As the change to moisture was remarkably sudden and great,
much expectation was formed that the virulence of the infection would be done
away, or considerably abated; but as neither happened, the strongest possible
argument was afforded against the agency of the weather in the production of
the disease. In June the thermometer, more than once, fell to 77 at noon; and
rose once as high as 88. All July was rainy also, with boisterous wind from N.
E. and much thunder and lightning; thermometer highest 88, lowest 77. In August
less rain fell; but the atmosphere was generally close and sultry; wind
variable, but chiefly S. and W. Thermometer highest 89, lowest 80.

The subjects of this disease may be divided into three classes; but differing
from each other only in the degree of violence of the symptoms; and from the
scale or gradation already given, it will readily appear that the three first
descriptions of men constitute the first class; the 4th and 5th the second; and
the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th the third. To avoid repetition, I shall first
describe it as it appeared in those seized with it in its most violent and
fatal form; and afterward treat more particularly of its most remarkable
symptoms.

The patient, without any previous complaint, suddenly becomes giddy; he loses
his eyesight; every thing seems to move round him with inconceivable velocity;
he falls down almost insensible, and in that state remains half an hour or
upwards. During this paroxysm the body feels cold, and is overspread with cold
sweat, which issues from every pore in astonishing abundance. On his recovery,
the cold goes off, and is instantly succeeded by intense heat, and quick,
small, hard pulse; the head achs dreadfully, particularly the forehead and
sinciput, which is generally accompanied with pain in the right side, and at
the praecordia. The last, however, has never been acute, and may rather be
called oppression than pain. The eyes are much inflamed, watery, protruded, and
wildly rolling; the face much flushed; much heat is felt at the pit of the
stomach; and that organ seems to be considerably affected by the nausea and
frequent retching and vomiting, which then come on. The patient soon after
complains of intolerable pain in the small of his back, and in the calves of
his legs; but the last appears to be the most violent, During twelve, eighteen,
twenty-four, or thirty-six hours, these symptoms continue increasing, except
the quickness and hardness of the pulse, which do not change materially during
that time, and are then succeeded by general coldness, cold sweat, a greater or
less degree of coma and delirium, or a state very much resembling intoxication.
Life in this state is lengthened out to sixty or ninety hours from the first
attack. A short interval of reason then takes place; the patient considers
himself better, and is for a moment flattered with the prospect of recovery;
but a fit as sudden and unexpected as the first comes on, during which he foams
at the mouth, rolls his eyes dreadfully, and throws out and pulls back his
extremities in violent and quick alternate succession. In general the patient
expires in this fit; but some have recovered from it, and continued rational
for a few hours longer, when a second fit has carried them off. This has been
the general progress of the disease in its worst form; and indeed there have
not been many deviations from it; the principal of these were, the general
symptoms coming on without any preceding convulsion. The patient has been, in
some instances, comatose from the very commencement of the disease; others have
had the disease ushered in by a frequent succession of short convulsive fits,
and it has afterward been marked with constant delirium and cold clammy sweat,
without any intervening heat of surface, etc. The disease too, in a few cases,
has seized the patient in the manner most other fevers come on; that is, with
shivering and a sense of cold. The most constant symptoms, and consequently
those which distinguished the disease, were the uncommon suddenness of its
attack; the remarkably acute pain in the loins and calves of the legs: the
watery, inflamed, and rolling eye; the flushing of the face; the tendency to
coma from the very onset; the peculiarity of the delirium attending; and the
pain confined to the forehead seldom extending to the temples, or even to the
sinciput. However mild cases might be in other respects, these were always
present. In no disease I have ever met with, is the physician more liable to be
deceived; for often when every symptom, indicating danger, has been apparently
removed; when the skin has become cool, the pulse seemingly natural, and the
stomach so retentive as to receive a large quantity of bark, convulsions
suddenly seize the patient and soon deprive him of life; or delirium and cold
clammy sweats supersede the favorable appearances, and forerun dissolution.
How applicable therefore is M. Tissot's comparison of the malignant fever to a
dog who bites without barking, to this insidious disease before us: "L'on
appelle fievres malignes, celles dans lesquelles, le danger est plus grand, que
les symptoms ne sont effrayants. Else sont du mal sans paroitre dangereuses;
c'est, comme on l'a fort bien dit, un chien qui (...) sans aboyer." Avis au
Peuple, chapter 17.


The delirium attending this fever is of a peculiar cast. During it, the
countenance, the eyes, and the actions of the patient resemble very much those
of a person inebriated. It is almost always mild, and never furious; but is
accompanied constantly with restlessness, and efforts to get out of bed. In a
few instances these rose so high, as to render the attempts of the assistants
of no avail; the patients dressed themselves, went out, and walked a
considerable way before they could be overpowered. The mind seems agitated by
the objects which were most its pursuit during health. An engineer, in his
delirium, is continually employed in giving directions to the inferior
officers, advising with them, and superintending the labor of the workmen. A
man much involved in debt, is incessantly arranging with his creditors. A
soldier talks of the duty he is employed in, and ever and anon expresses his
fear of the officer's displeasure. A sailor, in the same manner, is solely
engaged in maritime affairs. Scenes of former pleasure are eagerly recalled,
and presented to the imagination in their most alluring circumstances; and if a
momentary interval of reason takes place, the most piercing lamentations are
the consequence. But in all cases of delirium, whatever the subject may be
which the patient raves about, he is evidently and strongly actuated by fear;
and a word from the physician immediately reduces him to the most implicit
obedience, however restless he might have been before. No pain is complained of
during this state; the irritation of blisters has no effect in rousing the
patient; and the operation of medicines that prove laxative, though not
administered with that intention, passes without observation, and without
sensibility. The patient, on being questioned respecting his situation, seems
to recognize the person who speaks; but never complains of any thing; his
answer being constantly that he is very well. Indeed, during the low state of
the fever, whether delirium is present or not, the sensations of the patient
seem exceedingly imperfect; and instead of refering to any symptom which the
bystanders perceive evidently, his answer invariably is, that he is very well;
and sensible of no pain. During delirium, the patient's lips are in continual
motion; he is continually muttering, and he is continually attempting to reach
to some object which his deranged imagination presents to him. The strength,
during the delirious state, appears to be surprisingly great, for it is
frequently necessary to use the united efforts of two or three men to keep the
patient in bed. This is however no more than a spasmodic affection of the
muscles, for in reality the powers of the sick in this disease are reduced to
the extreme of debility, as is seen in the convalescent state. The delirium
comes on generally at the commencement of the low state, but is frequently
present during the whole of the disease.

Coma is the next most remarkable symptom in this fever. After the first two
days there is always more or less tendency to it; but after the third day, if
the patient survives it, it has been in almost every instance, present. He
appears drowsy, and is insensible of pain, or irritation of any kind; he moans
and sighs much, but is immoveble, unless called on. He generally lies on his
back, with his eyes half open, the balls of which do not appear to be capable
of motion: if there is any it is extremely languid; their luster is also much
diminished. For some time I could not account for the supervention of this
state at a certain stage of the disease: anxious to discover whether it
depended on any peculiar affection of the sensoriu^, I examined the brain of
two men who died on the fifth day. These patients, after the symptoms strictly
febrile had abated, became comatose; in which state they continued till a
convulsion put a period to their existence on the fifth day. In the first I
examined the upper part of the cranium, on being sawed and prized up by a
chissel, was so pressed from inwards by the swelling of the cerebrum as to fly
off, or separate in such a manner as if a spring from within acted on it. On
cutting into the cerebrum, the quantity of serous fluid was surprisingly great;
but as the greatest part was lost, it was impossible to ascertain it. In the
brain of the second, the quantity of water was also considerable. After
observing these appearances, I was led to examine more attentively the state of
the eyes of my patients in this disease; and I have not the smallest hesitation
in declaring, that in all those who became comatose, there was a very
considerable and permanent dilatation of the pupils: an appearance which left
no room to doubt respecting the state of the brain, and the nature of the
symptom it gave rise to. I believe this appearance has not been noticed by
writers on this subject. Of those at present in my possession, M. Poissonier
Desperrieres alone mentions something similar -- "quelquefois la surdite
survient, et quelquefois aussi une goutte sereine." Traite sur les Maladies des
gens de Mer. tom. I. p. 290.

Dr. Rush informs us, that a dilatation of the pupils was a very general
symptom of the malignant pestilential fever, as it appeared in Philadelphia. --
"For a while I ascribed this peculiarity in the pulse (a small intermitting,
slow, and tense, or chorded pulse) more especially its slowness, to an
affection of the brain only, and suspected that it was produced by what I have
taken the liberty elsewhere to call the phrenicula, or inflammatory state of
the internal dropsy of the brain; and which I have remarked to be an occasional
symptom and consequence of remitting fever. I was the more disposed to adopt
this opinion, from perceiving this slow and intermitting pulse more frequently
in children than in adults. Impressed with this idea, I requested Mr. Coxe, one
of my pupils, to assist me in examining the state of the eye. For two days we
discovered no change in it; but on the third day, after we began to inspect the
eyes, we both perceived a preternatural dilatation of the pupils in different
patients; and we seldom afterward saw an eye in which it was absent." An
Account of the Bilious Remitting Yellow Fever, p. 42. The Dr. most judiciously
laid much stress on this affection of the brain, in forming his indications of
cure; and he declares that the mortality would have been infinitely less in his
practice, had he earlier observed this symptom, and applied the appropriate
remedy. Ibid. p. 288




The appearance which marked the character of the fever most unequivocally, was
a species of efflorescence, which is said to be peculiar to malignant and
pestilential fevers: this efflorescence resembled more patches of red or livid
spots, than what is generally understood by the word Petechiae; and appeared
sometimes at the commencement of the slow or comatose state; but oftener a few
hours before death. It was a very fatal symptom; for I do not recollect a
single instance of recovery when it took place. The neck, shoulders, and breast
were generally the parts of the body the eruption broke out on; but in a few
very violent cases, almost the whole body has become of a deep livid or black
color three hours before death. In one instance, a young woman just arrived
from England, petechiae evidently appeared on her neck, breast, and arms; and
it was the only one in which I perceived any thing of the kind; they
constituted as fatal a sign as the vibices, for the patient died soon after
their eruption, on the third day of the fever. These patches are well defined
by Tissot, by comparing them to the wales or marks which remain after a severe
drubbing. "La peau se couvre souvent de taches petecheales (ce sont de petites
taches d'un livide rouge) sur-tout au col, autour des epaules, au dos; d'autres
fois ce sont de grandes taches brunes, tells que des meurtrissures de coups."
A^is au Peuple, p. 257.


The pains complained of in this fever, particularly those of the head and
legs, are in many respects peculiar to it. The former is confined to the
forehead, and shoots inwardly toward the bottom of the orbits, where it is
generally exquisite; it also sometimes extends to the temples, where indeed
there is always a throbbing. In no case has pain been felt in the occiput, or
generally throughout the head. The albuginea of the eyes is always much
inflamed at the same time; the balls are generally protruded, or seem ready to
start from their orbits; and the patient is sensible of a pain in them, which
renders the admission of light intolerable. It has sometimes happened that the
right eye has been most considerably affected; and when this has been the case,
the pain has been most felt in the right side of the head. The pain in the legs
has been always felt immediately below the calf, where the gastrocnemii and
soleus muscles unite and form the great tendon. A considerable involuntary
contraction of the leg takes place in consequence of it; and in the point where
it is chiefly felt, it communicates a sensation similar to gnawing, which from
time to time occasions extreme torture. Upon the whole, this pain resembles
very much the cramp; with this difference only, that it is, during the
continuance of the fever, more permanent.

I have already observed, that at the commencement of this fever the pulse is
quick, hard, and small; and it is always so in the more violent cases. It is
often, however, very full at this period; and when it is so, it affords a
favorable prognostic. But in no disease is the state of the pulse more subject
to variation than in this before us. It has frequently happened, and more
especially with the robust, that during the stage immediately succeeding the
febrile one, flushing and chilliness have oftentimes alternated in less than a
minute; and that although the skin felt considerably warm, the pulse has been
no more than 52; but that, even when the low state came on, in which there is
always a disagreeable coldness of the surface, it has been as quick and nearly
as full as during the preceding febrile stage, although unaccompanied with
thirst, or any other evident symptom of the existence of fever. One remarkable
circumstance of the pulse in this disease is, that it never intermits; even at
the approach of death it has not intermitted; but has been generally remarkably
tremulous, and so slow, as to beat no more than thirty times in a minute. Upon
the whole, I have never found it quicker than 130, nor slower than 30, in a
minute.

Subsultus tendinum is by no means a common symptom in the advanced stage; but
tremor of the hands and of the lips, and violent spasmodic contraction of the
legs and arms are very common, and always prognosticate much danger.

The appearance of the tongue is very various; in some patients continuing
white with florid edges to the very last; in others, becoming dark-colored
very early, and changing to black a little before death; but in general, the
change of color of the fur with which the tongue, teeth, and even the fauces
are covered, is gradual. Thus, during the two first days it is a white or
clayey; it afterward becomes buffy; then of a deep orange; about the fifth
day, brownish; and when the case terminates in death, black. The thickness of
the fur increases with the disease, and seems latterly to impede much the
speech of the patient. The edges of the tongue are generally florid, exactly
resembling its appearance in chronic aphthae. I have not unfrequently seen the
tongue have the appearance of having been exposed to foot, and covered with it:
a singular circumstance, and mentioned by no writer I am acquainted with,
except M. Tissot. "Quelquefois cependant elle resemble exactement a une langue
qui auroit ete long-temps exposee a la fumee." P. 1. chapter 17.


Aphthae sometimes occurred; and, I think, were generally a bad symptom. Those
I have seen were always of the white kind, resembling curd, and have been
accompanied with a thick fur of the same consistence and color on the teeth
and gums. This symptom has been mentioned by Huxham and Poissonnier; the former
of whom says, "^ut of much more uncertain and dangerous event are the brown
dark-colored aphthae; nor are those that are exceeding white, and thick like
lard, of a more promising aspect."

There were two kinds of eruption about the lips, of a very opposite nature;
one such as frequently appears at the termination of common remittents, and
indicating a favorable change; the other, consisting of black spots or specks,
such as might be made by the point of a painter's fine pencil, all round the
mouth, but especially the upper lip, and near the edge of the prolabium; and
indicating with certainty a fatal termination. The first generally appeared
about the fifty day; the latter about the beginning of the third, or toward
the end of the fourth day.

Haemorrhage has occurred in this disease much oftener and more profusely, and
has been attended with more dangerous consequences than in any other, the
scurvy perhaps excepted, that I have met with. In several instances, the
immensity of blood discharged has evidently been the more immediate cause of
death. The robust, plethoric, and gross habits have been the most subject to
it. It has taken place from the nostrils, mouth, anus, and urethra; sometimes
from the canthi of the eyes; but never, I believe, from the ears or pores of
the skin. The most profuse discharge has been from the nostrils and anus, and
has frequently amounted to three or four pounds at a time; the stools having
been on these occasions entirely composed of pure blood. Toward the close of
life, the blood thus discharged has appeared granulous, or like ichor, with a
sediment of a black gritty substance; and has been so extremely offensive as to
oblige all the attendants to keep at a considerable distance till the
haemorrhage ceased. Haemorrhage, however, has never been critical, nor has it
in any instance permanently relieved the headache or pain in the breast or side.
I have sometimes been induced to think, that it had benefited the patient, by
his declaring that the headache had abated in consequence of it; but cold clammy
sweats, an almost imperceptible pulse, and delirium or coma supervening soon
after, evinced the imperfect state of the patient's feelings, and the fallacy
of the prognostic.

Nearly about the period these profuse discharges of blood came on, a rawness
was felt on the whole of the interior surface of the nose; and on several parts
of it, little ulcers formed; on others, small escars, which were remarkably
itchy; but on being touched, or an attempt made by the patient to detach them
from the membrane of the nose, were very painful, and bled. These disappeared
in proportion to the patient's recovery; and I had much reason to suspect that
when the issue of the disease was fatal, these little escars became gangrenous.

About the same time another symptom appeared in many instances; which, were it
not for its singularity, might be considered as too minute to be mentioned
among those which distinguished the disease. Its singularity arises chiefly
from the silence of modern writers on the malignant hospital or jail fever,
with respect to it; and from its appearing to be critical in the present
instance. Dr. Donald Monro mentions the occurrence of a swelling and subsequent
suppuration of the testicles in the malignant fever. Diseases of the Army, 1st.
Ed. p. 44. M. Poissonnier says only, "il se sait bientot des ecorehures dans
certaines parties de leur corpse, et la gangrene s'en empare malgre toutes les
precautions qu'on lui oppose." tom. I. p. 291. I think something of this kind
is mentioned by Thucydides, in his celebrated account of the Plague of Athens;
but as I have not the original, I cannot speak with certainty. In Dr. Clifton's
translation of this part of Thucydides's history, there is the following
passage: "For the disease went through the whole body, beginning first in the
head; and, if any escaped, where the case was very desperate, this was denoted
by the extremities being affected; for it broke out upon the private parts, the
fingers, and toes,' etc. Clifton's Translation of Hyppocrates upon Air, Water,
and Situation, etc. Ed. 1739, p. 97. Hippocrates in several places mentions an
affection of the scrotum and testicles in malignant and pestilential fevers.
Does this afford a collateral proof of the pestilential nature of the disease
before us? A remarkable case of this kind occurred in the month of May, 1794.
Mr. O'Hara, an officer of his Majesty's 56th regiment, uncommonly robust, and
aged about twenty, having been seized with all the usual symptoms in the more
violent degree of the Boullam Fever, as it was then distinguished, had on the
4th day a very large discharge of purulent matter from the urethra, attended
with very considerable swelling of the scrotum. The discharge continued to
increase all the 5th; and I began to form a favorable prognostic from it. On
the 6th, however, it became ichorous; the penis swelled to a monstrous size, as
did the scrotum; and both began to change to a black color. These unfavourable
appearances increased rapidly the 7th and 8th, and the discharge became then a
putrid sanies, excessively offensive. On the day of his death, the 9th, the
scrotum was fully nine inches in diameter, and the penis three; and both were
completely mortified and black. During the latter days of his illness, he lost
a prodigious quantity of blood from the nose, mouth, ears, eyes, and even from
the pores of his skin.
About the end of the second day, the patient begins to complain of a violent
pain in his testicles; on questioning him, he says he feels a contraction of
the spermatic chord, and is sensible of a drawing up of the testicles toward
the abdominal ring. On examination they appear very much lessened in size, are
drawn up considerably toward the abdomen; and the scrotum appears at the same
time remarkably flaccid and empty. The surface of the scrotum becomes soon
after very painful, and an excoriation takes place, chiefly at the most
descending part, from which a considerable quantity of very offensive purulent
matter issues: at the same time a similar discharge from the urethra takes
place; which ceases with the disease when the event is favorable, or becomes
ichorous or bloody, and insufferably foetid when death is the consequence. In
cases which terminate favorably, the whole of the scrotum in a few days is
covered with a coat of hardened pus, which, in the convalescent state, comes
away very easily by means of a warm bath. The thickness of this coat way be
about a fourth of a line, and when separated, resembles much moistened
parchment. In fatal cases, this affection of the scrotum always terminates in
gangrene a few hours before death.

The change of voice is very remarkable in this fever; for from a strong tenor
or manly sound, it sinks to a treble, or a sound much softer, lower, and
shriller than the natural one; the syllables are more distinguished, and the
words are strangely lengthened out in a drawling or whining manner. In the
patients who have sunk under this disease, the change of voice happens much
earlier, and more remarkably than in others. It has therefore always afforded
me a pretty certain prognostic of the event; for any alteration of the sound
toward the natural one, is an almost certain sign of a favorable change.

A suppression of urine is by no means an uncommon symptom in the bilious
remittents of the country; and, in general, it is a circumstance which often
occurs in fevers of a synochus or typhus character; but in the malignant
pestilential fever, it is particularly remarkable for its coming on early, its
duration, and the cause which seems to produce it. In the third volume of the
Edinburgh Literary Essays, there is a very ingenious and useful paper on the
affection of the urinary bladder, which Dr. Gilchrist, the author, has called a
"thickening of the bladder." To this I might refer for a description of the
state of the bladder occasioning urinary suppression in this fever; for on
dissection it appears exactly similar. Here I shall only observe, that the
suppression is accompanied by a violent pain above the os pubis; a scalding in
the urethra; a sense of fullness, without any visible turgescence in the region
of the pubes; a considerable contraction and contortion of the penis; and the
urine is generally of a very deep red color; sometimes brownish; sometimes
green; very frequently bloody; and, in a few instances, much inclining to
black, and of an oily consistence. The smell of the urine was generally
offensive in the highest degree. Indeed, all the excretions were remarkably
foetid; but the stools were more especially so. Constipation almost universally
prevailed: a circumstance extremely unfavourable, as the means used to obviate
it always increased the tendency to putrefaction, by bringing on debility
proportioned to their effect. This appeared to arise from a suspension of tone
in the intestinal canal; for on exciting the fibers to act, a redundant
evacuation was generally the consequence. The faeces at the commencement of the
disease were seldom very foetid; but, during its progress, became excessively
so; and, a little before death, when they were discharged insensibly, the smell
was intolerable. The color and consistence of this discharge varied much; from
yellow, or a yellowish white to black; and from a considerable degree of
thickness, to the exact appearance of coffee-grounds. The discharge by
vomiting, which became a most dangerous symptom at the commencement of the low
state, also varied much; although for the most part poracious; but toward the
fatal crisis, always black, and resembling coffee badly boiled.

The thirst was not very considerable in general, and no very useful indication
could be drawn from the state of it. It was, however, a bad sign when the
thirst ceased, especially if at the same time the tongue appeared parched,
cracked, and black.

A principal distinction between this disease and typhus icteroides, is the
yellow suffusion, which in the former very seldom happened; in the latter
almost always. But as this appearance can never be considered as a
distinguishing symptom in any highly malignant fever, it frequently occurring
where the other symptoms point out a disease differing essentially from that in
which it most generally takes place, it will be sufficient to mention, that in
some protracted cases on shore, and in some among the sailors which might have
been a combination of the pestilential and yellow fevers, this symptom appeared
about the 5th, 7th, or 9th day.

Most other diseases degenerated into, or partook very much of the nature of
this. Dysenteries suddenly stopped, and were immediately succeeded by the
symptoms of the pestilential fever. A remarkable instance of this occurred in
the month of July, 1793. About the beginning of the month, twenty-seven
recruits joined the detachment of royal artillery in this island. These men
formed part of the artillery, which, with other troops under the command of
Major General Bruce, landed on the island of Martinique about the middle of
June. During the three days they remained on shore, they were encamped, and
almost the whole time exposed to very heavy rain. Dysenteries were the
consequence; and most of them, on their arrival here, were immediately admitted
into the royal artillery hospital; where at that time, as has been already
observed, there were many cases of the pestilential fever. The apparent effect
of the medicines they took very much surprised me; but I soon found that the
original disease only yielded to one more powerful; for in a few hours after
the symptoms of dysentery disappeared, those of the pestilential fever came on.
Catarrhal complaints, simple at first, soon changed their nature: convalescents
from other diseases were very subject to this, but it generally proved mild.
Those laboring at the time under chronic complaints, particularly rheumatism
and hepatitis, were also very subject to it. The puerperal fever became
malignant, and of course fatal; and even among pregnant negro-women, who
otherwise might have had it in the usual mild degree peculiar to that
description of people, were reduced to a very dangerous situation by it. In
short, every disease, in which the patient was liable to infection, sooner or
later assumed the appearance, and acquired the danger of the pestilential fever.

Although the contagion seemed to vary much in different descriptions of
people, it is highly probable that the virus of the contagion itself was
uniformly the same, only variously modified by peculiar constitutions, habits,
or modes of living. Thus among sailors, perhaps a scorbutic taint, joined to
extreme irregularity and imprudence, rendered the disease infinitely more fatal
than among any other class of men. On the other hand, among field-negroes who
certainly possess an idiosyncrasy peculiar to themselves, and whose mode of
living is generally temperate and regular in a remarkable degree, the virus of
the contagion was so blunted, as to act in the mildest form. Why, however, it
should operate with most violence on Europeans just arrived, and who had never
entered the torrid zone before, is a singularity I do not pretend to explain.
The advice of Celsus is very applicable in the present instance, and may afford
us a hint with respect to the cause of this singularity: "Si plenior aliquis,
et speciosior, et coloratior factus est, suspecta habere sua bona debet." Lib.
II. cap. 2.
Every thing debilitating predisposed the body to be acted on by this
contagion; fear; an hypochondriacal disposition; inebriation; fasting, or
visiting the sick with an empty stomach; great fatigue; entering the chamber of
the sick in full perspiration, etc. But whatever were the predisposing causes,
the contagion always acted within four days from its application to the body. I
am aware of the difficulty of ascertaining the time which contagion takes to
act on the system after its admission into it; but my situation afforded me
many opportunities of knowing it with sufficient exactness. In some instances,
symptoms of its action have appeared in six hours; in others, in twenty hours;
in others in forty-eight; and in others, not till the expiration of the fourth
day; so that, in general, we may consider the space of time required for the
production of disease consequent upon the application of the contagion, as
about a trifle short of two days. For although all from whom I have received
the information which has enabled me to make the above calculation, have been
sensible of receiving the contagion, the instant it was applied, by nausea and
slight rigor indicating it, yet those symptoms were only momentary. I do not
know that this point has been much attended to; at least the writers I have
been able to consult, seem silent on the subject. Dr. Guthrie of St.
Petersburgh, from the information he received from the medical gentlemen of the
Russian army, as well as from the event of the inoculation for the plague in
one instance, seems inclined to fix the time of action of pestilential
contagion, at the fourth day. Medical Commentaries, vol. 8.
And as the diseases are not dissimilar, on the contrary, are much of the same
nature, his authority may be considered as strongly corroborative of my
observation. The importance of ascertaining this point with tolerable
precision, is evident; prevention altogether depending on it.

Another point subject to much uncertainty, and a good deal agitated among
physicians, is the distance at which it is possible to communicate the
contagion. The result of my inquiries and observation on this subject amounts
to the following facts: 1. That those who most carefully avoid houses where the
infection is, are the most certain to escape it. 2. That although the disease
is in the same house, avoiding the chamber of the sick, prevents infection. 3.
That the merely entering the chamber of the sick, without nearly approaching
the diseased person, has never communicated infection. 4. That approaching so
near the diseased person as to be sensible of the foetor of his breath; or of
the peculiar smell which is always emitted from the bodies of the sick in this
disease; or to touch the bed-clothes he lies on, generally occasions nausea,
slight rigors, and often headache at the moment, and some hours after the
disease itself. 5. That actual contact, so that the perspired fluid of the sick
person may adhere to the hands, etc. of the healthy person, more certainly
produces this disease. 6. That touching the wearing apparel of a person who is
actually diseased, or has just recovered from the disease, as certainly
communicates the infection to the healthy person. And, 7. That frequently the
merely passing a person infected, or who wears the clothes he had on during the
existence of the disease, in such a manner as that the effluvia proceeding from
them may be blown on the healthy person, has produced the disease. From hence
it is evident, that the infectious effluvia do not extend themselves beyond a
limited distance from the person or thing from which they are emitted; and this
distance may be fixed at the utmost at six or ten feet. Dr. Lind, however,
thinks that "in the open free air, this infection does not appear to diffuse
itself above fifty sixty feet from its nidus; though even at that distance a
person might run some risque from being exposed to a current of air highly
impregnated with the contagion which immediately issued from a door or window,
where it had been long pent up. Dr. James Lind's Essays, Ed. 1774, p. 319.
Although this, during the time the malignant pestilential fever prevailed
here, never, I believe, happened, both accounts may be reconciled, by allowing
for the influence of heat in this climate, occasioning such a degree of
rarefaction of the air as to prevent the diffusion of contagion beyond the
atmosphere immediately surrounding the diseased or infected body, the radius of
which may be estimated at six or ten feet. And Dr. Blane very justly observes,
that "virulent matter is of such a degree of volatility as to be readily
dissipated in a certain degree of heat." Diseases of Seamen, p. 279.
But whatever the limits of infection may be with respect to its power of
acting on healthy bodies, much must depend on the state of these bodies at the
time they are exposed to the contagion.

The danger attending the opening of bodies in this disease, prevented me from
extending my inquiries this way so far as I otherwise would have done. I opened
only five, the appearances in which I shall here give an account of. Three of
the five were sailors, who died on the fifth day, and labored under the worst
symptoms of the disease. In one of them it began and terminated with convulsive
paroxysms. The intestines were much inflated, inflamed, and sphacelated,
particularly the duodenum, a little beyond the pylorus; the liver had shrunk to
less than one-half its natural size, was uncommonly flaccid, and of a color
nearly approaching to buff; or a mixture of yellow and that of ashes; the
gallbladder was flaccid and greyish, and contained a small quantity of very
dark-colored, ropey bile. The spleen and pancreas were in a natural state; but
the lungs were highly inflamed, and of a livery texture and hue: a circumstance
the more extraordinary, as no symptom of marked pulmonary affection could be
perceived during the existence of the disease. The bladder contained near three
quarts of urine; and was dilated to considerably above the os pubis; and its
coats were much thickened. This patient had been constantly tormented with
pain, throughout the whole region of the pelvis, and almost a total suppression
of urine.

The second was remarkably robust and athletic, and had been seized with the
disease in the form of an aguish paroxysm; but died strongly convulsed. The
viscera were in general in the same state, particularly the liver. All the
vessels of the intestines were uncommonly turgid; the right kidney was
mortified; although, during his illness, no symptom of inflammation of that
organ was perceived. The quantity of urine was small, although the suppression
had been considerable; and the bladder, a good deal enlarged, felt much like an
elastic gum-syringe; the coats very much thickened, but renitent.

The principal morbid appearances in the bodies of the third and fourth, I have
already described. These two were the only subjects in which I examined the
state of the brain. To what I have already said on the dissection of these two
bodies, I have only to add, that the viscera of the abdomen and thorax, were
exactly in the same state as the others; and that one was a young man of the
royal artillery, about 18 years of age, who arrived with his master, Capt.
Irwin of that corpse, about six weeks before; was remarkably florid, robust, and
lively; and obstinately refused to avail himself of medical assistance during
the whole of his illness. In the brain of this young man, the quantity of blood
was surprisingly great; for, exclusive of what was lost in opening the cranium,
fully two pounds were collected. In the left ventricle the quantity of water
was also considerable; but there was none in the right. The fourth ventricle
contained a larger quantity than ordinary; and the plexus choroides was almost
obliterated. There was no polypous concretion in either of the ventricles of
the heart.

In the fifth, a young man of the royal artillery, just arrived from England,
who died in twenty-nine hours from the commencement of the fever, the
appearance of the viscera was exactly the same. This man's fever abated
considerably on the breaking out of a copious diaphoresis; his stomach was
remarkably retentive, which enabled him to take at least two ounces of bark in
a very few hours. As he was preparing to take a dose of this medicine, he felt
a little uneasiness at his stomach, which induced him to defer it; but on
laying his head on the pillow, he expired without a groan, or the least
struggle.

Mr. White, mate to the 45th regiment, who at that time attended the hospital
of the regiment, with much and deserved credit to himself, opened several
bodies of soldiers who died of the malignant pestilential fever; and he in all
remarked the same appearances I have above described. He did not examine the
brain in any instance but from the symptoms, particularly the coma, delirium,
and dilatation of the pupils, being exactly similar, little doubt can remain
with respect to the state of it.

I may here observe, that the appearances in the bodies of twenty which were
opened at Breast, were almost exactly similar, that of the liver in particular,
which M. Poissonnier says was livid, flaccid, and overspread with cineritious
and blackish spots, under which were small drops of clotted and ill-conditioned
blood -- "le foie de plusieurs se trouve livide, mollesse, et parfeme de taches
cendrees et noiratres, sous lesquelles on apercevoit des gouttelletes de sang
grumele et denaturee." Tom. I. p. 334.


The only material difference which appears between the dissections described
by Sir John Pringle, and those which were made here is, that in his there were
abscesses in the brain; whereas in ours, a considerable quantity of serous
fluid in one, and of serous fluid and blood in another, alone were found. But
this difference, I apprehend, may be very readily accounted for by the very
rapid progress of the disease in our cases, and the length of time to which
those Sir John Pringle treated, were protracted. In ours, the disease
terminated fatally in five days; in his, death did not happen till the
expiration of a fortnight or a month. Diseases of the Army, 7th ed. p. 301. It
is singular that no mention is made, by this illustrious physician, of
dilatation of the pupils of the eyes. Does this symptom distinguish the two
diseases?


From the circumstances of this disease related in the foregoing sheets, it
will readily appear that the mode of termination could not with certainty be
foretold by any one of them alone. The particular state of any of the
excretions, unless the changes which took place in the other symptoms were at
the same time attended to, could not afford any precise prognostic. In a word,
it was only from attention to the general state of the patient, we could form
any idea of what the event might be. It is a general observation, that in
malignant fevers the critical periods are more distinctly marked than in any
other; the disease before us affords an additional proof of this. I have not
met with any disease in this climate, in which the periods were more distinctly
ascertained. The disappearance of the disease, or the death of the patient,
always happened on the odd days; but the change in the state of the disease,
which preceded either event, took place on even days. Thus, if the patient was
worse on the evening of the second day, he would die on the third; if worse on
the fourth, he would die on the fifth; and so on, as far as the fourteenth day.
Beyond that period, I have not seen an instance of the disease ending fatally,
although it has been protracted, in a few instances, to the 21st day. In the
same manner, if the patient felt better, or if there was an evident abatement
of the symptoms on the 2d, 4th, 6th, etc. days, the resolution of the disease
would happen on the following days. But perhaps the subjoined Table of the
state of the patients in the royal artillery hospital, who recovered, and died,
will illustrate this point more fully than any other mode of explanation. I
make choice of this in preference to any other part of my practice, because
there my observations were necessarily more accurate; and because few in
private life enjoy the advantages which the sick of the royal artillery do;
arising from the very liberal manner in which their hospitals are fitted up,
and supplied with the necessary servants, diet, wines, and medicines. This
Table will also show the result of my practice, in the four modes of treatment
I adopted. I shall detail them when I come to treat of the cure.

A TABLE showing the Number that Died, and the Number that Recovered, under the
various Methods of Treatment.
MODES OF TREATMENT. Died on the Began to recover on the 29th H. 3d D. 5th D.
7th D. 9th D. 36th H. to 5th D. 7th D. to 9th D. 9th D. to 21st D. Treatment
with Mercury 5 8 2 1 11 24 7 Treatment with Peruvian Bark 1 3 4 3 4 Russian
Treatment 1 1 1 1 Treatment with Angustura Bark 2 3 Total 1 6 11 3 5 13 31 12

The very uncommon malignity which marked this disease after its appearance,
and during its progress here, and some of its symptoms resembling those of
pestilence; the manner too in which it was introduced, and afterward
propagated among the sailors, garrison, and inhabitants, will induce us to
consider it as in no small degree partaking of the nature of true plague. It is
generally agreed among writers, who have themselves seen and treated the
disease in all its various forms, that the only symptoms, which can be with
propriety considered as characteristic of the plague, are the buboes and
carbuncles which appear about the critical period, and generally forerun a
resolution of the disease; but it has been at the same time allowed, that the
plague does sometimes appear without buboes. Whether the disease in question
may be classed among the pestilential or not, I leave to those to determine who
have more leisure and fitter opportunities than I have. I shall only further
observe on this head, that I have not seen carbuncles in any case which ended
in death; but that in many who recovered they were numerous, large, and very
troublesome. These occurred chiefly in the young and robust; and always about
the period the dangerous symptoms disappeared; and indeed so exactly did the
appearance of the carbuncles fall in with the favorable change in the disease,
that I have always considered them as a critical discharge: the only thing of
the kind, except the purulent discharge from the scrotum and urethra, I have
been able to observe in this fever. Swellings on the parotids, and buboes in
the groins and armpits also occurred in several cases; but these generally
terminated in death.

When this disease first appeared here, and for some time after, the prevalent
opinion was, that it was the yellow-fever of the West Indies, engrafted on the
European jail-fever. But it must appear from the foregoing account, that though
it is evidently of the nature of jail-fever, heightened by some pestilential
symptoms, it does not partake in the least of the typhus icteroides. The most
obvious circumstances which distinguish the two diseases are the following: The
nature of the delirium in the malignant pestilential fever is singular, and
resembles that in the plague, being marked with the fatuity, silliness, and the
stammering and faultering of the voice peculiar to that malady; the delirium in
yellow-fever is generally more of the wild, furious kind, and is never attended
with the circumstances mentioned. The yellow-fever is endemic and sporadic; the
other, epidemic, and imported from another country. The yellow-fever is always
influenced by the weather; and, indeed, depends altogether on the heat of
climate; the other, till of late, was thought to be peculiar to the temperate
and cold climates. The one is evidently caused by marsh effluvia, heat, violent
exercise in that heat; thick, hot, moist atmosphere; night air, and dews; and
the abuse of spirituous liquors. The other, on the contrary, is caused by
contagion alone. This is certainly the most remarkable difference; and
constitutes an obvious, clear, and undisputable diagnosis. I have never in any
instance, and I have seen many, of yellow-fever, known it to be contagious: it
has always been evidently produced by the causes mentioned; and other persons
on board the said ship, or in the same house, have continued in perfect health.
But what more positively demonstrates the difference between the two diseases
is, that the yellow-fever has been known in the West Indies ever since the
first establishment of the colonies; the malignant pestilential fever never, I
believe, till the year 1793. When the yellow-fever appeared at Barbados in
1721, Dr. Warren, who then practiced there, was induced from its violence, and
the seeming likeness of many of the symptoms, to call it a species of the
plague imported from Marseilles to Martinique, and from thence to Barbados.
That it was not pestilential, however, is manifest from the united testimony of
contemporary practitioners, and from the account given by Mr. Hughes, the
Natural Historian of the colony at that period. The Rev. Mr. Griffith Hughes's
Natural History of Barbados, folio ed. p. 37, 38. Dr. William Hillary, 2d ed.
On the Air and Diseases in Barbados, p. 144, 145. M. Pouppe Desportes, in his
description of the yellow-fever, corresponds exactly with the idea he gives of
it in his Constitutions of the different Years: "On a ignore pendant long-temps
les funestes effets de cette malady dans les isles; la regularite avec
laquelle elle se reproduit, semble devoir la fair regarder comme une de ces
maladies don't il faut chercher la cause dans la constitution de l'air."
Histoire des Maladies de S. Domingue, tom. I. p. 191. The attentive perusal of
this writer's Constitutions of the Air at Cape Francois from 1732 to 1748, when
he died, will give a much better idea of the causes and nature of the
yellow-fever, or "Malady de Siam," as he calls it, than all that has been
written on the subject by others -- to those who are not practically acquainted
with it.


Upon the whole therefore, if we draw our conclusion with respect to the
diagnostic of this disease, from the remote and proximate causes, from the
symptoms, from the dissections, I apprehend, we must consider it as truly
pestilential, and differing from the plague strictly so called, only, in not
always exhibiting the symptoms that are said to be peculiar to that malady.

The sudden manner in which this fever attacked, in every case, rendered it
impossible to administer any thing in the way of prevention. Had the sick,
indeed, been always sensible of the infection the instant it was applied, no
doubt much might have been done in this way; but unfortunately this happened in
very few instances, comparatively speaking; and when it did, none were willing
to believe that any dangerous consequence would ensue. In the cure therefore of
the disease, I was always obliged to begin at, or soon after its actual
invasion; but as the symptoms very seldom directed to a proper knowledge of its
true nature; and as the fatal termination often happened at a very early
period, and unexpectedly, I found it a most difficult as well as painful task,
for some time after the disease broke out, to form a plan of cure. Finding at
length the total inefficacy of the usual method recommended in treating
malignant fevers; and becoming by constant observation on a multitude of cases,
in its most violent form, better acquainted with the disease, I founded my plan
on the following reasoning. It was evident, however indirectly marked by the
symptoms, that the first stage of the fever was an inflammatory diathesis,
peculiar in this respect, that its tendency to terminate in gangrene was
infinitely greater than in any other disease I ever met with. It was no less
evident that this stage was succeeded by one wherein nervous excitement and a
putrescent diathesis were equally remarkable, and equally tended with an
uncommon rapidity to the dissolution of the patient. It was also evident, that
these diatheses had an extraordinary aptitude to run into each other, without
showing any distinct termination of the one, or accession of the other; and it
appeared, that the imprudent use, or the anticipation of the means of obviating
either of these states or diatheses, inevitably hastened the progress of the
other to its peculiar termination. Having these facts before me, it was clear
that if I at once went on the antiphlogistic plan, I would, with certainty,
anticipate the fatal issue of the disease, by inducing an extreme degree of
debility; and that, on the other hand, if I adopted at the commencement of my
treatment, the antiseptic plan, I would inevitably increase the tendency of the
existing inflammation to terminate in gangrene. Many proofs of both these fatal
errors occurred daily for some time after the introduction of the disease; and
surely the practitioner could not be blamed when it is considered that the
disease was new, and unknown in the climate. From the foregoing data, the
following indications naturally resulted, and always guided me in my future
practice; for however varied the remedies might be, still these were the points
to be gained:

1. To discharge from the stomach and intestines acrid and offensive humors.

2. To obviate inflammatory diathesis, without producing a tendency to
putrescence.

3. To moderate the tendency to putrescence, and to obviate it when actually
present.

4. To restore tone and energy to the system.

In the remittent fever of the country, and indeed in every disease in which
there is a bilious accumulation in the primae viae, I have generally used a
solution of the natron vitriolatum and tartarised antimony in water, in
preference to any other evacuating medicine. It possesses this singular
advantage of effecting three evacuations in a very short space of time; and
although a powerful emetic, it by no means occasions any untoward irritability
of stomach. In the present instance I had recourse to this excellent remedy,
and gave it in the following manner: An ounce and an half of the salts, and two
grains of the tartarised antimony, being dissolved in a pound and an half of
pure cold water, a large wine-glassfull of the solution was given every hour to
the patient, until a sufficient effect was produced, or till the whole of the
quantity was taken. The two first glassfulls generally operated as an emetic,
and fully evacuated the stomach; the medicine after this acted on the
intestines, and excited a copious discharge of their contents. If, at the same
time, a diaphoresis broke out (and it almost always did) the patient found
himself considerably relieved. I have sometimes, however, dreading the
consequence of copious evacuation by stool, contented myself with an emetic
alone, composed of from ten to thirty grains of ipecacuanha, and one or two of
the tartarised antimony; but any advantage derived from this practice, did not
compensate for the loss of time; for if a gentle purge was administered after
the operation of the emetic, it took several hours to produce its effect: and
if clysters were depended on, their action did not extend beyond the larger
intestines. In several cases of the third class, and a very few of the second,
in which my assistance was called for very early in the fever, I had the
satisfaction of seeing a speedy and complete termination put to the complaint,
by the solution. This, indeed, was doing what has been recommended by Sir John
Pringle, preventing the disease, or rather carrying off its fomites before they
can act generally on the system; but perhaps the means were better. When the
disease first appeared among us, fear of anticipating the irritability of
stomach, induced some practitioners, and myself before I became fully
acquainted with the disease, to give at first a pill of solid opium, and after
allowing an hour or two for its solution, to administer the evacuating
medicine; but for the reasons already given, the impropriety of this practice
must be obvious. As it is highly probable, from the manner in which the
contagion acted, that it was carried into the system chiefly by means of the
stomach and intestines, the importance of administering a medicine which in the
shortest space of time possible will evacuate them, at the same time that it
tends to obviate any general febrile affection which may have taken place, must
be evident. I have often derived considerable advantage from using the bitter
purging-salts, instead of Glauber's, either in the same proportion, or a larger
one; and I have rendered the solution much more palatable by the addition of
lime-juice and sugar.

To fulfill the second indication was infinitely more difficult; and the danger
of making an improper choice of the means, much greater. The fate indeed of the
patient altogether depended on the judicious selection of means, in removing
the inflammatory without producing a tendency to putrescent diathesis.

It has been very generally recommended to draw some, blood before other means
are used, at the beginning of malignant and pestilential fevers. In the present
instance, the ardent heat of the surface, the oppressed hard pulse, the pain of
the side, the oppression at the praecordia, the headache, and the throbbing in
the temples, seemed strongly to indicate the use of bleeding. Very little
experience, however, was sufficient to show the impropriety of it; and
instructed by repeated examples of its hurtful effects, I very early laid aside
all thoughts of lessening the inflammatory state by means of it. Although the
blood, drawn in the cases wherein this remedy was employed, was remarkably
florid, and always threw up an inflammatory crust of greater or less thickness;
and although the pains seemed to undergo a temporary mitigation, yet the
consequence at the expiration of a few hours was always fatal. I was the more
surprised at this event, as the patients were remarkably robust, florid, and
generally in the vigor of life.

Having thoroughly cleansed the primae viae, my next object was to encourage a
diaphoresis, if it had already come on, which I have observed often happened in
consequence of the use of the evacuating medicine; or if it had not, to promote
one. For this purpose, I made use of various means; such as the saline draughts
of Riverius, with and without the addition of the ethereal spirit of nitre or
vitriol; and I often preferred this addition, on account of the suppression of
urine. In all cases, the symptoms of which did not run high, this was a most
useful medicine; and although the taste was often complained of, it seldom
deranged the stomach. With this I generally gave a powder every two hours,
composed of nitre, camphor, and the pulvis antimonialis; and in order to give
these medicines a greater tendency to act on the skin, a few drops of laudanum
were occasionally added to the draught, or a small proportion of opium joined
to the powder. Perseverance in this plan, in the less violent cases, was
sometimes attended with complete success; for the pulse becoming slower and
soft, the pains abating, and the skin being covered with an agreeable moisture,
all that remained to complete the cure, was to prevent the tendency to
putrescence by the liberal use of bark, wine, and nourishing food.

This success, however, was confined to the third, and a very small part of the
second class of patients. The more violent cases of the disease, in which the
patients were hurried out of existence, wherein the whole frame was agitated by
a conflict the most dreadful, demanded a treatment in which the most vigorous
and speedy decision, the boldest perseverance in the adopted plan, and the
closest attention and observation became absolutely necessary. In these cases
local inflammation was more clearly indicated than in others; but bleeding was,
if possible, a more dangerous remedy here than in them. Finding all the
antiphlogistics I had used totally ineffectual, and that bleeding was on no
account admissible, I had recourse to the only remedy left me, mercury. I was
encouraged to the practice by the appearances I observed in the two first
bodies I opened. The liver was evidently the most diseased part, and I knew
that mercury was specific in all inflammations of that organ; besides, it was at
all events better to try a doubtful one than remedies of no efficacy. I
accordingly administered calomel either combined with nitre, camphor, and the
antimonial powder, or in the form of a pill. After many trials of both, I
preferred the last, chiefly on account of the nitre and camphor disagreeing
with the stomach. The pill was generally composed of five grains of calomel,
two of the antimonial powder, and one of opium; and repeated four times in the
twelve hours, or eight in the twenty-four hours. I confess it was with no small
degree of anxiety I ventured on this practice, unwarranted by any other
authority than dissection and my own observation; but its success justified my
temerity. If salivation was speedily raised, the danger was removed, and the
patient recovered. But in order to effect this, it was frequently necessary to
increase the quantity and number of the doses; and, in several instances, I
have pushed it to an almost incredible length, with astonishing success. In one
case in particular, a gunner of the royal artillery, named Thomas Smith, in
whom signs of recovery did not appear till the twenty-first day, fully 400
grains were given before the salivary glands were affected.

For some time the question respecting the propriety and impropriety of this
practice was much agitated among my fellow-practitioners. The principal
arguments offered against it were founded on its novelty; its militating
against the received theory of the nature of malignant and pestilential fevers;
and on the very limited duration of the disease, which, it was said, did not
admit the administration of a quantity large enough to excite salivation,
whereby, even was mercury useful, time sufficient was not given it to act. To
these I had to observe, that the mere novelty of a practice was no sufficient
objection to it. It is a pity that Dr. Lind, on advancing the following as a
fact, did not give his authority; for no such practice was ever known before
the present period in these islands, nor in Jamaica; if we judge by the silence
of medical practitioners of that island who have written. "If the patient,
after the application of blisters, still continued very ill, and was delirious,
with a low pulse, some have empirically given from five to ten grains of
calomel, joined with camphire, which was said to remove the delirium," etc.
Essays, etc. ed. 1774, p. 267.
That we were taught by frequent experience, that medicines not long since
considered as dangerous, and even poisonous, have been proved to be among the
most efficacious in certain diseases; that the received theory of the action of
mercury on the human system was, perhaps, not founded on established facts:
that in many instances, particularly inflammatory complaints, it did not
account for the effects produced by it: that in the present instance, it was
evident there was a change brought about in the system by it, when pushed to
salivation, which obviated inflammatory diathesis, without weakening, in a
dangerous degree, the powers of the living principle: that this effect was
illustrated, by what has constantly and uniformly happened to those who have
been cured of hepatitis by salivation, their strength having been comparatively
increased after the mercury had ceased to act: that the nature of pestilential
fevers was by no means generally well understood; the uncertainty of physicians
with respect to it, being a principal cause of their fatality: that we find
where the stages of these diseases have been well defined, and an appropriate
treatment judiciously adopted, the success of the practitioner has been
proportionally great: Compare, for example, Sir John Pringle and M. Poissonnier
on this disease; the balance of merit is strikingly in savor of the former,
merely from the circumstances I have mentioned.
that a remarkable peculiarity appeared during the inflammatory stage of
pestilential fever, in the inflammation seizing particular organs; in its often
affecting them without any external signs of such affection; in its
extraordinary tendency to gangrene; in its aptitude to run into the putrescent
state, when much debility was induced; in its exciting an increased afflux of
blood to the brain, whereby an uncommon exhalation of serous fluid from the
extremities of the arteries of that organ taking place, compression ensued, of
which the dilatation of the pupils of the eyes was an incontestable proof: that
as the case was new, it could only be from what has been found useful in
disorders of a nature nearly similar, we could make our selection of the means
of cure; that the consideration of certain states of inflammation of the liver;
of the confluent smallpox; and of the hydrocephalus internus; led us to give
the preference to mercury: that the medical maxim "de quo dubitare in ejusmodi
re non oportet: satius est enim anceps auxilium experiri, quam nullum," Celsi
Medicina, lib. II. cap. 10.
should always regulate our practice in dangerous and dubious cases: that
however short the time might be, we found salivation was often induced early
enough to save the patient; and that, although in certain states of the body,
and in other climates, much difficulty might arise from the tardy action of
mercury; yet that, in every species of inflammation, and perhaps more
especially those, the tendency of which to terminate in gangrene is great, and
in a hot climate, no such difficulty existed in general, unless the medicine
were to act on the intestinal canal, and consequently pass off without entering
into the circulating mass. These observations had their due weight on many; but
the powerful influence of prejudice operating with all its baneful force on
others, precluded conviction; although they had the mortifying experience of
the fatal tendency of the disease treated in the European way.

Dr. Gilchrist many years ago entertained the most decided opinion of the
antiphlogistic virtues of this medicine. His words are remarkable: "Nothing
embarrasses more than inflammation in a low state; but quicksilver is a
powerful antiphlogistic, and removes inflammation without accelerating the
motion of the fluids, which it rather diminishes, by subduing their
inflammatory disposition. When there is little or no fever, it as powerfully
resolves obstruction, without diminishing the impetus of the blood; on a proper
degree of which resolution depends." Essays and Observations Physical and
Literary, vol. III. p. 498.
In several instances of the malignant pestilential fever I have observed a
fact, which is certainly curious, and strongly illustrative of Dr. Gilchrist's
opinion: In the low comatose state, when the mercury already exhibited failed
of producing salivation, and of course of effecting the change in the disease,
which is attended with signs of recovery; and, when the stomach was
sufficiently retentive, such stimulus, or such tone has been given by the bark,
as enabled the former to act. The moment this was effected, signs of recovery
appeared. In very acute inflammations of the liver, I have a thousand times
seen, on the contrary, that the operation of the mercury is forwarded by
diminishing the tone of the system, by means of very liberal bleedings. A
similar effect to the former is also produced in ill-conditioned venereal
ulcers, attended with hectic symptoms; the use of the bark gives much efficacy
to mercury; and indeed the latter, in these cases, is seldom useful without the
former. There is a singular observation of Dr. Huxham's on the low nervous
fever, which may, I think, be brought forward here, as an analogical proof of
the propriety of the practice described: "There is no evacuation of a more
favorable portent than a pretty (...) salivation, without aphthae. When this
happens, with a kindly moisture of the skin, I never despair of my patient,
however weak and stupid he may seem." Essay on Fevers, 6th ed. p. 88.
To multiply arguments and proofs drawn from analogy would be useless; those
already offered are surely sufficient to justify even the empirical
administration of mercury in the malignant pestilential fever, as it appeared
here; wherein the danger was so imminent, when recourse was not had to bold
practice. The foregoing table will, I trust, constitute a clear demonstration
of this. I shall therefore only add a few words on the cause of the successful
treatment of the sick of the 45th regiment. I mentioned on a former occasion,
that the small number of deaths in that regiment arose from the mode of
treatment adopted by Mr. White, a very ingenious young gentleman, who attended
the sick in the absence of the surgeon. The disease being new, its symptoms
remarkably insidious, and its fatal tendency very uncommon, Mr. White did me
the honor to consult me, and request my opinion and advice. I mentioned to him
the difficulties I had for some time labored under, the result of my
observations, and the treatment I found alone useful in the more violent cases;
and recommended it to him as the most likely to be successful among his
patients. He immediately adopted it, and has since frequently declared to me,
that he did not lose afterward one man, who had taken a sufficient quantity of
calomel to excite salivation. Mr. White and myself were striking instances of
the efficacy of the practice; we were both infected, were very dangerously ill,
and cured by exciting salivation.

By comparative want of success in treating this dreadful malady with any other
means than those I have mentioned, might render any account of them
unnecessary. I shall, however, offer a few observations on the most remarkable
of them, chiefly with a view to show how inefficacious remedies strongly
recommended by experienced and judicious writers in certain states of the
malignant fever, were found to be in the disease before us. When symptoms of
local inflammation are so strongly marked as they were in many of the more
violent cases of this disease, and in the low state, in which the strongest
stimuli are indicated, blisters we should expect would be pre-eminently useful.
Dr. Lind in several places recommends blisters as the most effectual remedy in
the early stages of malignant and infectious fevers, and as often even
preventing them. Nay, he goes so far as to consider the effect of blisters as
the most certain proof of a prevailing infectious fever. Dissertation on Fevers
and Infection, chapter II. sect. 1.
On the other hand, many, as Dr. Huxham, Sir John Pringle, Dr. D. Monro, M.
Poissonnier, and Dr. Cullen, recommend blisters in the low stage only. The
latter observes in general on this subject, that "blistering may be employed at
any period of continued fevers; but that it will be of most advantage in the
advanced state of such fevers, when the re-action being weaker, all ambiguity
from the stimulant power of blistering is removed, and when it may best concur
with other circumstances tending to a final solution of the spasm." First
lines, vol. I. p. 178.
In the present instance, however, blisters were of little or no use at any
period of the disease, or wherever applied. In order to mitigate the
intolerable violence of the headache, I have blistered the whole head, and the
inside of each thigh, at once, in several cases, without producing the least
change in that or any other symptom. I have had recourse to this remedy to
lessen pain, to remove irritability of the stomach, and to raise the vital
powers in the low comatose stage; but always, except in two cases, without
success. In one of these, a soldier of the royal artillery, the irritability of
the stomach was completely removed by a blister applied to the scrobiculus
cordis. The other case was singular. In a tradesman of the town of St. George,
all the symptoms of the disease appeared, except the febrile heat. A blister
was applied between the shoulders, without administering any medicine
previously, except the solution, which operated very moderately. The effect was
wonderful; the discharge was uncommonly large, black, and foetid in an
intolerable degree; and the instant this took place the patient became better;
and soon after, without the use of any other remedy, recovered. A medical
gentleman of the army, at that time with the 67th regiment, informed me, that
in his own case, as well as those of four or five soldiers, he experienced
extraordinary relief from the application of a blister to the forepart of the
head, or sinciput. It is probable that the cases of the disease he treated were
less violent than most of those which occurred in my practice; otherwise it is
impossible to account for so great a difference of result in the same practice.

From the history of the disease, it will not appear extraordinary that
practitioners should have recourse to bark very early in it. The suddenness of
the changes, and the apparent sinking of the vital powers a few hours after the
accession of fever, naturally incline us to consider it as a disease wherein
tonics and antiseptics, with the whole tribe of cordials, could be alone
useful. But no indication can be more fallacious than this; and innumerable
instances occurred of the fatal consequence of adopting it. The use of the bark
in the violent cases of the malignant pestilential fever, immediately after the
operation of the evacuating medicines, was hurtful in the extreme; many
continued the practice, notwithstanding the glaring absurdity as well as danger
of it. But by way of removing spasm, and obviating the tendency of the
phlogistic symptoms, which they considered as unimportant, put in competition
with the expected putrefaction, they accompanied it with warm bathing, either
partial or general, and occasional purges. Their success, as might be expected,
was proportional to the unaptness of the means.

In every case wherein salivation took place, little farther was required than
the plentiful use of nourishing simple food, and wines. But when the mercury
had not this effect, or when its action was so tardy as to give room for the
most serious apprehensions of the event, it was necessary to have recourse to
the bark. This medicine, in remittent bilious fevers, is seldom uncommonly
disgusting to the patient; for although the stomach is very often irritable in
these fevers, and consequently incapable of retaining the bark, yet the patient
seldom expresses any dislike to swallowing it. In this fever, however, this
medicine was extremely disagreeable to the patient, and the irritability of the
stomach at the period when it became necessary was so great, as very frequently
to baffle every attempt to render it retentive. Nature seemed to point out the
impropriety of administering the bark, by not only rendering the palate
abhorrent to it, but exciting such a degree of spasm in the stomach, as made
that organ totally unequal to even the reception of it. Hence we are not to be
surprised that the bark did so little in this fever. In fact, except in the
third, and part of the second classes of patients, it was not a medicine to be
depended on; and even in these, the success was obtained chiefly by the agency
of other medicines in restoring some degree of tone to the stomach. Opium, so
often useful in other fevers, attended with irritability of the stomach, was in
this seldom beneficial. Burnt ardent spirits seemed to give a momentary relief;
but it was merely momentary. Nor had a repetition of them a similar effect, for
they were then instantly rejected. Blisters, I have already observed, did
almost no good in this way. Tincture of bark, or a very strong infusion of it
in Port-wine, was sometimes useful. But ether was the only medicine that was
in any degree truly and permanently beneficial in enabling the stomach to
receive and retain the Peruvian bark. Many cases fully evinced this; and a few
occurred in my practice, wherein the cure was completed by this medicine alone.
The only writer I have met with, who recommends the use of ether in malignant
pestilential fevers, is M. Poissonnier: "C'est dans ce (...) surtout qu'on peut
proposer avec confiance quelques petites doses d'ether vitriolique sur du
suore, afin de combattre plus efficacement la pourriture, et de retabler le ton
de l'estomac, et de toutes les parties. Ce remede ranime, sans etre
incendiaire, et semble devoir rempler ici la double indication de soutenir les
forces de la nature, et de s'opposer a la putrefaction des humeurs. Je sais
qu'a la Cayenne, ou une malady a peupres de cette nature, a enleve les quatre
cenquiemes des persons qui etoient passees dans cette colonie, plusieurs
malades reduits a l'extremite, ont du leur guerison a l'usage qu'ils ont fait
de ce remede, et qu'ils prenoient meme en assez grande quantite." Maladies des
gens de Mer. tom. I. p. 351. See also something to nearly the same purpose in
"Observations sur les Maladies des Negres, par M. Darille." p. 49.
This ample testimony was sufficient encouragement to try it in a malady that
had hitherto resisted all the means usually recurred to. The event justified
the practice. I gave the ether in the following manner. The patient being
allowed to remain undisturbed about an hour, I gave him about a tea-spoonful in
about half a wine-glassfull of cool water. After this he continued undisturbed
about two hours, when the dose was repeated. At the expiration of another hour,
the bark was offered him; and if he swallowed and retained it, the ether
afterward was given only once in five or six hours. But as this very seldom
happened, it was generally necessary to repeat the ether in the same quantity
every three hours, till the spasm of the stomach was entirely overcome. Ether,
given in the manner I have mentioned, is extremely grateful to the patient; it
occasions an agreeable warmth along the oesophagus, and gently stimulates the
stomach. This effect, however, does not continue long; but the frequent
production of it at length gives it permanency. It appears to act as a tonic,
an antiseptic, and an agreeable stimulant; a warm glow overspreads the surface,
and thirst, nausea, and oppression often have fled before it. I have generally
during the exhibition of the ether, and till the stomach became retentive,
ordered bark to be administered in the form of injections.

With respect to injections of bark in general, a great deal cannot be expected
from them. In the disease before us, when the case was of the more violent
kind, the spasm which affected the stomach, prevailed more or less throughout
the whole length of the intestinal canal; consequently the injections were
almost always immediately voided; or if they were retained, so little of the
antiseptic part of the medicine was absorbed, as to be totally inadequate to
combat the rapidly increasing putrescence. In a state of the intestines so
highly morbid, the action of the absorbents must have been imperfect; or if,
with Dr. Cullen, we consider the operation of bark as arising merely from a
tonic power, the spasmodic state of the intestinal fibers must have prevented
any efficacy from its application to them. But as the tonic power of this
medicine could be alone efficacious, I did all in my power to obviate the
spasm, by antispasmodics, by distension of the fibers of the rectum and colon,
and by the addition of Port-wine to the bark. The antispasmodics I used were,
opium in watery solution, asafoetida, and camphor rendered soluble in water by
mucilage; but I derived very little benefit from any of them. The most useful
was the opium, of a strong watery solution, of which I generally added two
tea-spoonfuls to an injection composed of an ounce and an half of bark, and
eight or ten ounces of water moderately warm, or of strong chicken-broth or
beef-tea. This injection was repeated, day and night, every three hours; and if
uniformly retained, a laxative injection was administered once in the
twenty-four hours to carry off the accumulated bark, which, otherwise, gave the
patient considerable uneasiness. With a view to overcome the spasm by
distension, I had a pint and a half of the above mixture injected into the
rectum, and ordered an assistant to compress the anus with some degree of
violence, by means of a towel well rolled up, the instant the pipe of the
syringe was withdrawn. This sometimes succeeded, when the patient could be
prevailed on to lie quiet in one posture; but in most cases, the patient being
comatose, delirious, or restless, from the general uneasiness and oppression
which then prevailed, it could not be put in practice. In the very troublesome
spasmodic affection of the stomach and oesophagus, particularly the latter,
called Hiccup, or Singultus, proceeding from irregularities in diet, nothing
sooner or more effectually relieves than distention of the oesophagus by the
detention of as large a quantity of very cold water, as possible, in that
passage, for a minute or thirty seconds. This is easily effected by throwing
the head back, and putting the muscles of deglutition into action, in such a
manner as to compress the oesophagus. I have often experienced the good effects
of this operation; and it was this which first induced me to try the above
practice.
The total inability of the stomach to receive either medicine or nourishment
in many cases; and the inefficacy of the bark injections described, in
obviating or correcting the tendency to putrescence, at length induced me to
use Port-wine, as the most restringent, instead of the water, chicken-broth, or
beef-tea. As the practice was not warranted by any medical authority, I confess
it was after some hesitation I ventured on it; and my hesitation arose chiefly
from a fear of the irritation which the wine might occasion when applied to the
tender surface of the intestines; and, in a healthy state, perhaps very
untoward symptoms might be the consequence. But in the present morbid state of
these viscera, so far from its producing irritation, I found it a most useful,
and not unfrequently a very efficacious practice. To two ounces of bark, I
added as much Port-wine as rendered the mixture sufficiently thin to pass
through the pipe of the syringe; and after adding the usual proportion of the
solution of opium, had it administered every three hours, taking care to use a
considerable degree of compression on the anus for some time after, to prevent
its being too soon passed. Although this medicine was by no means always
effectual in stopping the progress of putrefaction, yet it was infinitely more
so than any other antiseptic combination used in this way, when the stomach did
not admit of the exhibition of bark in any other. Perseverance, however, was
absolutely necessary in order to produce the desired effect; and it was also
equally necessary to leave the stomach undisturbed, as long as any irritation
remained in it.

Frequently baffled in my endeavors to fulfill the third indication of cure, by
the exhibition of the bark in the forms I have described; and often induced
from many of the symptoms, as well as the general character of the disease, to
consider it as a plague or pestilence; I had, in a few cases, recourse to the
practice described by Dr. Guthrie, and said by him to be uncommonly successful
in the treatment of the plague by the Russian physicians. I followed it
exactly, with this exception only, that the dread of producing or increasing
irritability, prevented me from repeating the emetics so frequently as
recommended by the Russian physicians. The result of this practice is laid down
in the foregoing table, from which it appears, that as the number of
unsuccessful cases was exactly equal to the recoveries, the encouragement to
proceed was not very great. One of the patients treated in this way, Martin
Gray, a soldier of the royal artillery, had been apparently cured by mercury,
without its producing salivation; but having relapsed, I put him on this
course. After a flattering but momentary change on the fifth, he died on the
seventh day. Another of the same corpse, Richard Ducket, had recovered in the
same manner, by means of mercury, but relapsing, he was treated in this method,
and recovered. This difference of result in circumstances exactly parallel,
must have arisen from the former being a recruit just arrived from Europe; the
latter, near three years in the climate.

It may not, perhaps, be considered as foreign to my subject, to remark here,
that in the furunculus, which prevailed very generally almost immediately after
the malignant pestilential fever had abated about the end of August or
beginning of September, I found the combination of bark and sulphur, which
forms part of the above plan, a most excellent remedy in increasing the
eruption, and promoting the suppuration. These furunculi, or as they are
commonly called, Blind-boils, were very large, seldom less than an inch in
diameter, very painful, and discharged a very uncommon quantity of purulent
matter, frequently mixed with ichor. They appeared on every part of the body;
but in greatest number near the scrotum, the hips, and on both upper and lower
extremities.

Wishing to leave nothing untried that promised any relief to my patients in
this fatal malady, I determined on trying what the Angustura bark would do. On
a former occasion, this bark seemed useful in an irregular fever depending on
local disease. Since then, I have read Mr. Brand's "Experiments and
Observations on the Angustura Bark," wherein its efficacy, as an antiseptic and
tonic, are highly commended in various states of fever. Encouraged by these,
and perceiving that this bark possessed a pungency or spicy taste, a quality
which the Peruvian bark had in a very inferior degree, I made use of it, in
expectation that by gently stimulating the stomach, and thereby obviating the
spasm with which that organ was affected, it might have a better chance of
being retained. I did not begin to use this medicine till toward the end of
July, and gave it in only twelve cases. Five of these were soldiers of the
royal artillery; and the remaining seven, inhabitants and transient people. The
former recovered with remarkable rapidity, and three of the latter; so that
only one in three died. Although this success was greater than I expected, I
did not think myself justifiable in trusting altogether to the Angustura bark,
when I was possessed of a remedy more certain in its effect, and of whose
safety extensive experience had fully satisfied me. From the event, however, it
was evidently a more suitable medicine than the Peruvian bark. Three of the
five of the artillery, who took the Angustura bark were young men, who had
never entered the torrid zone before, and were almost total strangers to the
climate; and those who died were sailors, who had only lately arrived from
Europe. It was evident therefore, that although frequently an useful medicine,
and although it generally agreed with the stomach, it was by no means to be
safely depended on in cases of great violence. I always preceded the
administration of this medicine with the deobstruents and diaphoretics I have
already mentioned; and after the operation of these, I gave a scruple of the
powder of the Angustura bark mixed with water, every hour, or two scruples in
three hours. In the eight cases wherein this practice was successful, I was
astonished to see an almost immediate change take place; for instead of the
heat being increased, and the surface becoming dry, which too often followed
the too early use of the Peruvian bark, an agreeable glow, an increase of warm
sweat, and a diminution of pain were the consequences. For instance, if the
patient was seized with the usual symptoms on the evening, I had immediately
the vomit administered, and repeated if necessary; this was followed up, as
soon as possible, by the cooling diaphoretic, or with the saline draughts, with
a sufficient addition of the bitter cathartic salts; or instead of all these,
the solution of salts and tartarised antimony, in the manner already described.
These having operated sufficiently during the night, I began the use of the
Angustura bark in the morning. By the following evening, all the symptoms were
relieved; and on the second morning, the patient was up, walked a little, and
had some appetite; and from that time, using occasionally the Angustura bark,
he continued to recover. How different this from the effect of the Peruvian
bark; nausea, vomiting, heat, dry skin, quickened pulse, increased pain; often
succeeded by coma, delirium, etc. and seldom administrable without ether. Upon
the whole it appeared, that the inefficacy of the Angustura bark in the more
violent cases, arose from the irritability of the stomach being greater, and
less tractable in them; and from an insufficiency of the antiseptic power in
the bark itself. From some experiments I made, after the above successful
exhibition of the Angustura bark in the malignant pestilential fever, with a
view to discover to what particular qualities it possessed, this success was to
be attributed, I was induced to refer it to an uncommon quantity of fixed air
or aerial acid, and to a volatile alkali which this bark appeared to contain.
As however experiments of this kind are often subject to deception, I shall not
take upon me to speak with certainty on the subject. But in order that the
experiments I allude to may be repeated by those more experienced in this way
than I am, I shall insert them here. "In order to discover whether this
infusion, made of one ounce of the powder of Angustura bark in eight ounces of
water, contained any fixed air or aerial acid, I added to one ounce of it
filtered, a small quantity of filtered limewater. The infusion became
immediately turbid, and of a dirty yellow color approaching to white, and
deposited soon after, on the sides and bottom of the glass, a small quantity of
a greyish-white powder. The infusion, after the powder subsided completely, was
perfectly transparent, and of a beautiful amber-colour." "To two ounces of the
infusion, I added a small quantity of a watery solution of corrosive sublimate.
The mixture became instantly whitish, which, no doubt, had the coloring matter
of the bark been wanting, would have been milky; a whitish powder was soon
after precipitated." The infusion of pale Peruvian bark suffered no change on
the addition of limewater; but with the addition of the watery solution of
corrosive sublimate, it became instantly whitish, and a precipitation of a
whitish powder took place. The antiseptic power of this medicine in infusion is
evidently extremely weak, but not so in powder; thus, the infusion with fresh
meat becomes highly offensive in thirty hours, in the common temperature of the
air; that is, in a heat at an average about 83 degrees of Farenheit; but a
piece of meat of equal weight, viz. two drams, well rubbed with the powder and
wrapped in a piece of paper, placed in the same heat, was perfectly sweet at
the end of ten days, no other smell being perceptible but that of the bark.
Does this corroborate the result of the above experiments? And is not the
remarkable efficacy of this medicine in dysentery, which I have frequently
experienced, to be attributed to the powers ascribed to it here? For the above
tests, see Bergman's Physical and Chemical Essays, Cullen's Translation, vol.
I. p. 32, etc. though, as they are applied in the preceding experiments, may be
fallacious.


Having thus offered the most important observations I made in endeavoring to
fulfill the three first indications of cure of the malignant pestilential fever,
I shall now treat of the fourth, viz. to restore tone and energy to the system
when the patient was in a state of recovery. Change of air and suitable diet
were the means I found most useful; for, contrary to most febrile diseases,
bark was here either useless or hurtful; and, as I have already remarked, the
patient seemed instinctively to reject and loath it.

As long as the patient remained in the infected room or house, although all
symptoms of the disease had disappeared, the progress of his recovery was
remarkably flow. And here I may also observe, that his restoration to health
seemed to bear a pretty exact proportion to the means used in overcoming the
disease. Headache, a heavy dull eye, with a considerable protrusion from the
orbits, low spirits, thirst, and a total want of appetite, were the general
consequences of the treatment with bark, without the previous use of
deobstruents, and the appropriate antiphlogistic. None of these unpleasant
feelings attended convalescence, when the disease had been removed by
mercurials; and I had frequently reason to imagine, that a serous accumulation
continued in the brain a considerable time after the disappearance of the
disease, when treated in the former way. Compression indeed was evidently
indicated by the appearance of the eyes, the continual headache, a frequent
nausea, and a tendency to stupor and sleepiness; and as no means were used
during the existence of the disease to excite an absorption of the exhaled
fluid in the brain, it was highly probable that the compression arose from this
deficiency. Although nothing of this kind followed the mercurial plan, extreme
debility was the immediate consequence of the disease in all cases. But there
was always this distinction observable, that convalescent debility was of much
shorter duration after treatment with mercury than the other. It appeared that
the infected air of the room in which the patient continued to reside, although
it could never renew the disease, stimulated the stomach in such a manner as to
produce an effect almost equally dreadful. To obviate this evil, a change of
air and situation became absolutely necessary the moment signs of convalescence
appeared; and indeed, of all the means I know for recovery from this state of
debility, it is the most efficacious. Even the instant the patient was carried
into the open air, he was sensible of a wonderful degree of refreshment; and
the purer the atmosphere, and the higher the situation of the place, provided
there was no dampness, the speedier was his acquisition of strength. The
instances of this were innumerable; as were likewise those of a contrary
treatment. The 45th regiment afforded one of the most remarkable of the former.
The sick soldiers, as soon as they were able to bear any degree of motion, were
sent to Hospital-hill, where they were kept till they acquired their usual
health; which happened in a surprisingly short time. The distance from Fort
George, where the regiment was stationed, to the barracks on Hospital-hill, is
fully a mile; and the ascent for the most part is very considerable. Although
the sick, at the time they began their walk, or ride, from the Fort were
apparently so weak and languid as to be scarce able to bear exercise, before
they reached their barracks, instead of being overcome with fatigue, they were
sensibly better and stronger. The change to a purer air, a high rocky
situation, abundance of good water, and the distance from infection, produced
an alteration in a few days; and this was rendered still more remarkable, by
their accommodation being cold and exposed to the weather; for the barracks in
which they were lodged, were so much decayed as to admit the rain and wind
almost everywhere. Under circumstances which did not admit of changes of this
nature, much benefit to the patient accrued from the moving him from the
infected chamber to one adjoining. In the hospitals this was frequently done,
and always with the best consequences. I have even extended this removal to
that state of the disease which immediately succeeds the inflammatory, and
frequently with evident advantage; nor is it to be wondered at, since it is
easy to conceive that the violence of a contagious disease will increase in
proportion to the accumulation of infection in the atmosphere immediately
surrounding the person afflicted with it. Something of this kind was done on
shipboard, where the accommodation was in general wretchedly bad and confined.
In a few of the ships, the captains had the humanity to give up their cabins
altogether to the sick; and in these, the sick enjoying sufficient room, good
air, and better ventilation than between decks, the mortality was infinitely
less. As I considered cleanliness and free ventilation as two principal agents
in destroying contagion, I always enjoined particular attention to them: where
these were more immediately in my own power, nothing was left undone to effect
them. In the royal artillery hospital, when the disease was almost at its
height of violence, I had all the wards successively white-washed; in doing
which I effected another object, the removal of the sick from the infected
wards to others that were not so. After each ward was white-washed, I had
several port-fires Port-fire is a composition of two-fourths of sulphur,
one-fourth of nitre, and one-fourth of meal or powder of charcoal, rammed into
paper tubes two feet long, used in firing off cannon, mortars, and other pieces
of ordnance, in lieu of slow-match, formerly used.
burnt in it, and the smoke confined for several hours; and afterward well
washed with hot vinegar. Twice or thrice in the week, moistened gunpowder was
burnt in each ward; and thrice in the day, the floors and bedsteads of the sick
were sprinkled with vinegar. But in order to destroy the seeds of infection as
completely as possible, all the blankets, shirts, flannel jackets and
waistcoats of those who died, were burnt immediately after their death; and the
bodies carried to a dead-house, some yards distant from the hospital. Sheets,
shirts, and other wearing-apparel of those who recovered, were first well
fumigated with gunpowder, and afterward washed, before the patient was
discharged. The captains of some of the London merchantmen, had the hold and
lower decks daily well fumigated with moistened gunpowder, during which the
hatches were kept close shut. All the under-decks were also frequently washed
with hot vinegar; and fires were occasionally lighted below. The beneficial
consequences of this attention were remarkably conspicuous; their men recovered
their strength surprisingly fast, and suffered no relapse; and new men who were
taken on board to replace those who fell victims to the disease, continued well
and untainted. It was otherwise with ships on board of which these precautions
were not observed; relapses, or rather a suspension of the disease, were not
uncommon, and new men became immediately infected. On the 19th of May, a letter
of marque belonging to Liverpool, brought into St. George's the crew, thirty in
number, of a French vessel she had captured on her passage from England. These,
on account of the scarcity of seamen, were distributed among the merchantmen
most in want. Many of these people were immediately infected, and died; and it
is remarkable, that the lot of these unfortunate men was to be put on board the
least cleanly, and of course the most infected ships.

Suitable diet was the next means of restoring tone and energy to the system.
During the existence of the disease, it was of little importance whether the
patient took nourishment or not; and indeed, from the circumstances under which
the sick generally labored, it is evident that nothing material in this way
could be administered. It was otherwise, however, the moment signs of recovery
took place: the great object was to select such articles of food as were most
palatable, most simple, most nourishing, and of smallest bulk; for nausea was
readily excited, the general debility was very great, and the digestive powers
were very imperfect. Most liquid aliment, especially soups, were extremely
disagreeable, and readily excited nausea; meats were sometimes acceptable, but
very few were admissible. Sago, panada, and the preparations of the Indian
arrow-root, Maranta Galanga, Linnaei.
with a large proportion of Madeira wine, well spiced, were by far the most
agreeable, the lightest, and most nourishing. To these therefore, with
occasionally the addition of a soft fresh egg, I confined my convalescents; and
I regulated the manner and frequency of giving them, by the rule laid down by
Celsus. "Cibus non multus quidem, sed saepe tamen nocte ac die dandus est; ut
nutriat neque oneret." Lib. III. cap. 19.
It is remarkable, and totally contrary to what happens during convalescence
from other fevers, that wine in general was extremely disagreeable to the
patients; and it was with much persuasion and difficulty they could be
prevailed on to use it. Madeira and the richer sweet wines were the most
unpalatable; Hock and Rhenish wine were often taken with pleasure; but
Port-wine was the least unpleasant of any. All convalescents were uncommonly
fond of porter and small beer; and, when permitted, greedily swallowed large
draughts of them. As they always agreed well with the stomach, and as it was of
the utmost consequence to please wherein it could be done without injury, I
generally indulged them in the liberal use of these liquors. Riding, and
moderate exercise of any kind, contributed very much to the restoration of
health.

In some, whose viscera became permanently diseased from improper treatment or
imprudence, hectic heats and colliquative sweats and diarrhoeas took place.
Several of these who could not change the climate, fell victims to this sequela
of the malignant pestilential fever. Milk diet, country air, and cheerful
society, had some effect in relieving these patients; but a northern climate
was always the last resource, where it could be obtained.

Before I conclude this part of the task I have imposed on myself, I cannot
help observing, that as the majority of the most useful part of society are
daily exposed to the ravages of one of the most destructive calamities mankind
are subject to, we have reason to consider ourselves as extremely fortunate in
possessing a remedy which, under certain circumstances, may be depended on in
the cure of it. There is, no doubt, the influence of old habits, and medical
authority to be combatted, ere the practice I have recommended can be generally
adopted; but it is to be hoped that these will yield to facts and experience,
the physician's only certain guides in the treatment of disease. Little
encouragement is held out by the result of the practice hitherto generally
resorted to in malignant and pestilential fevers; but, authorized by men highly
eminent in their profession, it has become a kind of false beacon, directing
the young and unexperienced to measures full of inconceivable mischief. An
instance will illustrate this: Dr. Schotte, in his very ingenious Treatise on a
Contagious Fever which raged fatally at Senegal, observes, that "he did not
think himself very blameable in not administering laudanum sooner; for what can
a young practitioner do better, than follow the rules and precepts laid down by
celebrated clinical authors?" -- "Opium I was prevented from giving, by those
cautions which are met with in the writings of many eminent authors, as
preventing nature in its operations, and putting a stop to its salutary
intentions." Treatise on the Synochus Atrabiliosa, p. 139, 140.
How much is it to be regretted that Dr. Schotte should in so melancholy an
extremity forget that he practiced in the torrid zone, where cautions
necessary, perhaps, in London and its neighborhood, are not admissible! How
much mischief might have been prevented, had his judgment been unshackled: had
he boldly, on an occasion which demanded new and decisive measures, thought for
himself: had he investigated more fully, more especially by dissection, the
nature of the disease he treated: had he known, or adverted to the
antiphlogistic virtues of mercury, and the infinite advantage arising from the
promoting of absorption in a disease so evidently depending on local
derangement. As a physician offers himself to the public as the declared enemy
of disease, in every form it may assume; as he consequently pledges himself to
leave naught undone which he knows can, or which promises to be useful toward
the obtainment of the object in view, is it not incumbent on him, as a
preliminary step, by every possible means to discover the nature of the malady
he is to combat with; and even should there be danger in the attempt, does it
not display a most unpardonable timidity, a medical lachete stamped with
characters uncommonly prominent, should he shrink from it when life or death is
the object to be obtained, by a little exertion of fortitude? "It is a
physician's duty to do every thing in his power, that is not criminal, to save
the life of his patient." Lectures on the Duties and Qualifications of a
Physician, p. 39.
And, to use a plain and rather trite simile, an able physician, like a skilful
general, should inform himself fully of the number, the strongholds, the
advantageous positions, the vulnerable points of the enemy, before he seriously
attacks. When he has acquired the necessary knowledge, his enemy falls before
him; because he knows where to attack him with superior advantage. It must be
confessed, however, that the part a young practitioner has to act in hot
climates is extremely difficult where, to use the words of an ingenious and
amiable writer on another occasion, "diseases are found complicated in endless
varieties; which occasions an embarrassment which nothing can remove but a
habit of nice discernment, a quickness of apprehension which enables him to
perceive real analogies; and, what is rarely united with this, a solidity of
judgment, which secures him from being deceived by imaginary ones." Lectures on
the Duties and Qualifications of a Physician, p. 15.


It may be expected from the opportunities I had, not only of seeing the
malignant pestilential fever in all its various degrees of violence, but also
of investigating the cause which might produce and promote it; that useful
information may be the result of my observations with respect to the means of
prevention. The importance of an inquiry of this nature is manifest, and
perhaps in the torrid zone, of more than in any other; because in it the agency
of cold can never interpose to prevent the ravages of a pestilential disease;
nor is there ever observed that degree of heat which destroys pestilential
infection in the warmer regions of the old continent. Some late travelers
observing more accurately, or possessing means more adequate to the
investigation of truth than their predecessors, have thrown much light on the
causes and source of pestilence. The Baron de Tott, who we have reason to
believe had the best means of information, says, that the plague would be
unknown in Egypt, were it not for the contagion which is introduced by the
trading vessels from Constantinople; that it is in Alexandria it first
manifests itself; that it rarely reaches Cairo, although no precautions are
used to prevent it: "ou les chaleurs la font bien-tot cesser, et l'empechent de
penetrer jusques dans le Said." Memoirs du Baron de Tott sur les Tures et les
Tartares, tom. IV. p. 57.
M. Savary, who resided a considerable time in Egypt, observes in his
forty-fourth letter, that Smyrna and Constantinople are the foci of this
frightful malady; from whence it is always imported into Egypt, which,
otherwise would be exempt from it. He adds, "Another remark, deserving our
particular attention, is, that the extremes of heat and cold are alike enemies
to this terrible contagion. The winter puts an end to it at Constantinople; the
summer destroys it in Egypt. It scarcely ever reaches the polar circle, and
never passes the tropic." The last part of M. Savary's remark does not appear
to be now altogether well-founded, since we may certainly consider the disease,
which is the only subject of these sheets, as a plague modified by the uniform
heat of the climate into which it has been introduced. Does not the ceasing of
this disease at Philadelphia at the commencement of winter, constitute a proof
of this: Some objections may arise from its being considered as doubtful,
whether the disease which raged here was the same as that which proved so fatal
in Philadelphia? That they were the same, the following fact renders evident: A
vessel belonging to Philadelphia introduced the disease into St. Pierre,
Martinique, in October, 1793. Another vessel from New London touched at St.
Pierre, in her way to Grenada, and received the infection. On her arrival, in
February, 1794, the sick were put under my charge; and I found the disease to
be my old enemy, the malignant pestilential fever. I treated it with mercury,
and was successful.
The original causes of plague, and all its modifications, are unquestionably
accumulated human effluvia in close hot rooms, filth, and the hoarding up of
woollen clothes and bedding used by infected persons. All writers agree in
this; and the observations of Dr. Guthrie have thrown much light on the manner
in which these causes act to produce so dreadful an effect. Baron de Tott has
given the public a most important observation with respect to the manner in
which the plague is propagated at Constantinople: "Qui qu'il en soit ii n'y a
point d'incertitude sur le foyer qui la conserve, ni sur les causes que la
propagent. On retrouve l'un et l'autre, chez les merchands fripiers de
Constantinople, et chez les particuliers qui conservent dans leurs coffres tous
les vetements, les fourures memes des persons mortes de la peste. C'est sans
doubt prendre le moyen le plus efficace pour en fomenter et en perpetuer le
germe," etc. This observation was fully illustrated by the conduct of
individuals in the lower classes of the inhabitants of this town. Many of these
derive their subsistence from retailing rum of the cheapest and worst quality
to sailors, soldiers, and sailor and porter negroes; and as the detection of
this practice, which is not permitted by law, might be destructive to their
views, and ruinous to their little capitals, they carry it on in booths, and
small wooden buildings of little value, erected near the wharfs, or under the
shelter of large houses, or in lanes and places out of public notice: to these,
persons of the description I have mentioned are encouraged to resort, where
they soon become intoxicated, and are crowded together in a hot, putrid, or
infected atmosphere, till they recover their senses; when they generally find
themselves precipitated into a fever of a most malignant character. Into these
sinks of pestilence and destructive dissipation, captains of vessels, during
the prevalence of the malignant pestilential fever, induced by the apparent
cheapness of the accommodation, hurried their wretched sailors laboring under
the disease in its worst form. The moment they entered them, their fate was
generally decided, since the best digested plan of cure, and the most
appropriate remedies could not overcome a disease whose violence was
continually accumulating by the surrounding infection. But the evil did not
cease with their lives; their mattresses, blankets, and wearing apparel,
wretched as they were, became an object of value in the eyes of these insidious
plunderers; and whether they were hoarded up in these places, or disposed of to
others, still being preserved, they became the seminium of the disease, and
were the principal means of propagating it. Another cause contributed not a
little to support the contagion: From the indolence peculiar to all classes of
people in this climate, and from the novelty of the thing itself, few paid the
necessary attention to sweetening and ventilating the rooms of the sick when
the disease ceased; from this it frequently happened that a healthy person on
entering any of these infected rooms, was instantly struck with the infection.
These facts demonstrate, that means are always in the power of the inhabitants
of the torrid zone to check or prevent contagion. That the disease therefore
might have been prevented in the first instance, and that the propagation of it
afterward might have been confined to those places which first received the
infection, is certain, had the nature of it been properly understood, and had
laws which oblige the observance of quarantine been in existence, But much,
very much depends on individual prudence, as well as public policy; and it is
to be feared that plans of prevention, however well adapted they may be to the
local situation and other circumstances of the case, will always prove abortive
in the West India colonies, from a constitutional want of energy in the
executive government; from a kind of deficiency in the public spirit of
individuals; and because, as Mitio in the play observes, Homine imperito
nunquam quidquam injustices;
Qui, nisi quod ipse facit, nil rectum putat.
Terentii Adelphi, A. I. S. 11.


A general plan of prevention has, in these colonies (particularly Grenada) for
its objects, the destruction of all small wooden buildings erected purposely
for the accommodation of the lowest class of white people, and free people of
color; who, renting them with no other view than to retail rum of the worst
quality, and to harbor poor transient persons, in order to despoil them of
their scanty property, become the greatest nuisance in West India towns, and
literally the pest of society. The obliging the inhabitants to build with stone
or brick, and to lay out the plan of their buildings in such a manner that the
streets may be spacious, and subject to the perflation of the prevailing winds;
the rooms as large as the general dimensions of the house will permit; stables,
necessaries, and all other erections of that kind, at a distance from the
dwelling house, not less than twenty feet; certain places built at individual
or general expense, to which all filth shall be early in the morning carried;
from whence, at stated times, proper persons paid by the public shall carry it
to a distance from town. The obliging butchers to slaughter in places so far
distant from town, and so situated as not to affect the atmosphere with the
offensive foetor arising from offals and putrid meat; and proper sheds or
stalls well ventilated, and as near running water as possible, to be built at
the expense of the public, to which butchers and all others who slaughter meat
for sale, shall be obliged to carry their meat at certain stated hours, which
should be as early in the morning as possible. The appropriating a certain
portion of ground for the burying of the dead, at some distance from town, and
to enclose it with a stone wall. The enacting of a law which shall involve in
it the foregoing objects the prohibiting the retail of rum, except under
certain limitations: the appointing of proper persons with adequate salaries,
to be denominated officers of health; the duty of a certain number of whom,
shall be the preventing the erection of buildings of the description mentioned:
the regulating the licensed rum stores: the superintending the general
regulations relative to cleanliness, ventilation of streets and houses,
butchers stalls, and slaughterhouses, burying-grounds, etc. and preventing the
landing and lodging of any infected person or thing, or any person or thing
suspected of being so. This law should authorize the remainder of the officers
of health thus appointed, to visit all ships which shall carry on trade with
the island, and after ascertaining their health, or the existence of a
contagious disease on board, or which had lately prevailed on board, to permit
them to enter the harbor, and land their cargoes or to oblige them to retire
to a place appointed for the performance of quarantine. Proper places for this
purpose must be chosen, on which lazarettoes or pest-houses, and stores or
sheds shall be erected, in which the crews and goods on board shall be lodged
and purified by the means so copiously treated of by Dr. Mead, Dr. Lind, and
others. After remaining there a term of days, not exceeding fourteen, the
officers of health shall grant their certificate of the healthy state of the
crew, and purification of the goods: on which, the vessels shall be permitted
to enter the harbor, and land their cargoes. Authority should also be vested
in these officers of health, subject however to the control of magistrates or
justices of the peace, to fine or inflict such other punishment as delinquents,
in any of the cases specified, shall be judged deserving of. And in order to
give more efficacy to these regulations, perhaps it would be a wise measure in
the legislature, if they are constitutionally competent to it, to enlarge the
powers of the governor in such a manner as may enable him to act with energy on
such occasions as these, and prevent the repetition of delinquency, by
inflicting punishment in a more summary way than he can at present. The
obtaining these improvements in the police of West India towns, and the
enforcing obedience to these regulations, must altogether depend on the public;
and it is to be presumed, that the great importance of their object will be a
powerful stimulus to the legislative body, in enacting with all due speed the
necessary laws for the effectual establishment of them.

The means of prevention which more immediately depend on the prudence and
exertion of individuals, have been so often and so ably stated by writers on
this subject, as to render it unnecessary for me to enlarge on them here. When
an individual of a family has been seized with a contagious or pestilential
fever, care should be taken to prevent all, except those who are necessary in
attending him, from going into the room in which he is confined; if he
recovers, the bed-clothes and wearing apparel which he used during his illness,
should be as soon as possible destroyed by fire; his person well washed, and
dressed with clothes that cannot be subject to suspicion; he should be carried
into the country, if possible, and remain in it till he acquires his usual
degree of strength: the room he lay in should be new painted if wainscotted, or
white-washed if otherwise; and the floor and ceiling, doors, window-shutters,
etc. should be well scrubbed, and the whole afterward fumigated with moistened
gunpowder; the attendants, before they again mix with society, should be
obliged to purify their persons, and change their clothes. When the disease
appears on shipboard, the sick should be instantly separated from the healthy,
and carried to a place on shore, from which the infection cannot spread; the
space between decks, the hold, the cabin, should be immediately well scrubbed,
and, if it can be done, white-washed; fires should be lighted in the hold and
between decks, and whilst they are burning, the hatches should be kept close
shut; and the whole for several days should be carefully fumigated and
sprinkled with vinegar. But as the hammocks and mattresses of seamen are more
subject to receive and retain infection than any thing else on board, the
greatest care should be taken to wash them well; and if any have been used by
the sick, to burn them. A remarkable instance of the efficacy of these means of
prevention on shipboard, I have at present (February 20th, 1794) before me.
The ship Mary of Liverpool, of 26 guns and 70 men, received the infection
either from an American vessel, the crew of which had been infected at
Martinique, or from the rum-shops I have already described. I advised the
captain to separate the sick from the healthy, and if possible to send them on
shore; and afterward to wash all the decks well with vinegar, to light fires
between decks and in the hold, and to fumigate the whole with gunpowder. He
complied with my directions, and the result has been most happy; for after the
four in whom the disease appeared were sent on shore, and the means I have
mentioned were used, the disease entirely ceased to spread. I may observe here,
that some of the methods recommended in Europe for preventing the spreading of
a contagious disease, are not always necessary, the climate itself in some
circumstances doing what in Europe, particularly in Great Britain, must be done
by artificial means. I shall only mention two instances. It is by no means
necessary, or rather it is augmenting the virulence of the contagion, to shut
up families in their houses, when an individual of it has been seized with the
disease. I have already observed, that the sphere of infectious atmosphere in
this climate, has in no instance exceeded ten feet; and that all beyond that,
have remained untainted. It therefore is evident, that a measure of this kind
would not only be unnecessary, but extremely hurtful; for confined air in the
torrid zone, becomes in a very short time totally unfit for respiration,
however large the rooms may be: a proof of which is the oppression and other
uneasy symptoms a person is sensible of in a room, the doors and windows of
which are close shut. For the same reason, what has been proposed by Dr. Lind,
if executed in this climate, would produce an effect in every respect reverse
of that which that ingenious and experienced physician expected from it. His
proposal is, that "the dispersed sick should be carefully collected into one
place, and the houses be purified on their removal; as others are taken ill,
they should also be immediately put with the sick, and in a short time, the
infection will be wholly confined to one spot." Dr. Lind's Essays, p. 350.
In a climate whose temperature generally varies little, any thing like
crowding patients, laboring under the action of pestilential contagion, must
appear, prima facie, in the highest degree improper. It is therefore hospitals,
unless they have been constructed on a very large scale, that have always been
hurtful. On every account, separate rooms are better, were they even huts,
providing due care is taken to ventilate them properly, and keep them clean. A
striking illustration of this is, what happened in the royal artillery hospital
of this island, already related; and it is the more deserving of attention, as
the hospital is a stone building, situated in the most favorable situation
possible for ventilation; as the rooms are large, lofty, and well perflated in
every direction; and as every thing is kept remarkably clean and sweet.

Those whose business or duty lead them to the chambers of the sick, should be
particularly careful to avoid entering them with an empty stomach; or when they
are heated; or when they are in perspiration. The last caution is more
particularly to be attended to, as the pores of the skin in that state, may be
considered as so many open mouths ready to receive and swallow the infectious
effluvia; which no possible means can prevent. The usual manner of using the
aromatic gums, or keeping camphorated or aromatic vinegar to the nose, or
suspending small bags of camphor, musk, asafoetida, etc. on the breast, as I
have already observed, have not the smallest efficacy in preventing infection
when the body is exposed to it. But as it is evident that the contagious
effluvia do not extend themselves beyond a limited distance from the infected
person, so the best preventive must of course be the taking care not to go
nearer the sick, if possible, than the limits of the infected atmosphere. The
duty, however, of physicians, nurses, and other necessary attendants, must
render their observing that precaution impossible; they must therefore trust
more to their temperance than prophylactics of this kind for exemption from
infection. One caution, however, may be useful even to them, if strictly
observed. It is probable that the matter of contagion enters the body more
readily by the lungs and stomach, than by the skin; consequently, if care be
taken to keep the mouth and nostrils shut during the examination of the patient
or the more immediate attendance on his person, by means of handkerchiefs
sprinkled with any antiseptic fluid, particularly camphorated vinegar, or the
little balls recommended by Dr. Lind, there will be less risk of their
receiving the infection. Although I have little faith in amulets, and indeed
none of the tribe recurred to here were useful during the prevalence of the
malignant pestilential fever, perhaps the singular one mentioned by Dr. Lind,
may be employed on these occasions with advantage. I mean the quill filled with
quicksilver, and corked at each end, carried in a pocket near the groin, which
the Doctor says, "several surgeons in our hospitals, who had recourse to it,
imagined it was attended with success." Dr. Lind's Essays, p. 346.
In general, both as preventive of infection and as a means of rendering the
disease milder, every thing possible should be done to keep the room cool, and
so ventilated as that whilst a constant succession of fresh to infected or foul
air takes place, no current of it can immediately affect the person of the
sick; and in addition to its freshness, no doubt much advantage will arise from
saturating it with antiseptic particles; such as those which arise from boiling
vinegar, burning camphire, and other substances of the same nature. I may here
also mention the use of vitriolic ether, the evaporation of which in an
infected atmosphere, may have an excellent effect in purifying it, and perhaps
rendering healthy persons less obnoxious to the action of contagion. I have met
with no writer who recommends this medicine as a prophylactic, but M.
Poissonnier, "Quand on considere que quelques onces d'ether peuvent repandre
l'odeur la plus suave et la plus salutaire dans un tres-grand hospital
sera-t-on arrete par la depense que cette pretendue profusion occasionera! Si
il est un cas ou il soit beau d'etre prodigue, c'est celui ou l'on soulage les
malheureux." Traite sur les Maladies des gens de Mer. tom. I. p. 360.
But as, notwithstanding the justice and humanity of M. Poissonnier's
observation, the expense attending the liberal use of ether in this way will
be always an unsurmountable objection to it among the generality of mankind, I
would recommend in lieu of it the aetherial oil. Oil of Wine.
Its smell is amazingly penetrating and permanent, and is highly antiseptic.
The rubbing the bed-posts with a little of this, and sprinkling it on places
most liable to receive and retain infection, would, I have no doubt, be
infinitely beneficial.

Notwithstanding the evident necessity existing for the adopting a plan such as
that I have proposed for the prevention of infection, and destroying it when it
appears on shipboard, it is probable that the causes I have mentioned may
always render the measure abortive. If therefore no proper places are chosen
for the purpose of performing quarantine, and no lazarettoes are built, some
other temporary expedient must be thought of in an emergency so pregnant with
mischief. At the time the malignant pestilential fever began to rage on
shipboard, and before it was communicated to the inhabitants, several
expedients were proposed to stop its progress; but none were put in execution.
Among these, I suggested to many of the captains, and some of the principal
inhabitants, the following: The carenage or harbor is situated at the bottom
of a very extensive bay, and so completely surrounded by land, as to be
perfectly secure against every wind, except the S. W. which seldom blows. The
opening into this fine basin is on the S. W. and is formed by two rocky
promontories, on one of which Fort St. George stands; the other is private
property, but perfectly barren, and so situated with respect to the inhabited
part of the neighboring country, as to be in a manner insulated. On this I
proposed to have tents, formed of sails and spars, pitched, in which the sick
from the different ships were to be lodged; temporary cooking places and
privies were to be erected in the rear of the encampment; and proper nurses,
and careful sensible negroes, as laborers, were to be employed. After landing
and lodging the sick, such ships as had no part of their cargoes on board, were
to put in practice all the usual means of destroying infection; and others were
to do the same thing after re-landing the sugar and other produce they had
taken on board. To prevent the spreading of the infection from this encampment,
sentinels were to be posted in such a manner as would effectually prevent
stragglers from it or to it. It certainly requires no more than the simple
description of the plan to show its utility; and, sure I am, had it been
adopted, all the subsequent mortality and scenes of distress might have been
altogether prevented.

During the prevalence of a pestilential fever, the great prophylactics are
temperance in eating and drinking; regularity in exercise; the proper
distribution of time with respect to sleep and watching; attention to
cleanliness of person; and the avoiding such gratifications as have a tendency
to weaken the vital powers. The words of Celsus in his "Observatio in
Pestilentia," or fevers arising from marsh effluvia, are very comprehensive:
"vitare fatigationem, cruditatem, frigus, calorem, libidinem; multoque magis se
continere." Whilst the pestilential fever raged here, the utility of these
means was remarkably illustrated by the almost total exemption of the French
inhabitants from the disease. Their mode of living, compared to that of the
English, is temperate and regular, in an uncommon degree; animal food and
strong liquors are very moderately used by them; vegetables and small red-wine
chiefly compose their diet; their passions are seldom excited to any degree
bordering on excess; their minds seem in general tranquil, or actuated by a
vivacity peculiar to themselves; and depression, or that state of the animal
spirits they call Ennui, is never perceived to have place among them. The event
too among the negroes, more especially those employed in the cultivation of
plantations, affords another striking proof of the great benefit resulting from
temperance during the existence of pestilence; for although it is probable that
the negro race possess something constitutional which resists the action of
contagion in a very great degree, still it must be admitted that their
necessary temperance must have contributed much in the present instance to
their exemption from or to the mildness of the disease when it appeared among
them. Many of the emigrants from the French islands, particularly Martinique,
who from their unhappy situation could not accommodate themselves with their
customary modes of living, and whose minds, suffering under the pressure of
disappointment and deprivation of property, were subject to an unnatural
depression of spirits: and some French prisoners, who, at this time, were
obliged to live on salted animal food, and to use rum diluted for their drink,
which articles composed the ration of provisions allowed them by government,
did not enjoy the exemption their countrymen, inhabitants of the island,
experienced. Many of the former, and all the latter had the disease; and many
fell victims to it. Want of cleanliness and due ventilation could have little
share in increasing the violence of the disease among the prisoners; for their
confinement was limited to the extent of the ridge of Hospital-hill; from the
purer air of which the 45th regiment had immediately before derived so much
benefit.

THE following CASES, which have not, except two or three, been selected from
many hundred, will perhaps illustrate the preceding History of the Malignant
Pestilential Fever, and throw additional light on the mode of treatment I found
most successful. The four first I have been favored with by my partner Mr.
William Campbell, a gentleman possessed of much ability, and diligence in the
discharge of his professional duties. At the time they occurred I was confined
with a violent attack of hepatitis; the most common, and, if not properly
treated, the most dangerous endemic of the country. The first is inserted
chiefly from the circumstance of its being the first which occurred.

CASE. I.
The carpenter of the ship Charlotte of London, Stephen Holman commander, was
attacked in the night with the usual symptoms of fever, attended with pain in
the eyes, which appeared very much inflamed and watery. He likewise complained
of pain in the legs near where the gastrocnemii muscles join to form the tendo
achillis. His stools were of a dark-green color, and very offensive: were
evacuted by means of a solution of salts and tartar-emetic; fourteen hours
after which the fever was considerably abated. At bedtime, took a diaphoretic
anodyne draught; on the following morning was entirely free from fever, and was
ordered the bark every hour. In the evening was very low; his pulse small and
quick; no febrile heat; his stomach rejected whatever he took; at bedtime had
an opium pill, but passed a very bad night. On the following morning all the
unfavourable symptoms were increased; the smell of his breath very offensive;
and the irritability of stomach so great, that even opium was rejected as soon
as swallowed. Had him carried on shore, but was soon after seized with
convulsions, and died in the course of the day. He passed no urine from the
time he was taken ill till his death, and yet never complained of the smallest
uneasiness from that cause.

CASE II.
21st March, 1793, went on board the ship Baillies, William Sym commander, to
see John --, one of the crew. Found him very low, his pulse pretty full, yet it
could be stopped by the slightest compression; had no febrile heat; his eyes
and skin were perfectly yellow; his stomach in such a state, that whatever he
took was rejected immediately; complained of violent pain in the right side; a
few spots of a dull purple color were observable on his breast and shoulders;
urine scanty, and of a pale-yellow color. He said he was suddenly attacked,
two days before I saw him, with violent headache, dimness of sight, and cold
shivering, which were very soon after followed by convulsions that continued
about two hours, as he was told; for he was by no means sensible himself either
of their presence or duration. Upon recovering from the convulsions, he found
himself in a hot fever, with violent pains in the legs and eyes. These symptoms
continued without any abatement till the end of thirty-six hours, although he
was for the greater part of that time in a profuse perspiration. Being fully
satisfied that his disease was the malignant fever, which prevailed at the
time, and being at the same time well convinced that the common mode of
practice in fever was by no means successful in this, I thought it necessary to
try the effects of some medicines more powerful than those in common use; and
my choice in this instance was directed to mercury, for two reasons: the first
was the evident presence of local affection; the last, and perhaps the most
cogent of the two, was its being strongly recommended by Dr. Chisholm; in whose
hands I had seen it productive of the happiest effects, in a variety of other
diseases. The patient was accordingly ordered to take a pill, composed of four
grains of calomel and half a grain of opium, every four hours.

22d. The symptoms much the same; his stomach had frequently rejected the pills
during the course of the day. Ordered to persist in their use.

23d. In the morning the symptoms the same as on the preceding day; but toward
evening, the uneasiness at the stomach had greatly abated, and he had rejected
only one of the pills during the whole day. Ordered to continue the use of the
pills.

24th. About noon the mercury had evidently affected his mouth, and he was
spitting plentifully. He complained of nothing now but weakness, every other
symptom of the disease had disappeared excepting the yellow color of his skin
and eyes, which went off gradually. By the use of fresh diet and a little wine,
he was able to do his duty in the ship in the course of eight days. He had
taken, before his mouth was affected, about 48 grains of calomel.

CASE III.
April 10. Stephen --, of the ship Baillies, a lad about seventeen years of
age, was suddenly seized about noon with convulsions, which lasted about an
hour and an half. When he began to recover, complained much of pain in the
legs, back, head, and eyes, the latter of which were remarkably inflamed and
watery: his pulse very quick and hard; his skin, although at the time in a
profuse perspiration, felt very hot, and on withdrawing the hand after touching
it, a sense of heat remained in the points of the fingers for some time; was
evacuated by a solution of salts and tartar emetic. Toward evening the fever
began to go off, but was succeeded in the night by coma to such a degree, that
at eight o'clock on the morning of the 11th, every attempt to rouse him or make
him take any thing was ineffectual. At that time respiration was laborious; and
his breath was so offensive, that one could smell it at the distance of two or
three yards. Was again attacked with convulsions about two o'clock P. M. which
carried him off in a very short time.

CASE IV.
May 9. Mr. Tailor, mate of the ship Charlotte, was attacked about nine o'clock
in the morning with the usual symptoms of the malignant fever: was evacuated by
means of pills composed of calomel, jalap, and cath. extract, taking at the
same time a wine-glassful every hour of a solution of salts and tartar-emetic,
which operated freely. In the evening the fever had not abated in the smallest
degree, although he was in a continual free perspiration the whole day.
Continued during the night to take the saline mixture, with the addition of
some spirit vitriol. dulc.

10th. In the morning the fever partly gone off, but complained of great
uneasiness at stomach; pain in the right side, eyes, legs, and back; little or
no headache; frequent vomiting and purging; what he voided by stool had much the
appearance of boiled greens beat into a pulp with water, and the smell very
offensive. Took, during the day, the saline mixture, and every four hours a
pill of calomel, opium, and antimonial powder. In the evening, symptoms much
the same, with some appearance of delirium, without however any degree of
febrile heat, or quickness of the pulse.

11th. Had been delirious all night, but was in the morning perfectly
collected; no fever; pain of the side much the same; considerable difficulty in
breathing; had passed for the first time since the commencement of his disease,
about two ounces of urine, of a pale yellow color, and perfectly transparent,
Ordered to continue the calomel pills alone. Toward evening, began again to be
delirious, and continued so the greater part of the night.

12th. Eight o'clock, A. M. his breathing more affected than on the preceding
day, and exceedingly restless; he said he felt as if about to be suffocated, if
he continued for any length of time in one position; the smell from his breath
and body remarkably strong and offensive; at noon, his mouth began to show
signs of being affected by the mercury; the pain in his side was now not so
violent; the oppression in breathing much less; could lie in any position for a
length of time without much uneasiness. In the evening was spitting freely, and
free from every complaint but weakness; passed a good night, and in the course
of a week, by the use of wine and nourishing food, was able to do his duty in
the ship.

CASE V.
June 10, 1793, Thomas Smith, a gunner of the royal artillery, was admitted
into the hospital with the usual symptoms of the malignant pestilential fever,
which had seized him the preceding evening, in a very sudden manner. A solution
of salts and tartar emetic was immediately given; but not having operated well,
on the 11th he had a bolus of ten grains of calomel, followed up by a brisk
purge of jalap. By means of these, the symptoms having considerably abated, he
began the use of the Peruvian bark on the 12th. In the evening of that day,
however, he was suddenly seized with delirium, and in the nightime, taking
advantage of the quiet in the hospital, he stole out, and walked to the
barracks, at least a mile distance; in which the commanding officer, imagining
he was intoxicated, had him confined. On being brought back the following
morning, he had every appearance of fatuity, low fever, cold clammy sweats,
dilated pupils, and staring eyes. With the utmost difficulty the assistants
could keep him confined to bed. After having his head shaved, I had a large
blister applied to it, and one to the inside of each thigh, and ordered six
grains of calomel, without opium, to be given to him every four hours.

14th. Blisters rose well; the calomel gave him several small stools; urine
scanty and bloody; a yellow suffusion has begun to appear on his neck and
breast; still fatuitous. The blisters to be dressed with blistering ointment,
and eighteen grains of calomel, with two of opium, to be given twice in the day.

15th. Much less deranged; yellow suffusion increased; urine very scanty; no
appearance of ptyalism. The calomel to be repeated as yesterday; and to have a
tea-spoonful of sweet spirit of nitre every two hours, till the symptoms of
stranguary abate. In the evening, fatuity pretty much gone; mouth a little
affected; pulse remarkably small and quick, but soft; other symptoms as in the
morning, only much general prostration of strength. Ordered a large
tea-spoonful of bark in a glass of Port-wine every hour; to have every third
hour a tea-spoonful of vitriolic ether in a little cold water; and, should his
stomach reject the bark, to have it by injection.

16th. Fatuity totally gone; soreness of his mouth much the same; skin warmer,
and pulse fuller, and more natural; yellow suffusion less; stomach retentive;
has taken seven doses of bark in wine, and thrice of the ether. Continue bark,
wine, and ether.

17th. Soreness of his mouth much increased; pulse, preceding evening,
extremely feeble and small. Today much as yesterday. Has taken three pints of
wine since last night. Continue.

18th. Much better; salivation troublesome; an ounce of salts.

23d. Convalescent; and, July 11, discharged.

CASE VI.
June 13, 1793. Robert Mackay, gunner in the royal artillery, admitted into the
hospital with the usual symptoms of the malignant pestilential fever; had a
solution of salts and tartar-emetic.

14th. The solution having operated well, took every three hours the following
powder; Nitri pulv. i. Calomel pp. gr. iij. Camphor, gr. iv. M.


15th. The powders occasioning irritability of the stomach, a pill was
substituted of five grains of calomel, and a grain and a half of opium.

16th. Notwithstanding the use of the pills, which agreed well with him, the
more untoward symptoms, coma, low delirium at times, cold clammy sweats came on
so rapidly, as to induce me to discontinue the calomel all this day and the
following, and to give bark and wine. These, however, had no effect; his state
seemed desperate; and perceiving, with the symptoms mentioned, the dilatation
of the pupils, I had again recourse to the calomel on the

18th. And ordered blisters to the thighs and the stomach. During all this day
he took twenty grains without effect; nor were the blisters of the smallest
use, although they rose remarkably well.

19th. In the same state; if any change, it is for the worse. Ordered eight
grains of calomel every three hours; and, should it purge, thirty drops of
laudanum to be given to him, from time to time, till the purging ceases. Bark
and wine, at the same time, to be given as liberally as possible. In the
evening, matters becoming worse, ordered sixteen grains of calomel to be given
at one dose. The quantity taken, including this today, forty grains.

20th. The same. Fifty grains of calomel to be given at three times, with opium.

21st. In addition to the calomel, I now ordered as much spiced Port-wine, and
bark and Port-wine, to be given to him as he could possibly take.

22d. Still the same. Took fifty-four grains of calomel, and four pints of
spiced wine yesterday.

23d. As he still continued in the same state, and as a black fur had formed on
his teeth, gums, and tongue, I was afraid to push the calomel any further. He
had already taken 254 grains without its purging him, and without showing any
disposition to act on the salivary glands. I therefore now left him to Nature,
only endeavoring to assist her by the plentiful use of spiced wine, and bark
and wine. In this state he continued till about noon of the 24th, when a gentle
spitting came on, which, however, disappeared about midnight. With a view to
encourage and bring on the salivation, I had his head well wrapped in flannel;
and his neck and jaws frequently anointed with warm camphorated oil; and he
still continued the bark and spiced wine. By means of these, a gentle
salivation was again brought on, and continued till the third of July, when
carbuncles broke out all over his body, particularly in the most fleshy parts:
some of these were as large as a small pullet's egg; but in general they were
of the size of a pigeon's egg. Those of them which opened naturally were
dressed with digestive ointment, and the others had a poultice applied to them.
From this time he continued to recover; but it was not before the second of
August he could be discharged.

CASE VII.
June 9, 1793. John Chevers, a gunner in the royal artillery, of a weakly
constitution, and a tailor by trade, was admitted into the hospital for the
malignant pestilential fever, after the inflammatory stage had passed: he
still, however, complained of violent pain in his right side. For this, he had
a blister applied; the nitrous powders with calomel; and, now and then, bark
and Port-wine, if his stomach could bear them.

11th. His stomach rejected all these: and the putrescent stage came on with
most of the worst symptoms, particularly coma and cold clammy sweats, with
deadly coldness of the surface. Irritability of the stomach disabled him from
taking any of the medicines hitherto used in this disease; I therefore directed
twenty drops of ether to be given to him four times in the day, in a little
cold water.

12th. The same. The ether to be doubled; and if his stomach can receive them,
to have nourishing food and wine. He continued the ether alone all the 13th,
14th, and 15th, when the dangerous symptoms disappeared: his stomach became
retentive; and on the fifth of July he was discharged.

CASE VIII.
July 12, 1793. John Gibson a gunner in the royal artillery, lately arrived
from Europe, was admitted into the hospital, laboring under all the symptoms
of the malignant pestilential fever in a very violent degree. Had a solution of
salts and tartar-emetic.

13th. The solution having operated well, he immediately began the use of the
calomel.

14th. Much as yesterday, only lower; and the calomel seems inclined to affect
his bowels. Ordered a grain of opium every two hours, should the purging
increase, and to have in the course of the day an ounce and an half of bark.

15th. Slight soreness of the mouth, pains, etc. relieved; but coldness of the
surface, and some degree of clamminess have come on. Continue the medicines.

16th. Much inclined to coma; ptyalism very moderate. Ordered to have two
ounces of bark mixed in a bottle of Port-wine, in the course of the day.

17th. The purging returned, and more frequent than before; ptyalism much
abated; much irritability of the stomach; coma; and a tendency to delirium;
clamminess and coldness of the surface. Ordered two grains of opium every two
hours till the purging ceases. The bark and wine as yesterday; and ether, from
time to time, till the stomach becomes retentive.

18th. The purging ceased after taking a few pills of opium; ptyalism
increased; but the stomach still irritable. Continue bark, wine, and ether.

19th. Much better. Ordered to continue the bark and wine, and to have a small
basin of sago frequently. From this time he continued to recover; and was on
the second of August discharged.

CASE IX.
Duncan Ross, a bombardier in the royal artillery, aged about thirty-seven, of
a remarkably robust person, and strong constitution, was seized with all the
usual symptoms of the malignant pestilential fever on the 22d of July, but was
not reported till 25th, when he was admitted into the hospital. Complained of
most violent pain in the forehead, back, calves of the legs, and right side,
with very full and quick pulse, ardent heat of the surface, staring inflamed
eyes, and considerable irritability of the stomach. Before his admission he had
taken some salts without my knowledge. He immediately began to take calomel; of
which, in the course of the 25th, he took twenty grains, with a proportionate
quantity of opium and James's powder. In the evening the symptoms were so
unfavourable, that I judged it necessary to administer bark-injections every
third hour.

26th. Much the same. Ordered the medicines as yesterday.

27th. Irritability of the stomach much increased. Continued the medicines as
before, and ordered to have a tea-spoonful of ether in water, from time to
time, till the vomiting abates.

28th and 29th. The same. No appearance of ptyalism, although he had taken 130
grains of calomel.

30th. Became comatose; frequently delirious; and made violent exertions to get
out of bed. His skin, which had acquired on the 28th the livid disagreeable
color constantly observed in the bad cases of the fever, became now in several
places of a much darker hue; vibices began to appear about the neck; a
hemorrhage, amounting to a quart, came on last night; has still frequent large
discharges from the nose; irritability of the stomach so great as to resist
every means I could devise to allay it, particularly large quantities of
ether. I now gave up every thought of pushing the mercury further, and
depended solely on the bark-injections, which were repeated every two hours.

31st. The same. Lost two quarts of blood last night; vibices increasing.
Continue.

August 1. Hemorrhage still continues; had discharged by stool a very
considerable quantity; from the nose also; and the blood had now become so
extremely putrid and offensive, as to keep the nurse and assistants at a
considerable distance from the patient. Died early this morning.

CASE X.
James Knowles, a recruit of the royal artillery, young, spare made, but of a
florid complexion and strong constitution, was admitted into the hospital the
25th July, on which day the malignant pestilential fever seized him. It came on
with strong convulsions, which was succeeded by the usual symptoms in the most
violent degree. On his admission he had the solution of salts and
tartar-emetic, which operating well, he took, on the morning of the 26th, a
pill of five grains of calomel, and one and a half of opium; the calomel was
repeated every three hours; and as there was much irritability of the stomach,
a large blister was applied to the epigastric region.

27th. Tendency to coma and delirium; most ardent heat and dry skin; of a
color much inclining to livid; the quantity of calomel doubled; and, as what
he had already taken had purged him, ordered a grain of opium every three or
four hours to check it.

28th. Continual vomiting, coma, and delirium; the latter more violent than
usual attended with continual sobbing, sighing, and shedding of tears. Former
scenes were continually presented to his imagination; and, as if in the midst
of his domestic friends, he related the circumstances, but with much
incoherency. It was remarkable, that although all these were related in a most
desultory, unconnected manner, and with a total forgetfulness of the place or
situation he then was in, they excited piercing lamentations, and a profuse
discharge of tears; and if for a moment he happened to recollect himself, he
bitterly accused himself of folly, in a disposition strongly composed of
gaiety, or seeming gaiety, and the deepest melancholy. During this dreadful
scene, which I was unfortunately a witness to, he frequently made most violent
attempts to get out of bed; and on being prevented by the assistants, he
upbraided them for their cruelty, in the names of his friends or former
companions. Toward evening he had several convulsive paroxysms, in one of
which he expired; completing exactly seventy-two hours.

CASE XI.
In the following singular case, almost all the methods of cure described in
the foregoing sheets were used, as indications arose. In its commencement it
betrayed no marked malignity, or uncommon violence; but in its progress, the
disease acquired the utmost degree of virulence, in so much as to induce me to
expect to hear of the patient's death every morning on visiting the hospital.
It is singular also for being the last which occurred of the malignant
pestilential fever.

September 9th. Thomas Smith, a second gunner of the royal artillery, was
admitted into the hospital, laboring under the usual symptoms of the
prevailing epidemic in the second degree of violence; had the solution of salts
and tartar-emetic, which operating well, was followed up on the 10th with the
saline draughts, and a proportion of spt. nitri dulc. The symptoms, however,
not yielding to this, he began in the evening the use of calomel. Calomel ppt.
gr. v. Pulv. Jacob. gr. ij. Opii, gr. i. M. f. pilula tertia quaque h. s.
Together with these, on the 11th he took 20 grains of Angustura bark every
hour, mixed with water.

12th. The symptoms, particularly the pains, having abated, the pills were
discontinued; but he took every hour the Angustura bark, as before.

13th. Worse. Two of the pills to be taken thrice in the day; the Angustura
bark as before, and a laxative injection in the evening, being rather costive.

14th. The same. Three pills to be taken thrice in the day; the Angustura bark
as yesterday; and if he has no stool before noon, a laxative injection is to be
administered.

15th. The same. Eighteen grains of calomel and two of opium, thrice in the
day; two ounces of Angustura bark during the day; an injection as yesterday;
and spiced wine from time to time.

16th. Had 76 grains of calomel since yesterday morning; the last 20 without
opium; in consequence of which, he had two stools. Thinks his mouth is rather
fore; turbid brown urine; brown parched tongue, and black furred teeth and
fauces. Deep yellow suffusion since the afternoon of the 14th, interspersed
with petechical spots, and vibices on the neck; perfectly collected. A blister
that was applied to the head, and one to the inside of each thigh, in the
evening of yesterday, rose well; but during the night delirious at times; at
present coma and clamminess of the surface, although pulse 100. and pretty
full, with some degree of hardness. Took very little bark yesterday. Ordered,
to have immediately 20 grains of calomel without opium. At noon, the same
quantity to be repeated; and if a purging should come on, to check it with a
grain of opium from time to time. The Angustura bark as yesterday. In the
evening, still comatose; at no times delirious; had 40 grains of calomel, which
having brought on a purging, two grains of opium were given every two hours to
check it; which had the effect after six were taken. In every respect as in the
morning; urine turbid; no calomel; but injections composed of two ounces of
Peruvian bark, with a sufficiency of Port-wine to render it fluid, and two
tea-spoonfuls of laudanum to be administered every two hours.

17th. In the course of the night sometimes delirious; calm and collected at
present, but coma and clamminess of the surface still continue. Yellow
suffusion of a deeper hue; and the serous discharge from the blisters, as well
as the urine, of the same color. Had five injections since the evening of
yesterday, each composed of two ounces of bark and half a pint of Port-wine,
and a tea-spoonful of laudanum; urine turbid, but has deposited a small
sediment of a granulous texture, and whitish color. Ordered the bark
injections, the Angustura bark, and spiced wine. In the evening, had five
injections since morning, three of which were immediately passed; his stomach,
however, has been remarkably retentive, so that he has taken more than an ounce
of the Angustura bark. In the afternoon, the delirium increased very much; and
at that time he made several violent exertions to get out of bed, and was so
affected at the resistance made to them, that he called out Murder, and
expressed otherwise great perturbation of mind. He appears, however, at present
calm, and as collected as in the morning. Remarkably deaf; which he is himself
sensible of. In the course of the day, marks of subsultus tendinum; which have
now disappeared: pulse 112; warm moisture on the surface, without clamminess;
comatose; lies chiefly on his back, with his eyes open. Ordered the injections,
with a double quantity of laudanum, and a larger quantity of the Angustura bark.

18th. Had only three injections in the course of the night, and they were
administered with considerable difficulty, owing to his prejudice against them;
stomach very retentive, has taken two ounces of Angustura bark since last
night. Having a strong inclination for rum and water, he was deceived, by being
told the dose of Angustura bark was grog. In the nightime, made only one
attempt to get out of bed; and had much less delirium than usual. Still
comatose, however, on being called to, seems perfectly sensible of his
situation; no pain; no subsultus tendinum; and surface warm, and covered with
warm moisture, nowise clammy; deafness continues; pulse 104. Ordered to have,
from time to time, a little rum and water; to continue the injections; and the
Angustura bark in as large quantity as possible. In the evening had three
injections, but passed them almost immediately. Took an ounce and an half of
Angustura bark. Symptoms much as before: pulse 102; when offered the diluted
rum, though only the full of a common wine-glass, he expressed his satisfaction
by saying, "it is glorious." Continue medicines.

19th. Had only two injections during the night; would not permit any more to
be given; has taken more than an ounce of Angustura bark; no delirium, but
comatose. Some appearance of the hippocratic countenance today; thick black
fur on his tongue, which impedes his speech much: moisture, heat, etc. as last
night; sleep more natural, and lies on his side, which he has not done
hitherto; urine very turbid, and of a brownish color, inclining to green,
without any deposition of sediment; pulse 104. Had a gill and half of rum
diluted in water during the night. Continue the medicines as before. In the
evening, had only two injections, which were kept. Having ordered equal parts
of Peruvian and Angustura bark to be given by the mouth, instead of the latter
alone, two doses were given, but owing to the taste of the former, which he was
instantly sensible of, or to the peculiar dislike always manifested in this
fever to it, he vomited them up almost immediately; eat a good deal of
beef-soup, and some meat, both of which he called for. Symptoms much as before;
takes the rum and water greedily. Continue the injections, and Angustura bark
alone.

20th. Had three injections; one ounce and half of Angustura bark, and about a
gill of rum diluted. Symptoms as yesterday. Slept a little; pulse 96; urine
very turbid, and of a deep brown or porter-colour, with several clouds of the
same color floating near the bottom of the glass. Stools, of which he has one
generally in the twenty-four hours, are not foetid.

21st. Since yesterday morning had six injections, and two ounces of Angustura
bark; and last night took some oatmeal-gruel and wine; pulse 108. Symptoms
pretty much as before. In the evening, much more sensible than he has been at
any time since the commencement of the fever. Tongue free of black fur, but
still dry; fur on the teeth and fauces gone also. Has expressed a wish to have
the injections discontinued, as he thinks he can take the Peruvian bark and
wine by the mouth. Ordered to continue the injections, Angustura bark,
nourishment, and diluted rum.

22d. Much the same as yesterday, only pulse 112. Continue medicines, etc.

23d. Countenance rather clearer, and eyes seem less dull and heavy; tongue
still brownish, and today cracked, with, near its extremity, something like
brownish colored pus; pulse 110. Continue medicines, etc.

24th. Rather more of the cadaverous smell today than usual; other symptoms
nearly as before. Pulse however seems to quicken, and at the same time to
diminish in strength and fullness; today it is remarkably feeble, almost
thready, and 114 in a minute. Had no injections last night, as he took the
Peruvian bark and wine by the mouth. Continue.

25th. Pulse 108, and more feeble and thready than yesterday; perfectly
sensible, but debility increased to an extreme degree. Took in the course of
the night almost a bottle of wine, and two ounces of Peruvian bark. In the
evening, having continued to take the Peruvian bark and wine very liberally
during the day, for the first time complained of ptyalitic symptoms. On
offering him some soup, he immediately complained of its occasioning a most
unusual heat and pain throughout the whole of his mouth and throat; and even
rum and water, which hitherto he preferred to any thing else, he has refused,
not from dislike, but from the pain the swallowing it brought on. More sensible
than ever. Continue the bark, wine, and nourishment.

26th. Lower today than usual, although he took in the course of the night a
bottle of wine, and two ounces of bark; pulse much more feeble and thready, and
evidently tremulous; 112 in a minute. Soreness continues, but nothing like
spitting. Continue medicines, etc.

27th. Pulse 120, feeble and tremulous; tongue for the first time clean and
moist; urine less turbid, and more of the color of fined porter; and has
precipitated a considerable sediment, of a yellowish color. Soreness rather
increased; takes much nourishment, and a large quantity of wine and bark.
Continue medicines, etc.

28th. Pulse remarkably indistinct, and so small as scarcely to be felt; it
appears to be about 96; otherwise much as yesterday. Continue medicines, etc.

29th. Pulse 116; more distinct than yesterday; feeble, but not thready; skin,
at length, soft and agreeably cool; has now recovered in a great measure his
natural tone of voice, which hitherto has been low, shrill, and drawling.
Appetite increased much. Soreness of his mouth much as on the 27th, with now a
very moderate spitting. Continue medicines, etc.

30th. Pulse 116, perfectly distinct, but still rather weak and small; soft
skin, and otherwise, as before. Continue medicines, etc.

October 2. Pulse 112; good appetite; clear skin and eyes; tongue moist.

3d. Pulse 100. Continues to recover; complains much of his mouth: no bark; but
continue wine and nourishment.

From this time he continued recovering till November 2, when he had acquired
so much strength as to be able to quit the hospital and do his duty.

Many other cases similar to these might be added; but as they contain only a
repetition of the same circumstances, their insertion would be unnecessarily
occupying the time of the reader. The Angustura bark being however, a new
medicine, and the exhibition of it in malignant fevers having been, I believe,
till now unattempted, I shall add a few cases of the malignant pestilential
fever, in which it was the sole or the principal medicine used, after the
operation of the usual evacuants.

CASE XII.
Joshua Smith, a gunner in the royal artillery, just arrived from England, a
man of a strong constitution, aged 27, was admitted on the 23d of July into the
royal artillery hospital for a dysentery; the symptoms of which rather
unexpectedly disappearing, he was seized on the 27th with the usual symptoms of
the prevailing epidemic. A vomit of tartar-emetic was immediately given, and
followed up with saline draughts, charged with spt. nitri dulc.

28th. Much the same. Continue the draughts every hour till cooler, when he is
to have bark and wine.

29th. Symptoms increasing; the scrotum particularly affected; and, on
examination, found the testicles drawn up toward the abdominal ring, and the
penis contracted and distorted. Ordered a pill of five grains of calomel, two
of James's powder, and one of opium, every third hour.

30th. The pills having occasioned irritability of stomach and purging, were
discontinued; and bark and wine, in as large quantity as possible, substituted
in their room.

31st. The symptoms continue, with the addition of coma and occasional
delirium, with clammy sweats. The medicines hitherto used having disagreed with
him, particularly the pills and wine, I now ordered the bark to be given in the
following form, as frequently as possible: Pulv. cort. Peruv. i. Flor. sulphur.
i. Aq. cinamom. spirit. iv. -- simp. x. M.
and every two hours a pill of three grains of camphor. In the evening,
however, the irritability of stomach so much increased, as in some measure to
preclude the use of these medicines. I therefore directed a bark injection,
made with tepid water, to be administered every third hour, till the stomach
became retentive.

August 1. Irritability lessened, and able to take the above medicines.

2d. Very low; irritability has again returned; much low delirium; scrotum
ulcerated, and discharging a most foetid ichor. The bark injections to be
renewed, and the other medicines to be taken occasionally.

3d. Continued in the same state. Removed into another ward. Continue the
injections of bark.

4th. Much lower, and frequently insensible; at other times made violent
exertions to get out of bed; very delirious. What had hitherto been done having
produced no effect, I determined today on giving him the Angustura bark,
without much expectation of his deriving benefit from it, but to satisfy myself
that nothing had been left untried. He accordingly took twenty grains in water
every two hours.

5th. I examined the state of his urine today; it was clear, and of the color
of brandy, without any sediment or cloud; great thirst; parched tongue and
fauces, and of a brownish color. Continue the Angustura bark.

6th, 7th, 8th. The same. Has uniformly retained the Angustura bark.

9th. Urine very turbid, with whitish sediment. Continue.

10th, 11th. Free of coma; no delirium; skin agreeably cool and moist; tongue
moist; no thirst.

From this time he continued to recover; and on the 6th of September
discharged, fit for duty.

CASE XIII.
Henry M'Kendry, a young man of a florid complexion and small stature, was
seized with the symptoms of the pestilential fever on the morning of the 7th of
August, had lately arrived from England, and been once troubled with slight
symptoms of dysentery since his arrival; had taken a vomit of 20 grains of
ipecacuanha, and one of emetic-tartar, immediately after the symptoms of the
fever appeared; and, after its operation, began the use of the Angustura bark;
the discharge from the stomach consisted of at least two quarts of poracious
bile, which emitted a most offensive smell; the vomit also operated by stool
several times, which discharge was likewise very foetid. Before the morning of
the 8th, he took fully an ounce of the Angustura bark, at which time most of
the symptoms had disappeared, particularly the headache and nausea. On the 8th,
and the following night, he took two ounces of the bark; and on the 9th felt
himself considerably better. His urine on this day was of a deep brandy-colour,
and precipitated a considerable quantity of whitish sediment. He continued the
use of the Angustura bark till the 13th, when appetite, and other signs of
returning health, were so evident as to render the further administration of
medicines unnecessary. In a very short time after, he was perfectly recovered.

CASE XIV.
Robert Mill, a bombardier of the royal artillery, was on the 14th of August
seized with pain in the forehead, sinciput, and temples, with the other usual
symptoms of the prevailing epidemic, which in the evening increased to a very
alarming height; cold sweats, irritability of stomach, and tendency to coma,
with the staring prominent eye. For these he took in the afternoon an emetic of
ipecacuanha and the antimonial; and late in the evening, he began to take the
Angustura bark.

15th. General symptoms considerably abated; irritability of stomach almost
gone; took upwards of two ounces in the course of the night and morning of the
Angustura bark. Ordered to continue the Angustura bark with, occasionally, a
small addition of thebaic tincture.

16th. Complaints almost gone; urine very dark-colored, almost similar to a
strong infusion of tobacco, and turbid, with a considerable deposition of
whitish sediment in small cakes. Continue the Angustura bark as yesterday.

17th, 18th. Continuing better, and return of appetite.

I shall beg leave to make an observation here, which I neglected in its proper
place. A few drops of thebaic tincture will always be a good addition to either
the Peruvian or Angustura bark; for as the nervous system is very much affected
in the malignant pestilential fever, this, as an antispasmodic, will be found a
most useful medicine; and given, mixed with the antiseptic, will have the
double advantage of quieting the general irregular motions of the nerves, and
of acting on the stomach in such a manner as to enable it to retain the
medicine with which it is combined. Solid opium has in no instance I have met
with, acted with equal efficacy. Whether it is, that the opium has been
discharged before any part of it could be dissolved; or, that the tone of the
stomach and intestines being suspended, it has passed off without their being
affected by it.

I shall conclude with a Case in which very large quantities of the Angustura
bark always retained, had not the least effect in preventing a fatal
termination.

CASE XV.
Lieutenant Watkins of the royal artillery, a young gentleman of a strong
robust make and constitution, aged 25, on the evening of the 29th of August, a
few days after his arrival on the island, was seized with all the usual
symptoms of the malignant pestilential fever in the more violent degree. This
gentleman had heard before his arrival of the dreadful devastation committed by
this disease; and knew that three other officers, who had some time before
crossed the Atlantic in the same ship with him, had fallen sacrifices to it in
the very house in which he was then quartered. These circumstances had
impressed him with a just dread of the evil he had much reason to expect, and
no doubt added very considerably to the natural violence of the symptoms. After
being well evacuated by means of a vomit of ipecacuanha and tartar-emetic, and
a solution of salts and tartar-emetic, and a profuse diaphoresis having broken
out by noon of the 30th, he began the Angustura bark in doses of a scruple,
repeated every hour. The two first he retained; but afterward, the instant the
bark reached the stomach, it was rejected. During the remainder of this day,
all the 31st, and greatest part of the 1st of September, the irritability
continued. Neither medicine nor nourishment could be retained; his skin became
dry, his tongue and fauces parched, the former of a brownish color; a
weakening discharge by stool came on, of a most foetid smell and blackish
color. I gave him calomel joined to solid opium all the 31st; but this passing
off by stool, increased the general weakness, without a possibility of its
acting on the salivary glands. He now again tried the Angustura bark, but in
vain; and as nothing else could be at all effectual in stopping the progress of
the disease, I determined to persevere in it, in hopes of its being at length
wholly retained, or at least such a portion of it as might be sufficient to
prevent gangrene. In the nightime, he himself proposed that this bark should
be mixed in some strong wine or spirit, which might prevent its rejection.
Capt. D'Arcy, of the same corpse, who carefully attended him, luckily
recollected that he had by him some infusion of Peruvian bark in Port-wine,
that had been made upwards of a month before; and of this he gave Mr. Watkins
an half wine-glassful, and repeated it at the end of two hours. Its effect was
astonishing; for when, at the expiration of two hours more, a dose of Angustura
bark in water, with ten drops of laudanum, was given, he swallowed it without
disgust, and kept it. From this time he continued the Angustura bark with the
laudanum, and, retaining it, was, when I saw him on the 2d about noon, by which
time he had taken and retained twelve doses, totally free from fever; easy in
every respect; his skin agreeably cool, with a general warm moisture on it; the
staring prominency and redness of his eyes had almost entirely disappeared. In
short, he seemed now to be in a fair way of recovery, although the preceding
day I had formed the most unfavourable prognostic of his situation; but alas!
how flattering was all this! On visiting him on the 3d, I found a change had
taken place in the night; he suddenly became delirious, the protrusion and
staring of his eyes returned, every muscle was affected with tremor; but his
skin continued cool, and his stomach still retained the Angustura bark. When I
saw him he was nearly in this state, only the coolness of the skin was attended
with a clammy moisture. Together with the bark, which he took and retained
remarkably well, I ordered a large blister to be applied between the shoulders,
chiefly with a view to overcome, if possible, the general spasm.

4th. During the night the delirium increased much, and alternated with coma;
the muscular spasm was much more violent; the surface of his body was cold and
clammy, and some vibices appeared on the neck. The blister rose remarkably
well, and his stomach continued remarkably retentive; this was his state, with
the addition of insensibility, when I saw him near noon. A curious circumstance
(observed by the attendants frequently, and by myself once) was the rapid
change and alternate succession of color of the skin, from very pale to dingy,
or livid, or to bright yellow; these succeeded each other in the space of a few
minutes; at the end of which, his skin became of the usual dirty, livid hue,
peculiar to the complaint. An hour after, the alternate succession would come
on again; and after continuing the same length of time, would be succeeded by
the livid color, and so on. About four in the afternoon, a violent convulsion
came on, and continued a few minutes; his respiration became now extremely
oppressed, and he frequently, as if by a natural impulse, laid his hand across
the pit of the stomach; the muscular spasm now increased so much as to shake
the bed with much violence. About six o'clock, another violent convulsion
carried him off. During the two last days he took upwards of three ounces of
the Angustura bark, and fully three bottles of Port-wine, with a good deal of
nourishment, which indeed he generally had a craving for.

AFTER finishing the foregoing little ESSAY, it was not my intention to add any
thing further on the subject. Since then, however, so many aditional, and if
possible more powerful, proofs have occurred of the superior efficacy of the
Mercurial Treatment in the Malignant Pestilential Fever, that I should consider
myself as acting unjustly to the Public, as well as wanting in humanity, did I
withhold a short account of them, by way of Postscript to what I have already
written.

THE year 1794, whilst it unhappily produced many hundred instances of the
malignant pestilential fever in Grenada, also afforded the most unequivocal
proofs of the superior efficacy of mercury in the treatment of that dreadful
malady. Although in one instance the disease was evidently introduced by an
American vessel from Martinico, in the month of February; and in another, by an
English trader from the same island, after its capture, yet it is highly
probable, that, from the causes I have mentioned, the town of St. George has
been at no time since the first introduction of the disease by the Hankey, in
February, 1793, entirely clear of the infection; the rum-shops having been a
never-failing receptacle of it. The want of subjects to act on, might suspend
the operation of the contagion for a time; but the arrival of strangers, to
whom it has uniformly been deleterious, gave life to its seeds, which had
hitherto been concealed, not destroyed.

As it formerly not unfrequently happened, from the necessary timidity a
practitioner feels who adopts a new remedy in the treatment of one of the most
dangerous and destructive maladies the human frame is subject to, that that
remedy was not always pushed to the length which secures its efficacy; so on
the reappearance of the disease, I was determined to give the calomel earlier,
and in much greater quantity than the preceding year. Accordingly, instead of
preceding the administration of this excellent remedy with the usual evacuating
medicines, I began with it, and continued it without the interposition of any
other, till salivation took place. The success attending this practice exceeded
my most sanguine expectation; so great indeed was it, that I did not lose a
single patient in whose case it was pushed to the full extent. My practice
will, no doubt, by many be considered as unwarrantably bold; but as its
wonderful success has been experienced by several other practitioners, who can
bear testimony to it, I feel not the smallest hesitation in recommending it
with all the fervor which an earnest wish to save the lives of men, and the
fullest conviction of, I am almost inclined to say, its infallibility, can give
rise to.

My mode of using the calomel since the reappearance of the disease, is to give
ten grains to an adult patient as soon as possible after I see him. This
generally acts as an aperient in the degree required, about an hour or two
after it is given. At the end of three hours I repeat the same dose without
opium, if the first had not purged more than twice. At the end of three hours
more, the same quantity is given, adding opium or not, as the preceding doses
have acted. In this manner ten grains are given every three hours till the
salivary glands become affected; which generally happens in less than
twenty-four hours from the commencement of the treatment. The effect of the
medicine given in this manner, may be perceived after the third dose in
general; the patient becoming calmer, less restless, less anxious; his skin
being softer, and possessed of an agreeable heat; the stomach being perfectly
retentive, however irritable it might have been before; and the eyes recovering
their former luster and sensibility. When, at length, salivation takes place,
the patient is left free from disease, with a moderate warm moisture on his
skin; and very soon after, signs of returning health are indicated by calls for
food, etc. The recovery of strength is proportionally rapid to that from
disease; nor is it at all necessary to have recourse to bark, or any other
medicine whatsoever: a circumstance truly gratifying both to the patient and
physician, in a disease wherein Nature revolts at the very idea of it. In fact,
calomel is the only medicine, except the occasional addition of opium, I have
latterly given; of course the practice has been as simple as it has been
efficacious: an additional encouragement to the practitioner, and to those
whose situation may render them liable to receive the pestilential infection.

On my way to Europe, in the month of July last, I was detained a month at St.
Christopher's, waiting for convoy. During that time, I had frequent
opportunities of conversing on the malignant pestilential fever with some
ingenious and eminent practitioners of that island; who informed me, that the
want of success they experienced in the various modes of treatment they adopted
during the prevalence of that epidemic, in the latter months of 1793, made them
dread a second visit of it as the greatest calamity that could befall the
colony, At this time the arrival of a ship at Basseterre from Martinico, with
the malignant pestilential fever on board, gave me an opportunity of displaying
the efficacy of the mercurial treatment; which had never before been thought or
heard of there. Dr. Armstrong, who to the most pleasing manners of a gentleman
adds uncommon medical ability, and the candor which always accompanies both,
attended the sick on board this vessel. The first patient was a strong, robust
man, some time before arrived from Europe, and who had the further disadvantage
of having been three days ill before medical assistance could be called in. The
worst symptoms had already appeared; such as continual vomiting, coma, and the
delirium peculiar to the disease. The Doctor, by my advice, began with ten
grains of calomel, and repeated it without opium, as it did not purge, every
three hours. To his astonishment, and contrary to the prognostic of the other
medical gentlemen to whom he communicated the case, a salivation coming on
before the expiration of twenty-four hours, the usual signs of returning health
immediately after succeeded.

Since my arrival in England, I have had peculiar satisfaction in finding that
a treatment nearly similar to the above had been adopted with great success in
the malignant pestilential fever, which so fatally prevailed at Philadelphia
during the autumn of 1793. Dr. Rush's medical talents and merit are too well
known and too generally acknowledged to require the feeble efforts of my pen to
extol them. If any thing, however, could add to the excellence of this
gentleman's character, it must be his benevolent exertion, and unwearied
perseverance during the existence of this dreadful calamity, in relieving his
helpless and afflicted fellow-citizens, and in pursuing the mercurial mode of
treatment, with the weight of prejudice and malignity in opposition to him.
Such fortitude is rarely met with in the medical profession; and when it is, it
must secure our admiration and respect. Whether the disease described by Dr.
Rush, under the name of the "Bilious Remitting Yellow Fever," was produced in
the manner the malignant pestilential fever was in Grenada, is a matter of no
great importance; it is sufficient to know, that the diseases were exactly the
same; and that a similar treatment proved successful in both. I have also had
uncommon satisfaction in reading the following note in the ingenious Dr.
Clark's late publication: "Observations on the Diseases which prevail in long
Voyages to Hot Countries," etc. vol. II. p. 297. "When engorgement of the brain
takes place, to any considerable degree, in fevers, no medicine which has
hitherto been recommended is capable of removing it; and therefore I hope I
shall be excused for proposing mercury (the only medicine which has been found
adequate to remove obstinate congestions in the other viscera) in such a
deplorable and dangerous situation. But, at the same time, I confess I am not
able to point out the particular cases to which this practice will apply, from
not being able, certainly, to distinguish engorgement of the brain from mere
irritability of that organ; the symptoms in both being similar." I trust the
observations I have offered in the foregoing sheets will remove the difficulty
started by Dr. Clark, and direct the practitioner, in the exhibition of
mercury, in malignant pestilential fevers, at least to those stadia of the
disease wherein it is the only remedy that can be given with advantage. I am
confident, not from analogy, or the probability of the thing itself, but from
actual and very extensive experience, that mercury is, in general, the only
truly useful medicine in all fevers depending on congestions it the viscera;
or, as I have expressed it in another place, Medical Commentaries. vol. 19.
on glandular obstruction and visceral inflammation. And is it not probable
that all fevers depend, proximately, on those causes? Upon the whole, the
weight of evidence in favor of the mercurial treatment brought forwards by Dr.
Clark, Dr. Rush, Dr. Wade, and myself, in circumstances nearly similar, must
surely impress every mind, even those most influenced by prejudice and theory,
with a conviction not only of its utility, but of its certainty, if judiciously
conducted.

In India, in England, in North America, and the West India islands, medical
gentlemen, totally unconnected with each other, have recurred to the same
practice, and hesitate not to declare to the public, that the event has been
uniformly the same. Why should not pestilential infection have its antidote, as
well as others once equally fatal? "They have narrow conceptions, not only of
the Divine Goodness, but of the gradual progress of human knowledge, who
suppose that all pestilential diseases shall not, like the smallpox, sooner or
later cease to be the scourge and terror of mankind." Rush's Account of the
Bilious Yellow Fever, p. 327.
Let the knowledge of this salutary innovation in medicine be generally
diffused; let the confidence it merits be placed in it; let the destructive
dogmata of theorists be discarded, and no more will "Pestilential Fevers be
numbered among the widest outlets of human life." Rush's Account of the Bilious
Yellow Fever, p. 329.


THE END.
A Description of the American Yellow Fever, in a Letter from Dr. JOHN LINING,
physician at Charlestown, in South Carolina, to Dr. ROBERT WHYTT, Professor of
Medicine in the University of Edinburgh. March 7, 1754.

CHARLESTOWN, December 14, 1753. SIR,
IN obedience to your desire, I have sent you the history of the yellow fever
as it appeared here in the year 1748, which, as far as I can remember, agreed
in its symptoms with the same disease, when it visited this town in former
years. In this history, I have confined myself to a faithful narration of
facts, and have avoided any physical inquiry into the causes of the several
symptoms in this disease; as that would have required more leisure than I am,
at present, master of, and would perhaps have been less useful than a plain
description.

I wrote this history, so far as it relates to the symptoms and prognostics, in
the year 1748, when we had the disease last in this place; intending
afterward, if it returned, to add, from further experience, the method of
cure, and likewise an account of any other symptoms which might attend it; but
as no such opportunity has offered, I must now omit that part. However, I hope
the description which I have given of this dreadful malady, which so frequently
rages like the plague in the southern parts of America, is so full, that a
physician may, from thence, not only form a true judgment of its nature, but
likewise be able to deduce and communicate some more certain method of cure,
than has perhaps hitherto been used.

I am sorry I could not give a fuller account of the dissections of those who
died of this disease, having unfortunately lost my notes taken from those
dissections.

I am, etc.


I. THAT fever, which continues two or three days, and terminates without any
critical discharge by sweat, urine, stool, etc. leaving the patient excessively
weak, with a small pulse, easily depressible by very little motion, or by an
erect posture; and which is soon succeeded with an icteritious color in the
white of the eyes and the skin, vomiting, haemorrhages, etc. and these, without
being accompanied with any degree of a febrile pulse and heat, is called in
America, the yellow fever.

II. THIS fever does not seem to take its origin from any particular
constitution of the weather, independent of infectious miasmata, as Dr. Warren
In his Treatise concerning the malignant fever in Barbados, page 8.
has formerly well observed.

FOR within these twenty-five years, it has only been four times epidemical in
this town, namely, in the autumns of the years 1732, 39, 45 and 48, though none
of these years (excepting that of 1739, whose summer and autumn were remarkably
rainy) were either warmer or more rainy (and some of them less so) than the
summers and autumns were in several other years, in which we had not one
instance of any one being seized with this fever; which is contrary to what
would probably have happened, if particular constitutions of the weather were
productive of it, without infectious miasmata. But that this is really an
infectious disease, seems plain, not only from this, that almost all the nurses
catched it and died of it; but likewise, as soon as it appeared in town, it
soon invaded newcomers, those who never had the disease before, and
country people when they came to town, while those who remained in the country
escaped it, as likewise did those who had formerly felt its dire effects,
though they walked about the town, visited the sick in all the different stadia
of the disease, and attended the funeral of those who died of it. And lastly,
whenever the disease appeared here, it was easily traced to some person who had
lately arrived from some of the West-Indian Islands, where it was epidemical.
Although the infection was spread with great celerity through the town, yet if
any from the country received it in town, and sickened on their return home,
the infection spread no further, not even so much as to one in the same house.

III. THE subjects which were susceptible of this fever, were both sexes of the
white color, especially strangers lately arrived from cold climates, Indians,
Mistees, Mulattoes of all ages, excepting young children and of those only such
as had formerly escaped the infection. And indeed it is a great happiness that
our constitutions undergo such alterations in the smallpox, measles and yellow
fever, as for ever afterward secure us from a second attack of those diseases.
There is something very singular in the constitution of the Negroes, which
renders them not liable to this fever; for though many of these were as much
exposed as the nurses to the infection, yet I never knew one instance of this
fever amongst them, though they are equally subject with the white people to
the bilious fever.

IV. THIS fever began in the middle or rather toward the end of August, and
continued till near the middle of October, when the weather became cold enough
to prevent its further progress. In the beginning of August, the weather was
warmer than I had ever known it in that month: the mercury in Farenheit's
thermometer, for some days at 2 o'clock, p. m. rose, in the shaded air, to the
96th degree, at which time several people died of apoplexies. The latter part
of August and the first week in September were much more temperate; the weather
being then much as usual at that season of the year. The second week in
September was cold, the wind being constantly easterly and the weather cloudy;
after which time I kept a register of the heat of the shaded air; an abstract
of which follows.

IN the latter part of September, and from the 1st to the 18th of October,
September. October. The mean heat at 2 p. m. was 72 65 The mean nocturnal heat was
68 54 The greatest heat at 2 p. m. was 79 75 The least heat at 2 p. m. was 60
52 The greatest nocturnal heat was 71 70 The least nocturnal heat was 62 42 The
greatest increase of heat in 24 hours was 13 17 The greatest decrease of heat
in 24 hours was 9 22

IN all the month of September, and in the greatest part of October, the wind
was easterly.

THE depth of the rain in August, September and October respectively, was
6.881, 7.442 and 5.550 inches; which, though it exceeded the rain of these
three months taken together at a medium, from the ten preceding years, by 5.570
inches, yet it was inferior to that which fell in the same months in several
other years; for in the years 1747, 50, 51 and 52, there fell respectively, in
those three months of these years, above 21, 22, 24 and 26 inches of rain.

V. FOR a day or two before the attack of the fever, people in general
complained of a headache, pain in the loins and extremities, especially in the
knees and calves of the legs, loss of appetite, debility and a spontaneous
lassitude.

SOME, however, were seized suddenly, without any such previous symptoms.

VI. AFTER a chillness and horror, with which this disease generally invades, a
fever succeeded, in which,

1. THE pulse was very frequent till near the termination of the fever, and was
generally full, hard, and consequently strong: in some, it was small and hard,
in others, soft and small; but in all those cases, it frequently varied in its
fullness and hardness. Toward the termination of the fever, the pulse became
smaller, harder, and less frequent. In some there was a remarkable throbbing in
the carotids and in the hypochondria; in the latter of which it was sometimes
so great, that it caused a constant tremulous motion of the abdomen.

2. THE heat, generally, did not exceed 102 degrees of Farenheit's thermometer;
in some it was less, it varied frequently, and was commonly nearly equal in all
parts, the heat about the praecordia being seldom more intense than in the
extremities, when these were kept covered. In the first day of the disease,
some had frequent returns of a sense of chillness, though there was not any
abatement of their heat. In a few, there happened so great a remission of the
heat for some hours, when at the same time the pulse was soft and less frequent
and the skin moist, that one from these circumstances might reasonably have
hoped that the fever would only prove a remittent or intermittent. About the
end of the second day, the heat began to abate.

3. THE skin was sometimes (though rarely) dry; but oftener, and indeed
generally, it was moist and disposed to sweat.

ON the first day, the sweating was commonly profuse and general; on the second
day, it was more moderate: but on both these, there happened frequent and short
remissions of the sweatings; at which times the febrile heat increased, and the
patient became more uneasy. On the third day, the disposition to sweat was so
much abated, that the skin was generally dry; only the forehead and backs of
the hands continued moist.

4. THE respiration was by no means frequent or difficult, but was soon
accelerated by motion, or the fatigue of drinking a cup of any liquid.

5. THE tongue was moist, rough and white, even to its tip and edges. On the
second day, its middle in some was brown. On the third day, the whiteness and
roughness of the tongue began to abate.

6. THE thirst in very few was great.

7. A nausea, vomiting or frequent reachings to vomit, especially after the
exhibition of either medicines or food, came on generally the third day, as the
fever began to lessen; or rather as the fullness of the pulse, heat, and
disposition to sweat began to abate. Some indeed, but very few, on the first
day, had a vomiting either bilious or phlegmatic.

8. VERY few complained of anxiety or oppression about the praecordia or
hypochondria, nor was there any tension or hardness about the latter.

9. ON the first day they generally dozed much, but afterward were very
watchful.

10. Restlessness and almost continual jactations came on the second day.

11. A great despondency attended the sick from the first attack.

12. THE strength was greatly prostrated from the first attack.

13. THE pain in the head, loins, etc. of which they had complained (V) before
the attack, were greatly increased, and in some, the pain in the forehead was
very acute and darting; but those pains went generally off the second day.

14. THE face was flushed, and the eyes were hot, inflamed and unable to bear
much light.

15. ON the first day, many of them, at times, were a little delirious, but
afterward not until the recess of the fever.

16. THE blood saved at venaesection had not any inflammatory crust; in warm
weather, it was florid like arterial blood, and continued in one soft
homogeneous-like mass, without any separation of the serum after it was cold.
When there was any separation, the crassamentum was of too lax a texture.

17. THE stools, after the first day, were fetid, inclined to a black color,
and were very rarely bilious, soft or liquid, excepting when forced by art; for
an obstinate costiveness attended the febrile state.

18. THE urine was discharged in a large quantity, was pale, sometimes limpid,
and rarely of a higher than a straw color, except when the weather was very
warm, and then it was more saturated, of a deep color, and discharged in
smaller quantities. It had a large cloud, except when it was very pale or
limpid; but more generally it had a copious, white sediment, even in the first
day of the fever.

ON the second day, the urine continued to be discharged very copiously; in
some, it was then turbid, and deposited a more copious sediment, than on the
first day; this sediment was sometimes of a brownish color; in which case it
was generally followed by bloody urine, either about the end of the second or
beginning of the third day. The color and quantity of the urine, discharged in
equal times, were remarkably variable, being now limpid, then of a deeper
color, now discharged in a larger, then in a smaller quantity, which could not
be ascribed to any change made either in the quantity or qualility of the
drink, etc.

VII. THE fever accompanied with those (VI.) symptoms, terminated on the third
day, or generally in less than 72 hours from the first attack, not by any
assimulation, or coction and excretion of the morbid matter; for if by the
latter, there would have been some critical discharge by sweat, urine, stool,
or otherwise, none of which happened; and if, by the former, nothing then would
have remained but great debility. No; this fever did not terminate in either of
these salutary ways, excepting in some, who were happy enough to have the
disease conquered in the beginning by proper evacuations, and by keeping up a
plentiful sweat, till the total solution of the fever, by proper mild
diaphoretics and diluents. But those who had not that good fortune, however
tranquil things might appear at this period, (as great debility and a little
yellowness in the white of the eyes, seemed then to be the chief complaints,
excepting when the vomiting continued), yet the face of affairs was soon
changed; for this period was soon succeeded by the second stadium; a state,
though without any fever, much more terrible than the first: the symptoms in
which were the following.

VIII. 1. THE pulse, immediately after the recess of the fever, was very little
more frequent than in health, but hard and small. However, though it continued
small, it became, soon afterward, slower and very soft; and this softness of
the pulse remained as long as the pulse could be felt. In many, in this stage
of the disease, the pulse gradually subsided, until it became scarce
perceptible; and this, notwithstanding all the means used to support and fill
it; and when this was the case, the icteritious-like suffusion, the vomiting
delirium, restlessness, etc. increased to a great degree. In some, the pulse,
after being exceedingly small and scarce perceptible, recovered considerably
its fullness; but that favorable appearance was generally of but short
continuance.

2. THE heat did not exceed the natural animal heat; and when the pulse
subsided, the skin became cold, and the face, breast and extremities acquired
somewhat of a livid color.

3. THE skin was dry when the weather was cold, but was moist and clammy when
the weather was hot.

4. THE respiration was natural or rather slow.

5. THE tongue was moist and much cleaner than in the former (VI. 5.) stage,
its tip and edges, as also the gums and lips, were of a more florid red color
than usual.

6. VERY few complained of thirst, though they had a great desire for cold
liquors.

7. THE vomiting or reaching to vomit increased, and in some was so constant,
that neither medicines nor aliment of any kind were retained. Some vomited
blood; others only what was last exhibited, mixed with phlegm; and others again
had what is called the black vomit. That which is called the black vomit, at
first sight, appears to be black; but on a more careful examination, I
observed, that this color proceeded from a great quantity of small, flakey,
black substances which floated in the liquor thrown up by vomit; but the color
of this liquor was much the same with that which the patient had last drank,
and was by no means black. Those black flakey substances are the bile mixed
with, or adhering to the mucus which lined the stomach. For, upon dissection of
those who died of this disease, not only in this but former years, I always
observed that the mucus of the stomach was abraded, and the bile in its cystis
was black and sometimes very viscid. In a lad who died of this disease in the
beginning of the fourth day, and who was immediately opened, the bile was not
only black, but had the consistence of thick Venice-turpentine, and was
exceedingly tough. On the inside of the stomach, there were several carbuncles
or gangrenous specks. And in all those I have dissected, who have died of this
disease, I have not only always observed the same, but likewise that the blood
was very fluid, and the vessels of the viscera much distended; from whence I
have been very inclinable to think, when the disease was not conquered in its
first stadium, that, about the time of the termination of the fever, there was
a metastasis of the morbid matter to the viscera.
The reaching to vomit continued a longer or shorter time, according to the
state of the pulse; for as that became fuller, and the heat greater, the
reaching to vomit abated, and e contra.

8. THE inquietude was very obstinate, and when they dozed, their slumbers were
but short and unrefreshing. There were some who were drowsy; but these always
awaked, after the shortest slumbers, with a great dejection of spirits and
strength.

9. THE jactations or restlessness was surprising; it was frequently scarce
possible to keep the patients in bed, though, at the same time, they did not
complain of any anxiety or uneasiness; but if asked how they did, the reply
was, Very well.

10. THE debility was so great, that, if the patient was raised erect in the
bed, or, in some, if the head was only raised from the pillow, while a cup of
drink was given, the pulse sunk immediately, and became sometimes so small,
that it could scarcely be felt; at this time, they became cold, as in a
horripilatio, but without the anserine-like skin: their skin became clammy, the
delirium increased, their lips and skin, especially about the neck, face and
extremities, together with their nails, acquired a livid color.

11. THE delirium returned and increased; it was generally constant in those
whose pulse was small and subsiding.

12. THE inflammation of the tunica conjunctiva or white of the eyes increased
much, but without pain.

13. A yellowness in the white of the eyes, if it did not appear before in the
febrile state, became now very observable, and that icteritious-like color was
soon diffused over the whole surface of the body, and was continually acquiring
a deeper saffron-like color. In some indeed no yellowness was observable,
excepting in the white of the eyes, until a little before death, when it
increased surprisingly quick, especially about the breast and neck.

14. THERE were many small specks, not raised above the skin, which appeared
very thick in the breast and neck; but less so in the extremities, and were of
a scarlet, purple or livid color.

15. IN women the menstrua flowed, and sometimes excessively, though not at
their regular periods.

16. THERE was such a putrid dissolution of the blood in this stadium of the
disease, that, besides the vomiting of blood formerly mentioned, and the bloody
urine soon to be taken notice of, there were haemorrhagies from the nose,
mouth, ears, eyes, and from the parts which were blistered with cantharides.
Nay, in the year 1739 or 1745, there was one or two instances of an haemorrhage
from the skin, without any apparent puncture or loss of any part of the
scarf-skin.

17. AN obstinate costiveness continued in some; in others, the stools were
frequent and loose; in some, they were black, liquid, large and greatly
fatiguing; in others, when the stools were moderate, even though they were
black, they gave great relief; in others again, the stools nearly resembled tar
in smoothness, tenacity, color and consistence.

18. THE urine was discharged in a large quantity, in proportion to the drink
retained by the patient: it was pale if the patient was not yellow; but if
yellow, then it was of a deep-saffron color; in either case it had a sediment,
or at least a large cloud, which remained at the bottom of the glass; in some,
it was very turbid, in others, it was bloody, and the quantity of blood
discharged with the urine bore always some proportion to the state of the
pulse; when that became fuller, the quantity of blood in the urine was
diminished: when the pulse subsided, the bloody urine increased, and even
returned after it had ceased some days, soon after the pulse became smaller.

THIS stage of the disease continued sometimes seven or eight days before the
patient died.

IX. WHEN this stadium (VIII.) of the disease terminated in health, it was by a
recess or abatement of the vomiting, haemorrhagies, delirium, inquietude,
jactations, and icteritious-like suffusion of the skin and white of the eyes;
while, at the same time, the pulse became fuller, and the patient gained
strength, which, after this disease, was very slowly.

BUT when it terminated in death, those (VIII.) symptoms not only continued,
but sooner or later increased in violence, and were succeeded with the
following, which may be termed the third stadium of the disease, which quickly
ended in death.

X. THE pulse though soft became exceedingly small and unequal; the extremities
grew cold, clammy and livid; the face and lips, in some, were flushed; in
others, they were of a livid color; the livid specks increased so fast, that
in some, the whole breast and neck appeared livid; the heart palpitated
strongly; the heat about the praecordia increased much; the respiration became
difficult, with frequent sighing; the patient now became anxious, and extremely
restless; the sweat flowed from the face, neck and breast; blood flowed from
the mouth, or nose or ears, and in some, from all those parts at once; the
deglutition became difficult; the hiccoughs and subsultus of the tendons came
on, and were frequent; the patients trifled with their fingers, and picked the
naps of the bed-cloaths; they grew comatous, or were constantly delirious. In
this terrible state, some continued eight, ten or twelve hours before they
died, even after they had been so long speechless, and without any perceptible
pulsation of the arteries in the wrists; whereas, in all other acute diseases,
after the pulse in the wrists ceases, death follows immediately. When the
disease was very acute, violent convulsions seized the unhappy patient, and
quickly brought this stadium to its fatal end. After death, the livid blotches
increased fast, especially about the face, breast, and neck, and the
putrefaction began very early, or rather increased very quickly.

XI. THIS was the progress of this terrible disease through its several stadia.
But in hot weather, and when the symptoms in the first stage were very violent,
it passed through those stages, as Dr. Warren has likewise observed, with such
precipitation, that there was but little opportunity of distinguishing its
different stadia; the whole tragedy having been finished in less than 48 hours.

XII. IT was remarkable, that, 1. The infection was increased by warm and
lessened by cold weather. 2. The symptoms in the several stadia were more or
less violent, according to the heat or coolness of the weather. In hot days,
the symptoms were not only more violent, but in those who seemed, in moderate
weather, to be on the recovery, or at least in no danger, the symptoms were all
so greatly heightened, when the weather grew considerably warmer, as frequently
to become fatal. In cool days, the symptoms were not only milder, but many, who
were apparently in great danger in hot days, were saved from the very jaws of
death by the weather becoming happily cooler. 3. The disease was generally more
fatal to those who lay in small chambers not conveniently situated for the
admission of fresh air, to those of an athletic and full habit, to strangers
who were natives of a cold climate to those who had the greatest dread of it,
and to those, who, before the attack of the disease, had overheated themselves
by exercise in the sun, or by excessive drinking of strong liquors; either of
which indeed seemed to render the body more susceptible of the infection.
Lastly, the disease proved most certainly fatal to valetudinarians, or to those
who had been weakened by any previous disease.

XIII. THE prognostics in the first stadium are these. 1. The more acute and
constant the pains are in the head, loins, knees, etc. the more the eyes are
inflamed; the greater their inability is to bear light, and the more the face
is flushed at the first attack, the fever and all the symptoms (VI.) in the
first stadium will be the more violent. 2. The more intense the symptoms are in
the first state, the sooner will the fever terminate. 3. The sooner the disease
runs through the first stadium, the shorter will be the duration of the second,
and e contra. 4. The shorter the duration is of the first, the greater and more
certain is the danger in the second state. For when the fever terminated before
the beginning of the third day, death seemed inevitably to be the consequence,
as there was then no possibility of supporting the pulse, and as all the bad
symptoms were then hurried on with such precipitation, that the patient
generally died before the end of the fifth day, excepting a considerable
coolness of the weather happily intervened; but on the contrary, it was a
favorable circumstance when the fever was protracted to the end of the third
day, without any remarkable hardness or depression of the pulse. 5. A great
depression of the pulse, about the termination of the fever, is bad, since,
from that circumstance, the vomitings, incessant jactations, the coldness and
lividness of the extremities, haemorrhagies, delirium, etc. are ushered in with
surprising celerity. 6. The more the strength is prostrated from the first
attack, the greater is the danger. 7. A vomiting coming on early in the
disease, and continuing or increasing, is bad, and generally presages the black
vomit. 8. A sediment in the urine in the first and second day of the disease is
bad, and the more copious the sediment is, the greater is the danger.

XIV. THE prognostics in the second stadium are these: 1. An early yellowness
in the white of the eyes is bad: when it is observable about the end of the
second day, in the first stadium, the patient generally dies about the
beginning of the fourth day from the first attack of the disease. But when the
yellowness does not appear till the end of the third day, if the patient does
not recover, the disease sometimes continues to the 9th or 10th day of the
second stadium before the patient dies. When the yellowness of the skin and
eyes increases fast and acquires soon a deep icteritious-like color, the
greatest danger is to be apprehended. 2. If the inflammation of the white of
the eyes increases, it is bad. 3. The more inflamed and bloody-like the skin is
where it has been blistered, the greater is the danger. 4. If the vomiting
continues or increases, it is bad, but the black vomiting is generally mortal.
5. When the pulse varies frequently in its fullness, being sometimes small,
then fuller, it is bad. But there was less dependence to be had on the pulse in
this than is common in other diseases; for in some patients, in the second
stage of the disease, even within a few hours of their death, the pulse, with
respect to its fullness, softness, equality and frequency, has continued like
that of one in perfect health, although, from the other symptoms, the death of
the patient could be foretold with great certainty. 6. The more the strength of
the patient is reduced in the first, the greater is the danger in the second
stadium. 7. Great restlessness, inquietude, an early delirium and a
continuation of it are very bad. 8. Livid blotches about the neck and breast, a
lividness of the lips and nails flusshing of the face, or a livid color
thereof, are sure signs of the quick approach of death. 9. Frequent loose
stools, which give not any relief are bad, and sooner they spontaneously
happen, the greater is the danger: but those which are black, and continue so
without any abatement of the symptoms, are generally mortal. 10. Bloody urine
and all haemorrhagies, excepting flight ones from the nose, are bad; and more
copious they are, the greater is the danger. But a flux of the menses, though
not at their regular period, if attended with an abatement of the symptoms, is
a favorable circumstance, otherwise it is bad. 11. A suppression of urine,
especially in those, who, in the course of the disease, have had large
discharges that way, is a certain sign of the quick approach of death.

XV. As to the prognostics in the third (X) stadium, it is sufficient to say,
Nature, alas! Was now surpised
And all her forces seized
Before she was how to resist advised Dr. Sprat's Account of the plague of
Athens.



FINIS.

