AN EXPERIMENTAL DISSERTATION ON THE CHEMICAL AND MEDICAL PROPERTIES OF THE
Nicotiana Tabacum OF LINNAEUS, COMMONLY KNOWN BY THE NAME OF TOBACCO.

BY EDWARD BRAILSFORD, OF CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA, MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL AND
CHEMICAL SOCIETIES OF PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN ORMROD, No. 41, CHESTNUT STREET.

1799.

AN INAUGURAL DISSERTATION, SUBMITTED TO THE EXAMINATION OF THE REV. JOHN
EWING, S. T. P. PROVOST; THE TRUSTEES AND MEDICAL PROFESSORS OF THE UNIVERSITY
OF PENNSYLVANIA, FOR THE DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF MEDICINE, ON THE SIXTH DAY OF
JUNE, 1799.

TO ALEXANDER BARON, M. D. OF CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA.
PERMIT me, kind Sir, thus publicly to avow my acknowledgment for the many
civilities I have hitherto received from you and your amiable family, when
under your tuition: a period that I ever reflect on with the warmest glow of
pleasure: and accept my assurances, that in every stage of life, I shall
preserve that friendship and grateful remembrance of your judicious council,
which you have inspired by your attentive concern for my welfare, and which
shall never be crased from the mind of

Your affectionate Friend And PUPIL, EDWARD BRAILSFORD.

TO SAMUEL WILSON, M. D. OF CHARLESTON SOUTH CAROLINA.
DEAR SIR,
I EMBRACE this opportunity, of avowing the lively sense I entertain of your
amicable disposition toward me, when under your immediate care, and assure you
in the language of truth, that a grateful recollection of your friendly
admonitions will ever warm the breast of

Your affectionate Pupil, EDWARD BRAILSFORD.

TO JAMES WOODHOUSE, M. D. PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA.
SIR,
ALLOW me to adopt this mode of expressing my acknowledgment, for the many
testimonies of friendship I have experienced from you, and suffer me at the
same time to declare that a grateful remembrance of the many favors you have
conferred, will ever be retained by

Your affectionate Friend, EDWARD BRAILSFORD.

CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION, PAGE 9 CHAP. I. The natural history of tobacco, and of its first
introduction as an article of luxury. PAGE 14 CHAP. II. A concise account of
the influence of tobacco on living systems, illustrated with a few experiments.
PAGE 19 CHAP. III. Observations on the noxious effects of tobacco on the human,
species when used in the form of smoking, snuffing, and chewing. PAGE 32 CHAP.
IV. Of the prejudicial effects of the use of tobacco on the moral faculty. PAGE
38 CHAP. V. Of the analysis of tobacco, and the operation of its constituent
parts on living systems, PAGE 42 CHAP. VI. Observations on the experiments.
PAGE 55 CHAP. VII. An account of its medical virtues in eradicating certain
diseases. PAGE 58
EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE.
A. A branch of the tobacco plant.

B. An interior view of its blossom.

C. A posterior view of its blossom.

Fig. 1. Represents a seed vessel in a state of maturity.

Fig. 2. A transverse section of a seed vessel, which exhibits the distribution
of the seeds.

Fig. 3. A longitudinal section of a seed vessel.

Fig. 4. A calix, with the five stamina and the pistillum.

Fig. 5. Represents a longitudinal section of a blossom, which shows its
internal structure.

Fig. 6. A species of phalaeua, or butter-fly, very common on the blossoms of
the tobacco.

Fig. 7. The tobacco worm.

Fig. 8. The root and some of the inferior leaves.

INTRODUCTION.
WHEN we explore the extensive regions of the globe, and contemplate the many
plants which the beneficent disposer of all things has given as useful
ornaments to the earth, and at the same time reflect that through the ignorance
or indolence of man, many of those valuable subjects are permitted to wither in
our fields or forests, without ever attracting the attention of those mortals,
for the alleviation of whose corporeal infirmities they were indubitably
intended, many unpleasant ideas must naturally intrude themselves on our minds
-- Regret is awakened in our breasts at the inactivity of our ancestors, whose
unpardonable sloth has suffered diseases to exist as opprobria medicinae for
the relief of which many plants incontestibly flourish, and which from
inattention or some other omission equally culpable, die neglected, and answer
no valuable purpose but to fertilize the soil which gave them birth.

The free inhabitants of the United States of America, would merit additional
censure were they to evince a similar supineness. Possessed of pre-eminent
advantages for rendering valuable acquisitions to the Materia Medica, their
neglect of such pursuits would prove a national disgrace, and be considered by
their posterity equally criminal as the most heinous offense against civil
government.

Inhabiting a vast extent of territory, it would be arraigning divine goodness,
not to suppose, that he has bestowed with a liberal hand, sources of
alleviation to those miseries, which were incurred by the loss of our primeval
innocence.

It has been justly observed by a very learned author, Rollin's Arts and
Sciences.
that, "the strength of a state is not to be computed by extent of country, but
by the number of its citizens, and the utility of their labor." This should
actuate us in the pursuit of useful knowledge, so as to render the extent of
country which we inhabit more useful and more wealthy, whereby, not only our
literary character as a nation, but also our liberty and independence will be
effectually established.

That there are plants diffused all over the great continent of America, endued
with the most active medical virtues, is incontrovertible; but to use the words
of the poet, Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.


The industry and wisdom of man are now the only requisites to develope those
virtues, and render them beneficial to mankind.

To the honor of our infant republic, the science of medicine has been
laudably promoted by the invaluable acquisitions of the professor of botany and
materia medica in the university of Pennsylvania, with a view to cultivate an
intimate acquaintance with the indigenous plants of this country. -- The
literary fame of this gentleman is too well known to require any eulogy from my
pen; he has with as much ingenuity as industry, paved the way to facilitate the
future researches of men of science, and in language peculiarly pleasing and
descriptive, has given an agreeable animation to useful facts, so as to render
them not only grateful to the reader, but also truly beneficial and interesting.

Were candidates for medical honors to pursue this laudable example of their
preceptor, they would enrich the Materia Medica with many valuable articles;
but, unfortunately for this branch of science, a depraved predilection for the
thread worn subject of diseases, tempts them to launch their bark into the
dangerous sea of controversy, and frequently without the necessary implements
for the effectual execution of such an undertaking.

Attracted by the ostentatious glare of hypothetical reasoning, they frequently
adopt with avidity theories the most extravagant and fallacious, and without
examining the solidity of the opinions they embrace, confide entirely to the
judgment of others, and with the greatest temerity risque their reputation on
that unsubstantial basis.

When philosophy shall be esteemed an indispensable appendage to the medical
character, then shall such inconveniences cease to exist. The susceptible mind
of man, enlightened by the rays of philosophy, will then dissipate the clouds
of ignorance, and experimental enquiries shall then be cherished as the surest
vehicles to truth.

I have been prompted to adopt the subject of Nicotiana, not from any vain idea
of my ability to do ample justice to the medical qualities of this plant, but
from an anxious solicitude to contribute my mite toward the promotion of one
of the most useful branches of science, and I trust that from this
consideration, my experiments and opinions will be examined with an eye of
lenity, but, at the same time, with candor and impartiality. I have to regret
extremely, that a serious indisposition, for near two months, unfortunately
precluded my entering as minutely into the analysis of Tobacco, as I at first
contemplated; but I have endeavored to atone for this deficiency, by attending
particularly to its influence on the system, and also to the respective
operations of its constituent parts.

The exhibition of Nicotiana, as a medicine, for the mitigation of many
diseases to which mankind are incident, has been unfortunately but little
attended to by physicians.

The deleterious effects with which it is endowed, and the supposed danger of
exhibiting it on this account, have led medical characters to depreciate the
worth of a medicine, whose benign influence, by a judicious administration, in
eradicating certain diseases, has, in many instances, been evidently confirmed.

It has been declared, by some superficial observers, to be useless, from the
repeated proofs of its inefficacy in mitigating the violence of those diseases,
in which, many more accurate inquirers have asserted it proved beneficial.
Others have alleged, that the baneful powers, with which it is replete,
dissuade from an use of it. In consequence of these chimerical assertions, a
medicine which would prove a valuable acquisition to the Materia Medica, has
been almost entirely expunged from modern practice.

If we were to admit such injudicious opinions to govern our reason, in
selecting medical plants, how few would be the number which would engage the
attention of the timid and injudicious practitioner! for in the hands of such
only are powerful medicines rendered injurious, and in the hands of such also
the most lenient prove obnoxious. The invaluable aphorism of Dr. Withering,
therefore, merits the attention of every practitioner of medicine; he justly
observes, that, "poisons in small doses are the best medicines, and the best
medicines in too large doses are poisonous."

It would be as inconsistent to stigmatize this plant with the appellation of
poison, as it would be to pronounce a crum of bread noxious in its quality,
because it has in some cases entered the trachea, and occasioned instantaneous
death.

The conclusions which I have formed on the subject which constitutes the
subsequent pages of this dissertation have been founded on experiments, and
those experiments, though few, have been conducted with accuracy. They have
been mutually the sources of much mental disquietude, and the diffidence I now
feel in submitting them to the scrutiny of the learned, tends considerably to
augment the disagreeable emotions which, at this time, disturb my tranquillity:
however, I shall consider myself richly compensated for every inconvenience,
should any word or thought contained in these pages prove propitious in
exciting some more accurate observer to a more minute investigation of this
copious subject.

NATURAL HISTORY.
CHAPTER I. The natural history of Tobacco, and of its first introduction as an
article of luxury.
WE have accounts, in different authors of several species and varieties of
this plant, but as an accurate description of them may be acquired in almost
every botanical book, it would be altogether useless for me to enter into an
elaborate definition of each in particular. I shall therefore confine myself to
that species which is thus designated by the great Linnaeus, " Nicotiana
Tabacum: foliis lanceolatoovatis sessilibus decurrentibus, floribus acutis."

It is termed by Caspar Bauhin, Nicotiana major latifolia. According to the
natural method of Linnaeus, it belongs to the 28th order, called Luridae. Among
the aborigines of the continent of America, it was distinguished by the
appellation of paetum, whilst those who inhabited the islands, called it yoli
Encyclopedia.
.

According to Sir Hans Sloane Sir Hans Sloane's Natural History of Jamaica.
, its original name was picielt, but was termed tobacco by the Spaniards, from
the circumstance of its being brought from the island of Tobago, where it grew
almost spontaneously.

Tobacco was first introduced into Europe in the year 1559 by John Nicot, lord
of Villemain, who was agent in Portugal for the King of France, from whence he
brought the plant, and presented it to the Queen: from this circumstance it was
called Herba Regina, and in honor of him Nicotiana Theatrum Botanicum, page 711.
.

Lobel and others accounted this, as well as the other species of Nicotiana, an
Hyosciamus Theatrum Botanicum.
, and called it Hyosciamus luteus and dubious, in consequence of which some have
given it the English name of yellow Henbane. It is arranged by Linnaeus in his
fifth class, Pentandria Monogynia the stamina consisting of five subulated
filaments, topped with oblong antherae; the style rises from the rudiment of
the fruit single. The flowers are large and of a beautiful red, and annexed to
long and slender footstalk: they are of a monopetalous tubelous form, and
grow on the tops of the branches, and of the main stalk; the tube is longer
than the cup, and the limb which spreads open is divided into five
acute-pointed segments.

The capsule which succeeds the flower is bivalved and bilocular, is also
large, and of an oval form: it opens longitudinally, and sheds extremely minute
seeds, but very numerous.

The root is divided into many parts, grows very thick and long, and is
furnished with an infinity of small fibers. The growth of this plant is
generally from five to six feet in height, but sometimes more, depending upon
the season, and fecundity of the soil. The stalk is substantial, round, very
erect, and divided into branches. The leaves are large, numerous, and
distributed in an alternate manner: they are of a deep green, and have petioli,
or footstalk, but surround the common stalk, in great part at their base.

Tobacco is a native of America, and was first sent to Spain and different
parts of Europe, for the purpose of ornamenting their gardens, but so great was
the demand for the dried leaves, that it at length became an article of
commerce, and is at this present period almost universally resorted to as a
luxury.

The Indians formerly made use of it as a vulnerary, and ascribed many virtues
to it as a medicine. They entertain an idea, that tobacco was brought them down
from the heavens by the Great Spirit, who descended for the express purpose of
presenting them with this plant, in order that it might be spread throughout
the land for the benefit of their species. Hence many nations of that tribe,
make use of it in certain forms of their religion. -- It is called by them Each.

Travelers assert, that they often resort to the great mountain, where the
angel appeared, and do homage to that spot, on which their ancestors first
received so divine a plant.

It is alleged by Sir Hans Sloane, Sir Hans Sloane's natural history of
Jamaica.
"that the priests of Espaniola, called Bohitis, who are medical characters as
well as theologists, make a practice of chewing and smoking tobacco, until they
become perfectly inebriated, and in this situation they perform many
gesticulations, pretending likewise to recount for the will of God, what they
have seen." They feign also to perfect radical cures among many of the
diseased, and so prejudiced are the people in their favor, as to imagine
themselves perfectly relieved. The form which they observe on this occasion, as
related by Sir Hans Sloane, is in the following singular manner; "when they
attempt to cure, they shut themselves up with the sick, surround him, smoking
him with the same; suck out of his shoulders what they say was his disease,
showing a stone or bone they kept in their mouths, which the women keep as
relics, thinking they facilitate birth."

Thevet affirms that the women among the Aborigines of America were led away
with an idea, that indulging in the use of tobacco was not only injurious to
the body, but that it also prevented conception, and tended greatly to diminish
the venereal appetite; in consequence of which, they forbore the use of it in
any form whatever.

The Portuguese attributed many virtues to this plant, and pronounced it a
powerful counterpoison; hence they have given it the appellation of Herba Santa.

Sir Richard Greenfield, on his discovery of Virginia in 1585, observed that
the Indians made great use of tobacco in clay pipes, for the preservation of
their health. Pleased with the novelty of the circumstance, he took several of
the pipes with him on his return to England, which were introduced into court:
others were made agreeable to their construction, and from that period the use
of smoking soon became general.

It was first introduced among the Oriental nations by the Dutch Sir Hans
Sloane.
seamen, who used to carry pipes about them made of palm leaves, in which they
smoked to ease their weariness, as well as suspend a disposition for food.

The Indians after having gathered their crop of tobacco, hang it up in their
houses for the purpose of curing, after this is perfected, they take four or
five leaves, and wrap them up in the great leaf of a tree, in the form of a
funnel; they then apply fire to the extremity, and inhale the smoke, which
being frequently repeated, causes them to subsist three or four days It is
universally acknowledged that tobacco does not impart any degree of nourishment
to the body, but on the contrary tends greatly to reduce obecity; yet such is
its stimulating quality, that it supports the system for several days
successively, above what may be termed the hungry point. This is taken notice
of by Mr. Kerr Kerr. Land. Med. Obser. vol. v. art. 28.
, with respect to opium. "The eastern nations," says this author, "are so well
convinced, by experience, of its powers in diminishing the appetite, that in
the famine which prevailed in the East Indies, in the year 1770, the wretched
sufferers purchased it at exhorbitant prices, to allay the cravings of hunger,
and smooth the approach to death."
, without partaking of any aliment. They practice this more particularly, when
they contemplate going to war, or are about to predict the termination of
future important events. It is considered by them as the most valuable offering
that can be made to the beings that they worship. They use it in all their
civil and religious ceremonies. When once the spiral wreaths of its smoke
ascend from the feathered pipe of peace, the compact that has been just made,
is considered as sacred and inviolable. Likewise when they address their Great
Father, or his guardian spirits, residing, as they believe, in every
extraordinary production of nature, they make liberal offerings to them of this
valuable plant, not doubting but that they are thus secured of protection See
Encyclopedia.
.

CHAPTER II. A concise account of the influence of Tobacco, on living systems,
illustrated by a few experiments.
That tobacco is both a powerful emetic and cathartic, when exhibited in any
form whatever, is generally admitted: we find that all authors, who have
written on its effects, have unanimously concurred in this opinion; some have
also subscribed to its being efficacious in promoting the renal discharge; but
with respect to its sedative or stimulating effects on the living system,
various opinions have hitherto existed.

Notwithstanding the sagacity and experience of Doctor Fowler in many respects,
the influence of Nicotiana on the human system, in regard to its stimulating
quality, entirely escaped his attention.

After drawing several inferences, relative to the operation of this medicine,
in a concluding part of his work Fowler on Dropsy.
, he observes, that it possesses a sedative quality A similar opinion was
formerly entertained of opium; but the ingenious experiments of Doctor Crumpe,
must sufficiently demonstrate, to every unprejudiced mind, the stimulating
quality of that medicine; and that its supposed sedative effects, are solely to
be attributed to a secondary operation, or indirect debility induced by its
immense stimulating property, when disproportioned to the excitability of the
system.
, and frequently proves laxative: on this account he supposes that it may prove
salutary in many painful cases, where costiveness may render opiates
exceptionable.

That it is a laxative, I have almost uniformly observed, but with respect to
its being endued with a sedative quality the subsequent experiments will
greatly invalidate.

It is not my intention or wish to enter into the field of controversy on this
head, and therefore I have attempted to define by experiments, the unequivocal
operation of this plant. It is unquestionably the most substantial basis on
which we can found our arguments, and to such we must ultimately appeal for the
attainment of truth.

The stimulating effects of tobacco did not escape the discerning eye of Doctor
Cullen, whose opinions should ever be viewed with veneration and respect.

In treating of this plant, he observes, that "the infusion of tobacco when it
is carried into the blood vessels, has sometimes shown its stimulating powers
exerted in the kidneys; and very lately we have had it recommended to us as a
powerful diuretic of great service in dropsy Cullen's, Materia Medica, page 191.
."

That tobacco promotes the renal discharge, is beyond a point of controversy.
Every practitioner of medicine who has ever had occasion to administer it,
either in the form of infusion or substance, must have observed its diuretic
influence on the system.

This is sufficiently exemplified in the work of Doctor Fowler See Fowler on
Dropsy, page 72, where he observes that out of one hundred and fifteen cases in
which he administered tobacco, in ninety-three of them it proved diuretic.
, to whom we are greatly indebted for the series of experiments enumerated by
him. He has clearly demonstrated the influence of tobacco in promoting the
urinary secretion, and has as perspicuously evinced the utility of its
exhibition in violent cases of Ascites, Anasarca, and Dysury.

Without a further disquisition relative to the operation of tobacco on the
human system, I shall proceed with enumerating my experiments, and will leave
it to the candid reader to judge how far they may merit his attention; they
deserve at least the credit of being faithfully related.

EXPERIMENT 1.
In order to ascertain the particular operation of tobacco, with respect to its
influence on the pulse, I took three hours after breakfasting on toast and
coffee, forty drops of a strong decoction of tobacco Two drachms of the dried
leaves of tobacco were put into four ounces of water, and boiled down to two.
in a little water. My pulse beat seventy strokes in a minute. The following
table manifests the stimulating quality of this plant, as I have particularly
specified the number of pulsations at the expiration of every 5th. minute.

In 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 Min. P. beat 72 75 75 77 80 84 84 81 76
72 70 70

For the first five minutes there was an aromatic warmth diffused all over my
throat, which soon extended itself to my stomach, and continued thus for the
first quarter of an hour. In fifteen minutes I experienced a little nausea,
which was promoted on the twenty-fifth minute; on the thirtieth minute my pulse
was greatly increased, both in tension and frequency; a considerable moisture
appeared on my forehead, and a slight degree of dizziness attended, which
continued until near the fortieth minute.

On the forty-fifth minute, the symptoms abated, and my pulse was diminished
both in fullness and frequency. At the expiration of the hour, I felt a kind of
languor, and my pulse was reduced to its natural standard.

Soon after every inconvenience disappeared, and I dined with my usual appetite.

EXPERIMENT 2.
On the same evening, two hours after eating a little bread and milk, I took
forty drops of a strong infusion Two drachms of the dried leaves of tobacco
were infused in two ounces of water, for 24 hours, and then strained off.
of the dried leaves of tobacco; my pulse beating sixty-eight strokes in a
minute, its natural standard.

In 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 Min. P. beat 70 73 74 76 80 83 83 81 In 45 50 55 60
65 70 75 Min. P. beat 79 75 71 70 70 68 68

Immediately after swallowing the draught, I felt an evident sensation of
warmth throughout my throat, which was soon communicated to my stomach, and
continued to increase for fifteen minutes, but gradually diminished at the
expiration of the twentieth minute: I now experienced some degree of nausea,
which continued to increase until the twenty-fifth minute; it produced a
considerable moisture on my forehead, and in the palms of my hands, but no
vomiting attended. On the thirtieth minute, my pulse became tense, frequent and
quick, but the perspiration and nausea began to subside on the thirty-fifth
minute; throughout the remaining part of the hour, my pulse was diminished
considerably in regard to fullness, and when one hour and fifteen minutes had
elapsed, it resorted to its former state; I discharged that night an unusual
quantity of urine, and had two copious discharges downwards.

EXPERIMENT 3.
I gave to Peter Vallet, a robust healthy lad of about nineteen years of age,
thirty drops of the tobacco infusion, Similar to that exhibited in the
preceding experiment.
in a little water; he was not accustomed to the use of tobacco in any form
whatever.

His pulse beat seventy, previous to his taking the draught.

In 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 min. P. beat 72 76 78 79 80 78 74 73 68
70 70 70

When ten minutes had elapsed, he complained of a considerable warmth in his
stomach. In fifteen minutes he said that he was a little giddy and somewhat
exhilarated. In twenty he observed that he felt a little sick, and that the
room appeared to him to be turning round, as he expressed himself; his face was
much flushed, and on the thirtieth minute, he complained of a tremor in his
hands. In forty-five minutes the affection of his head and nausea abated but
the tremulous motion still existed. At the expiration of an hour he felt as
usual, excepting a slight degree of nausea, and a kind of langour throughout
his frame. In one hour and a half, he ejected the contents of his stomach, and
had two large evacuations downwards.

EXPERIMENT 4.
About two hours after partaking of a light supper, I finished, for the first
time, the smoking of a segar; my pulse beat seventy strokes in a minute, and I
felt uncommonly disposed to sleep. Recollecting the powerful effects of
smoking, but a few minutes, on a former occasion, I wished now to ascertain its
operation on the system, and its particular influence over the pulse, the
results of this experiment were as follow:

In 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 Min. P. beat 75 77 81 85 90 100 104 102 In 45 50 55
60 65 70 75 Min. P. beat 93 85 77 70 67 70 70

For the first five minutes, I experienced no evident effects; the pulse raised
only five. At the tenth and fifteenth minutes I had frequent eructations, and
all inclination for sleep was totally dispelled. At the twentieth minute my
head felt light, my spirits were much elated Doctor Crumpe observed this to be
the constant effect of opium.
, and my pulse more full, frequent, and quick.

I continued smoking without cessation, until the twenty-fifth minute, when I
perceived a considerable nausea at my stomach, and an evident moisture on my
forehead, accompanied with repeated eructations.

I now vomited very profusely, and on the thirtieth minute my pulse became
frequent and low. Every thing appeared in a circuitous motion, and I was
compelled to seek relief from my pillow for a few moments, until relieved of
this dizziness. On the thirty-fifth minute the vomiting was repeated, and I
took a draught of cold water, which mitigated every symptom. I felt so much
relieved, that I got up and walked across the room. I experienced at the
fortieth minute a tremulous affection of my hands, and a giddiness and pain in
my head; so much so, that I was compelled to lie down again: the former of
these affections continued for near two hours, but the latter was somewhat
abated, after being in a recumbent posture for a few moments. My pulse still
continued depressed, frequent, and quick; at the sixty-fifth minute my thirst
was urgent, my pulse diminished three, still languid, and headache increased. I
then drank a glass of water, and in seventy-five minutes, my pulse was restored
to its natural state, but the pain in my head still continued.

From the preceding experiments we may infer, that the primary effects of
tobacco, are to accelerate the pulse, and elevate the spirits; and that its
secondary operation is to depress the former, and subdue the latter: for it is
to be uniformly observed in the preceding, as well as many of the subsequent
experiments, that, after the first half hour had elapsed, the number of
pulsations, in a given time, continued to diminish, until reduced to, and
frequently below This gave origin to the supposed sedative effects of opium.
Physicians were not aware of its instantaneous operation on the system, and on
this account attended solely to the effects produced, after its primary
influence had subsided.
, the natural standard of health. Doctor Cullen Cullen's Materia Medica, vol.
2. page 151.
, in speaking of the commotion generated in the system, from the exhibition of
narcotics, observes, that to explain this operation, "it seems necessary to
assign some other cause than the direct stimulant power of the substance
applied; and it appears to be that resistance and consequent activity, which
the animal economy is suited to oppose to every application that has a
tendency to hurt it. This power is well known in the schools of physic, under
the title of the Vis Conservatrix et Medicatrix naturae; which however
difficult to explain, must, as a general law of the animal economy, be
admitted as a matter of fact."

In contemplating the sentiments of Doctor Cullen on this head, we must pay
homage to his great ingenuity, but at the same time, must not allow our
veneration for the abilities of this illustrious physician, to operate as a
barrier to the admission of truth.

We know that the system appears perfectly tranquil when in the enjoyment of
health, and that this depends upon a just ratio of excitement and excitability;
but when either predominate, disease is invariably the consequence. As this is
admitted, would it not be more just to suppose, that this disorganization of
the human frame, depends upon the stimuli applied, being disproportioned to the
excitability of the system?

Do we not see similar commotions generated in persons, on the immediate
application of heat, after exposing themselves to intense cold, and thereby
rendering their systems extremely excitable? And may not the same be extended
to narcotics, when disproportioned to the excitability of the system?

With respect to the operation of tobacco on the mind, in producing hilarity,
we see it sufficiently exemplified in many who have recourse to it in a certain
degree. A gentleman of this city informed me, that the smoking of two or three
segars, seldom failed of occasioning an evident degree of alertness for a few
moments after; but if he carried the smoking to a greater extent, it generally
produced a nausea, and a giddiness in his head.


Most of the ancient authors who have written on this subject, avail themselves
of an opportunity to mention the exhilarating effects of tobacco; and Sir Hans
Sloane in particular observes, that, in all places where it has come, it has
very much bewitched the inhabitants, from the more polite Europeans, to the
barbarous Hottentots.

We find also that the like effects of this noxious plant, are specified in
Cortes's conquest of Mexico, where this author affirms, that Montezumo, or the
Emperor, drank several sorts of liquor, richly perfumed with salutiferous
herbs; after his meals, he took a kind of chocolate, and smoked tobacco
perfumed with liquid amber. The juice of this plant was one of the ingredients
with which the priests intoxicated themselves, whenever they were obliged to
deliver an oracular answer.

Three or four buffoons generally attended at the table, for the purpose of
diverting the Emperor, with their ludicrous talents. Hernando Cortes's conquest
of Mexico. page 274.


These were the customs of the Indian tribes, and these also were the
amusements of many civilized nations. -- It is to be much lamented, that even
at this present enlightened period, the manners of the most civilized nations,
in this respect, partake of those of the savage. But to use the words of a much
celebrated and esteemed author, Rush. See his medical observations, vol. 1. p.
11.
"it would seem as if liberty and indolence were the highest pursuits of man;
and these are enjoyed in their greatest perfection by savages, or in the
practice of customs which resemble those of savages."

We find that its indiscriminate use as a luxury not unfrequently proves
injurious. "Its narcotic fumes," says Dr. Leake, "will stupify the brain, and
deaden the invigorating power of the nerves upon the whole bodily system. The
propensity of persons to the use of this noxious plant, after being once
habituated to the impression of its stimulus, is equally prevalent with that of
dram-drinkers, to spirituous liquors, without which, however pernicious, they
become languid, and debilitated, and are affected with nervous tremor." See
Leake's practical Essays on diseases of the viscera, p. 72.


As I shall have occasion to speak more particularly of its baneful influence
in a subsequent part of this work, when treating of its noxious effects in
smoking, snuffing, and chewing, I shall for the present suspend my opinions on
this head.

Notwithstanding the deleterious effects of tobacco hitherto enumerated, its
operation as a medicine frequently proves salutary; this has been clearly
demonstrated in many violent cases of obstinate disease, and as such it is to
be held in the highest estimation. Its influence on the system is immense. It
is beneficial in some diseases from its diuretic quality; in others as a
sudorific, and it proves in proper doses, a gentle emetic, and a lenient
purgative: hence the propriety of its use in many other diseases. But more of
this hereafter.

Having now enumerated its respective operations on the human system, I shall
proceed with relating some experiments which were made on living systems, both
internally as well as externally. --

EXPERIMENT 5.
I dropped a small portion of the expressed juice into my right eye, which
immediately imparted an excruciating pain, attended with a burning diffusible
heat, somewhat analogous to the introduction of an aqueous solution of opium:
Crumpe, on opium, page 24.
This sensation continued to increase for the space of thirty minutes, but
gradually diminished after this time; and totally subsided at the expiration of
one hour, leaving the part extremely sore and disagreeable, and somewhat
blood-shot, for the remaining part of that day. --

EXPERIMENT 6.
After boiling a large quantity of the leaves, in order to procure an extract,
I frequently expressed with my hands the liquor which the leaves absorbed,
which occasioned such a degree of nausea at my stomach, as almost to induce
vomiting: I am credibly informed, that many of the Dutch inhabitants of
New Jersey, apply the leaves of tobacco, steeped in water, to the external part
of the stomach, and continue the application until a vomiting is induced. This
they frequently practice, in preference to an internal emetic when under the
necessity of puking their children.
the sensation continued for some time, but gradually diminished, as the
application was not again renewed. -- This was succeeded by a flushing of my
face, a considerable pain in my head, a throbbing of my temples, a languor with
diminution of appetite, and a disposition to sleep.

In order to satisfy my readers that this effect on myself was produced by no
particular idiosyncrasy, I will relate a corroborating experiment communicated
to me by my friend Mr. Dart.

"April the 20th, 1799. About 12 o'clock at noon, I applied to the internal
parts of my thighs, and also the soles of my feet, a large quantity of the
dried leaves of tobacco, well stewed in about a pint of water, previously
washing the part with warm vinegar, so as to open the pores and promote
absorption. -- In about two hours after the application was made, I felt some
degree of lassitude, accompanied with a dizziness and headache, which were
evidently increased on the third hour; when it operated as a gentle cathartic.

At 4 o'clock, a nausea at my stomach was very perceptible, so much so, that I
removed the application for fear of vomiting, Professor Barton informed me,
that he was called to a man, who had taken a large dose of opium; he gave an
emetic, but being desirous of keeping up vomiting, he applied tobacco leaves,
steeped in vinegar, to the stomach, which had the desired effect.
which generally affects me materially, and, therefore, wished to avoid it. I
made several efforts to eject the contents of my stomach, but without effect.
In half an hour after, this affection began to subside, and I felt much
relieved, but still some degree of headache continued, together with a
disagreeable languor."

EXPERIMENT 7.
I made a strong decoction of the dried leaves of tobacco, and gave twenty
drops of it to a mouse. In the short space of ten minutes it discovered strong
marks of an almost insupportable pain, attended with tremor and convulsions,
quickly succeeding each other; at the expiration of thirty minutes, with a few
violent efforts, it suddenly expired.

EXPERIMENT 8.
I injected by means of an ivory syringe, a small portion of the above
mentioned decoction, into the rectum of another mouse, which evidently
exhibited all the symptoms of the former, and equally as vehement in degree,
for the little animal fell a victim to this exhibition, in the course of twenty
minutes.

EXPERIMENT 9.
After perforating the side of a mouse, I injected a small quantity of the
strong decoction of tobacco, taking particular care to avoid the introduction
of air, by applying the mouth of the syringe instantaneously to the aperture.
In ten minutes it discovered symptoms of a violent affection: the respiration
became considerably increased, which was quickly succeeded by strong
convulsions; in fifteen minutes, a paralytic affection, agitated the whole
frame, and in twenty, a violent corrugation of the body, closed the scene.

CHAPTER III. Observations on the noxious effect of tobacco on the human
species, when used in the form of smoking, snuffing, and chewing.
THE use of tobacco as an article of luxury, in all its noxious forms, comes
now to be considered; but before entering into the particulars of each, I must
beg leave to offer a few preliminary observations. It is generally admitted
that "man is an imitative animal;" to adopt, therefore, from the example of
others, what is pleasurable to our feelings, or subordinate to use, should not
be deemed strange: but that a rank and noxious weed, at first loathsome to the
sense of taste, as well as prejudicial to the constitution, should, by habit
become desirable, is a circumstance the most extraordinary, affording one
striking instance, among many, "of the folly and infatuation of the human mind,
and the force, and prevalence of custom opposed to sense and nature."

Without entering further into an enquiry on this head, I shall at once
commence with some few remarks on tobacco, when used in the form of smoking.

Persons who habituate themselves to the immoderate use of this plant, sooner
or later, experience its noxious powers, by the many disagreeable emotions
excited by its influence over the system.

Smoking in particular, by its stimulating effects on the mucous follicles and
sallavary glands, abstracts profusely their contents, and excites immoderate
expectoration: Hence its influence in inducing dyspepsia; for by abstracting
that liquid, Rush's M. S. Lectures. "That the saliva is requisite for
digestion, I infer, from its once being customary in Spain to make use of an
aromatic gum to perfume the breath; this had a very pernicious effect, as it
diffused dyspepsia throughout that place."
so essentially requisite for the purpose of digestion, it seems just to
suppose, that here it must inevitably prove the direct instrument of so
malicious a disease. It is alleged by Dr. Cullen in his materia medica,
Cullen's Materia Medica, p. 189.
that this plant evidently possesses a narcotic power, and through this means,
weakens the tone of the stomach in such a manner as to preclude the performance
of its respective functions.

From the preceding experiments, it has been ascertained, that nicotiana
possesses strong stimulant qualities, and therefore, Dr. Cullen's narcotic
power, is to be explained by the stimuly being carried too far, and thereby
inducing indirect debility. To corroborate this position, I will relate the
following singular fact, which not long since came under my own inspection.

A young gentleman, after being somewhat intoxicated by drinking of wine,
undertook for the first time, the smoking of a segar; after having inhaled it
as long as he could with safety to his mouth, he observed that it was customary
for gentlemen to fling away the remaining part of the segar; but, for his part,
he thought it extremely inconsistent, and highly improper, and, as he expressed
himself, to show his economy, would put it to a better use, by chewing, rather
than part with so inestimable a treasure: but unfortunately for the poor youth,
he had not gratified himself long in the enjoyment of his luscious morsel,
before he fell prostrate on his back, to the great astonishment of all the
surrounding company, until they recognized the cause of so unexpected a
transition. He was conveyed to an adjacent room, where he remained apparently
lifeless for a considerable space of time, and would probably have fallen a
martyr to his folly and imprudence, had not medical aid been near at hand: The
attendant physician accurately inspected his case, and very properly abstracted
twelve or fourteen ounces of blood from his arm; Doctor Allston, of
South Carolina, informed me, that he was called to a lady, who had
intentionally taken a dose of laudanum, for the purpose of destroying life. He
hastened to her assistance, and immediately administered a vomit, but without
producing the desired effect. The dose was repeated and with the same result.
He then abstracted a few ounces of blood, and vomiting immediately ensued,
which restored the woman to health.
when a vomiting ensued, attended with a profuse diaphoresis, which happily
dissipated every doubt of his recovery, and soon restored the youth to his
former state of salubrity.

We may infer from this fact, the infinite power of nicotiana, when used by
those who have never been accustomed to its noxious effects.

Smoking has been alleged by some authors to have oftentimes proved
advantageous in dispelling contagion of almost every description; but others
have opposed this assertion, with such valid arguments, and have produced such
substantial facts in support of their opinions, that it is now almost
universally believed, that tobacco possesses no such virtue.

I shall now proceed with some few remarks on snuffing, another form in which
the deleterious effects of Nicotiana are evidently depicted.

Snuffing, like that of smoking, may, by many repetitions, be rendered
perfectly simple and harmless with respect to its nauseating powers at first,
so that its peculiarities may at length be totally dissipated: though even this
does not evade the force of its action over those who practice its use in
certain quantities, for we find that those very persons accustomed to the
taking of snuff, by exceeding the portion limited, are attacked with every
disagreeable symptom, which they so evidently experienced on the first
employment of it.

"On this subject" says Dr. Cullen, "it is to be remarked that the power of
habit is often unequal; so that persons accustomed to the use of tobacco, a
lesser quantity, than what they had been accustomed to, will often have
stronger effects than had before commonly appeared. I knew a lady who had been
for more than twenty years accustomed to take snuff, and that at every time of
day; but she came at length to observe, that snuffing a good deal before
dinner, took away her appetite: and she came at length to find, that a single
pinch, taken any time before dinner, took away almost entirely her appetite for
that meal. When however, she abstained entirely from snuff before dinner, her
appetite continued as usual; and after dinner, for the rest of the day, she
took snuff pretty freely, without any inconvenience Culien's Materia Medica,
page 187.
."

This is further corroborated by an assertion of Doctor Rush's Professor Rush's
M. S. Lectures.
. "I once attended a gentleman," says the Doctor, "who had been for some time
troubled with pains in his stomach, attended with a diminution of appetite, and
some degree of emaciation. I observed that he frequently practiced the taking
of snuff, to which I attributed his disease, and advised him to suspend the use
of it. He accordingly did so, and soon began to mend very fast. I was informed
by him, a few weeks after, that he had gained thirty weight in flesh, and was
at that period, in the enjoyment of perfect health."

It greatly injures the organs of smelling, as the infinity of nerves, which
are diffused throughout the mucous membrane of the nose, on which depends its
sensibility, and the acuteness of our smelling, become considerably impaired by
the acrimony of snuff. "The use of this subtle powder, is further rendered
odious by discoloring the skin contiguous to the nose, and will taint the
sweetest breath with the rank odor of a tobacco-cask. For this reason the
ladies of fashion in France, seldom take snuff till they are married; a very
high compliment no doubt to their husbands."

"The only advantage," says Dr. Leake Leake on the viscera, page 69.
, "of taking snuff, is that of sneezing, which, in sluggish, phlegmatic habits,
will give universal concussion to the body, and promote a more free circulation
of the blood; but of this benefit, snuff-takers are deprived, from being
familiar with its use."

Chewing, the most odious form in which nicotiana can possibly be used, next
engages our attention.

The constant chewing of tobacco impairs the appetite, in a similar manner to
smoking, from a profuse discharge of saliva by expectoration Dr. Cullen
observes that "this practice is also the occasion of the greatest waste of
saliva; and the effects of this in weakening digestion, and perhaps from thence
especially, its noted effect of producing emaciation may appear. Cullen's
Materia Medica, page 190.
, so necessary for the preservation of the body, particularly in persons of a
thin habit.

The nauseous taste of the plant being more immediately abstracted by this
process, than either of the others hitherto mentioned, precludes its being
carried so far by those who have recourse to it, without considerable danger
attending such a procedure. Persons, therefore, who are desirous of effecting
their cuds in this polite accomplishment, are compelled to be extremely
particular in regard to the quantity, and time of using it, for if continued
too long with a novice in this art, we find evident marks of its occasioning
extreme anxiety, vertigoes, stupors, and disorders of the senses.
Notwithstanding the greatest caution of tobacco-chewers, a small portion of the
saliva, tinctured with this plant, will frequently insinuate itself into the
stomach, and thereby impair the functions of that viscus.

As longevity depends on a healthy state of this organ, being one of the most
important throughout the animal economy, the habits of those who addict
themselves to this pernicious custom become vitiated, and consequently, the
number of their days are considerably shortened. But, as the use of tobacco in
this form, most generally prevails among the vulgar, upon whom friendly
admonitions are too frequently thrown away, I shall not dwell long on the
subject; well knowing the great difficulty of eradicating prejudice from
ignorant minds, though a circumstance much to be regretted.

CHAPTER IV. Of the prejudicial effects of the use of Tobacco on the moral
faculty.
The general demand for tobacco, as an article of luxury, is owing, I am
convinced, to a servile attachment for imitation. Many customs equally odious,
have of late become fashionable from the same cause, and it is to be regretted,
that men whose exalted situations in life ought to have rendered them superior
to such weaknesses, have been the principle propagators of these pernicious
practices. The example of such characters is, unfortunately, esteemed by
persons in the more subordinate walks of life, as the standard of human
perfection; hence when vicious customs are brought into use by men of this
description, the impression which is made on illiterate minds is more durable,
and the prospect of eradicating them more gloomy.

This plant was first introduced into England by Sir Walter Raleigh, about the
year 1585; this nobleman used it in the form of segar, and hence the despicable
habit of smoking was speedily contracted by the inhabitants of that kingdom.

I presume, our forefathers, must have borrowed this custom from the aborigines
of America, as we are informed, these Savages used it long before it was
introduced into the civilized world.

Our ancestors then, have entailed one of the most odious vices on their sons
and daughters; for sorry am I to observe, that this plant is used by females,
as well as males.

Their delicate habits, it was to have been hoped, would have prevented them
from the luxurious use of such a nauseous weed, but fatal experience has taught
us, that our expectations were merely the results of benevolence; with exalted
notions of female delicacy, blended with a natural affection for the sex, we
fondly anticipated, that they would preserve themselves aloof from such a
detestable custom, and therefore expected that a segar would never find
admittance within their ruby lips.

How far these expectations have been realised, experience will declare.

The use of this plant is not solely confined to those ladies, who have passed
the meridian of life, for in such a case the evil would not be so great, but
the young and the blooming also delight in inhaling the fumes of tobacco; from
this source we may expect much mischief, for as habit will render this weed as
essential to their happiness, as their daily food; so also we will naturally
see the rising generation, fondly allured to a similar attachment.

It is granted that smoking, or chewing, universally produce thirst, therefore
a desire for strong drink is excited; and as these, when taken between meals,
are generally the forerunners of intemperance and drunkenness, so also is vice
universally the consequence. This is proved beyond the possibility of doubt, by
Dr. Rush Rush's Essays, page 270.
in his observations on the use of tobacco; he observes its influence in
promoting intemperance, in the following words -- "One of the greatest sots,"
says the Doctor, "I ever knew, acquired a love for ardent spirits, by
swallowing cuds of tobacco, which he did, to escape detection in the use of it,
for he had contracted the habit of chewing, contrary to the advice and commands
of his father. He died of a dropsy under my care in the year 1780."

From this fact we see, in the most undisguised manner, the pernicious effects
of this weed, not only on the morals, but on the health, and ought we not then
to endeavor to wean ourselves from the use of a plant, which evidently impairs
our ability for living as rational beings, and insures for us an early grave?

We daily witness the horrid effects of inebriety, in our intercourse with the
world; a train of evils are produced, which totally disqualify the slaves of it
from living in the polished walks of society; they become objects of pity, and
contempt, by men of genius and worth, and being excluded from the society of
such, they fly to the haunts of vice, and frequently end their days, in a
tavern or a brothel.

Idleness is also generated by the use of tobacco, and though it cannot be
considered so immediately destructive to health and moral rectitude, as the
habit of drunkenness, yet the effects are equally extensive, though slower in
their operation. The social duties of life are neglected, and every thing
valuable and interesting is totally disregarded. Our country, our connections,
and our friends become objects of but little regard, and finally we attain to
such perfection in indolence, that even the necessary duties of life, which
only extend to ourselves, are considered as burdensome, and at last totally
neglected.

These are generally the effects of a servile fondness for tobacco; and I could
enumerate many more, if my time would admit, which are equally disgusting in
their nature; however, as custom has rendered this plant so essential to the
happiness of many of our fellow citizens, it cannot be expected that these, or
any other remarks, would have a tendency to discourage the use.

CHAPTER V. Of the analysis of tobacco, and the operation of its constituent
parts on living systems.
EXPERIMENT 10.
I boiled two pounds of the dried leaves, in six quarts of water, down to four;
the liquor was then strained, and carefully evaporated, over a gentle fire, to
the consistence of an extract, which weighed four ounces.

EXPERIMENT 11.
To two ounces of the above extract, I added four ounces of pure alcohol As the
spirits of wine is frequently adulterated by the apothecaries, I was at the
trouble of distilling it myself, so as to procure it as concentrated as
possible.
, and triturated them together, for sometime in a mortar; after which I poured
off the menstruum, and by the affusion of distilled water, precipitated the
resin, from the alcohol; this I evaporated with a gentle heat, and then weighed
the residuum, which proved to be three drachms of pure resin.

EXPERIMENT 12.
Half a pound of the dried leaves of tobacco, put into a crucible, heated red
hot, and calcined in the open air yielded an ounce and an half of white ashes;
to this I added boiling water several times, and filtered the whole. The
residuum, when dried, weighed one ounce; so that the water took up half an
ounce of the vegetable alkali, as is sufficiently exemplified in the following
experiments.

EXPERIMENT 13.
In order to ascertain whether the substance taken up by the water, in the
preceding experiment, was of the nature of a vegetable alkali, I submitted it
to the following tests.

1st. To a small portion of this mixture, I added an aqueous solution of
Corrosive sublimate, which was instantly precipitated of a brick-dust color.

2d. I added a few drachms of this filtered mixture, to a solution of the
sulphate of iron Green Vitriol, or Copperas.
, which instantly rendered it of a black turbid color, somewhat tinged with a
darkish green.

4th. It precipitated the sulphate of copper Roman, or Blue Vitriol.
of a greenish hue.

5th. A piece of paper, stained yellow with turmerick, was stained of a
brownish hue.

6. Litmus paper was changed, to its pristine blue color, after being turned
red by the nitric acid.

7. A piece of paper, stained red by the brasil wood was changed from its
original color, to a beautiful purple.

All the above tests, were made individually with an aqueous solution of
pot-ash, and precisely with the same result, which incontestibly confirms the
analogy of the two.

EXPERIMENT 14.
The water which was poured on the ashes of the tobacco, was laid aside to
evaporate spontaneously, when it yielded crystals of the carbonate of pot-ash,
and common salt.

EXPERIMENT 15.
To the substance which remained after the affusion of hot water, weighing one
ounce, I added half an ounce of sulphuric acid, diluted with water, and
suffered the mixture to boil for a few minutes, over a gentle fire; I then
poured it off, and when filtered very clear, it was placed in a shallow vessel,
to evaporate; in a few days, crystals of the sulphate of alumine, were
obtained. The residuium consisted of silicious earth, and weighed six drachms.

EXPERIMENT 16.
To half an ounce of the extract, I added four ounces of concentrated nitric
acid, which were boiled together over a gentle fire. A large quantity of
nitrous gas escaped, but as soon as the whole was evolved, the mixture was
taken off, and it yielded crystals of the oxalic acid.

EXPERIMENT 17.
Half a pound of the dried leaves were calcined in a red hot crucible, which
emitted a considerable vapor. I covered the vessel close, and suffered the
smoke to pass through a tube, which was condensed in a receiver: by this
process, I procured several ounces of the distilled water, and near half an
ounce of an empyreumatic oil, which trickled down the sides of the vessel, and
floated on the surface of the water.

In order to ascertain the difference in strength between the resin and the
gum, I made the following experiments.

EXPERIMENT 18.
To Thomas Howel, aged fifty, whose pulse beat 66 strokes in a minute, I
administered two grains of the resin, obtained by the means particularized in
experiment eleventh, suspended in a little water, about two hours after he had
breakfasted on bread and chocolate. The result of this experiment was as
follows.

In 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 Min. P. beat 66 66 69 69 70 71 75 72 71
70 66 66

He complained of considerable nausea at his stomach, but no vomiting. He
shortly after had a passage, and voided a copious flow of urine.

EXPERIMENT 19.
To John Wheelder, a man of the same temperament, I gave four grains of the
extract, deprived of its resin. His pulse beat 68 strokes in a minute, and the
following was the result.

In 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 Min. P. beat 70 73 74 75 77 78 78 76 73
70 70 68

In fifteen minutes, he complained of a nausea; in 25, the nausea increased,
attended with a little headache. In 30 minutes he perspired, and felt somewhat
giddy. About the fortieth minute, he had a copious evacuation downwards, which
relieved him considerably. At the end of the hour, he felt much better, though
still some nausea at his stomach, which wore off in the course of two or three
hours.

I was favored with the following interesting experiment, by my ingenious
friend Mr. Lee, aged about twenty, an apothecary to the Philadelphia Hospital.

EXPERIMENT 20.
At 9 o'clock, P. M. three hours after drinking some tea, and eating bread, I
took two grains of the resin, that you gave me, made up into a soft pill, with
a small portion of flour, and drank water after it, so that there was no taste
perceived. From several previous examinations, my pulse beat sixty-eight
strokes in a minute, and the alterations produced in it, are marked, in the
following table, viz.

In 5 10 15 30 40 45 55 60 65 70 75 Min. P. beat 73 78 90 94 90 87 90 89 85 80
78 In 80 85 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130 135 min. P.B. 76 74 77 77 77 75 74
74 73 67 66

"In five minutes I felt a good deal of pain at my stomach, which continued
constant for two hours. This continuation of the pain, induced me to carry on
the experiment, as far as I did, to see more particularly the result of its
operation. In eight minutes, I began to perspire, and in fifteen and eighteen
minutes, the perspiration increased most profusely, particularly on my upper
extremities, and forehead. At ten minutes, I felt giddy, and soon became
vertiginous, with an evident tremor throughout my frame. These effects went off
at thirty five minutes. I vomited four times, viz. at the 20th, 35th, 50th and
90th minutes. This vomiting was as violent, as I have ever experienced from
tartar emetic. During the whole time I belched a great deal. After these
affections subsided, I voided urine, and felt disposed for a passage downwards,
but being late at night, I did not indulge myself.

"This last affection I attributed solely to the purgative quality of the
medicine, as I had a passage this forenoon, which generally attends me in the
four and twenty hours, when in a healthy state; but seldom more, and sometimes,
I pass the whole day without such an evacuation.

"N. B. I took particular care not to examine my pulse after vomiting, until
the expiration of five minutes; and always before noting it, I remained still
in one posture, at least two minutes, in order that it might not be increased
by exertions of any kind."

Mr. Lee informed me, that he does not use tobacco in any form whatever, to
which may be attributed, the violence of the symptoms, as well as great
increase of pulse, for we find the same quantity did not produce such violent
affections in Thomas Howel, who occasionally indulged himself in the taking of
a little.

EXPERIMENT 21.
I gave three drops of the distilled water, This water was extremely acrid, and
somewhat impregnated with the oil.
as procured in the 17th experiment, to Thomas Howel, on whom the 18th
experiment was made. His pulse beat 68 strokes in a minute, and it affected him
in the following manner.

In 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 min. P. beat 69 71 71 73 75 78 76 76 74
71 70 67

In fifteen minutes, he said that his stomach felt a little warm, as if he had
drank brandy and water. At the 25th minute a nausea occurred. In thirty-five
minutes, still some sickness at his stomach, but not so perceptible as before.
In 55 and 60 minutes, he experienced no further inconvenience from the dose.

EXPERIMENT 22
To ascertain more particularly the operation of the distilled water, I took
three drops in a little cold tea, on an empty stomach, my pulse beating 68
strokes in a minute, and the following was the effect.

In 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Min. P. beat 70 70 72 73 77 80 80 In 40 45 50 55 60 65
70 75 Min. P. beat 80 80 76 72 66 66 68 68

In ten minutes, I felt a warmth throughout my throat and stomach; in twenty
minutes my head became a little confused, and the nausea increased. At the
thirtieth, I made several efforts to eject the contents of my stomach, but
without effect, and in forty minutes this disposition for vomiting subsided.
There was a considerable moisture on my forehead, until the forty fifth minute,
but disappeared on the sixtieth, in an hour and fifteen minutes, every symptom
totally vanished, and I remained perfectly composed for the remainder of the
evening.

EXPERIMENT 23.
Five grains of the extract were dissolved in water, and given to a cat, which
induced vomiting in the course of five minutes; this continued for near half an
hour, with intervals of six or eight minutes. After this time the vomiting
subsided, and the animal perfectly recovered.

EXPERIMENT 24.
Five grains of the extract were dissolved in one ounce of water, and injected
into the rectum of a small dog: in three minutes it began to be extremely
restless; in five it ran about the room, and apparently in great distress; it
continued thus for seven or eight minutes, when a copious evacuation took
place, which relieved it considerably; the animal was divested of every
indication of pain in the space of thirty minutes.

EXPERIMENT 25.
I injected ten grains of the extract dissolved in half an ounce of water, into
the rectum of a full grown cat, which produced slight convulsions in the
abdominal muscles, and a great degree of disquietude for the space of thirty
minutes; a copious evacuation succeeded these symptoms, which lessened them
considerably; at the expiration of an hour, they were evidently diminished,
and, to every appearance, totally subsided in the course of two hours and a
half.

EXPERIMENT 26.
Three hours after performing the above experiment, I administered to the same
cat, ten grains of the resin suspended in water, which produced violent
contortions of the abdomen, in the short space of ten minutes: free and
repeated discharges were the result of this exhibition; and the poor animal
discovered by its mewing, and grimaces, such exquisite torture, that at the
20th minute, I injected the like quantity into its mouth, in order to put an
end to its existence. In less than thirty minutes, these affections were
greatly increased, and a violent vomiting ensued, attended with great
commotions of the stomach, and repeated discharges of its contents. In forty
minutes the convulsions of the abdominal muscles, were considerably augmented,
and an incessant tremor pervaded the whole frame. In this deplorable situation
it continued for some time, when it sprung up, and hobbled across the room. In
an hour and ten minutes, it foamed considerably at the mouth; the respiration
became quick and extremely laborious, and it assumed, in every respect, the
appearance of a rabid animal; the spasmodic contractions of the stomach and
abdomen were greatly promoted, and the poor animal appeared for a time, as if
it would eject the very stomach itself. Similar symptoms took place from the
exhibition of two drachms of camphor, and as the analogy is so great, I will
give the extract from the London medical observations, as related by Mr.
Hoffman. "I gave," says Mr. Hoffman, "to a large gray hound, two drachms of
camphor, in a ball of hogs lard. Three quarters of an hour after, the dog began
to look wild and furious, lolled out his tongue, worked in his flanks, as if
excessively fatigued. I found the nervous parts so violently contracted, their
rigidity so great, and the dog when attempting to walk, instead of advancing,
recoiled backwards, dragging his forelegs after him, as if he dreaded by going
forwards, to fall down a precipice. He then fell into convulsions. After a
little time he got up, began to walk, striking his head against any thing, that
happened in his way; tumbling and tottering as if intoxicated. When I offered
him some water to drink, notwithstanding he appeared very thirsty, he refused
it. The symptoms resembled the hydrophobia. In about twenty-four hours every
appearance of madness, gradually subsided, and left the dog in a quite weak and
feeble condition; but afterward he recovered gradually.
In this dreadful state it remained until near the 2d hour, when death as a
benign attendant closed the lamentable scene.

EXPERIMENT 27.
I gave to a large dog, thirty grains of the extract, consisting of the gum and
resin, which produced no sensible effects for the first hour; in an hour and
fifteen minutes, he discovered some commotion in the stomach, by the saliva
which run from the mouth, and also by several convulsions of the body, as if
inclined for vomiting. Nothing was ejected from the stomach, but the dog had
copious and repeated discharges through the medium of the rectum, for several
hours after. The ensuing day he had perfectly recovered, and sustained no
apparent inconvenience from his bolus.

EXPERIMENT 28.
Fifteen grains of the resin were given to a dog of the same strength, which
caused an inclination to vomit in the space of half an hour. In three quarters,
he threw up the contents of his stomach, and appeared for some time in great
anxiety. In an hour, he had a large evacuation from his bowels; and the
medicine operated various times, both as an emetic and cathartic.

For the succeeding part of the day, he appeared as usual, and no further
inconvenience attended this exhibition.

EXPERIMENT 29.
Thirty drops of the distilled water, as procured in experiment 17th, was given
to a cat, which occasioned convulsions in five minutes. In ten it sprung about,
and contorted its body in a variety of forms; the convulsions, in twelve
minutes were so much augmented, that it was affecting to behold the torture of
the animal, and in this exquisite pain it suddenly expired.

EXPERIMENT 30.
I applied three drops of the oil of tobacco to the tongue of a cat, which
almost instantaneously produced convulsions, and in six or eight minutes, its
breathing was stertorous, accompanied with tremors, and considerable pain. This
is taken notice of in the new Royal Encyclopedia, under the head of Nicotiana.
It recovered considerably in the course of an hour, and in about an hour and
an half, seemed to enjoy its pristine composure.

EXPERIMENT 31.
After laying bare several muscles of the leg of a pigeon, I am conscious of
the apparent inhumanity of many of the experiments here inserted; but when we
reflect on the necessity which frequently occurs of our resorting to them in
particular enquiries, relative to the various operations of medicines, I
flatter myself that I shall be deemed sufficiently excusable for practicing
them as often as I have done.
I applied two drops of the oil of tobacco, which almost instantaneously
occasioned a spasmodic affection, and such a degree of rigidity in the whole of
the extremity, as to induce an inability for motion; a quick respiration
accompanied the whole, attended with a violent palpitation of the heart, and a
considerable tremor, throughout the extremity.

These symptoms continued for twenty minutes, but after the expiration of half
an hour, gradually diminished and totally subsided in the course of an hour. In
attempting to catch it, it walked across the room, but with some difficulty. In
an hour and fifteen minutes, it ejected The Indians poison their arrows, with
the oil of tobacco, which, infused into a fresh wound, occasions sickness, and
vomiting, or convulsions and death.
the contents of its stomach, which relieved it considerably, and occasioned
its assuming a more lively aspect.

No disagreeable consequences ensued, and it perfectly recovered these
affections.

EXPERIMENT 32.
The muscles of the lower extremity of a frog, were laid bare, and four drops
of the oil of tobacco applied to them, which occasioned, in five minutes a
paralysis of the limb, and small tremulous motions throughout the whole body:
the limb remained perfectly inactive; the ischiatic nerve was then pricked, in
order to ascertain, whether the part was deprived of its contractile power, but
no visible effect was produced: upon touching the ischiatic nerve of the other
extremity, a violent contraction of the leg instantaneously took place.

This experiment was repeated diverse times, and with the same results.

EXEPRIMENT 33.
An opening was made in the teguments on the back part of the neck of a pigeon,
and raised without injuring the fleshy part of it. Four drops of the oil of
tobacco were then introduced. In five minutes, it indicated some degree of
pain, by a flapping of its wings, and on the seventh minute, it was attacked
with a tremor, when its feet became rigidly extended, and on the tenth, it
instantly expired.

EXPERIMENT 34.
The breast of a pigeon was punctured, and the orifice filled up with several
drops of the oil of tobacco. In five minutes the legs were seized with an
inability for motion. The breast was now its only support, and it continued in
this situation, for forty minutes. It indicated great pain the whole of this
time, and was surprisingly convulsed. It made several efforts to vomit, but its
stomach being empty from a long confinement, nothing was ejected. At the
expiration of an hour, it arose, and walked across the room.

The pigeon sustained no further injury, and was perfectly lively, two days
after.

Observations on the Experiments.
AS I have already taken notice of the particular operation of tobacco, on the
human system, in a preceding part of this work, I shall avoid prolixity by
referring to those pages, Pages 32 and 33.
where an accurate definition has already been offered; the inferences of which
are drawn from several of the preceding experiments. I shall, therefore,
without further comment pass them over, and proceed to an examination of the
fifth experiment, where we have an opportunity of observing the stimulating
effects of tobacco, when applied externally to an irritable surface.

In reviewing the sixth experiment, we find that Nicotiana proves a gentle
emetic, when externally applied to the body, which fact is also corroborated,
by an experiment of my friend Mr. Dart's, already taken notice of. In cases
where internal emetics may be objected to, this application may be adopted with
little or no inconvenience, particularly as its operation is of a very lenient
nature.

In regard to the experiments made on the mice, it is to be observed, that
death was almost an immediate attendant on each. I dissected several of these
animals after the extinction of life, in order to see if I could trace any
marks of inflammation. In two or three that I opened, no visible effects were
produced; in others, the minute blood vessels throughout the intestines, were
somewhat florid, but perhaps this might have proceeded from some other cause.
Here it may be presumed, that the excessive stimulating quality of this plant,
was disproportioned to the excitability of their systems, and consequently
death was induced, before any inflammatory type could possibly have taken
place. Dr. Rush remarks that the same frequently occurred, with persons who
died suddenly of the yellow fever. "It is owing," says this acute physiologist,
"to a sudden prostration of the system, before the existence of morbid action,
without which no inflammation can take place."


With respect to the constituent parts of tobacco, we find, agreeable to the
eleventh experiment, that it possesses an extract consisting of a gum and
resin, two ounces of which afforded three drachms of pure resin. From the
several experiments that I have made, the most active property of this plant
consists in the resinous portion.

The ashes obtained from the twelfth experiment, yielded a large portion of
vegetable alkali, as is sufficiently confirmed from the tests enumerated. The
fourteenth experiment afforded crystals of the carbonate of pot-ash and common
salt; from the fifteenth was obtained the sulphate of alumine.

Crystals of the oxalic acid, were procured from the sixteenth experiment. The
seventeenth afforded a water extremely pungent when applied to the tongue, and
the oil which floated on its surface was very acrid, when in contact with a
denuded surface of the body. We may perceive from the results of the 18th and
19th experiments, the difference existing between the gum and resin, for both
of the men on whom these experiments were performed, were of the same
temperament, and occasionally practiced the chewing of tobacco. From the
twentieth experiment, which was performed by Mr. Lee, we see clearly manifested
the immense power of the resinous portion of the extract, and its virtue as a
medicine, occasioning nausea, a profuse perspiration, and at length vomiting.

Tobacco appears to be unequivocally a powerful diaphoretic, and as such it has
proved efficacious in a variety of diseases. It is to be regretted that its
exhibition is not oftener repeated; for there are testimonies of its salutary
influence in many obstinate fevers, which predominated over the most powerful
remedies which are esteemed valuable for exciting a speedy and profuse
perspiration.

The twenty-first and twenty second experiments, vince the immense power which
the distilled water possesses: physicians formerly made use of it with
advantage, and I entertain not the smallest doubt, but that, with a proper
dilution, it may now be administered with much efficacy.

The twenty-third, twenty-fourth, and twenty-fifth experiments, clearly
demonstrate the emetic and purgative qualities of this plant; and the
twenty-sixth, twenty-seventh, and twenty-eighth, again elucidate the difference
existing between the gum and resin; for, agreeable to these experiments, we
find that one half of the latter, operated more powerfully than twice the
quantity of the former.

The immense acrimony of the distilled water, is evidently depicked in the
twenty-ninth experiment, for the small quantity of thirty drops produced
convulsions and death in a cat, in the short space of twelve minutes. The
thirtieth, and the succeeding experiments sufficiently evince the power with
which the oil of tobacco is endued, occasioning a universal tremor throughout
the whole frame, and a paralysis of the parts to which it was applied.

An account of its medical virtues, in eradicating certain diseases.
THE medical powers of tobacco were generally known among physicians, at an
early period, who ascribed many virtues to it in certain obstinate diseases.
With respect to its operation as a general evacuant, I may, from my
experiments, and the corroborating assertions of various authors, pronounce
this medicine a valuable acquisition to the materia medica; and that its
evident operation on the system, is that of a sudorific an emetic, a cathartic
and a diuretic. Hence the propriety of its use, in a variety of diseases.

In cases of ascites and other dropsical affections, it appears to be an
invaluable remedy.

As a diuretic, I would venture to assert, that it is excelled by few, if any
of our indigenous plants. The digitalis purpurea, Purple Fox-glove.
which grows luxuriantly in South Carolina, has been much celebrated for its
diuretic quality, by medical characters; but I have seen instances where the
tobacco has eradicated several violent cases of ascites, where this had proved
but of little effect. "Diuretics," says a much celebrated character, See
professor Barton's essay toward a materia medica of the United States. page 34.
"have so long been employed with benefit in the treatment of dropsies, that it
becomes a matter of consequence, to increase the number of the medicines of
this class, and to learn how to exhibit, with more advantage, those which are
already known." In how great estimation then should we hold that plant, which
is evidently endowed with a power of evacuating the accumulated water by a
natural discharge, for the relief of ascites and other dropsical affections, in
lieu of resorting to a surgical operation, which is painful and disagreeable to
the afflicted patient; that nicotiana possesses this quality no one will
pretend to deny.

Every practitioner of medicine, who has attentively perused the publication of
the ingenious Doctor Fowler, on the effects of Tobacco, with respect to its
diuretic quality, must heartily acknowledge its salutary effects, in cases of
dropsy and dysury. The uniform result attendant on his experiments, together
with the many proofs of its virtues which have come under my cognizance,
clearly evince the indefinite worth of this plant, and the necessity of
administering it in those cases of dropsy, which seem to triumph over medicines
of less efficacy, although held in the greatest repute.

To illustrate this still further, I have been informed by several persons of
unquestionable veracity, that a variety of the most violent cases of dropsy,
many of which had baffled the skill of the most eminent physicians, were
perfectly eradicated by an old negro fellow. His remedy was, for a time,
unknown to any but himself, until, by some accidental occurrence, it was
discovered to be a simple decoction of tobacco, disguised with some odoriferous
herb. As an additional proof of the efficacy of this plant in the various
species of dropsy, I shall take the liberty of introducing the opinion of Dr.
Cullen, when considering the effects or vomiting, in promoting absorption, and
thereby relieving patients affected with dropsy. "Spontaneous vomiting," says
the Dr. has sometimes excited an absorption in hydropic parts, and thereby
drawn off the waters lodged in them, it is reasonable to suppose, that vomiting
excited by art, may have the same effect; and accordingly it has been often
practiced with advantage Cullen's First lines Vol. II. page 407.
." The doctor then proceeds with observing, "that there are no means we can
employ to procure a copious evacuation of serous fluids, with greater certainty
than the operation of purgatives, and it is upon these accounts, that purging
is the evacuation which has been most frequently, and perhaps with most
success, employed in dropsy Cullen's Practice of Physic. Vol. II. page 408.
." He further remarks "that the kidneys afford a natural outlet for a great
part of the watery fluids, contained in the blood vessels; and the increasing
the excretions by the kidneys It is remarked by Dr. Sydenham when treating of
diuretics in dropsical cases, "that where the waters are not to be discharged
by vomiting or purging; for instance in weak constitutions, and hysteric
subjects, they cannot be evacuated by purgatives, and much less by vomitives
but are to be carried off by diuretics. Several of this kind are extolled in
the writings of physicians, but the most, if not the only efficacious ones, in
my opinion, are those prepared from lixivial salts, from whatever plant the
ashes be obtained". Doctor Wallis observes that the ashes of tobacco, has
oftentimes proved efficacious in the relief of dropsy. Wallis's Sydenham. Vol.
II. page 289.
to a considerable degree, is a means, as likely, as any other of exciting an
absorption in dropsical parts. It is upon this account that diuretic medicines
have been always properly employed in the cure of dropsy. It happens however,
unluckily, that none of them are of a very certain operation Doctor Fowler
observes on this head, that such considerations first induced him to make trial
of a greater variety of diuretic medicines in dropsical cases, than have
generally been used; in hopes of finding some one, more efficacious than the
rest: and he flatters himself, he may recommend, as such, the celebrated India
plant commonly called Tobacco.
". He then proceeds by announcing the utility of sudorifics, in many cases of
dropsical affections, and affirms, that they have proved salutary in many
instances.

As I have had some opportunities of witnessing the happy effects of tobacco,
and its various operations on the system, I would beg leave to observe that all
these virtues hitherto enumerated by Doctor Cullen, appear to be, under certain
circumstances, concentrated in this plant; from my experience, I may venture to
assert, with some degree of confidence, that it has proved of inestimable worth
for the relief of patients afflcted with dropsy.

In reviewing what I have written on the medical properties of this plant, I
perceive that my limited information has prevented me from doing ample justice
to the subject: in order, therefore, to extenuate my deficiencies, I shall
apply to the learned pages of Doctor Fowler See Doctor Thomas Fowler's Medical
reports of the Effects of Tobacco.
for aid, in accomplishing the design of this undertaking.

In this work so replete with medical information, many interesting facts may
be collected; and I trust that it will be found on an impassioned examination
of our experiments, that I have not departed from truth, nor built my opinions
on conjecture.

Doctor Fowler observes that a paragraph, in the third volume of Dr. Duncan's
very valuable medical commentaries, first induced him to administer tobacco. It
was part of a letter, from Dr. Garden of Charleston South Carolina, to Dr. Hope
of Edinburgh; wherein he says -- "Here we use with surprizingly great efficacy,
in dropsical cases, the alkaline fixed salt of tobacco, etc.

Doctor Fowler remarks that a variety of operations, in different authors, have
been ascribed to this plant, and that he was led from this circumstance to
ascertain more particularly its virtues; being solicitous of establishing his
opinions on a more substantial basis than the assertions of others, he resolved
on entering into a minute investigation of the subject, and consequently
founded the positions there stated, on his own experience and observation.

The result of this enquiry, has afforded him very favorable ideas upon the
subject, and from the number of facts enumerated by him, we may infer, that
tobacco, under proper regulations, may be administered internally, not only as
a safe, but as an efficacious, and valuable remedy; especially as a powerful
diuretic in cases of dropsies and dysuries To illustrate the manner of its
exhibition, and also its saluary effects in many cases, I will take the liberty
of inserting a few extracts from Dr. Fowler, as related by him, and which were
the results of his own observations.

It appears from many experiments, says the Doctor, that the average dose for
an adult sufficient to produce the desired effect, will be about eighty drops
of the infusion; or to speak with some latitude, from sixty drops to one
hundred, and to be repeated twice a day.

The properest times for administering the medicine, are two hours before
dinner, and at bedtime; it being observed to disagree the most with the
stomach, in a morning fasting. And such is the difference between morning and
night, that almost every patient will require to take one fourth, and some even
one third less, in the forenoon, than in the evening; in order to enable them
to bear the doses, with equal convenience. The infusion should always be
administered in some vehicle; which may either be water, or any other simple
drink.

The common dose just mentioned, relate only to adults of an ordinary
constitution; for it deserves particular notice, that between constitutions,
which are very nervous and irritable, and those which are very robust, or
torpid, or long accustomed to the use of tobacco, the doses will admit of very
great, and surprising variations.

As an illustration of this point, I shall here annex a comparative view of the
doses of the infusion, administered in ninety four cases of adults; taking the
medium-dose of each case, and reducing the whole into four classes, according
to the number of drops.

First Class. Medium doses. 21 Cases (3 men, and 18 women), from 35 to 60
drops. Second Class, 57 Cases, (29 men, and 28 women), from 60 to 100 drops.
Third Class. 13 Cases, (9 men, and 4 women), from 100 to 150. Fourth Class.
3/94 Cases, (3 men), from 150 to 300.
Seeing the diversity of doses is so great, I would lay it down as a rule, by
way of caution, to begin with sixty drops, or three fourths of the medium-dose,
in a case of a delicate constitution; and to increase the number of drops, by
five, eight or ten at a time, till by their obvious effects on the system, the
proper dose shall be ascertained.

But if the patient should be a male, and the constitution robust, torpid, or
accustomed to the use of tobacco, we may safely venture to begin with eighty,
ninety, or one hundred drops; and thus, with more expedition, regulate the
future doses according to the effects


.

A medicine possessing this quality in an emiment degree, has long been
acknowledged to be a desideratum in physic; and let it be considered as a
further recommendation, that it is found in a vegetable. Because the
productions of nature are generally constant and uniform; while those of art,
are too often variable and uncertain; which is the case in some of our most
powerful chemical remedies.

In Fever.
AS it is not my intention to enter into a particular disquisition relative to
the nature of fever, I shall only observe that such medicines as promote a
profuse diaphorexis are frequently resorted to by physicians, and I have no
doubt but that the infusion of tobacco, in nauseating doses, so as to induce
copious sweating, would be attended with very salutary effects.

In the cure of fever, various means are resorted to by medical characters;
some appear to be more particularly attached to the use of the lancet, others
to vomiting, some to sweating, and many prefer the use of purgatives, but their
objects, it may be presumed, are ultimately the same, viz. depletion. Is it not
probable then that the complicated operation of tobacco would render its
exhibition beneficial in many cases of fever? And would it not, on this
consideration, be expedient for physicians to practice the use of it more often
than they do?

In testimony of its efficacy, I have a well authenticated fact, where the
external application of the leaves to the wrists of a child, produced
considerable nausea, a profuse diaphoresis, and at length vomiting, with
repeated evacuations downwards. This child had been for some time afflicted
with an obstinate fever, and the usual remedies were made use of without any
benefit attending them; but by the virtues of tobacco, in the manner above
specified, the disease was totally subdued, and the child was happily rescued
from impending death.

Doctor Shannon remarks, "that the Africans make use of a sort of poultice of
wild tobacco chopped up green, with green capsicum A species of Pepper.
, applied to the wrists for the cure of fever, with a decoction of herbs that
promote a copious sweat R. Shannon, M. D. on Medicine, page 380.
."

In Nephritis.
IN cases of nephritis calculosa, or gravel, the infusion of tobacco has been
given with very good effect; and Dr. Fowler affirms, that he has seen many
cases where it proved of infinite utility, and in some instances perfected
radical cures. Physicians many years back, were not ignorant of its virtues in
such affections, for they have asserted that it has proved "profitable for
those who are troubled with a stone in the kidney, both to ease pain, and by
provoking urine to expel gravel and the stone engendered therein. Theatrum
Botannicum. p. 711.
"

Ascarides.
A SPECIES of worms, thus termed from their incessant troublesome motion, which
excites an itching. They are small and white, with sharp pointed heads, and
generally exist in the rectum.

They oftentimes occasion such uneasiness in some people as to induce fainting,
and frequently prove so troublesome throughout the night, as to deprive them of
sleep. They are so completely enveloped in mucus, that it is with difficulty
they can be eradicated, and frequently they resist the most powerful
anthelmintics; but practical authors observe, "that the fumes of burning
tobacco injected clysterwise into the rectum, is of singular efficacy."

Farriers are aware of its immense virtues in such affections, for they
generally pronounce it to be infallible in expelling those small worms,
commonly called bots, which so frequently prove mortal to many horses.

In Asthma.
IN asthmatic cases, this medicine has frequently afforded relief, by its
expectorant quality; Dr. Fowler observes, that he has tried the infusion in
many cases of asthma, where it proved expectorant, and procured relief.
for agreeable to the discharge of mucous, we find the remission of coughing
more or less considerable: but should an inflammatory type prevail, which
generally occurs in the recent stage of this disease, its use should be
protracted, until proper depletive remedies have had the effect of reducing the
system to that state, which would render its exhibition the more efficacious.

In Odontalgia or Toothache.
IN such affections, the smoking of a segar, has imparted considerable relief.
A piece of lint, impregnated with the expressed juice of tobacco, has often, in
some instances, acted as a charm, in mitigating the violence of the toothache.
The oil of tobacco, It must here be remarked that this remedy should not be
adopted by persons unaccustomed to the use of tobacco, as the oil is extremely
nauseous, and will often times induce vomiting.
dropped on a piece of cotton, of sufficient magnitude to occupy the concavity
of the affected tooth, has proved almost instantaneous in its relief. In these
various forms, tobacco acts by its stimulating quality, destroying the
sensibility of the nerve, and thereby encountering pain. Opium oftentimes acts
in like manner, but neither perfect permanent cures; for the pains frequently
recur, and the only radical remedy to which we must ultimately resort, is the
extraction of the affected tooth.

In Colic.
THE decoction of tobacco, exhibited in the form of an injection, has afforded
almost instantaneous relief, after other medicines had proved ineffectual.
Particularly as Dr. Sydenham observes, "when the violence of the vomiting do
not yield to mild purgatives; for it avails not to exhibit a gentle cathartic,
unless perhaps, the patient be easy to work upon, which should be carefully
inquired into, because such a medicine, being too weak to make its way through
the intestinal tube, does more mischief: the vomiting and pain being increased
by its languid and ineffectual motion. Wallis's Sydenham, p. 277.
" There was a violent case of this disease, which came under the immediate
inspection of Dr. Deas, in South Carolina; where the beneficial influence of
tobacco was very demonstrative. Several powerful cathartics were administered
without the smallest effect; and the disorder was degenerating fast into an
iliac passion. Recourse was then had, as the last resource, to a strong
decoction of the dried leaves of tobacco; immediately after the exhibition of
it, through the medium of the rectum, a violent commotion pervaded the whole
abdominal viscera; the patient became extremely restless Dr. Fowler remarks,
that by a proper administration, these violent effects may be avoided. An ounce
of the infusion he observes, will be found a medium dose, in the form of an
injection, for an adult of an ordinary constitution; and the general rule by
which he was guided, is as follows: Supposing a common injection to have been
administered without effect, I would order one of an ounce of the infusion,
agreeable to the preceding observation, in half a pint of milk, or common
gruel, to be immediately injected. If this procured no relief, or excited no
giddiness, or nausea, continuing for the space of thirty, forty, or sixty
minutes; these last effects in obstinate constipations, most frequently
preceding its laxative operation, then I would gradually increase the strength
of the future injections, till one or other of these effects should take place.

By this mode of proceeding, the powers of the medicines, whether successful or
not, will be fully tried in the space of a few hours; a matter of serious
consequence, where suspense is distressing, and delay dangerous.


, and it was with the greatest difficulty that two persons could keep him in
his bed. At length a profuse discharge ensued, and relief was afforded in a
very short time.

In the Iliac Passion.
"IT is highly proper," says Dr. Sydenham, "to give a strong purging glyster,
an hour or two after bleeding Wallis's Sydenham, p. 443.
." In such cases, I have seen the tobacco infusion made use of with
considerable advantage. The Doctor himself remarks the salutary effects of
tobacco in this disease. "The smoke of tobacco," he observes, "forced up through
a bladder into the bowels by an inverted pipe, has been attended with very
beneficial consequences."

It is asserted in the Royal Encyclopoedia, that a strong decoction of tobacco
thrown up the rectum, has proved of good effect in what is usually called the
stone-colic, and also in the iliac passion.

In Hernia.
IT generally occurs that costiveness is one of the most alarming symptoms
attendant on this disease, for the relief of which, stimulating purgatives are
generally administered; but it not unfrequently happens that they do much
injury, for when they have not the desired effect, they produce a considerable
nausea at the stomach, and sometimes vomiting, which promotes the pain and
tension of the tumor.

"In such affections," says Mr. Bell, "I would recommend tobacco smoke thrown
up in the form of injections, as preferable to every other remedy. Bell's
Surgery, vol. I. p. 162.
"

In Tympanites Intestinalis.
This is termed a flatulent dropsy, the abdomen frequently becomes considerably
distended, and in such cases the chief intention is to discharge the
flatulencies: various remedies have been indicated for this purpose, and there
have been instances where the infusion of tobacco has proved efficacious after
the failure of many of them.

"A case of two years continuance," says Doctor Fowler, "after the trial of
various remedies, has been surprisingly relieved by glysters of tobacco
prepared in a very strong manner. Their operation was moderately purgative,
accompanied with nausea, vertigo, a copious perspiration, and much discharge of
wind."

In obstinate Ulcers.
The dried leaves of tobacco, steeped in water and applied to the parts
affected, have sometimes been attended with beneficial effects.

Mr. William Bartram informed me, that he knew of several long standing ulcers,
after having resisted the usual remedies, that were entirely cured by the use
of tobacco, in the manner above specified. Doctor Earl, of Maryland,
communicated to me the case of a child, who had been for several months
afflicted with an obstinate eruption on its head, which evaded the skill of
several eminent physicians, that was ultimately cured by an old woman, who
daily dressed it with an ointment of tobacco, previously washing the part with
a decoction of the same.

In the Itch.
This fulsome disorder has frequently been cured by the application of tobacco
to the affected parts. Mr. Jacobs, a gentleman from Paris, informed me, that
the French physicians, make great use of the tobacco wash The wash is prepared
in the following manner.

To one pound of the dried tobacco leaves, add four quarts of water; let these
boil slowly over a gentle fire, for the space of half an hour, then pour off
the liquor, and add to it one ounce of soda or mineral alkali. The parts
affected are to be well rubbed with a sufficient portion of this mixture, and
to be continued from one to three weeks, according to the virulency of the
case. Though it must be remarked, that, in consequence of the irritability of
many constitutions, great caution is requisite, with respect to its use, as it
has, in some instances, occasioned vomiting, and sometimes convulsions.


in obstinate cases of cutaneous eruptions. The same, he avers, seldom fails of
curing the itch: the eruptive parts are to be washed three or four times a day,
until every appearance subsides; in this way radical cures have been effected,
even after the disease had resisted the most powerful medicines.

A strong decoction of the stalks with sharp-pointed dock and alum is said to
be of good service, used externally, in cuticular distempers: this is also said
to be infallible in curing the mange in dogs. The New Royal Encyclopedia, by
George Selby Howard.


In Phtheiriasis.
This is a lousy distemper, to which most children are generally subject,
adults also at times, are afflicted with it. Moist and warm situations promote
the increase of these detestable vermin; but a cold and dry one very soon
exterminate them. Four species are peculiar to the human body, viz. 1st. The
pediculi A gentleman informed me, that when young, he was neglected by his
attendants, and for a time was much afflicted with the first and third species
of these fulsome vermin, which occasioned obstinate eruptions, in his head, and
on various parts of his body. Many medicines were tried for his relief, but
without any benefit whatever. Recourse was then had to a strong decoction of
tobacco, which was applied three or four times a day, to the parts affected,
and in a fortnight or three weeks he was radically cured.
so called from their being more troublesome with their feet, than from their
bite. They generally infest the head, particularly if sore.

2d. Morpiones or Crab-lice. They are thus called from the analogy which they
bear to a crab-fish. 3d. Body-lice. These are generated in the apparel of the
filthy. 4th. A species which breed under the cuticle, and are called by some
authors, cyriones. They are of a round form, extremely minute, and are
generally found in the hands and feet. By creeping under the scarf-skin they
induce an intolerable itching, and when the skin bursts where they lodge,
clusters of them are found deposited in a small concavity.

A good diet, and attention to cleanliness contribute much to the destruction
of these fulsome vermin. Mercurial ointment, and a solution of corrosive
sublimate are held in the greatest estimation; but I have heard of instances,
where these have failed, and an infusion of tobacco, perfected a radical cure.

Errhines.
These are medicines which excite a preternatural discharge from the mucous
follicles of the Schneiderian membrane upon the internal surface of the nose,
and adjacent concavities; by which they frequently relieve rheumatic
congestions, and particularly violent toothache. As an errhine, the tobacco
powder, commonly called snuff, has been long in great repute: its use is
frequently practiced, and has been strongly recommended for the relief of
headache, pains of the ear, and opthalmias. Its salutary influence in such
affections is sufficiently confirmed by the pains again recurring as often as
its use was suspended for a day or two.

How far the effects of errhines may extend, says Dr. Cullen, cannot be exactly
determined; but it is probable, that they may operate more or less on the whole
vessels of the head, as even a branch of the internal carotid passes into the
nose: and independent of this, it is not improbable that our errhines may have
been of use in preventing apoplexy, Cullen's materia medica, vol. 2. page 295.
and palsy; which at least is to be attended to so far, that whenever any
approach to these diseases is suspected, the drying up of the mucous discharge
should be attended to, and, if possible restored.

As much virtue has been attributed to nicotiana, in expelling worms, I made
the subsequent experiments, with a view to elucidate an interesting subject,
and to ascertain the foundation for such an opinion.

These experiments were made with accuracy; and in my opinion substantiate the
anthelmintic powers of this plant.

Exp. 1. I immersed a common worm I selected this species of worm for my
experiments, in consesequence of the analogy which exists between them and
those generated in the human system.
, taken out of the earth, into a small quantity of this solution, and in three
minutes it became convulsed, which continued for the space of twelve minutes,
but at the expiration of fifteen minutes, no symptoms of life were discernible.

Exp. 2. Ten grains of calomel were suspended in a small quantity of water.
Another worm of the same species was introduced into this mixture, which was
considerably affected in three minutes, in ten still more so, in fifteen began
to subside; in thirty it remained perfectly dormant.

At the expiration of an hour still alive, but continued inactive, unless
disturbed.

Exp. 3. In a solution of white sugar I introduced another worm, as above; it
was convulsed in five minutes: in ten these symptoms were somewhat diminished;
in fifteen remained quiet at the bottom of the vessel, and in forty it appeared
perfectly inanimate.

Exp. 4. In the distilled water of tobacco, which was extremely pungent, I
immersed another worm, which almost instantaneously contorted itself into a
variety of forms, exhibting strong marks of violent pain, and in the short
lapse of three minutes it expired.

Exp. 5. Five grains of corrosive sublimate, dissolved in water, produced
convulsions in two minutes, and a torpor in twelve.

Exp. 6. Molasses produced convulsions in five minutes, and inactivity in
twenty-five.

Exp. 7. A strong decoction of pink root, brought on convulsions in seven
minutes, and a torpor in thirty.

As a Cathartic.
In cases of constipations of the abdominal vicera, the infusion of tobacco has
sometimes been administered, and often with immediate relief, by occasioning a
speedy expulsion of the obstructing innurated foeces. The smoke, A gentleman of
my particular acquaintance informed me, that he was not in the habit of smoking
much, but whenever he was troubled with any degree of costiveness, it was only
resorting to a segar to obviate this inconvenience, which never failed of
acting as a lenient purgative, and imparted immediate relief. This method he
preferred to the taking of physic, as it was mild in its effects, and left his
body agreeably composed.

If the generality of persons were to relinquish the perpetual use of this
plant, and only to have recourse to it for its medicinal* virtues, when
necessity demanded, is it not more than probable, that many diseases may be
eradicated, or at least their violence mitigated by its salutary influence?


says Dr. Cullen, thrown up the rectum, will operate in like manner, and has
proved beneficial, after the failure of many violent cathartics; it enters much
further into the intestines than injections commonly do, and is thereby applied
to a larger surface, by which means it may be rendered much more powerful than
the infusion.

It is to be regretted, says Dr. Fowler, that injections of tobacco are not in
more general use, for I am thoroughly persuaded, that in cases of the colic,
they would prove more successful than any other kind with which we are
acquainted.

From the many facts and observations which I have hitherto adduced, relative
to the medicinal influence of tobacco, it is doubtless, reasonable to infer,
that it may prove efficacious in many diseases.

That it is of great service in dropsical affections, has been clearly
demonstrated; and, in cases of dysury, it has, in many instances, proved
salutary, by successfully promoting a copious discharge of urine. In short,
much may be said of its virtues as a medicine, but as it is not my wish to
prove prolix, by profusely extending encomiums on an indigenous plant, so
universally known, I shall conclude* by observing, that the errors and
imperfections of this essay, are, no doubt, easily discernible: but, at the
same time, I am buoyed up, with the flattering idea, that the candid reader,
will readily excuse a juvenile attempt.

As an expanded field lies open before us, for investigation, I would wish,
that the subject might be hereafter taken up, by some more adequate
experimentalist, as I am persuaded that the complicated operative effects of
tobacco on the human system, would render it an invaluable medicine in many
obstinate diseases.


