AN EULOGIUM TO THE MEMORY OF DR. SAMUEL COOPER, DELIVERED, BY APPOINTMENT,
BEFORE THE PHILADELPHIA MEDICAL SOCIETY, ON THE FOURTH DAY OF MARCH, 1799.

BY CHARLES CALDWELLL, A.M. M.D. A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118,
MARKET-STREET. 1799.

Extract from the Minutes of the Philadelphia Medical Society.
March 4th, 1799.
RESOLVED, That the thanks of this Society be presented to Dr. CHARLES
CALDWELL, for the eloquent, judicious, and appropriate Eulogium, delivered by
him, this day, upon the character of our deceased friend and colleague Dr.
SAMUEL COOPER.

And, Resolved further, That a copy of it be requested for immediate
publication."

GEORGE LEE, SECRETARY.

AN EULOGIUM, etc.
Gentlemen of the Philadelphia Medical Society,
TO embalm, by offerings of tributary monuments, the memory of the wise, the
valiant, the good, and the great, is a custom co-eval with the history of man.
Nor is this custom less honorable and praiseworthy, from its nature, than
venerable, from the circumstance of its high antiquity. Whether we view it, in
its relationship to the cultivation of private virtues, or to the promotion of
public good, its objects are highly interesting and important. They are, to fan
in our breasts the flame of friendships threatened with extinction by the damps
of death, to add perpetuity to sentiments of gratitude for distinguished
services, to cherish in our bosoms a love of exalted worth, and to allure us on
to virtuous conduct, through the medium of our constitutional propensity to
imitation, and by the powerful motives of emulation and the love of praise.

For these purposes have the rude but energetic songs of the bards and
minstrels, of old, resounded -- for these purposes have temples and other
architectural monuments been erected in honor of departed heroes -- for these
purposes has the chissel of the skilful statuary been plied -- for these
purposes has the pencil of the painter been exercised -- for these purposes
have the pens of the historian and biographer been employed -- and, for these
purposes has the voice of the eulogist been heard -- Allow me to add, for these
purposes have we assembled on the present interesting, but mournful, occasion!
--

Death, my fellow members, has, not long since, invaded our institution, and
swept off one of the most distinguished of our colleagues! -- The name of
Cooper is still alike dear and familiar to most of you, though he, who bore
that name, has sunk, with all his virtues, to an untimely grave! -- But I
renounce the unfounded thought, and retract the unwelcome and injurious
assertion! -- Though our inestimable colleague has himself, disappeared, it is
not so with his numerous virtues! They still remain, a guardian constellation
-- a glittering galaxy, to light his surviving friends, on the dark and
intricate journey of life! -- Thus were the pious sages of the east, originally
apprised of the birth of the Messiah, and afterward conducted on their way to
do him homage, by a bright and supernumerary star in the heavens! -- Though
snatched away by a sudden and unexpected stroke, this amiable young philosopher
has not left us without a fair and authentic testimonial of his affection and
regard! We have even become his heirs -- He has bounteously bequeathed to us
his character and example -- a legacy, as far superior to the ordinary bequests
of men, as moral excellence surpasses the value of perishable matter; or, as
the beauty of intellect surpasses the beauty of material objects! Mine is the
melancholy, yet not unwelcome task, to examine well the contents of this
legacy; to endeavor to appreciate each separate article of the treasure it
embraces, and exhibit a detailed statement of the whole, that you may, then,
with the more facility, arrive at an estimate of its real worth -- To drop the
language of metaphor, I am called on, by your suffrages, to speak what I know,
respecting the general character of our deceased friend.

As the field, on which I am about to enter, abounds with the choicest flowers
and fruits of intellect and morality, you will pardon me should I leave it with
much reluctance. But it is not more rich and beautiful, than extensive and
capacious. For though our friend and colleague did not, in age, complete his
twenty-seventh year, in scientific acquirements, in rectitude of principle, and
in acts of benevolence and virtue, he had already attained an advanced
longevity. Let my reluctance, then, to lose sight of a prospect so fair and
enchanting, as that exhibited by the character of the gentleman, whose worth we
commemorate, be received as an apology, for any unintentional trespass I may
commit on your patience.

In your late resolution to perpetuate, by an eulogium, the memory of Dr.
Cooper, you have done equal honor to me, to yourselves, to genius, to science,
to morality, to religion, and to the healing art.

You have done honor to me, by the appointment which your flattering
partiality has assigned me: you have done honor to yourselves, by avowing your
unalterable attachment to distinguished excellence: you have done honor to
genius, by an attempt to preserve from the shades of oblivion, one who
possessed an uncommon share of this first of endowments: you have done honor
to science, by paying due respect to the memory of one, who would shortly have
been ranked among its brightest ornaments: you have done honor to morality, by
doing homage to a character formed on the basis of its purest principles: you
have done honor to religion, by a respectful tribute to the worth of a young
philosopher, whose life was a series of conduct conformable to its precepts:
and you have done honor to the healing art, by making honorable and worthy
mention of one, who had spent many toilsome years in its cultivation, and whose
talents and industry would have raised him, in time, to a level with the most
exalted medical characters of the age.

Dr. Cooper was a native of the state of Maryland. He was born in Talbot
county, on the Eastern Shore, on the 8th of September, 1772. Amid the fields
and forests, in the neighborhood of this place, did he imbibe, from early
observation, the rudiments of that knowledge of nature, which he afterward
cultivated with such industry and success. Though himself the only surviving
individual of his family, he, notwithstanding, retained and exhibited, through
the whole of his life, the most respectful and affectionate attachment to the
place of his birth, being also the place where the relics of his forefathers
and kinsmen were deposited. Respecting the parentage of our deceased colleague,
my knowledge is extremely limited and defective. As his pre-eminent modesty
kept him for ever silent on subjects that bore relation to himself, I never,
during the whole of our acquaintance, received from him, a single article of
information respecting his descent and family connections. I well know,
however, that he possessed neither the right nor the inclination, to avail
himself of that most empty and unmeaning of all boasts, a long and splendid
line of ancestry. As far as I have been able to learn, his parents were
remarkable for nothing except their honesty, their industry, and the general
decorum and rectitude of their conduct. No uncommon blaze of parental genius,
no glitterring pomp of accidental riches, no towering pride of family
alliances, no lengthened catalogue of ancestral greatness, contributed to add
an artificial luster to the birth of our young philosopher. Like the fair star
of the morning, springing from the bosom of the darkest hour, he rose to what
he was, from the lap of obscurity. Nor let the haughty and the highborn, those
slaves to conspicuous descent, and titled greatness, consider his
respectability and merit as diminished by this -- Let such remember, that to
the humble valley, no less than to the cloud-capt mountain, are many of our
most beauteous and majestic streams indebted for their origin. Who, in gazing
on the brilliancy of the diamond, can suffer the darkness of the matrix, where
its beauties were matured, to throw, in imagination, an envious shadow over its
luster? -- Or who, on surveying the majesty of the oak, that exults in its
strength, and towers aloft, the glory of the forest, can consider its grandeur
as, in any measure, diminished by the smallness of the acorn from which it
sprang?

As my acquaintance with our fellow-member, whose worth we commemorate, did not
commence till his arrival at manhood, I am disqualified for being a minute
biographer of his earlier years. I am unable to ascend, historically, to the
period of his infancy, when his observation was gradually awakening to the
beauties, the harmonies, and the contrasts of nature. I will not undertake to
portray to you, from positive anecdote, the impressive wonder with which he, at
first, viewed the general fabric of visible creaation -- the delight he derived
from an immediate examination of surrounding bodies -- nor the silent rapture,
with which he surveyed the distant expanse of the starry heavens! His
sensations, when first introduced to an interview with the more bold and
sublime scenes of nature -- when the heavens were involved in a dark and
tumultuous covering of clouds -- when all nature seemed immersed in a depth of
expectation and solicitude, on account of the impending elementary convulsion
-- when, at length, the fierce lightning began to dart, in all directions, its
dreadful coruscations, and the mingled roar of tempest and of thunder to be,
every moment, reiterated in his ears -- the sensations, I say, of our young
philosopher, on such an interesting occasion as this, constitute a subject of
which it is not my design to attempt a description. Allow me, however, to
observe, that they must have been such, as could be experienced only, by a
young mind of superior strength and consummate sensibility -- a mind
exquisitely formed for the enjoyment of that pleasure, arising from the
contemplation of objects of grandeur and sublimity. I can, at least, very
confidently assert, that, when arrived at manhood. Dr. Cooper possessed a mind
peculiarly adapted to the enjoyment of this superior description of pleasure --
a mind, formed to listen, with that of the minstrel of Beattie, with pleasing
dread, to the deep roar of the wide-weltering waves; or, with that of
Shakespeare, to exult in the whirlwind, and enjoy the storm!

The progress, which our deceased friend made, in the cultivation and evolution
of his intellectual powers, are points, which I will, in like manner, pass over
in silence. I will not attempt to trace the expansion of his mind through all
its infinitude of gradations from his early infancy, when it was but little --
perhaps, I might even say, nothing more than a sensitive germ, till that period
of maturity in which it became capable of the most glowing conception, and the
most powerful exertion of philosophic thought. In vain would I attempt to point
to the time, when his opening imagination commenced its sportive excursions, to
collect materials for its future scenes of mimic creation -- and, in vain, to
the time, when his understanding began to discern and discriminate, and his
reason to unravel, by degrees, its slender and intricate thread of induction.
These are themes of refinement, which I am obliged to resign to a better
informed, a more metaphysical, and more descriptive pen.

The particulars of Dr. Cooper's early scholastic education, in the country,
are wholly unknown to me. Being unacquainted with himself, at this interesting
period of life, and having, since, had no knowledge of any of his teachers,
patrons, or school-fellows, I am constrained to leave a blank in this part of
his biography. If we may judge, however, of his character, as a student, at
this, from that which he bore at a subsequent period, he was equally
distinguished for the intensity of his application to study, the amiability of
his manners, the decorum of his general deportment, and the accuracy and
rapidity of his literary acquirements. It may not be amiss, however, to
observe, that there, not unfrequently, exists between the early and subsequent
periods of the lives of illustrious characters, the most striking dissimilitude
both with regard to their habits of study, and the evidences of talents which
they exhibit to the world. Thus, even the celebrated Dean Swift was once
considered by his school-fellows and teachers, as an incorrigible blockhead;
the supposed stupidity of the great Newton himself, the illustrious father of
astronomic philosophy, procured for him, on first entering the university, the
nickname of "The Calf;" and the afterward laborious and learned Gibbon, was
pointed at, in the earlier part of his life, as a perfect paragon of idleness
and dissipation.

When of feeble and tender age, and wholly inadequate to the task of
self-direction, young Cooper had the misfortune to be deprived of both his
parents. On the occurrence of this event, our minor was entrusted to the
guardianship of Mr. John Needles, a gentleman, whose name alone, constitutes
the only article in his history, respecting which I possess any information.
Thus circumstanced, before precept and example had fully formed and established
his principles of conduct -- before observation and experience had furnished
him with knowledge, or reason had lighted up her lamp for the direction of his
steps, the situation of our young friend was critical and perilous. Suddenly
cast on the fathomless and turbulent ocean of life, with the syren-voice of
dissipation and pleasure, for ever melodiously vibrating in his ear, and no
venerable Mentor to conduct him, in safety, to the wished-for Utica of virtue,
dark and dubious, at best, were his prospects of future celebrity and
happiness! But no situation, however perilous and unfavourable, in appearance,
can justify our submission to a spirit of despondency. Fortune is ever
changeful, and may, in the ceaseless revolution of events, give birth to
something unexpectedly auspicious. Such was her conduct to our young
philosopher. Though she appeared to frown, malignantly, on his earlier years,
she favored him with her smiles, at a subsequent period. In his passage
through life, he acquired, by the mildness of his disposition, the attractive
gentleness and modesty of his manners, and the general rectitude of his
deportment, friends and patrons, whose conversation and advice, supplied, in a
great measure, the want of parental admonition and example.

In the year eighty-six, being, then, in the fourteenth year of his age, young
Cooper was removed, by his guardian, to Philadelphia, for the purpose of
completing his classical education. Here he had the good fortune to be placed
under the auspices of a chartered scholastic institution, the most ancient of
the kind in the state, yet not more venerable, from its age, than respectable,
from its good government and extensive utility. I allude to the Friends' public
grammar school, taught, at that time, by Mr. Robert Proud, a gentleman, whose
qualifications, as a teacher, can receive no additional respectability or
luster, by any thing that can result from the efforts of my pen. Mr. Proud is a
character, whose unaccommodating sincerity and attachment to truth, are well
known to prevent him alike from censuring unjustly the faults of his enemies,
or bestowing unmerited praises on the excellencies of his friends. Nor is he,
perhaps, second to any one, in his powers for the discovery of youthful merit.
To acquire the particular friendship of such a teacher, and to be spoken of by
him in terms of the highest applause, must be alike grateful to the feelings of
a pupil, and evidential of his being possessed of superior worth. Such a pledge
was it the good fortune of our colleague to receive and retain. Mr. Proud was
his inalterable friend when living -- He faithfully watched and recorded, in
his memory, his numerous virtues as they opened, and does not cease to dwell on
them now, as a just and grateful tribute to his memory when dead.

Dr. Cooper continued a pupil in the grammar school, in Philadelphia, till some
time in the autumn of the year ninety. During this period he was equally
distinguished for his studious habits, his decorum of behavior, and the ease
and rapidity of his advancement in the various branches of scholastic
literature. Besides the acquisition of a very liberal acquaintance with
geography, mathematics, history, and natural philosophy, he became so perfectly
master of the Latin, French, and Greek languages (particularly of the two
former) as to write and converse in them with elegance and ease. I believe I am
correct in asserting, that, in point of scholastic and philosophical
acquirements, he stood alone, the pride, the boast (I had almost said) the
idol, of the institution!

But the resources of his genius were, by no means, expended on the study of
the classics. Possessed of an imagination towering, active, fertile, and
creative -- an imagination bright and fervid as a sunbeam, and coextensive in
its range with the landmarks of creation, his mind was not to be imprisoned in
the narrow cloister of scholastic learning. With a native and strong
predilection for works of fancy, he faithfully devoted his hours of amusement
to the cultivation of an intimate acquaintance with the writings of the poets.
No puerile attachment to giddy and unmeaning sports -- no dislocated propensity
to the idle amusements and dissipation of the times -- no criminal pursuit of
forbidden pleasures, ever diverted his attention from its favorite channel.
Instead of dexterously spinning the well-poised top, or following, with his
eye, the polished marble rolling along the pavements of our streets, he chose
to pursue, with the illustrious Newton, the heavenly bodies revolving on high,
in their spacious orbits. Instead of consuming his hours in the lap of apathy
and idleness -- instead of participating, with a circle of dissolute
companions, in shameful and perilous scenes of immorality and vice, he chose to
soar, with his beloved Milton, through the haunts of angels, to the throne of
the Deity -- to descend, in imagination, to the infernal regions, and survey
the glooms, the torments, and the horrors of the place, in company with Homer,
Virgil, and Fenelon -- or to unravel the mazes of the nature and character of
man, with Horace, Juvenal, Shakespeare, and Pope. But his amusements did not
consist solely in traversing the superior regions of poetry; he would
oftentimes, in his more gay and sportive moments, descend to listen to the
shrill and piercing notes of the harp of Gray -- to enjoy the melody of the
tuneful Waller's lute -- to dwell enraptured on the voice of the muse of
Thomson -- or stray enchanted through the fairy regions of the descriptive
Spencer!

Such were the elegant and rational amusements, which occupied, during the
earlier part of his life, the leisure hours of him whose virtues we have met to
commemorate. But he did not remain satisfied with cultivating, and regaling his
taste for the poetical beauties contained in the writings of others. Such an
end was, by far, too grovelling for his literary ambition. Nor was that ambition
destitute of the aid of talents, fully adequate to its gratification. Born with
a genius almost equally competent to every species of literary exertion, he,
not unfrequently, indulged his imagination in the most chaste and elegant
effusions of poetry. Many of these productions, of our young bard and
philosopher, were published, under fictitious names, in the different prints of
the city, and were sought after, with avidity, by readers of taste. As a
farther evidence of his acquirements in literature, it is but justice to
observe, that several of these were clothed in pure, correct, and classical
Latin.

It will hereafter appear, that, at a subsequent period, when time had fully
evolved his muse's pinions, and farther experience had emboldened her flights,
he gave birth to several poems, which might have been owned, without a blush,
by the pen of a Dryden, a Pope, or a Darwin. Nor were his talents in writing,
confined to poetry alone; his prose compositions were no less remarkable for
exterior beauty and substantial merit. In corroboration of this fact, I had the
pleasure to receive, by request, from Dr. Rush, the following note, which I
here subjoin by special permission.

So high was the opinion entertained of Dr. Cooper's correct taste and judgment
in the English language, that one of the oldest of his preceptors in medicine,
Dr. Rush, submitted the last volume of his Medical Inquiries and Observations,
to his criticism, before he committed it to the press.


Their excellence consisted in variety of matter and richness of sentiment,
combined with perspicuity, elegance, and energy of expression. His talents for
descriptive narration were particularly bold, glowing, and happy. Here it was
that he appeared to tower above himself. Having command of a style highly
animated, but not extravagant; rich, but not exuberant; lofty, but not
bombastic; figurative, yet neither studied nor affected; and full, yet not
degenerating into superfluous verbosity -- he possessed, in a degree to which
few writers have pretensions, the art of giving to his subject the figure, the
coloring, I had almost said, the motions of life. -- Such were the effects of
studious habits, contracted at an early period of life, on the mental
accomplishments of him whose premature death we so justly deplore. While
others, of his age, were engaged in pursuit of evanescent pleasures, in
parties, at balls, at concerts, or at the theater, he, in his closet,
surrounded by the writings of poets, philosophers, and sages, and zealous in
the investigation of some favorite subject, was in the actual enjoyment of
that more rational and permanent pleasure, arising from the contemplation of
truth, and the cultivation of the several powers of the mind. They, like the
gaudy, sportive, and improvident tribes, that hover around the tempting, but
perishable sweets of a flower, remained contented with the enjoyment of the
present moment; while he, like that well-known insect, which nature would seem
to have created as a model of wisdom and industry, devoted his time to the
accumulation of a store for future enjoyment, which nothing but the hand of
death could exhaust!

As the period of Dr. Cooper's continuance at the grammar school of this place,
was that in which his mental powers began to be unfolded, like an intellectual
Eden, to the minds of his acquaintance, it may not be amiss, on the present
occasion, to attempt, at least, to make them pass in bright, but brief, review
before you.

Here would seem, indeed, to be the threshold of my toils! Here do I become
duly sensible of the weight of my subject! Here its difficulties thicken and
magnify to my view, like Alps rearing their crests over Alps, till even hope
becomes almost extinct, and enterprise disheartened at the arduous prospect. --
Where! Tell me, ye choice and favored spirits, whose faculties of utterance
move in nice and perfect accordance to your powers of conception, where shall I
find a mirror of expression, to furnish an adequate representation of such a
splendid assemblage of faculties, as that exhibited by the mind of our departed
friend! Could I, like the prophet of old, but have caught the skirt of his
mantle, as he ascended! Could I now invoke to my aid but one ray of that
genius, by which he was illuminated and inspired -- then, indeed, would I feel
some degree of confidence in myself -- then would I venture to indulge the
pleasing hope, of being followed, by your approbation, in my descent from this
place, to which I have been raised by your flattering suffrage!

The mind of Dr. Cooper, as far as relates to the history of its physical
powers, would appear to have involved, in its constitution, little less than an
absolute contradiction. Among its assemblage of brilliant and valuable
qualities, it embraced such as have been generally supposed to be hostile and
incompatible. While it possessed, in an eminent degree, the properties of the
world-descrying telescope, it was, by no means, a stranger to those of the
microscope. While it shone a Herschel, in its capacious range, and boundless
comprehension, it was, no less, a Leewenhoek, in its painful and accurate
examination of the minutiae of matter. Exquisite in its sensibility, and nice
in its perception, no physical object, however inconsiderable, could be
presented, nor any phenomenon occur, without giving rise to an appropriate
impression, or exciting a corresponding exercise of thought. Like the
well-poised needle, tremblingly alive to the attractions of the pole, his mind
appeared to possess a constitutional bent and affinity to truth. Nor was this
affinity under the government of quantity, so much as of quality. It was called
into action by truths the most minute, no less than by those of superior
magnitude.

It has been already observed that Dr. Cooper's imagination was so enterprizing
and powerful, as, occasionally, to accompany his muse in the loftiest flights.
It might be said, like the poet's eye, to range "from heaven to earth and from
earth to heaven," collecting every thing fair and valuable in its way. But it
was not left to its own wild, desultory excursions, like a tempest-driven
vessel, without a pilot and without a helm. It was ever reined in, and
governed, by a solid and luminous understanding, and corrected by the most
delicate and accurate taste.

Nor was his capacity for reasoning at all inferior to his other intellectual
powers. For ever tracing, with nice discernment, and uncommon facility, the
existing relations and connections between propositions or things, it seldom
failed to conduct him to fair and happy conclusions. In reasoning, what was to
others toilsome and fatiguing, appeared, with him, but pleasure and amusement.

His memory was a capacious and faithful repository of facts, opinions, and
principles. It was fed through the avenues of all his senses, for each sense
was rendered subservient to the information of his mind. So comprehensive was
it as to admit every thing interesting from whatever quarter, and so faithfully
tenacious, as seldom or never to lose a useful fact or truth, by which it had,
once, been duly impressed. In a word, his observation and industry had
collected, and his memory gave reception to, an inconceivable volume of
materials, to be arranged, systemized, and converted to their proper purposes,
by the other kindred powers of his mind.

Thus, superlatively eminent, in its expansion and vigor, and nicely balanced,
in all its powers, the mind of Dr. Cooper was to be respected as the
dewlling place of genius. This divine endowment does not appear to consist, as
has been suspected by some, in an additional or supernumerary faculty of the
mind, to be denominated, a sense of truth, and representing, in miniature, the
immediate intuition of the Deity. Such velocity is there, however, in the
movements of genius -- with such rapidity and ease does it bound from truth to
truth, and from principle to principle, most perfectly comprehending each, yet
dwelling long on none, that the existence of such an opinion is, by no means,
extraordinary. This first gift of heaven would seem to be the result of an
exquisite degree of mental sensibility, a talent for extensive, rapid, and
accurate observation; a capacious and retentive memory; a lively, strong, and
enterprizing imagination; a clear and profound understanding; and vigorous and
active powers of reason, all nicely balanced, and reciprocally aiding each
other in the discovery of truth.

By the balance of the mental powers, I mean, that they should all be equal in
point of strength and perfection, the one not characterized by excess, nor the
others by deficiency. Like the different parts of a well-finished edifice, they
should support, strengthen, and ornament each other. Thus, the man, whose mind
is nothing but an entire blaze of imagination, can, by no means, be said to be
in possession of genius* Nor can he, whose imagination is weak, or
phlegmatically dull, though his other powers be of the most exalted grade. The
same thing must be said of him, whatever be the perfection of his imagination,
his memory, and his understanding, who is incapable of rapidly advancing to
general truths, by the aid of simple and intermediate propositions. The man of
real genius possesses a mind that can, at once, feel, perceive, observe,
retain, distinguish, soar, and combine, and that can perform all these
functions, in a manner the most perfect -- Though such a mind must be esteemed
a phoenix, no less in rarity than in beauty and excellence; yet such was the
mind of our departed colleague!

Beneath the auspices, and amid the numerous literaty advantages of
Philadelphia, the intellect of our young friend disclosed its resources, with a
rapidity, and acquired, finally, a degree of expansion, strength, and activity,
to which, under circumstances, less favorable, it could never have attained.
Had it been suffered to remain sequestered, in a distant and obscure part of
the country, where the orb of science sheds, at best, but a faint and sickly
gleam, its powers might have lain for ever dormant and undiscovered by the
world, for want of adequate causes to rouse them into action. Thus lies the
diamond embedded in the rock, its value unknown, and its luster unadmired, till
the skilful hand of the lapidary rescues it from its imprisonment, and ushers
it to the world for ornament and for use. Thus lies the marble, a crude and
shapeless mass, till, touched by the magic chissel of the statuary, it springs
erect, with the beauty and elegance of the human form. And, thus, beneath the
raging of the wintry elements, lies, cold and torpid, the vegetable embryo,
till, awakened into life by the voice of spring, it expands its tender leaves
and flowers, a harbinger and pledge of its impending fertility!

In the autumn of the year ninety, young Cooper left the grammar school in this
city, by the direction of his guardian, and returned to Maryland, with a view
to engage in the study of a profession. His loss was much and sincerely
regretted, by a very respectable acquaintance, who followed him, to his retreat
in the country, with the most cordial expressions of friendship and affection.
Nor was this an occurrence at all unexpected. For such was his general
character and deportment, that to know, and admire him, were events inseparably
and necessarily connected.

Sometime in the year ninety-one, he entered on his medical studies, in his
native state, under the direction of Dr. Martin, a gentleman whose esteem and
confidence he very soon acquired, and of whom I have always heard him speak in
terms the most respectful. In ninety-two he returned to Philadelphia, on an
invitation from the managers of the Pennsylvania hospital, and, on the 28th of
August, in the same year, entered as an apprentice to that celebrated, and
benevolent institution -- an institution, which reflects equal honor on its
original founders, and on those, who, at the present day, conduct it with such
consummate wisdom and fidelity!

Here our young friend found himself in a situation admirably calculated to
exercise, and rear to full maturity, every bright and amiable quality of his
mind. The ancient and venerable mansion, where he resided, enclosed by a massy
wall, and overshadowed by lofty trees, prepared, in appearance, to bid defiance
to the shock of ages, impressed his mind with sensations of solemnity,
favorable to the contemplation and reception of the truths of nature. Nor were
the best sources wanting for the supply of such truths. Furnished with a large
and choice collection of books, on every branch of physical science, immersed
in walks well suited for the purposes of observation and reflection, and
surrounded by numerous objects of distress, claiming equally his attention and
skill as a physician, and philosopher, and his sympathy and soothing
tenderness, as a man; he found ample scope for the exercise of all his
intellect and benevolence. Nor did he suffer either the powers of his head, or
the virtues of his heart, to contract the cankering rust of indolence. Ever
busied in pursuits of science, of literature, or of humanity, his life was a
perpetual circle of action. Except during his hours of repose, which were but
few, and when engaged in familiar intercourse with his friends, his mind was
but seldom indulged in the luxury of relaxation. To him the amusements of the
city presented no attractions. Supremely intent on acquiring knowledge, and on
doing good, he found no time to bestow on such useless engagements. His
business way study, his pleasure resulted from the alleviation of human misery,
and his amusement consisted in the cultivation of polite literature; but, more
particularly, in frequenting the haunts of the muses. It may not, perhaps, be
deemed inadmissible to observe, that, during the whole time of his
apprenticeship to the Pennsylvania hospital, he attended the theater but twice,
both times in complaisance to my importunity. His first visit was, to be
present at the performance of Shakespeare's celebrated tragedy of Othello; and
his second, at that of the Revenge, by Dr. Young. Though struck by the
brilliancy and elegance of the scenery of the stage, and delighted with the
sublimity of sentiment, and energy of expression, which characterize those two
monuments of genius, his enjoyment was, notwithstanding, mingled with much
regret, that talents, which might be employed for the important purpose of
ameliorating the condition of man, should be suffered to evaporate in
theatrical declamation!

Of the attention and ability, with which he discharged his numerous and
arduous offices, as an apprentice to the hospital, the united applause of the
managers and physicians of that benevolent institution, constitute the most
respectable degree of testimony. Never were the duties of that appointment
performed with greater tenderness, fidelity, and skill, than when it was filled
by our deceased colleague. But this fact does not, for its authenticity, rest,
exclusively, on the evidence with which we are furnished by the managers and
physicians: it is still farther substantiated, by the spontaneous reports, and
heartfelt effusions, of many individuals, who, during his apprenticeship,
found an assylum from death, within the walls of the hospital. Long will these
characters, with gratitude, remember, and long will they continue to declare to
the world, with what skill and solicitude he combated their diseases; and, with
what a friendly and unwearied hand, he held to their view the all-supporting
mirror of hope. Nor will this be the amount of their tributary evidence --
Often will they forego the general and fashionable topics of conversation, to
speak of the times, when, as he passed along the wards, whose very breezes were
the vehicle of sighs, and whose walls had been long the melancholy mansion of
the echo of distress -- oftentimes, I say, will they delight to tell, how,
under such circumstances, the benignity of his address, and the sympathy of his
manners, suspended the impression of their ruthless maladies, and lulled, for a
while, their agonies to rest! Thus, amid the wild disorder of a troubled ocean,
does oil, diffused over the surface of the water, afford a temporary respite to
the convulsions of the deep!

But those within the walls, where he resided, were not the only objects who
experienced his beneficence and humanity. The out-patients of the hospital
were, at that time, numerous, and widely dispersed through the city and
liberties. I will venture to affirm, without any wish to throw a shade over the
merits of his predecessors, that his exertions, for alleviating the sufferings
of these indigent applicants, were unprecedented in the annals of the
institution which he served. Of this description of patients he visited upwards
of five hundred, during the two last years of his apprenticeship. Nor did he
attend them with that cold indifference, which, too generally, characterizes
the actions of man, when directed to objects of wretchedness and charity.
Painfully sensible to their sufferings and wants, he was a stranger to that
counterfeit humanity, which evaporates in the empty parade and professions of
sympathy. Leaving to others the suspicious practice of announcing, in words,
their benevolent and charitable dispositions, he spoke, by his actions, the
reality of his feelings. When called on to administer relief in the line of his
profession, his exertions were paramount to every difficulty. Neither the
inclemency of the weather, nor the untimeliness of the hour, could operate as
barriers to the accomplishment of his purposes. The stream of humanity, issuing
from the copious reservoir of his heart, was neither to be congealed by the
wintry blast, nor evaporated to dryness by the summer blaze! Fed by a tributary
streamlet from every fiber in his system, it could be exhausted, only, with the
termination of his life! There stands scarcely a hovel of indigence in the
neighborhood of the hospital (and the same thing may be said of many at a
distance) that does not exhibit some memorial of his skill, as a physician, and
of his humanity, as a man. Such was the labor and assiduity with which he
attended these objects of penury and misfortune, that the temporary loss of his
own health was not unfrequently the painful consequence. In his toilsome
rounds, to administer to these paupers gratuitous relief, he was lighted on his
way by the twinkling fires of the night, perhaps, not much less freqently than
by the orb of day. But for this, his reward was high and enviable: it was
nothing less than a conscious enjoyment of the heaven-born "luxury of doing
good!" -- a reward, denied to all except to minds of true benevolence! Allow me
to add, a reward, for the enjoyment of which, no mind was more perfectly
calculated -- no mind possessed a more exquisite relish, than that of our
friend, whom we this day commemorate!

So wise and economical was Dr. Cooper's division and appropriation of time,
that, notwithstanding the wide and diversified scene of his active engagements,
he still found leisure for cultivating the field of general science. To the
divisions of chemistry, and natural history (including the subordinate
compartment of botany) he exhibited a more decided and elective attachment. In
these delightful and important branches of science, his accumulation of
knowledge was already extensive and respectable. Had he lived to the customary
period of human life, there is little doubt, but that he would have acquired a
place and a name among the most distinguished chemists and naturalists of the
age.

Nor did either his taste for polite literature, or his propensity to frequent
the haunts of the muses, forsake him while immersed in the cares and duties of
the hospital. It was here his style in prose received its maturity and its
polish, and here was the birthplace of some of his finest poetic effusions. In
confirmation of this last assertion, I beg leave to lay before you Dr. Cooper's
bold and picturesque description of the several varieties of madness, contained
originally in a letter to myself, in the autumn of ninety-three, when we were
both medical students, and the component ideas of which were derived from
observation on the maniacs, at that time confined within the walls of the
hospital.

Here moody madness, of wild passions born,
Muses reclined, in ghastly state forlorn;
Or weeps, or laughs, or desultory sings,
Totters along, and speaks unmeaning things;
Or with fierce eye, lank jaw, and horrent brow,
Loud raving, clanks his iron chains below!
The accuracy of many of your judgments, with regard to the merit, and the
sensibility and correctness of your tastes, for the beauties of poetry,
supersede the necessity of any comment on the foregoing lines. From this time,
let Dr. Cooper, as far as relates to the poetic description of madness, be
ranked with Lee, Penrose, and the immortal Shakespeare!

It is a maxim, equally ancient and well established, that the acquaintances we
form, but, more particularly, the intimacies we contract, reflect, like
mirrors, our characters to the world. It may not, therefore, be amiss to
observe, that our deceased friend was so fortunate, in life, as to be favored
with the closest intimacy and friendship by several distinguished characters,
whose talents, virtues, and accomplishments cover his memory with much
reflected honor. From the respectable catalogue of these, I beg leave to
select, in particular, the names of Dr. Rush, Dr. Barton, and Mr. Samuel
Coats. The two former of these were connected with our colleague, principally,
by the medium of literature and science: they had been his teachers in
medicine, and some of its collateral branches, and found him possessed of
virtues and qualities, which conciliated their affection, and commanded their
esteem. But the latter was his friend and patron on all occasions: sagacious in
the discovery, firm in the protection, and zealous in the advancement of
youthful merit, he saw Dr. Cooper, and became deeply interested in the issue of
his fortune!

I feel that I have already engrossed too much of your time, and trespassed, I
am afraid, unwelcomely on your patience. But I flatter myself the apology,
already offered, will cover the fault I have involuntarily committed -- a
fault, indebted, for its origin, to an excessive attachment to the memory of my
friend! On taking a general survey of the character of our departed
fellow-member, quality has crowded on my view after quality, and virtue after
virtue, and each one too fair and tempting to be passed unnoticed. Nor have I
yet completed the illustrious catalogue. Though some small tribute has been
paid, yet still am I deeply in arrears to his merit. I have briefly spoken of
the physical talents he possessed, and have slightly glanced at some of the
amiable qualities of his heart. But respecting his moral virtues, I have,
hitherto, been silent. To suffer these to remain still in the back ground,
unnoticed, and unappraised, would render my biographic sketch extremely
imperfect and exceptionable, and would, indeed, be little less than treason to
the memory of our friend!

Of the moral virtues of Dr. Cooper I can say, in general, that their connected
luster constituted the ursa major, the brightest constellation in the
hemisphere of his character. He possessed none of those wild irregularities,
none of those immoral habits, none of those vicious propensities, which are too
often the lamentable concomitants of genius. Time would fail me were I to
attempt a detailed and individual description of this fair and inestimable
assemblage of virtues. I can only add, that they were such, as seemed
calculated to form a perfect equilibrium and correspondence between the moral
and physical parts of his character. We^^ ^^s powers of intellect originally
strong? his moral virtues were, in like manner, unsullied -- Were the former
improved by high cultivation? the latter were confirmed by experience and habit.

But in that galaxy, formed by the combined radiance of the moral qualities of
Dr. Cooper, there were two which shone with distinguished luster. I mean his
love of justice, and his attachment to the indefeasible rights of man. Such was
the power of these two virtues, that it led him to a voluntary sacrifice of
more than half his fortune, by executing manumissions to all his slaves. Nor
was this action performed with that pausing hesitation, that calculating
reluctance, characteristic of a base and mercenary disposition: It was
spontaneous and prompt, as if proceeding from a mind urged on by a pure and
irresistible sense of right. Lest accident, or death, might intercept the
accomplishment of his upright and benevolent purposes, Dr. Cooper executed
manumissions to his negroes, on the morning of the day in which he had emerged
from the character of a minor. Determined that the sun should never behold him
voluntarily aiding in the unprincipled business of African slavery, before that
luminary had gilded the mountains with his earliest beams, the pen was in his
hand, to subscribe to the deed, that now gilds his memory with such a blaze of
honor. But his humanity, on this occasion, was in no degree inferior to his
love of justice, which restored to freedom this injured people. For those of
his slaves who were incapable of self-government and support, he made such
provisions, as were sufficient to preserve them from poverty and want.

As far as relates to the enjoyment of freedom, he acknowledged no distinction
between the sable African, in his humble hut, and the lordly monarch on his
ermined throne. So liberal and extensive were his sentiments and schemes of
benevolence, that, like the all-pervading light of heaven, they embraced the
whole circle of animated nature. The extent of the charity, benevolence, and
also of the gratitude of Dr. Cooper, is evidenced by the tenor of his last will
and testament, subjoined as an appendix to this publication. This instrument
is, without any comment, respectfully submitted to the attention of the reader.
I would beg leave, however, to observe, that it speaks the praises of the
testator, in a higher strain of eulogium, than even the pen of a Burke or a
Grattan could bestow?
In this respect, he even surpassed the compliment paid to the late earl of
Chatham, by his eloquent friend and eulogist, the celebrated Grattan. In
sketching the outlines of the character of this unrivalled statesman and
orator, the Irish Demosthenes has the following bold and comprehensive
expression. "His object was England, his ambition was fame." With truth may I
say of our departed friend, that his object was more than England, it was the
peopled world; and that his ambition was more than fame, it was the happiness
of the whole human race!

But I have not yet completed my analysis of his mind, nor summed up, in full,
my account of his merit. Over the preceding assemblage of talents and of
virtues, was thrown a shade of retiring modesty, which, by softening and even,
in appearance, attempting to conceal their luster, rendered them doubly
impressive and interesting. Thus, the gauzy veil, floating before the
countenances of the fair, heightens their beauty, and adds superior power to
their charms. And, thus, the shadowy curtains of the night, spread along the
vault of heaven, awaken into life the luster and beauty of its slumbering fires!

With respect to the theological principles of Dr. Cooper, I shall say nothing,
except that he was an enthusiastic admirer of the pure and sublime morality of
the christian religion, and regulated, by its precepts, the tenor of his
conduct. So superlative was his attachment to a life of peace, that he was
never known to interfere in a controversy, either of a religious or of a
political nature. He was a quaker, by principle and adoption, though not by
birth or early education. He was led to attach himself to this denomination of
christians, in consequence of discovering, that their sentiments and collective
disposition were, in most respects, in unison with his own. He admired the
modest simplicity of their manners, the morality and uprightness of their
general conduct, and their love of an orderly and peaceful life, and,
therefore, resolved to become one of their society.

In May, ninety seven, our colleague completed his studies, and was admitted to
the degree of doctor of medicine, in the university of Pennsylvania. On this
occasion, he acquitted himself, in all respects, with distinguished reputation.
But his celebrity, as a graduate, arose, more particularly, from the merit of
his inaugural dissertation. This performance treated of the history and
medicinal virtues of the Datura Strammonium, an indigenous and very powerful
vegetable of our country. It is not excessive eulogy to say, that, as a piece
of experimental investigation, it is not, perhaps, inferior to any
dissertation, of the kind, that has ever appeared, either in this, or in any
other country. Was America favored with many such pupils, to adorn, by
graduation, her rising seminaries, we would soon become acquainted with the
medicinal virtues and powers of all her indigenous vegetables, many of which
now bloom and wither in her fields and forests, neglected through inattention,
and, through ignorance, unknown!

In the autumn of ninety-seven, Dr. Cooper left the Pennsylvania hospital (his
term of apprenticeship having now expired) and settled, as a practitioner of
medicine, in the city of Philadelphia. He had, previously to this, received
several pressing, and very flattering, invitations to settle in different and
respectable parts of the country; but he rejected them all, declaring, that he
had rather live on bread and water, in Philadelphia, in the midst of literary
societies Dr. Cooper was, already, an active, faithful, and distinguished
member of various literary institutions in Philadelphia. Among these may be
mentioned, in particular, the medical society, the chemical society, and the
academy of medicine.
and friends, than roll in affluence in the country, remote from such
opportunities for the cultivation of his mind.

Though surrounded by physicians of talents, learning, long establishments, and
powerful family connections, yet still was he rising, with rapidity, in
professional reputation. Already was he employed by many wealthy and
respectable families: already was he, occasionally, called into consultation
with the old and established practitioners of the city, who had, even, been his
fathers and teachers in medicine. But his principal business, and, with truth,
may I add, his principal pleasure, as a physician, arose from his humane and
gratuitous attentions to the poor. His habits of practical benevolence and
charity he did not leave behind him, within the walls of the hospital. He bore
them with him to the heart of the city, even farther brightened and confirmed
by a change of situation. Thus the fruit tree, ingrafted on a foreign stock, or
transplanted into a different soil, regales the senses by a greater luxuriance
of flowers and fruit! A knowledge of this, often drew to his door objects of
poverty, wretchedness, and disease. Nor did he ever give them cause to go
murmuring or disconsolate away. By his skill, as a physician, he administered
relief to their maladies, and, by the cheerfulness of his conversation, the
mildness of his manners, and the indescribable tenderness of his attention, as
a man, he often succeeded in dissipating the gloom that overshadowed their
minds.

Thus passed, till the month of August, ninety-eight, the hours of our beloved
colleague, not consumed in a round of dissipation, not immersed in apathetic
indolence, nor yet devoted to the indulgence of philosophic ease -- but divided
between the real duties of his profession, the active pursuits of science, and
the various offices of charity, arising out of his situation. At this period an
event occurred, which the genius of Philadelphia has already enrolled in the
darkest page of her catalogue of misfortunes, and the effects of which, she
will long -- very long, continue, with justice, to deplore. Nor did, even, the
genius of Columbia remain insensible to the sorrows of his daughter. The
general concerns of the nation, for a while, neglected, he appeared to mingle
his tears with hers, over such an unprecedented instance of calamity. But the
distresses of our city were not confined to the bosoms of its own immediate
inhabitants: Like the ripple, spreading around over the surface of the lake,
they were communicated along the inexplicable web of human feeling, till, by
breasts of sympathy, they were finally realized, even in the most distant
extremes of our country.

To you it is unnecessary for me to mention the cause of this unparalleled
extent and complexity of distress. It is already imprinted on your memories, in
characters, which, in point of permanency, beggar any impressions that can
possibly result from my feeble accents. It is unnecessary for me to inform you,
that, at this period, we were a third time visited by that first of physical
evils, which, by way of pre-eminence in horror and fatality, our divines have
emphatically denominated "the destroying angel," I mean the vengeful spirit of
pestilence! This insatiate demon (like the poet's Python, descended from the
fermenting filth, deposited by the waters of Deucalion's flood) -- this demon,
I say, sprung from the cooperating sources of filth, in our city, our suburbs,
and along our wharves, invaded our habitations in all his horrors. Nor did he
come alone: Terror was commissioned the leader of his van, while agony, death,
and desolation were marshalled in the rear. Thus accompanied, and thus arrayed,
the malignant spirit swept, with his inexorable myrmidons, along our streets,
diffusing around his envenomed breath. At once were our prospects of pleasure
and security blasted; at once was the aspect of our city metamorphosed. No
longer the crowded emporium of our country -- no longer the haunt of gaiety and
ease, Philadelphia was converted into a scene of consternation and tumult. From
every tongue dropped expressions of terror -- on every face sat the gloom of
dejection, mingled with the wildness of deep apprehension. Flying from the
city, as if its foundations were convulsed by the rockings of an earthquake, or
its buildings threatened to be whelmed in a deluge of lava, the eyes and
footsteps of all were directed in quest of an assylum, in the depth of the
country! Still, however, with demoniac rage! -- still with more than
giant-strides, went forward the dreadful work of destruction! -- But I forbear
from a farther description of the tragical scene -- The attempt, at best, must
prove abortive, and would, no doubt, in the minds of some, by whose presence I
am honored, tend to a renovation of feelings, which I had much rather be
instrumental in soothing into a state of tranquillity, or even of profound and
everlasting sleep!

Amid this embattled chaos of disorder and confusion, our departed colleague
was by no means, an idle, or an indifferent spectator. He early discovered, and
most devoutly deprecated, the impending cloud of calamity, nor saw, without
solicitude, the bursting of the tempest. But his fears and anxieties respected
not his own personal health and safety. They sprang from a much more generous
source, the health and safety of his friends and fellow-citizens. Calm,
intrepid, and resigned, as far as respected himself, he resolved, from the
first, to ride out the storm, or be wrecked, a faithful and spontaneous matryr
to the duties of his profession. So powerful was this sense of duty, and so
unconquerable this sentiment of heroism, that neither the entreaties of his
friends, nor the most bold and picturesque representation of the danger that
awaited him, could have the smallest effect in diverting him from his purpose.
With a mind that delighted in contending with difficulties -- a mind,
possessing an elective attraction to objects of greatness, he determined, if
possible, to take his stand, amid the most formidable concentration of disease!

While influenced by this temper and disposition of mind, Dr. Cooper was
called, in conjunction with his illustrious friend and colleague, Dr. Physic,
to take the medical charge of the city hospital. The end and object of this
institution it is unnecessary for me to mention. It is known to you all, to
have been intended, as a receptacle for pestilential subjects, from all parts
of the city and liberties. Amid the ravages of such a desolating calamity, the
walls of the hospital were soon found to be too contracted, to answer the
benevolent purposes of its establishment. So unexpectedly rapid and profuse was
the influx of the sick, that it became necessary to pitch tents, and erect
temporary buildings for their accommodation.

Here was a scene, where, even, the mind of Dr. Cooper might find ample room
for the exercise of all its powers, and the exhibition of all its virtues. Here
it might exhaust the sources of its strength and ingenuity, here find scope for
its unwearied activity, here expend the last drop of its benevolence and
humanity! -- For the ability and address of the physician, here existed a
malignant and formidable epitome of all febrile diseases; for the engagement of
the man of active industry, here were duties, numerous, diversified, and
pressing, in the extreme; and to excite the sympathetic attention of the man of
humanity and benevolence, here was a consummation of wretchedness and misery!

In each branch of this threefold character, Dr. Cooper was qualified to acquit
himself with equal eminence. But, on the present important and melancholy
occasion, the extent of his abilities was the only measure of the services he
rendered. It is not sufficient to say, that his life, while engaged in the city
hospital, was a circle of action, it was an uninterrupted series of laborious
exertion. Ever awake to the whisperings of duty -- ever painfully sensible to
the sufferings of his patients, he acted as the physician, the nurse, and the
friend, to those whom disease had subjected to his care. But his attention to
himself bore an inverse ratio to his attention to others. Absorbed in his views
of public good, his own individual safety was banished from his mind. In his
excessive zeal for the interest of the institution which he served, he even
neglected or resisted the calls of his system for refreshment and repose. Often
has he relinquished his table for the more delicious banquet of contributing to
the relief and safety of the agonized objects by which he was surrounded --
Often has the noon of night looked down, with approbation, on his round,
through the crowded wards, and the following day-dawn descried him remote from
his pillow!

In the intervals of his exertion as a physician, nurse, and friend, to the
sick, he devoted his time to dissections, and various physical experiments,
calculated to throw light on the seat, the cause, the nature, and the treatment
of pestilential diseases. By this was his situation rendered doubly perilous.
But, in a mind like his, a sense of duty, cooperating with a zeal for the
promotion of science, is paramount to every selfish consideration. Enterprizing
and intrepid as the celebrated but unfortunate Rosier, he appears, like him, to
have fallen a victim to a daring experiment. Dr. Physic, with much apparent
reason, attributes the origin of Dr. Cooper's disease, to his having visited
the city, in the latter part of August, during the height of our pestilential
constitution of atmosphere, with a view to subject the air of our streets,
particularly, of that part of Water-street, from which, the disease appeared to
spread, as from a focus, to a series of eudiometrical experiments.


Beneath the pressure of such powerful and uninterrupted bodily and
intellectual exertion, tired nature could not possibly do otherwise than
languish. For, to excessive action, of whatever kind, debility never fails to
succeed, in conformity to an established principle in the nature of man. Under
such a combination of circumstances, the seeds of pestilence, which Dr. Cooper
appears to have inhaled from the atmosphere of Philadelphia, and which had
lain, for some time, dormant in his system, could not avoid being awakened into
life and action. Accordingly, this melancholy occurrence took place on the 26th
of August, the same month in which he received his appointment to the hospital.

Nor was his disease ushered in with symtoms of ordinary magnitude. Such was
their unusual power and malignity, that each one seemed separately commissioned
as the messenger of destruction. The demon of pestilence, as if exasperated at
having been so often disarmed in a combat with the skill and address of this
young physician, appears, on this occasion, to have concentrated all his
strength and ferocity, determined, at once, on decisive revenge. Over the issue
of his dark and fatal purpose, let the friends of science and humanity weep!

So fierce and violent was the commencement of Dr. Cooper's disease, that it
wrecked, like a tempest, every fiber of his system. At its very onset, the
powers of life were prostrated almost to extinction. For several hours they
remained, to a great degree, torpid and inactive, as if in suspense whether or
not to retreat for ever from the field of a conflict, so unequal in point of
strength, and so certain in its termination. At length, however, they began to
revive from the violence of the shock, to which they had been subjected -- At
length they attempted to return to the charge, and offer resistance to the
invading enemy! -- But the resistance was feeble, irregular, and ineffectual --
It resembled the convulsive and vacillating resistance of a soldier, sinking
beneath a wound from a victorious adversary. -- But the unexpected trespass I
have already committed on your patience, forbids me to be minute on this part
of my subject.

I call not your attention to the medical exertions that were made for the
preservation of the life of our departed colleague. Under this head, it is
sufficient to say, that he was entrusted to the care of a Physic, and a Rush --
men, whose minds are an abstract of the science of medicine, while their hearts
are consecrated as the dwelling of humanity and benevolence!

-- -- "Si pergama dextra
"Defendi possent, etiam hac defensa fuissent."
If skill could vanquish -- mortal powers could save!
Such skill, such powers, had snatched him from the grave!
Nor will I attempt to awaken your sympathy, nor excite your admiration, by
minutely pourtraying to you his conduct, during the course of his illness.
Though he realized his sufferings and approaching dissolution, not with the
indifference of an insulated misanthrope -- not with the immovable apathy of a
stoic -- but with the genuine feelings and solicitude of a man; yet he bore the
one, with the fortitude of a philosopher, and submitted to the other, with the
resignation of a christian. On the third of September, ninety-eight, the fatal
and looked-for catastrophe occurred. On this day, he yielded to his disease,
having nearly completed the twenty-seventh year of his age.

The place of his interment is not far distant -- In yonder The Friends'
burying-ground, at the south-east corner of Fourth and Arch streets.
neighboring and capacious reservoir of the exuviae of the dead, lie deposited
his mouldering relics. His body was conducted thither by four of his particular
friends, Mr. Samuel Coats, Dr. Thomas Horsefield, Mr. George Lee, and Mr.
Francis Higgins. It is but justice to observe, that these same gentlemen
visited him, frequently, at the city-hospital, during his last illness.
whom, not even the dangers and horrors of pestilence could deter from
attending his funeral, and bathing, with their tears, his hallowed grave! May
the dews of heaven weep tenderly over him! -- May they decorate his turf with
their brightest pearls! -- And may the sympathising breezes, as they pass
along, sigh out their sorrows for his untimely fall!

To the melancholy circumstances attending the close of the life of Dr. Cooper,
I beg leave to apply a quotation from an epistolary poem, I had the pleasure to
receive from him, in the autumn of ninety-three, in which, with a boldness and
pathos peculiar to himself, he describes and laments the death of an intimate
friend, who fell a sacrifice to the pestilence of that period.

The young disease, waked by some demon's rage,
Asserts its sway, o'erpowers his vigorous age,
Along his system steals in tremors fleet,
Shakes his lax arms, and chills his torpid feet,
Over his red cheek, and redder eye ball glows,
Burns in his bosom, rends his aching brows,
Goads and inflames his stomach's velvet sides,
In torturing trains through every fiber glides,
Or, with delirium, fierce, assails, enshrined
In the bright brain, the shadowy tribes of mine --
Now, issuing from pale lips, dark currents flow,
Or, downward, seek the long canal below,
And bile, in novel ducts meandering, dies
His lifeless limbs, and paints his beamless eyes --
Weak throbs his heart, and faint the living fire,
And failing lungs unaltered air respire,
Over all his senses shades eternal spread,
And the young bard lies numbered with the dead!
Such were the talents, and such the virtues -- such was the life, and such the
death, of our friend and colleague, whose worth we have, this day, assembled to
commemorate. Shall the splendid close of the eighteenth century be obscured by
a ridiculous, and even criminal, prostitution of eulogium? -- Shall the name of
the lordling, whose only title to celebrity rests on the pride of ancestry, or
the pomp of wealth, be preserved and emblazoned in the rolls of heraldry? --
Shall the talents of the statesman, whose military arrangements have exhausted
the blood, and whose projects of finance have beggared the coffers, of his
country, be circulated as a theme of encomium among the nations of the world?
-- Shall the fame of the conqueror, whose life has been little else than a
constant series of rapine and massacre, be embalmed by the reiterated eulogia
of ages? -- Shall such occurrences as these exist, and not one grateful
monument be offered, in commemoration of the real friend and benefactor of man?
-- Shall such occurrences as these exist, and not one effort be made, to
preserve, from the gulf of oblivion, the memory of an enlightened and a
benevolent Cooper, whose time was devoted to science, and to virtue, and whose
life was finally sacrificed, an offering on the altar of humanity? I trust -- I
am confident, this will not be the case -- When the present assembly shall have
been, long since, numbered with their forefathers -- when the lapse of years
shall have, long since, obliterated the remembrance of this day's feeble
attempt to do homage to the merit of our departed colleague, still shall his
name be revered by the inhabitants of Philadelphia -- still shall he be spoken
of, with admiration and gratitude, as one who fearlessly volunteered his
services, and fell at his post on the forlorn hope of humanity -- as one, whose
love of duty was triumphantly paramount to his love of life!

Hail! hapless youth! if fame my voice could give,
From age to age thy memory should live!
Long as, on high, the eternal mountains soar,
Long as the surges lash the shelving shore!
Long as, with gentle breath, the breezes sigh,
Or cloud-wreath'd tempests howl along the sky!
Long as the sun emits his golden light,
Or pearly stars bedeck the throne of night!
Long as over systems nature's God commands,
And bright creation's heaven-born order stands!
APPENDIX.
LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF DR. SAMUEL COOPER.
I, SAMUEL COOPER, late of Maryland, but now of Philadelphia, physician, do
make my last will and testament, in manner and form following, viz.

I will, that my debts be discharged, and my funeral expenses paid by my
executors.

Having always abhorred slavery, in every shape, I have freed all my negroes,
by executing, as I apprehend, proper manumissions; but if any thing is
informally done, or any thing is wanting to complete their emancipation, I
request my executors to do it, and to liberate the girls at eighteen, and the
boys at twenty-one years of age, if any of them survive me, and to charge the
expense to my estate; and I allow my executors, if they see occasion, to pay
any charge that may be found necessary by them, to procure suitable places for
the young children, and to secure to them the opportunity of obtaining a little
school learning.

Item. -- I will, that my executors collect my outstanding debts, in
particular, a legacy of one hundred and fifty pounds, with its interest, which
was left me by my grandfather, Thomas Winchester, deceased.

Item. -- I will, that my executors, hereafter named, shall sell, at any time
they may think best, at public or private sale, for cash or on credit, at their
own discretion, my two plantations or tracts of land, in Talbot county, in the
state of Maryland, with all their improvements, and make good and sufficient
titles for the said lands and improvements, to the purchaser or purchasers, in
fee simple; and all the moneys arising therefrom (after payment of my debts,
and providing, if need be, for my young negroes, as above mentioned) I give,
with all the securities they may take for the said lands, to the Contributors
to the Pennsylvania Hospital. But as it may happen, that I may sell those lands
myself, which I have some thoughts of doing, it is my will, in that case, that
the said contributors shall have and possess all the moneys and securities I
take for both or either of those places, in the same manner as if my executors
were to sell them, under the preceding directions.

Having served my apprenticeship in the Pennsylvania hospital, I know it to be
a most valuable and useful institution, not only as the best asylum in America,
for lunatics and the sick poor, but also the best school of instruction for a
medical pupil. With these sentiments, I esteem it a duty I owe to the
community, to devote my earthly substance to encourage and promote it, in
preference to any temporal consideration; I do, therefore, give to the
contributors to the said hospital and to their successors for ever, as well my
said two plantations, as all the moneys that may arise from the sale thereof,
by me, or by my executors, and all my other estate, both real and personal,
whatsoever, to and for the following uses, viz.

I request them to buy a neat, substantial coachee, or light wagon, that will
conveniently hold a driver and six persons, with its furniture complete, to
procure which I allow them to pay a sum not to exceed six hundred dollars.

Item. -- I request them to buy two good, sound, and able-bodied horses,
neither of which to be more than eight years old, in the opinion of good
judges; to purchase which, I allow them to expend a sum not exceeding five
hundred dollars.

Item. -- I allow them to retain, of my estate, any sum they may think
sufficient to pay a coachman two years' wages.

Item. -- I recommend that the carriage or horses may never be lent from the
house, nor suffered to be out all night, unless the carriage is sent to be
mended, or the horses to pasture; that it be used, only, for the patients and
their needful attendants, or to bring to, or take from, the hospital, the
managers, treasurer, o^ physicians, when employed in the service of (...)
house; and it is further my desire, that the (...) may never be driven, on any
pretense, more than (...) miles in one day. And as to the residue (...) ^^ots,
funeral expenses, and provision for my (...) negroes, which are to be paid and
made before the hospital contributors receive any part of my estate) my will
is, that it may be added to, and become a part of, the capital stock, for the
general use of the house, and I trust it will be enough to purchase and
support, at all times, a carriage for the use of the patients, if the managers
shall approve thereof.

Lastly, I nominate and appoint my friends, Samuel Coats, Thomas Morris,
Mordecai Lewis, and Elliston Perot, the executors of this my last will and
testament, hereby revoking and making null and void, every other will by me
heretofore made.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto affixed my seal and subscribed my name,
this fifteenth day of August, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven.
SAMUEL COOPER. (L. S.) Signed, sealed, etc. etc.

THE END.

