SEMI-ANNUAL ORATION, ON THE ORIGIN OF PESTILENTIAL DISEASES, DELIVERED BEFORE
THE ACADEMY OF MEDICINE OF PHILADELPHIA, On the 17th day of December, 1798.

By CHARLES CALDWELL, A. M. M. D. Senior Vice President of the Academy.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL F. BRADFORD, No. 8, South Front
Street. 1799.

EXTRACT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE ACADEMY OF MEDICINE.
December 17th, 1798.
RESOLVED, that the thanks of the Academy be presented to Dr. CHARLES CALDWELL,
for his learned, elegant, and ingenious discourse, upon the origin of
pestilential diseases, delivered before the Academy this day.

RESOLVED, that DR. CALDWELL be requested to furnish a copy of it for immediate
publication.

JOHN C. OTTO, Sec'y.

To THE PRESIDENT AND (...) OF THE ACADEMY OF MEDICINE OF PHILADELPHIA.
GENTLEMEN,
PURSUANT to your special appointment, was the following oration prepared and
delivered, and in compliance with your express order, is it now introduced to
the notice of the public. In this state of things, it presents, on your
attention and patronage, that claim, which, I am confident, none of you will be
reluctant to allow. Accept it, as an humble, but well meant offering, from your
friend, and

Fellow-member, THE AUTHOR.
Philadelphia, January 27 th, 1799.
INTRODUCTION.
THAT the following oration may lead to no misconception of the opinion I
entertain, respecting the actual origin of our late epidemics, I beg leave to
introduce it to the notice of my fellow-citizens, by a few preliminary remarks.

I. I do not believe that, either, in the years ninety three, ninety seven, or
ninety eight, the American pestilence was exclusively of domestic origin. I am
persuaded that, on each of those occasions, a very powerful cause of this
disease, was introduced into Philadelphia, through the channel of commerce. I
do not, however, with some physicians, conceive, that this cause was introduced
in the form of human contagion, generated in the diseased bodies of men, but in
that of foul air, resulting from the putrid ballast, or damaged cargoes of
vessels. Nor have I, on enquiry, ^^^nd reason to believe, that there exists, on
record, a single well authenticated instance, of the disease in question,
having, ever, in the former method, been introduced into any part of the United
States. As often as commerce has borne a part in giving birth to this disease,
in any of our seaports, it does not appear to have been through the
instrumentality of human contagion, imported from the East or West Indies, from
the Levant, or the shores of Africa; but, as lately in this place, through that
of pestiferous air, generated by the putrefactive dissolution of the cargoes or
ballast of vessels at sea. Nor is it a matter of the smallest import, from what
quarter of the globe these cargoes come. Provided, they be of a putrefiable
nature, and arrive in our ports, during the intensity of our summer heats,
(but, particularly, between the middle of July and last of September,) it is
wholly immaterial whether they be the native productions of Europe, of Asia, of
Africa, or of the West India Islands. And it is equally immaterial, from which
of these places they are immediately imported. The suspension, therefore, of
commercial intercourse, during certain months in the year, with the West India
Islands alone, would be a measure wholly inadequate to the prevention of this
disease. Were such suspension adopted by the Government of the Union, it
should, unquestionably, extend to all parts of the globe, from which
putrefiable cargoes may be imported. But such an impolitic measure, suggests at
once sufficient cause for its immediate rejection, as it is evidently pregnant
with nothing less than absolute ruin to the commerce of our country.

II. I have not found sufficient cause to believe, that, without the
cooperation of foul air, from the vessels at our wharves, the American
pestilence would have become epidemic, in our city, in either of the years, to
which I have alluded. I have even gone so far as to flatter myself, with a
belief, that, in the present state of our city, such cooperation is absolutely
necessary to its epidemic prevalence. In this belief, however, I am, by no
means, confirmed. Perhaps, even now, the filth of our city and suburbs has
accumulated to a sufficient height, to give to pestilence an epidemic rage. In
ninety three, I had not completed my medical studies, and can, therefore, say
nothing respecting the immediate source of particular cases, that might have
occurred in the city during that year. But I hesitate not to say, with as much
confidence, as I ought to use, in speaking on any speculative subject in
physics, that, in ninety seven and ninety eight, I saw, myself, several cases
of the disease in question, which must have necessarily resulted from the
operation of domestic causes. I am further confident, that many cases of a
similar nature, were attended by some of my medical friends. If, then, from the
present sources of our city, solitary, or (to speak in medical language)
sporadic cases of pestilence may now occur, how melancholy is our prospect,
should the filth in our city and suburbs, be suffered to accumulate with the
progress of time! Of such an accumulation must not an epidemic be finally the
offspring?

But let us, even, for a moment, admit, that not a single case (...) the
epidemics of ninety three, ninety seven, or ninety eight, originated from the
exclusive operation of domestic causes. Still, it is a position, which no one
will venture to deny, that their rapid and extensive propagation, was effected
by some peculiarity in the atmosphere of our city. This inference we draw from
the very few instances, in which, the pestilence, under consideration, was
propagated by contagion when taken from the city to the unadulterated
atmosphere of the country.

Were the atmosphere of Philadelphia preserved in purity, by a due degree of
attention to domestic cleanliness, and by preventing vessels, charged with foul
air, from entering our port, pestilence, as an epidemic, would never again
occur, to swell the catalogue of our future misfortunes. -- In such a state of
things, sporadic cases of the disease might, possibly, originate with
ourselves, and might, unquestionably, be introduced from distant places; but
the evil would terminate with the death or recovery of those first attacked,
and would never spread, to the distress of our citizens, and the depopulation
of our city. The baleful plant, though fairly ingrafted on our systems, would
languish, wither, and die for want of nourishment!

III. Thus, whatever principles, I may advocate, with respect to the
practicability of pestilence originating and existing, as an epidemic, in our
city, under certain circumstances, from the exclusive operation of domestic
causes, I believe this to be an event, which has never yet occurred, Commerce
appears to have been, at all times, justly chargeable with part of the
calamity, that has never failed, to accompany this worst of evils. The epidemic
train would seem to have been, always, laid in our atmosphere, by the action of
the summer-sun on the filth of our city and suburbs, while immense volumes of
foul air, discharged from the holds of vessels at our wharves, served as the
spark to rouse it into flame. Had not the train existed, the spark would have
expired without effect, and had not the spark been applied, the train would
have lain dormant, and, perhaps never burst into actual explosion -- If, then,
by the destruction of either of these, we might acquire an exemption from the
inevitable effects of their cooperation, by the removal of the one, and the
prevention of the other, we become doubly secure against the calamities, to
which they give origin.

I hope I will be indulged in attempting, by another analogy, a farther
illustration of the above intricate and interesting subject. With this view, I
would compare the summer atmosphere of our city, deeply contaminated by putrid
exhalations from domestic sources, to a mass of paste or dough, duly kneaded,
and prepared to undergo the process of fermentation. In this state of things,
the yeast, or leven, calculated and intended to give actual birth to this
process, not unfitly represents the foul air issuing from the holds of vessels
at our wharves, and mixing, in abundance, with our vitiated atmosphere. As the
operation of the ferment is well known to be, that of assimilating to itself,
the mass into which it is introduced, such would seem to be the effect of the
deleterious air discharged along our wharves. It communicates to the atmosphere
of our city, perhaps, by a peculiar species of fermentation, its own
pestilential and destructive properties. Or, like the matter of the smallpox,
introduced into a system predisposed to its reception, it inoculates our
atmosphere with effect, and thus, possibly, by an indescribable species of
sympathetic action, approximates to its own nature, the air that surrounds us.

If we pay due attention to all the branches of domestic cleanliness, and keep
foul vessels at a distance from our wharves, war may rage in the West Indies,
Of all the explications, which have been hitherto given for the existence of
our late epidemics, none has appeared to me, so completely the child of fancy,
as that, which attributes it to the prevalence of war in the West Indies. For
my own part, I must confess, I am not able to discover any more necessary
physical connection between war in the West Indies, and pestilence in America,
than between coach-making in Philadelphia, and button-making in London!
till the passions of man begin to languish, and the ambition of nations become
exhausted, and the yellow-fever may there spread desolation from island to
island, yet, still, amid this deplorable wreck and confusion, will our city
remain exempt from an epidemic pestilence! Whereas, on the other hand, if these
requisites be not attended to, -- if our city and suburbs be suffered to
continue immersed in their present filth, and vessels be allowed to disembogue
their pestilential vapors along our wharves, though the West Indies should be
converted into an Eden of peace, fragrance, and healthfulness, and though the
seeds of pestilence, should be, for ever, blasted along the shores of Asia, and
Africa, yet still, will Philadelphia -- hapless Philadelphia, remain subject to
a reiteration of the melancholy scenes of ninety three, ninety seven, and
ninety eight!

A SEMI-ANNUAL ORATION, etc.
MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN,

IN rising to address you on the present occasions my feelings impel me to a
twofold acknowledgment -- An acknowledgment for the unexpected honor, with
which I have been distinguished, in your appointing me to prepare and deliver
the first of the semiannual addresses enjoined by our constitution; and a most
cordial acknowledgment for the liberal indulgence, which I experienced from
you, on a former occasion, when indisposition interfered, and, by frustrating
my attempt to comply with my engagement, disappointed, for the time, the
expectations of the Academy.

Would that I could suffer my exordium to terminate here! But circumstances
forbid that this should be the case. The pleasure of acknowledgment I must now
exchange for the task of apology.

In behalf of the following performance, I would address myself, not to that
rigid, unaccommodating justice in criticism, which I have reason to believe
most of you have at command, but to that forbearance and clemency, of which, I,
am well assured, you are all possessed. I must solicit you to extend to the
subsequent oration, some share of that partiality, with which, on various
occasions, you have honored the Orator. Let me not be disappointed in
flattering myself, that the usual benevolence of your natures will throw, at
least, some shadow of palliation over such faults as the clearness of your
understandings will inevitably discover, and the justness of your sentiments
oblige you to condemn.

Suffer it to operate in mitigation of your impending sentence, when I assure
you, that the following address was prepared and numerous avocations, of a
nature more than usually unfavourable to success in composition. But satisfied
that I have more -- much more, to expect from the ingenuous liberality of your
minds, than from the humble merit of my own defense, I will no longer address
you in the language of apology. Part of the imperfections of the oration I am
about to deliver, arise no less from want of abilities, than from want of
leisure. A portion of the censure must, therefore, in justice, rest on
yourselves, for not having been more circumspect in your choice of an orator.

It was my intention to have paid in this place, a passing tribute to the
memory of our two deceased friends and fellow members, Dr. Sayre and Dr.
Cooper. I had even prepared myself for the discharge of this mournful duty.
Impressed by respect for the talents and learning, and by sentiments of esteem
and friendship for the numerous virtues of those two medical philosophers, I
was unwilling to neglect so fair an opportunity of expressing my sense of their
distinguished worth. Being superceded however, in this duty, by a very
judicious and respectful appointment of the Academy, for the express purpose of
doing justice to their memories, I shall pass in silence over the melancholy
subject. But when the name of Cooper, in particular, is mentioned, to suffer
oblivious silence to usurp the place of descriptive and just eulogium, is, with
me, no inconsiderable effort of self-restraint. On such an occasion my feelings
would prompt me to a far different conduct. As I have ever ranked the
acquisition of the friendship of this gentleman among the most fortunate
occurrences of my life, it will not be thought strange, that I should feel an
inclination to contribute my mite to the immense treasure of respect, which his
numerous acquaintance will pay to his memory. But an indulgence of my feelings
on this occasion, would lead to an unwarrantable digression from what I propose
as the immediate subject of my address.

Instead of attempting, therefore, to cherish in your breasts a kind, but
unavailing sorrow for the dead, allow me to solicit your attention to a few
general observations relative to the origin of pestilential diseases. I shall
afterward confine my remarks and speculations more immediately to the origin
of that disease, whose ravages and concomitant terrors, have thrice, of late,
reduced the gay and crowded streets of our city to a dismal scene of desolation
and solitude.

As my subject is, evidently, very extensive and copious, should I even engross
a little more of your time than you at present anticipate, I hope you will
bear, with a patient indulgence, the unintentional but unavoidable trespass.

It is, in this place, worthy of remark, that Pestilence has been, at all
times, treated by the world, as an illigitimate child, without an acknowledged
parent -- in other words, as a plant perfectly exotic as to every inhabited
soil and climate -- or as a physical evil, existing in almost every region, yet
(strange inconsistency!) originating in none!

It is a fact not more singular than true, that, there is not to be found in
the whole range of the globe, a single country, which is acknowledged by its
own inhabitants, to be the immediate birthplace of pestilence. When this
dreadful scourge makes its appearance in any place, however favorable, from
climate and local causes, to its domestic generation, its existence never fails
to be attributed ^ito introduction by land, or importation by sea, from some
foreign country. As it, for the most part, appears first in large commercial
cities, the latter of these is most commonly considered as the channel of its
conveyance. Hence the evils of pestilence have been generally charged to the
account of commerce. Thus, when the plague prevails in any part of Europe, it
is uniformly asserted to have been imported in merchandise from Asia. When it
breaks out in the latter place, where it not unfrequently depopulates towns and
villages, and, occasionally, lays even whole countries waste, it is always
traced, or what, with the indolent and unthinking natives, amounts to the same
thing, is supposed to be traced to some communication with the continent of
Africa. But the hardy sons of this burning climate, spurn, with indignation,
what they consider not only as an insult to the healthfulness, but also as an
injury to the prosperity of their country, and contend, that the plague is
never generated with them, but is always introduced from some distant quarter.
Nor is this obstinate spirit of reluctance in the human race to admit
pestilence to be a native of the same soil and climate with themselves,
confined to the continent of the old world. But five years ago, the same thing
might have been said with respect to most of the inhabitants of the United
States. Few of them could then be induced to believe, that the western shores
of the Atlantic could possibly give birth to a pestilential disease. They
seemed to suppose, that a physical evil of such a magnitude, must necessarily
be the growth of a foregn climate, not so highly favored by heaven as their
own.

To you, Gentlemen, it is scarcely necessary for me to observe, that this
unwillingness in mankind to acknowledge pestilence to be a native of the same
country with themselves, should be viewed as an inveterate prejudice,
supported, like all other prejudices, by the two gothic pillars of ignorance
and error. It requires no uncommon depth of logic to prove, that pestilential
diseases, having an existence, must have also a place of origin; and, that this
place, must be in some of the inhabited parts of the earth. But so
extraordinary and absurd is the prejudice, of which I have spoken, that it
literally denies these diseases to have originated in any place. Taking the
sentiments of mankind, on this subject, for our guide, we would find a search
after the real birthplace of pestilence equally abortive with the poet's
search after the North, which he so energetically represents in the following
lines. But where the extreme of vice was never agreed;
Ask, Where Is the North? at York it is on the Tweed;
In Scotland, at the Orcades, and there,
At Greenland, Zembla, or the Lord knows where!
So it is with respect to the birthplace of pestilence. In America it is in
the West Indies; in the West Indies, it is, at one time, at Siam in the
East Indies; and again at Boulam in Africa; while, at these places, it is still
farther to the east as if the rising was capable of exalting the poison of
putrefaction to higher malignity than even the midday sun. Were not the
subject too serious to be treated as a jest, I would farther say, that this
singular absurdity, in most men, with respect to the birthplace of pestilence,
brings to my recollection the humourous story of Goldsmith's pauper, who, in
quest of the real or acknowledged place of his birth, (the place where, by the
municipal regulations of his country, he was entitled to a subsistence for
life,) was carted about from parish to parish, till, to use the poor fellow's
own words, he "thought in his soul, they would not allow that he had been born
in any parish at all."

Let us, for a moment, trace this prejudice through all its windings to its
fountain head. It springs from the bosom of self-love. This real though secret
principle of all our sentiments, opinions, and actions, will not suffer us to
admit, that we ourselves can be the source of any thing evil, or of any thing
disastrous. From ourselves we are inclined to extend this favorable opinion to
our friends, acquaintance, and countrymen; and from them, to the air which we
breathe, the soil which gave us birth, and even to the waters which variegate
the landscapes that surround us. The same selfish principles -- the same
contracted spirit, which led the reprobate Jews of old to exclaim, "Can any
thing good come out of Galilee" induces the more favored, but, in some
respects, not much more enlightened, moderns to ask, can any thing evil
originate in our beloved country?

This prejudice, respecting the origin of pestilential diseases, derives no
inconsiderable support from the operation of a (...) but powerful principle of
self-interest. We are apprehensive, that should our country be characterized as
the birthplace of pestilence, such an opinion would prove injurious to its
population and prosperity, and that, consequently our interests as individuals
must suffer. This however, is a mistaken fear. General truth and general
utility are sworn friends, and inseparable companions. Nor are they more so, in
any instance, than in that which claims our present attention. The same
enlightened views in science which declare, that pestilence may originate among
ourselves, afford us, at the same time, the most firm and consolatory
assurance, that we have in our own hands the means of prevention and safety.
Nor is this our only consolation. Were physical truth, on this subject, fully
evolved, it would set most, if not all countries and climates, nearly on a
level with respect to the origin of pestilential diseases. For I am persuaded
that there exists not a spot on the surface of the globe, which may not, under
certain, circumstances, become capable of giving birth to these wasteful
epidemics.

I beg it may not, from the foregoing observations, be understood, that I mean,
on the subject of the origin of pestilential diseases, to accuse the whole
human race of ignorance and error. Far from it -- There have, at all times,
existed many distinguished instances of exemption from such a charge. There
have, in all ages, and in all countries, existed men, who, in opposition to an
overbearing torrent of popular prejudice and indignation, have boldly
maintained the diseases in question to have been the offspring of the places
where they have spread desolation.

This is well known to have been formerly the case, in London and Marseilles,
during the unparalelled calamities inflicted by pestilence on those two ancient
and populous cities. Nor was it of late, less remarkably the case in different
parts of the United States, but more particularly in the city of Philadelphia.
When the Yellow Fever (which might with more propriety have been denominated
the American pestilence) made its appearance in this city in the autumn of
ninety three, to have said that it was a disease of domestic origin, was
considered as an unfounded slander on our climate, and the man, who dared to
advocate such an opinion, was viewed in the light of an enemy to his country.
Almost every mind was then big with the idea of importation, and almost every
eye fixe^ on a tropical region, as the only place capable of giving birth to
such an irresistible malady. To this blindfold state of the public mind, there
fortunately existed some degree of exception. Amid the general gloom of
ignorance and error, by which we were overshadowed, there appeared, even then,
a few twinkling stars, the joyous harbingers of a brighter day. The dawn of
that day has already reached us, and we have every reason to believe, that we
will very shortly be wrapped in its full meridian.

The opinion, that our late epidemic must be necessarily imported to us from a
tropical climate, will soon become as unpopular as it was once extensive.
Already is it greatly circumscribed in its limits -- Already is it confined
almost entirely to those, who were originally active and clamorous in its
support. By such characters we are not to expect that it will be immediately
abandoned. They have already pledged themselves to the world for its support,
and consider, therefore, its fate as in some measure interwoven with the fate
of their own characters, as philosophers in medicine. Like a parent, with all
his tenderness awakened by the approaching dissolution of a beloved child, they
will cling to it with the greater fondness, the more nearly they see it about
to expire. But expire it will, nor can all the partial and studied efforts of
its supporters prolong its fleeting existence. Like the old system of chemistry
tottering before the new, it must finally sink beneath the doctrine of domestic
generation, nor will it find, among all its advocates, a Priestly to appear
great and unshaken in the midst of its ruins!

We have already observed, that in all parts of the world, and in all periods
of society, mankind, in general, have entertained and exhibited a most profound
hostility against the opinion of their own country being, under any
circumstances, the birthplace of pestilence. Nor has the matter ended here.
They have been solicitous and active to defend, not only their own immediate
country, but even our whole globe, from the charge of giving origin to an evil
of such magnitude. Whenever this disease has appeared, they have, like many
physicians and citizens of the United States, been extremely anxious and
industrious to trace it to some particular species of importation. It may not
be altogether useless nor uninteresting, to trace the many singular and absurd
modifications, through which this opinion, of the foreign importation of
pestilential diseases, has successively passed.

In the earliest ages of the world, when ignorance and superstition led men to
attribute all extraordinary phenomena to the direct agency of supernatural
beings, pestilence was supposed to be imported immediately from Heaven. This is
the opinion which appears to have prevailed among the ancient Hebrews, and may
be ranked at the head of the catalogue of absurdities on this subject. The
dominion of prejudice over the minds of that ignorant and obstinate people,
appears in this instance particularly striking. Such was the depth of their
blind bigotry in favor of the healthfulness of the globe they inhabited, that
they would seem to have considered it as even superior to that of the celestial
regions. Hence, unwilling, to believe that their favorite earth could give
origin to an evil so dreadful as pestilence, they imported the seeds of this
calamity from the more unhealthful climate of heaven!!

Another species of importation no less extraordinary than the former, is that
which derived pestilential diseases from the sun. An opinion of this kind
appears to have been entertained, respecting the origin of that pestilence,
which desolated the Grecian camp before the walls of Troy.

Another description of importation from distant worlds remains yet to be
mentioned. During that period of error, in which the science of medicine, in
common with most other branches of science, was deeply perverted by
astrological notions, not one of the planets (our own perhaps excepted!)
escaped the charge of giving origin to pestilential diseases. Thus Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, may all be found arraigned in the dark
catalogue. Nor did the moon herself escape. Even the celebrated, but fanciful
Paracelsus, boldly accused this fair luminary, as being the parent of deadly
pestilence. -- Had nature, previously to this period of intellectual
perversion, by a happy effort, raised up a Herschel, to soar, an astronomical
Columbus, through the immensity of space, there is little doubt, but that the
orb, which now bears his name, would, even from its distant bourne, have been
called to the narrow bar of human prejudice, to answer to the charge of having
been the birthplace and nursery of the same disease!

In support of the foregoing opinions, however irrational and absurd in the
view of a more enlightened age, our remote ancestors appear to have acted in
concert. Such was their blind partiality in favor of the world they inhabited,
that they could not, for a moment, admit the belief of its ever giving rise to
true pestilence. At length, however, were they forced to abandon the ground
they had originally taken -- At length was this extraordinary metastisis of
error obliged to relinquish entirely the heavenly bodies, and fix on earth as
its final retreat. At this period men became divided in their opinion,
respecting the origin of the evil in question. Obliged to acknowledge it as a
native of our own globe, they commenced a zealous search for the particular
soil and climate from which it sprang. Here it was that their opinions became
hostile. Each one desirous of preserving, in purity, the character of his own
country, charged the birth of pestilence to the country of another. Nor has the
controversy as yet subsided. We have seen very evident traces of it in the
researches of men after the origin of that malignant pestilence, by which we
have, lately, been three times visited. Thus, in America, the West India
Islands were, at first, considered as its birthplace. Some physicians, in the
West Indies, on the other hand, attribute its prevalence there to importation
from the coast of Africa. While, no doubt, the hardy African will retort the
charge, and say, that they are indebted, for this disease, to the lawless
intrusion of white men on their peaceful shores. Thus we see that the same
illiberal spirit of prejudice which, in the earlier ages of the world, induced
our forefathers to attribute the origin of pestilence to heaven, to the sun,
the moon, and the various planetary bodies, still continues, though under a
different form, among their more highly favored posterity. They went to
distant worlds in quest of the origin of this disease, whereas we rest
satisfied with shorter excursions, and travel only to distant countries!

I have called that prejudice, which leads to remote parts of the globe, in
quest of the origin of pestilential diseases, an illiberal one; nor am I at all
inclined to retract the epithet. I think it narrow and illiberal, because it
frequently urges men on to defend the character of their own climate and
country, at the expense of that of other places, which nature has favored with
equal advantages. As formerly observed, the very same principle of illiberality
which leads us to deny, to other portions of the globe, the possession of
advantages and excellencies which they undoubtedly hold, induces us also to
load them with the imputation of evils, from which they an wholly exempt. This
is a principle which the enlightened Americans should indignantly renounce.
From its undue operation, in the minds of Europeans, they themselves have
already suffered much. There was a time when America was considered, by most
Europeans, as capable of giving birth to but little that was valuable. And
shall we, now, actuated by the same narrow principle, and governed by the same
circumscribed views, contend, that it can give origin to nothing embraced in
the catalogue of evils? I flatter myself with a confidence that we never will.
For though proud and happy in the belief, that the wisdom and spirit of
Americans will be at all times competent and prompt to defend our country and
its character from every description of insult and injustice, I should yet be
sorry and humiliated at the appearance of a selfish national spirit, inclining
us to the defamation of other countries, for the illiberal purpose of adding a
superior luster to our own!

From arguments to be laid before you in a subsequent part of this address, it
will I trust appear, that America is, equally with other parts of the world,
capable of giving birth to the worst of diseases.

With respect to the opinion, that our late pestilence is necessarily imported
from the West Indies, it is with pleasure I observe, that its relinquishment
has already very evidently commenced. Even some of its most strenuous advocates
have found it necessary, in attempting its defense, to abandon entirely their
original ground. They, at first, contended that the seeds of this disease were
imported to us in the form of human contagion only, adhering to the clothes or
bodies of seamen or passengers, or to the timbers, apparel, or contents of
vessels. This however, constitutes no longer an article in their medical creed.
They are now willing to allow, that the seeds of the disease may be brought,
not only under the form of human contagion, but also under that of foul air,
produced by a high state of putrefaction in the vessel's ballast ^r cargo. This
must be granted by all, to be a very material, and you will indulge me in
adding, a very auspicious change of opinion. But the change will not stop here.
Having so far relinquished their original ground as to allow, that the American
Pestilence can originate from putrefaction in the hold of a vessel at sea, they
will next accede to the proposition, that it may, under certain circumstances,
result from a similar process on shore. Hence the warmer regions of North
America will, in all probability, be next suspected of giving birth to the
formidable disease in question. But at this point opinion will not remain
stationary. The change will still continue to progress, till, at length, when
the shades of error and prejudice shall have been entirely dissipated, each
citizen of Philadelphia will see the principal cause of the pestilence that
afflicts him, not in the immediate hand of a benevolent Deity -- not in the
malign aspect of the sun, the moon, or the planetary bodies -- not on the
burning shores of Africa or the West Indies, but in the very center of his own
city!

Indulge me, for a few moments, in a detail of the leading arguments, which
induce me to consider our pestilential diseases as the genuine offspring of our
own country.

Pestilence can become epidemic only, when aided by a concurrent constitution
of Atmosphere. This position is founded on the collective experience of ages.
Where such a constitution does not prevail, sporadic cases of pestilence may
indeed occur, but they will again disappear, and leave surrounding individuals
unhurt. The nature of that peculiar state of atmosphere, favorable to the
propagation of pestilential diseases, has hitherto eluded the researches of
philosophers. The reality of its existence, however, is sufficiently
established from the obvious effects to which it gives rise. Though ridiculed,
of late, by some physicians, under the denomination of an occult quality,
reason and observation still declare it to be a quality resting, for the
certainty of its existence, on evidence as substantial, as that which supports
the great Newtonian principle, the gravitation of all terrestrial bodies.

A pestilential constitution of atmosphere may be either general or local. The
general is that which extends over whole countries, sometimes even over entire
continents, and, for the most part, prolongs its duration for several
successive years. The local is confined to particular spots, most commonly to
large commercial cities, and terminates with the disappearance of certain
topical causes, which generally possess but a short lived existence.

Various opinions have been entertained, by philosophers, respecting the cause
of this general pestilential constitution. By so me, it has been attributed to
a general and permanent exhalation, perhaps of a mineral nature, resulting from
the action of subterraneous fires; by others, to an immense volume of poisonous
gas, forcibly discharged from the bowels of the earth, during the dreadful
con^^^sions of an earthquake; and by others again, to torrents of pestiferous
air ejected into the atmosphere from the craters of Volcanos. In support of
these two latter opinions, some degree of evidence is derived from the
circumstance of the prevalence of pestilence, being very often either preceded
or accompanied by the occurrence of earthquakes, or by repeated and dreadful
volcanic eruptions. Of the frequent and striking coincidence, both in point of
time and place, between the existence of pestilence and the occurrence of
earthquakes and eruptions from volcanos, the records of medicine afford ample
proof. An unanswerable argument in favor of the reality of this general
constitution of atmosphere, is derived from the frequent (I had almost said
uniform) cotemporary prevalence of pestilential diseases, in different and
distant parts of the globe.

That such a general constitution of atmosphere may exist in America, as well
as in other places, is a position, which, abstractly considered, we have no
reason to doubt. And that it even does actually prevail, at this time, is an
opinion entertained by many respectable characters, and supported by various
physical phenomena. On a full and minute statement of these phenomena, time
will not suffer me, at present, to enter. I flatter myself, however, that the
following facts, relative to this curious and interesting subject, will not be
deemed unworthy the attention of the Academy.

For some years past, several species of insects, whose existence is known no
be intimately connected with the state of the atmosphere, have been more than
usually abundant in our country. Of the truth of this, our farmers are able to
furnish us with but too many unequivocal and, to them, expensive testimonies.
It will require many years to obliterate from the memory of this useful and
respectable class of our fellow-citizens, the injuries they have sustained from
the invasion and ravages of the Hessian Fly.

The origin of this destructive insect has, like that of our late epidemic,
constituted a subject of speculation and doubt, among the literary characters
of the United States. While some have traced it to foreign importation, others
have contended that it is a native of our own country. Were I to lay before you
the result of my own enquiries and reflection on this point of natural history,
I should be inclined to advocate the latter opinion. I am rather disposed to
believe, that what is vulgarly denominated the Hessian Fly originates entirely
with ourselves. There is reason to suspect, that our fields and forests
contain, perhaps, at all times, this insect in certain members, and that it
superabounds, and, depredates on the labors of the husbandman in those seasons
only, during which there prevails a state or constitution of atmosphere, more
peculiarly favorable to its propagation and existence. For it is a fact well
known to naturalists, that no less in the economy of insects than in that of
plants, certain seasons are favorable, and others unfavourable to their
generation and growth.

Again, it is a fact, with which men of observation, cannot be unacquainted,
that for several years past, but more particularly during the last and
preceding autumns, muskitos were more than usually abundant in those situations
which they generally infest -- Nor is this all -- These insects, not willing to
be confined, during the two last seasons, to their former limits, made their
way into many places, which, before, had been almost wholly exempt from their
invasion. But from the well known circumstance, that muskitos uniformly abound
at the same time, and in the same places, with epidemic bilious fevers, we are
very fairly authorized to conclude, that these noxious insects depend, for
their existence, on an insalubrious state and constitution of atmosphere. Nor
must I here omit to observe, that the immensity of grass-hoppers, which
infested our country, during last summer, bespoke a condition of atmosphere
different from what usually prevails at that season.

If then our country has, of late, been characterized by an unusual prevalence
of insects and of disease in different places, and if these insects and disease
have, in most instances, prevailed, not only at the same time, but also in the
same situations, (both of which facts are unquestionably true) have we not, at
least, a very ostensible ground of belief, that these unusual and cotemporary
phenomena proceed from the same cause, and that this cause is no other than a
state and constitution of our atmosphere, different from those that usually
characterize the atmosphere of our country?

In corroboration of the preceding inference, namely, that the same
constitution of atmosphere, which favors the prevalence of pestilential
diseases, is, in like manner, favorable to the existence of insects, I beg
leave to give a brief statement and explanation of an interesting fact, which,
we learn from the history of former ages. For more than fifty years, during the
reign of the emperor Justinian, the plague raged in Europe, Asia and Africa,
with such unparalelled violence and malignity, as sometimes to threaten, in
appearance, even the depopulation of the whole earth. Throughout this period of
devastation and calamity, such was the immensity of locusts which infested the
countries where the pestilence prevailed, that many were disposed to attribute
the existence of this disease to the death and putrefaction of these
destructive insects. This latter opinion, however, we conceive to be founded,
in a great measure, in error. For although the pestilential constitution of
atmosphere was, no doubt, strengthened by the deleterious gas, arising from the
putrefactive dissolution of such an immense volume of animal matter, it is by
no means likely that it resulted from this as its primary cause. There exists
certain facts which render it much more probable, that the same constitution of
atmosphere, resulting originally from some more powerful source, proved
favorable, at once, to the generation of locusts, and to the birth and
propagation of the pestilence of the age.

Might not a like physical explanation be given of the cause of several of the
plagues, which sacred writ declares to have visited, in ancient times, the
incorrigible Egyptians; and which were then supposed, to have been inflicted by
the immediate hand of the Deity? I allude particularly to the destructive
swarms of locusts, and flies, and to the pestilence among men, and the murrain
among cattle, two diseases, which appear to be intimately connected. Is it not,
I say, at least, an admissible conjecture, that there prevailed, at that time,
a certain pestilential constitution of atmosphere, which operated as the
leading physical cause of all these evils? The profound darkness which, shortly
afterward, overshadowed, for a time, the dominions of the impious and
tyrannical Pharaoh, was probably nothing more than a natural concomitant of the
same constitution.

That there was something peculiar and uncommon, in the general state and
condition of the air, during our epidemics of ninety three, ninety seven, and
ninety eight, we would deduce from the vast number of fiery meteors, (commonly
denominated falling or shooting stars) which appeared in our atmosphere during
those periods. I think it highly probable, that these blazing meteors, always
abound during the existence of a pestilential constitution of atmosphere, and
that on their uniform appearance, superstition has erected a belief, that
certain strange and supernatural phenomena in the heavens, never fail to give
premonition of the approach of pestilence.

As a farther evidence in favor of the existence of a peculiar constitution of
atmosphere, particularly during the years ninety three and ninety eight, it
deserves to be mentioned, that, in those years, the fruits of our country, in
general, ripened and rotted with much more than their usual rapidity. And that,
on many of our fruit trees, second crops of blossoms appeared early in the
autumn of the same years, and, on some of them, even second crops of fruit made
considerable advances toward maturity. Nor could the occurrence of these
phenomena be fairly deduced from the existence of any peculiarity in the
sensible qualities of the atmosphere. Seasons as warm and dry as those, to
which I have referred, are not uniformly productive of similar effects. To the
agency, therefore, of some imperceptible cause in our atmosphere, must we
attribute the several phenomena in question.

Another unanswerable argument in favor of the occasional existence of a
general morbid constitution of atmosphere in our country, is derived from the
extensive prevalence of the catarrhal fever (commonly denominated influenza) in
the years eighty eight and eighty nine. This disease, which I believe is
acknowledged by all to have resulted from a certain deleterious constitution or
state of the air we inspired, was so general, as to pervade every part of the
United States. But the constitution, from which it originated, must have been,
in like manner, general, being necessarily co-extensive with the disease
itself. During part of the continuance of this catarrhal constitution, a deep
duskiness, or want of due transparency in the atmosphere, considerably obscured
the sun, in many, if not most, parts of our country, thus constituting an
approach toward Egyptian darkness, which, as formerly observed, was, probably,
nothing more than a natural effect or concomitant of the then existing
pestilential constitution.

The causes, which give rise to that local constitution of atmosphere,
favorable to the generation and propagation of pestilence, are by far more
obvious in their nature, operate on a much less entensive scale, and possess an
existence by no means so durable. They are principally confined to large
cities, camps, and garrisons, where multitudes of people are crowded together,
and where personal and other descriptions of cleanliness do not receive the
attention they merit. They may be said, in general, to be, all such causes as
tend, in the above descriptions of places, to generate foul air, and thus
produce a vitiated state of atmosphere. The principal of these shall hereafter
become subjects of particular specification. This local constitution of
atmosphere extends, frequently, beyond the immediate confines of cities, camps
and garrisons, and, sometimes, even pervades considerable tracts of country,
particularly such as are low and marshy. It is an evil, which may be said to
owe its origin, in general, to that indolence and inattention, which
unfortunately, constitute such predominant traits in the character of the human
race. This peculiar constitution, of which we have spoken, is nothing else than
a predisposition or capability in the atmosphere to generate and propagate
pestilential diseases. It would seem to consist, either in the actual admixture
of pestilential effluvia with the air which we breathe, or in the presence of
some aeriform substance, which favors the existence and conveyance of such
effluvia, and prevents their action from being destroyed by the influence of
the atmosphere.

Your attention, for a few moments, is next solicited to the remote cause of
pestilential diseases. It need scarcely be observed, that this subject is very
nearly allied to that of which we have last treated. So intimate, indeed, is
their connection, that they might, without any impropriety, have been both
spoken of under the same head. This remote cause may be defined, a gas of a
highly poisonous nature, which, when brought into contact with the human body,
renders it liable, if exposed at the same time to the action of exciting
causes, to an attack of the disease denominated pestilence. A knowledge of the
peculiar physical properties of this gas has hitherto remained, and, I fear,
will very long continue to remain, an important desideratum in the science of
medicine. Even the reality of its existence is, as yet, established, only, by
its unparalelled ravages on the system of man, and on the systems of a few
species of inferior animals. So extremely subtle and evanescent is its nature,
that we have not been able to separate it from surrounding matter, to embody it
together, and thus subject it to the test of observation and experiment.

A knowledge of the actual source of this pestilential vapor is equally
interesting to physical science, and important to the welfare of the human
race. Though it be possible that it may occasionally arise, in the form of
exhalation, in consequence of the action of subterraneous fires; and though it
be probable that it has, in some instances, been thrown from the bowels of the
earth, during the convulsion of an earthquake, or the eruption of a volcano,
yet these are by no means its most frequent sources. It appears to be now
reduced to a certainty, as decisive as any existing in physical science, that
organized bodies, in a high and long continued state of putrefaction,
constitute the legitimate parent of pestilential effluvia. I have not thought
proper to attempt a minute detail of all the evidence that might be collected
in favor of the above position. It is, by far, too extensive to be embodied
within the necessary limits of my address. It maybe found most copiously
diffused through the works of all philosophical physicians, who have written
expressly on the subject of pestilence. A condensed statement of it here, would
be nothing more than a needless repetition of what must be familiar to the mind
of every one, who has attended to the cultivation of the science of medicine.
Ever since pestilence was first acknowledged to be a native of our globe, it
has been uniformly derived, by physicians of observation, from the poisonous
gas resulting from the putrefactive dissolution of organized bodies. This would
lead me to a few observations on the subject of poisons.

This destructive class of substances has been, generally, divided into the
animal, the vegetable and the mineral, to which should be added, that much more
formidable description of poison, derived originally from the process of
putrefaction. Under these four denomination, are embraced all the species and
varieties of poisons, that have hitherto attracted the notice of philosophers.
That pestilential and infectious diseases are the result of poisonous effluvia,
operating on the system of man, is a truth, to which medical characters have
long given their assent. An interesting question would seem to arise here,
namely, to what denomination of poisons, do these effluvia appear to belong? It
cannot be supposed to be to the animal, the vegetable, or the mineral poisons,
because these deleterious substances have never been known, nor even suspected,
to be capable of propagating themselves. Thus, a person under the painful
operation of an over-proportion of arsenic, or of opium, or agonized by the
bite of the rattle-snake, is incapable of communicating his disease to any of
his attendants. The same thing may be said respecting the morbid affections,
resulting from any species of either of the three foregoing genera of poisons.
I believe it to be a truth, that they have never been known to be, in any
instance, communicable. The poison, therefore, giving birth to pestilential and
infectious diseases, belongs to that genus, which derives its origin from the
putrefactive process.

Putrefaction I would consider as a generic term, embracing several specific or
at least various modes, in which organized bodies undergo dissolution, and
recombination into gaseous results, some of them of a deleterious or poisonous
nature. These poisonous result would seem to differ from each other, according
to the varieties of the process by which they were produced. Thus for example,
from one particular description or modification of the putrefactive process,
or, if the reader be more pleased with the hypothesis, from the putrefaction of
a particular description of matter, originated the poisonous offluvia or seeds
of pestilence; from another, those of smallpox, from another, those of
measles, from another, those of lues venerea, etc. From the foregoing
principles it would appear, that all infectious diseases, as the smallpox and
lues venerea, instead of being, as they have been generally supposed, the
specific and exclusive growth of the East, the West, or of any particular
climate or situation, may, under certain circumstances, originate in any
inhabited portion of our globe. Nor do I consider our own country as by any
means exempt from this general charge. I believe, that the small pox may
originate in America or Europe, as well as in Asia, and that the venereal
disease may originate in Asia or Europe, as well as in America. I am persuaded
that the great and irreversible principles, by which, the decomposition and
recomposition of matter are governed, operate uniformly in all places, and that
no spot on the globe is privileged with a special exemption from their
influence.

I am aware, that, by some physicians, this note will be considered as nothing
else than the mere child of fancy, or as the airy effusion of a speculative
mina -- Be it so -- I will, however, most sincerely thank such solid and
sagacious characters, to point out to me a more probable source of pestilential
and infectious diseases, than the putrefactive dissolution of organized bodies!




That this is the case, we justly infer, from the circumstance of pestilence
never raging, to an alarming extent, unless in situations where putrefaction
goes forward on an extensive scale. In turning over the annals of medicine,
even from their earliest period, down to the present day, we will not find a
single record of pestilence having prevailed and spread in places, where
cleanliness has been attended to in all its branches. Whereas, on the other
hand, most large cities, and even considerable tract of country, where
putrefying filth has been suffered to abound, have repeatedly experienced this
scourge in all its malignity. Thus the plague of Egypt, unquestionably derives
its birth from the filth spread around by the waters of the Nile. The immensity
of putrefying animal and vegetable substances, with which the streets and
suburbs of Constantinople abound, afford origin to the pestilence, which so
frequently visits that unfortunate city. And the Yellow Fever or plague of the
West Indies, appears to be indebted, for its birth and existence, entirely to
the extensive putrefactive dissolution of organized bodies, produced by the
fervors of a topical sun.

From a similar source, namely, the filth of a crowded garrison city, must we
deduce the celebrated plague of Athens, which, to the eye of fancy, seems still
to live and rage with consummate malignity, in the descriptive eloquence of
Thucidides: And to causes precisely similar, must we attribute that dreadful
pestilence, which before the walls of Syracuse, made greater havoc among the
Roman legions, than even the stupendous engines of Archimedes -- To what
causes, I would beg leave to ask, are we to ascribe the more frequent and
general prevalence of pestilential diseases in camps, garrisons, and other
places of military establishment? Is it not to a want of cleanliness? -- To the
immensity of putrefying filth, with which such places, for the most part,
abound? A want of cleanliness, and a greater exposure of men to actual hardship
and fatigue, are the two only circumstances, relative to health and disease, in
which military situations differ materially from others. To these
circumstances, therefore, are we bound to attribute the more frequent
visitations of pestilence, to which such places are unfortunately subjected.
The former of these, namely, a want of cleanliness, gives rise to the remote,
and the other, viz. exposure to hardships, acts as the exciting cause of the
malady. Let me me not, on the present occasion, fail to observe, that when
pestilence breaks out in any place, it never fails to make its appearance about
that period, when, from the usual cooperation of physical causes, the process
of general putrefaction, has arrived to its summit. -- Thus may pestilential
effluvia be generated in every spot on the surface of the globe, where the soil
gives birth to organized bodies, and the climate affords a sufficiency of heat
and moisture, to give rise to a high putrefactive process. There exist numerous
proofs, sacred, I had almost said, as those of holy writ, of pestilence having
been the native growth of many places on the continent of Europe. Even beneath
the frozen sky of Russia, has this Demon of putrefaction burst into existence,
from domestic causes, and called up death and desolation, as the concomitants
of his career.!

If the foregoing propositions and assertions be true, -- and confident I am,
they are such, as rest on a basis, no less secure than the experience and
observation of ages, cemented by the fairest deductions of reason -- If it be
true, I say, that pestilence can originate from the putrefaction of organized
bodies in Europe, Asia and Africa, what shadow of reason have we to suppose
America privileged with an exemption from a similar misfortune? Can we have the
vanity -- I might have said the presumption, to allege, that the God of a
general providence has condescended to enact a law of special dispensation in
favor of us, because we inhabit the western shore of the Atlantic? Has he, for
us alone, laid aside his robes of Deity? has he, for us alone, stooped from the
unaccommodating majesty of his character? has he forfeited his title, as the
impartial ruler of the universe, and belittled himself by becoming a partizan
on benalf of the continent of America? -- Highly as I think of my native
country, and proud as I am of my birthright as an American, my patriotic
fervor has not yet so far obscured my understanding, as to bear me out in a
belief so irrational, and presumptuous! But to relinquish, for a moment, our
views in theology, and address you in language more strictly philosophical. --
Are the atmosphere, the waters and the organized productions of the new world,
exempt from the government of the great physical principles, to the influence
of which, those of the old are uniformly and necessarily subjected? Have we
not, within ourselves, an immensity of the requisites necessary for carrying
putrefaction to the highest stage? When advanced to such stage, will not this
process produce, with us, the very same deleterious effluvia to which it gives
birth in other quarters of the globe? And, when once evolved, will not this
effluvia generate and propagate pestilence here, with as much readiness, and
with as much malignity, as in countries situated beyond the Atlantic? To answer
those propositions in the negative, would be to deny, that the same physical
causes, when uncontrouled in their operation, will always be productive of the
same effects. As well may we say, that the same animals which propagate their
likeness in Europe, cannot in America; or that the same sun which wakes to life
the sleeping blossom there, cannot rouse it from its wintry slumbers here!

Let not chemists, in the pride of their knowledge, deny, that pestilential
effluvia can be the offspring of putrefaction, because they are unable to
produce it in their laboratories. Let them remember, that they are not yet able
to operate, in all respects, as nature does, nor are they possessed of any
chemical tests to ascertain, with decision, where these effluvia do and where
they do not prevail. Their effects on the human body constitute the only
indubitable testimony of their existence; and these, as mentioned before, never
occur to any extent, except in places abounding with substances in a state of
putrefaction.

It may not be improper, on the present occasion, to observe, that of all
animal substances, the matter of human perspiration is by no means the least
liable to putrefaction. After its discharge from the pores of the body, it
would seem to run, with much rapidity, into this offensive state. Nor is it the
most innocent, in its nature, when under the actual influence of this process.
There is reason to believe, that, from the putrefaction of the perspirable gas,
in places where numbers have been unduly crowded in small, unventilated
apartments, diseases of a pestilential nature have resulted. But, unless when
vitiated by means of putrefaction or actual disease, I believe the matter of
perspiration to be perfectly unnoxious.

The relationship between the American pestilence, the yellow fever, or
pestilence of the West Indies, and the plague of Asia, shall now constitute the
subject of a few remarks.

From all the information I have been able to collect from observation, books,
or conversation, respecting those three diseases, I have not been able to
perceive that there exists between them any radical or essential difference.
They seem evidently to originate from the same source, they are alike
influenced by the usual vicisitudes of the seasons, they invade the human
system in the same manner, and are characterized, in their course, by the same
train of general symptoms. They appear, in fact, to be the very same disease,
modified, to a certain degree, by various causes, of which the most powerful is
that of climate. This is, indeed, a cause, the operation of which but few
things are able to resist. It is well known that climate possesses a power of
changing the aspect of plants, the appearance of inferior animals, and even the
figure, complexion, and countenance of the human race. Thus, how different, in
all these respects, is the appearance of an Asiatic from that of a native of
Africa, of Europe or America? May we not then, very rationally conclude, that
the same cause, which possesses such an immense influence over plants and
animals, is, in like manner, fully competent to the modification of disease? I
will venture to affirm, that there exists a much greater difference between the
general appearance of an Asiatic, and that of an American, than between the
symptoms and progress of the American, and those of the Asiatic pestilence. But
the men of Asia and America are held to be nothing more than varieties in the
human race, resulting from a difference of climate and of the state of society.
When any inconsiderable difference, then, is discovered in the general
appearances of the pestilential diseases, by which the two countries are
occasionally invaded, it may doubtless be attributed to the same causes.

With regard to the pestilence of the West Indies, it might, at first sight,
appear to be, in one respect, very materially different from the other two.
Thus, we learn from physicians, on whose report we may, most confidently, rely,
that the former disease is never, in any instance, known to be contagious,
whereas there is, perhaps, reason to believe, that the case is different with
respect to the two latter. That they are occasionally propagated by contagion,
is a position, to the truth of which physicians of the highest eminence have,
at all times, afforded the testimony of their assent. On farther reflection,
however, it will be immediately perceived, that this trait in the character of
the West India pestilence results entirely from the influence of a tropical
climate. For it is a fact, well known to physicians of experience and
information, that a high and uniform temperature of atmosphere, is decidedly
hostile to the communication of pestilential diseases. Such a temperature,
continued for some time, arrests the progress of even the desolating pestilence
of Asia. It is a truth, which must be alike familiar to you all, that, at
Constantinople, the summer no less than the winter solstice bestows on the
inhabitants a temporary respite from the ravages of that dreadful calamity. --
As, then, the men of Europe, Asia, Africa and America, are held, by our most
eminent philosophers, to belong to the same species, and to owe the diversities
in their appearance, principally, to the influence of climate and manner of
life, would not a similar observation appear to be admissible, with respect to
the pestilential epidemics of those four divisions of the globe? May not these
diseases be, very rationally, viewed as the same in their nature, variously
modified by climate, and by the habits and manners of the human race?

From subjects of speculation, let us now turn our attention to an object,
which claims, from its situation, the solicitude of us all. Let us look around
on Philadelphia, which has so lately exhausted the cup of calamity, and whose
agonies, from the bitter draught, no friendly opiate has yet entirely lulled to
rest. -- Let us, I say, survey this opulent mart, this once fair and
flourishing metropolis, and say, can it, or can it not, from causes within
itself, give birth to a genuine pestilential disease? To you, gentlemen, who
have considered the matter with so much deliberation, I need hardly observe,
that on the just decision of this question, and the subsequent measures
established thereon, depends little less than the future existence of our city.
It merits, therefore, the most profound attention of every American, who is a
friend to his country, or who wishes well to the interest of the human race.

The subject of the origin of our late and preceding epidemics, has been
already so amply discussed, that those who take it up, at this period, can be
considered as little else than gleaners in the field of controversy. I cannot,
however, close my address, without laying before you the following remarks. To
strike, by their novelty, is not my intention, because I am sure they are
already familiar to you all. To gain your assent to their truth and justice,
constitutes, at present, the height of my ambition.

I. Considerably remote from the breezes of the ocean, and standing on a site
of but a moderate elevation, Philadelphia is by no means favorably situated
for free ventilation. These disadvantages, cooperating with those of numerous,
lofty, and crowded buildings, produce a stagnation in the air of most parts of
the city, unknown in places exempt from such obstructions. This stagnation is
very sensibly, and even oppressively, experienced, by our citizens, during the
warmth of the summer months. It is unnecessary to observe, that an atmosphere,
such as this, is in a fit state for the reception and retention of noxious
effluvia. Nor does it, under this evident want of motion, appear, by any means,
well calculated to dilute or weaken such effluvia, and thus obviate their
pernicious influence on the human system.

II. Philadelphia, though situated in the latitude of forty, is,
notwithstanding, annually subjected to all the fervors of a tropical climate,
for the successive space of, at least, eighty or ninety days. Suffering, during
this lengthy period, (...) superior, by three or four degrees, to that of the
(...) country, it may be considered as a pe^fect hot-^o^^e, with regard to
generating and fostering the seeds o^ ^^^tilential disease. Granting,
therefore, that pestilence is the more native offspring of a tropical sky, and
that it is even incapable of springing spontaneously beneath the natural
temperature of a milder climate, yet still, may it rise and flourish
luxuriantly in the hot-bed of a city as large and populous as that of
Philadelphia. Thus, the plants of the tropics are reared in hot-houses by the
curious, beneath the highest and most rigorous latitudes inhabited by man. In
like manner may pestilence, (though possibly the more natural product of a
tropical climate,) be reared to perfection in the hot-bed of Philadelphia.

III. The two evils, which I have just specified, are, in some measure,
necessarily attendant on our unfortunate city. Though, by wisdom and industry,
they may be diminished, to remove them, entirely, is beyond the limited powers
of man. Their foundation is laid in the works of nature, and art is, therefore,
incompetent to their removal. Its utmost extent is to obviate the mischiefs
which they tend to produce. We cannot countermand the excessive heats of our
climate, we are unable to elevate the ground on which Philadelphia stands; nor
can we invoke, with effect, the breezes of the Atlantic, to shed refreshment
through our oppressive streets! Notwithstanding the above observations, I am
persuaded, that, by a due attention to domestic cleanliness, cooperating with
such port regulations, as will prevent vessels containing foul air from
entering our harbor, the city of Philadelphia may be rendered as perfectly
exempt from pestilential epi^^^ics, as any commercial city in the the world.


Another evil remains yet to be mentioned, very different, in its nature, from
the preceding two. It is altogether of artificial birth, and art and industry
are, therefore, competent to its extinction. I allude to the immensity of
filth, with which the different parts of our city and suburbs abound. Nor is
this an evil of inferior magnitude. It may be considered as the hydra, whose
malignant breath, gave birth to the calamities we have three times suffered.
The severities of the season have paralised it, for the present, and reduced it
to its customary state of hybernation. But unless prevented, by an adoption of
the most wise and energetic measures, there is but too much reason to
apprehend, that it will be again awakened to life and action, by the returning
warmth of the summer sun! Before the arrival of that eventful period, may some
favored champion -- some enterprising Hercules arise, and strike from
existence this insatiate monster!

In taking a survey of many parts of our city and suburbs, our senses are
struck by the offensive and dangerous spectacle, of an accumulation of the
filth of nearly a century. In passing, in several directions, to a considerable
distance from the pavements of our streets, we are not even suffered to tread
on the soil of nature. We travel over artificial ground, made up of a
fermenting assemblage of the most noxious materials. Here, to the depth of
several inches beneath the surface, is promiscuously blended together, animal
and vegetable matter, in a state of high putrefaction, while the same
substances, in a similar state, are most plenteously strewn over the surface
itself. Nor is moisture wanting to give vigor to the process. -- During the
excessive heats of our summer solstice, what, I would ask, must be the effected
of the poisonous exhalation, arising from so extensive a source, added to that
proceeding from numerous other domestic causes? Must it not be, (to use the
language of the poet,) the conversion of the whole atmosphere of our city into
a "foul and pestilent congregation of vapors?" During this portentous
seed-time of pestilence, we are not privileged to breathe the untainted air,
prepared for our systems by the operations of nature, but are obliged to inhale
a mixture of deleterious exhalations, proceeding from the indolence, ignorance,
and inattention -- I had almost said, from the criminality of man. -- Nor is
the experience of time devising measures for the removal of this enormous evil,
nor erecting any barriers to check its growth. Even the melancholy reverse of
this is true. Notwithstanding the numerous declarations we hear, in favor of
the cleanliness of our streets, at present, compared to what existed some years
ago, it is an unquestionable truth, that, in the existing state of things, as
year succeeds to year, the aggregate mass of filth in our city and suburbs
increases. The filth taken up from our streets, not excepting even that which
is removed from our necessaries themselves, is, at present, conveyed to such an
inconsiderable distance from the city, that it might almost as well, be
suffered to remain in its original situation. Instead of employing such
materials for filling up ponds, and levelling the ground, in the south-western
part of the city, would it not be much more wise and economical, to convert
them to the purpose of fertilizing the ground, under cultivation in the
neighborhood, where, instead of proving destructive to the life of man, the
effluvia which they emit, might contribute, to rear up vegetables for his
sustenance and comfort?
Should our civic police, (as far as it respects the prevention of disease,)
continue supine and feeble, as it is, at present, what a dark and gloomy
prospect is opened to our view! With the future progress of time, danger would
seem to accumulate on danger, and distress to blacken over distress, till
imagination becomes bewildered, in attempting to calculate the melancholy
result.

Owing to such a state of domestic filth, as now prevails in and around the
city of Philadelphia, was the plague, in former times, the scourge of London,
and other populous cities of Europe; and, owing to a similar state, does it
still continue, occasionally, to rage in Constantinople, and in many other
devoted places in the East.

However painful the prospect, and however unpopular the idea, may, at present,
be with many, it is, in my apprehension of things, a truth which ought not to
be forgotten, that unless the misfortune be averted, by the most vigilant and
energetic measures of domestic cleanliness, the the large commercial cities of
America will, in, perhaps, less than a century, become as remarkable for giving
birth to pestilence, as any ever have been in Europe, or as any are now on the
continent of Asia.

To enumerate all the sources of our domestic filth, is not my present object.
This has already been ably done, in several memorials from the Academy of
medicine. There exist, however, two sources in particular, to which, I will be
pardoned for thinking, that the public attention has not been directed, in a
manner sufficiently forcible. These are, the vast quantity of putrid and
putrefying timber, which enters into the formation of our docks and wharves,
and the immensity of animal and vegetable substances, strewn, in a putrefactive
state, along the commons, in a south-western direction from the city.

From the former of these sources, an incalculable volume of deleterious air
must be discharged, to the great annoyance of the crews of vessels in our
harbor, and of all whose business demands their attendance along shore. For
this evil the remedy is easy and obvious. The timbers ought to be removed, as
much as possible, from the docks and wharves, and their place supplied by brick
or stone.

From the latter source, namely, the abundance of putrefying substances,
dispersed over the commons, in a south western direction, the air of the city
most be deeply contaminated. To have a due sense of the propriety and weight of
this observation, it is necessary to recollect, that, particularly, during the
months of July, August, and September, our prevailing winds are from that
quarter. Whatever noxious effluvia, therefore, may be evolved from those
substances, by the process of putrefaction, is wafted, immediately, into the
heart of our city, and mingled with the air of the streets which we breathe.
There is certainly reason to believe, that, to these effluvia, we were
indebted, in no inconsiderable degree, for that local constitution of
atmosphere, so highly favorable to the propagation of our late epidemic.

It is scarcely necessary to observe, that the remedy for this evil is the
immediate and entire removal of the offensive substances. If the places, which
those matters now occupy, were planted with trees or shrubbery, or, even, put
under a crop of inferior vegetation, the effect, on the city, would be both
pleasant and salutary. Vegetables are known to emit, during their wakeful and
active state, large quantities of pure respirable air. Were the above
regulation, therefore, adopted, instead of the offensive and pernicious vapor
of putrefaction, this fluid of life, would, in consequence of the south-western
winds of summer and autumn, glide through our streets, and diffuse both health
and vigor from its wings.

To the two preceding sources of the vitiation of our atmosphere, let me not
omit to subjoin that which is constituted by our public burying grounds. To a
mind eying, with deep solicitude, the apparently dubious balance of fate, with
respect to the future prosperity of our city, these extensive reservoirs,
fraught with the mouldering relicts of the dead, present themselves, as objects
of painful apprehension. They appear equally melancholy and dangerous, and, in
neither respect, is the degree inconsiderable. Situated, as some of them are,
in the very center of our city, these spacious enclosures, a great part of the
soil of which, is composed of human exuviae, cannot do otherwise than aid in
contaminating the air of our streets, and the water of our pumps. That the
water of our city is injured, by the immensity of dead bodies, deposited in our
grave-yards, we would infer, from the very considerable distance, to which the
putrid effluvia, from the contents of a grave, have been known to make their
way, through the bowels of the earth. And, that the same cause, has a tendency
to vitiate our atmosphere, we would conclude, in particular, from certain
physical phenomena, for which ancient grave-yards have been always remarkable.
The phenonema, to which I allude are, a kind of burning meteors, that sweep
along the surface of the ground, and which are known, under the vulgar
denomination of Will-with-the-wisp, or Jack-with-the-lanthern. These would seem
to owe their existence, principally, to an inflammable gas, discharged, through
the pores of the earth, from the putrefying contents of the graves, and have,
probably, aided much, in giving origin to the superstitious legends of the
ignorant, respecting churchyards being haunted, by goblins and ghosts.

For this evil, I need hardly observe, that the only remedy is, the removal of
our burying grounds, to a distance from the city. Nor let an attachment and
veneration, however natural and amiable, for the relicts of our friends,
prevent the adoption of such a salutary measure! If we painfully feel and
deplore the loss of our friends deceased, why dispose of their bodies, in such
a way, as to sow the seeds of pestilence and death, among those that survive,
and thus, voluntarily, subject ourselves to additional sorrow? To a feeling and
reflecting mind, it is, doubtless, a much more eligible alternative, to have a
portion of our relatives and friends still living, and those that are dead,
buried in a distant situation, and, even, in what some might consider as
unhallowed ground, than to have them all swept off, though buried in the
immediate vicinity of our dwellings, and in ground duly consecrated for the
purpose of interment.

On taking the preceding general view of the situation and circumstances of
Philadelphia -- On considering it as a large and populous city, deprived of the
advantage of free ventilation, subjected, during the summer months, to a heat
equal, at least, to that of the tropics, and en^veloped during that period, in
a cloud of poison^^^* exhalation, from the putrefactive dissolution of
organized bodies. -- On maturely weighing, I say the foregoing considerations,
and, at the same time, recollecting, that, under similar circumstances,
pestilential diseases have, unquestionably, arisen in other places, what shadow
of reason have we to doubt the practicability of pestilence originating in our
city, from domestic causes alone? As well may we assert, that the same sun,
which promotes vegetation, in the eastern, has no such influence in the western
hemisphere, as deny to causes, which are known and acknowledged to give birth
to pestilence, in the cities of Asia, the power of producing the same disease,
when operating, with equal force, in the cities of America. Could I be
persuaded, that, under similar circumstances, the same causes, do not,
uniformly and necessarily, produce the same effects in Asia and America, I
would, immediately, subscribe to the Pagan belief of Polytheism. In such a
state of things, I would be constrained to believe, that the God of the old
world, was not, in like manner, the God of the new, but that the two
hemispheres of our globe, were governed by distinct Deities, through the medium
of different physical laws!

I have, hitherto, treated my subject in a manner rather abstract and general,
and have indulged myself, occasionally, in discussive speculation. I have
endeavored to demonstrate, on principles long since known and established, the
practicability of pestilential diseases originating on the western shores of
the Atlantic. from general reasoning, I might now descend, (...) particular
specification, and exchange principles in science, for plain and undeniable
matters of fact. Thus, might I advert to the history of a far distant period,
and show, from authentic records, that, previously to the establishment of any
commercial intercourse, between America and the West Indies, even the depth of
our forests were unable to shelter the aborigines of our own country, from the
invasion of pestilence. I might point to our extensive north western lakes, and
the country adjacent, where pestilential epidemics not unfrequently prevail
with high malignity, and where, at the same time, foreign intercourse is
altogether unknown. But leaving former times, and remote places, I might
proceed to show, that, within a few years past, and, in places not far distant,
numerous instances of the American pestilence have appeared, which could not
possibly be traced to any communication with a foreign climate or infected
source, and which must have, therefore, originated in the very place^ where
they occured. But I am precluded, from a more extensive view of my subject, by
an unwillingness to intrude any farther on your time, and, thus, be guilty of
an undue trespass on your politeness and indulgence.

Before concluding my address, allow me, Gentlemen, to congratulate you on the
success, I had almost said, the triumph of the principles, which the Academy
advocates, respecting the origin of the late epidemics of America. To say, that
these diseases are of domestic growth, is no longer denounced as medical
heresy, nor as a species of blasphemy against our country. On this subject, the
shades of prejudice and error are rapidly retreating, before the radiance of
liberality and truth. As far as relates to the necessary importation of
pestilential diseases from foreign countries, the time-worn fabric of
superstition in medicine, has received a revolutionary blow, from which it is
tottering to the depth of its found^^^^^* (...) the time far distant, when this
humiliating (...) of the bigotry of ages, shall tumble to irreparable ruins
around the hoary Of those physicians, who advocate the opinion, that the
disease, in question, is necessarily of foreign origin, there are but very few,
who are not considerably advanced in years. This, on first view, might appear
to be an evidence, of some degree of respectability, in favor of the
authenticity and truth of the opinion. The force of this evidence, however,
will be much diminished, when we recollect, that almost the only medical
characters, in Great Britain, who opposed the truth of Harvey's discovery of
the circulation of the blood, and blindly adhered to the antiquated and absurd
error of its flux and reflux through the same channels, were such as bad, at
the time of the discovery, passed the fortieth year of their age. On the death
of those characters, all opposition to the Harvean doctrine ceased. Such will
be the fate of the doctrine which embraces the domestic origin of the
pestilence of America. Our medical posterity will unanimously adopt it, nor
will they fail to wonder, why it was rejected by any of their ancestors.
heads of its supporters.

Persevere, then, my fellow members, to the completion of the work you have so
laudably undertaken. Wage for yourselves, both jointly and individually,
nothing less than a war of utter extermination, against those prejudices and
errors, which threaten the depopulation of the cities of America. While thus
engaged, whatever may be the fate of your reputations, with a few of your
narrow minded cotemporaries, be assured, that, if you continue firm in the
track, where philanthropy leads and science lights the way, you will not -- you
cannot fail, to receive the approbation and applause of a more enlightened and
grateful posterity!

END.

