MR. DAGGETT'S ORATION On the 4th of July, 1799.

SUNBEAMS MAY BE EXTRACTED FROM CUCUMBERS, BUT THE PROCESS IS TEDIOUS.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1799. AT THE REQUEST OF THE
CITIZENS OF NEW HAVEN.

BY DAVID DAGGETT.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY THOMAS GREEN AND SON. 1799.

[Copy Right Secured.]

TO the Citizens of New Haven, at whose request this Oration was pronounced and
published, it is respectfully inscribed by their affectionate friend and
Fellow-Citizen,

DAVID DAGGETT.

AN ORATION.
HISTORY informs us, that at Lagado, in Laputa, there was a grand academy
established, in which there was a display of much curious learning.

"ONE artist, of a very philosophic taste, was racking his invention to make a
pin-cushion out of a piece of marble.

"ANOTHER had formed an ingenious project to prevent the growth of wool upon
two young lambs, by a composition of gums, minerals and vegetables, applied
inwardly, and thus he hoped in a reasonable time to propagate the breed of
naked sheep throughout the Kingdom.

"A THIRD had contrived a plan to entirely abolish words; and this was urged as
a great advantage in point of health as well as brevity. For it is plain that
every word we speak is an injury to our lungs, by corrosion, and consequently
contributes to the shortening of our lives. An expedient was therefore offered,
that since words were only names for things, it would be more convenient for
all men to carry about them such things as were necessary to express the
particular business on which they were to discourse;" and the Historian adds,
"that he had often beheld two of those sages almost sinking under the weight of
their packs, who, when they met in the streets, would lay down their loads,
open their sacks, and hold conversation for an hour together; then put up their
implements, help each other to resume their burdens, and take their leave.

"A FOURTH appeared with sooty hands and face, his hair and beard long, ragged
and singed in several places. His clothes, shirt and skin were all of the same
color. He had been eight years upon a project for extracting sunbeams out of
Cucumbers, which were to be put into vials, hermetically sealed, and let out to
warm the air in raw inclement summers. He said he did not doubt but that, in
eight years more, he should be able to supply the Governor's gardens with
sunshine at a reasonable rate."

THESE Theorists were very patient, industrious and laborious in their pursuits
-- had a high reputation for their singular proficiency, and were regarded as
prodigies in science. The common laborers and mechanics were esteemed a
different race of beings, and were despised for their stupid and old fashioned
manner of acquiring property and character. If the enquiry had been made
whether any of these projects had succeeded, it would have been readily
answered that they had not; but that they were reasonable -- their principles
just -- and of course, that they must ultimately produce the objects in view.
Hitherto no piece of marble had been made into a pin-cushion, and few, very few
sunbeams had been extracted from Cucumbers; but what then? Are not all great,
and noble, and valuable things, accomplished with immense exertion, and with an
expense of much time? If a farther enquiry had been made what would be the
great excellence of a marble pin-cushion, or the superior advantage of a breed
of naked sheep, the answer would have been, it is unphilosophical to ask such
questions.

IN more modern times we have witnessed projects not unlike those of the
learned of Laputa, above mentioned. A machine, called an Automaton, was, not
long since, constructed. This was designed to transport from place to place, by
land, any load without the aid of horses, oxen, or any other animal. The master
was to sit at helm, and guide it up hill and down, and over every kind of road.
This machine was completed, and proved demonstrably capable of performing the
duties assigned to it, and the only difficulty which attended it, and which
has hitherto prevented its universal use, was, that it would not go. -- Here,
if any ignorant fellow had been so uncivil, he might have doubted why, if wood
and iron were designed to go alone and carry a load, the whole herd of oxen,
horses and camels were created.

A FEW years ago the Learned insisted that it was grovelling to travel either
by land or water, but that the truly philosophical mode was to go by air.
Hence, in all parts of the world, speculatists were mounted in balloons, with
the whole apparatus of living and dying, and were flying through the Heavens,
to the utter astonishment and mortification of those poor illiterate wretches
who were doomed to tug and sweat on the earth. To be sure this method of
traveling was somewhat precarious. -- A flaw of wind, regardless of the
principles of this machine, might destroy it, or, by the giving way of one
philosophical pin, peg or rope, it might be let into the sea, or dashed against
a rock, and thus its precious contents miserably perish. But doubtless reason
will, in time, provide sufficient checks against all these casualties. Here
again some "busy body in other men's matters" might ask, if it was intended
that men should fly through the air, why were they not made with feathers and
wings, and especially why are there so many who are justly called Heavy molded
men?

ANOTHER class of the literati of our age, scorning to travel either on the
sea, or on the land, or in the air, have constructed a submarine boat or diving
machine, by which they were constantly groping among shark, sturgeon and
sea-horses. To say nothing of the hazard which these gentlemen encounter of
running on rocks or shoals, or of being left in the lurch, on the bottom of the
sea, by a leak, may we not wonder that they were not made with fins and scales,
and may they not esteem themselves very fortunate that they have hitherto
escaped being cut up to be made into oil?

THESE are a few among many modern inventions. All the principles of these
various machines are capable of defense, and the inventors are all great, and
learned, and ingenious men. Yet, strange as it may seem, the stupid, foolish,
plodding people of this and other countries, still keep their oxen and their
horses -- their carriages are still made as they were an hundred years ago, and
our coasters will still go to New York on the surface of the sound, instead of
sinking to the bottom or rising into the clouds -- and they still prefer a fair
wind and tide to the greatest profusion of steam, produced in the most
scientific manner.

THIS species of enterprise, and this spirit of learning, has entered deeply
into the business of agriculture. Discoveries have been made which have
rendered sowing and reaping unnecessary. The plow, harrow, spade, hoe, sickle
and scythe, have undergone a thorough change, on mathematical principles, and
the speculative husbandman has yearly expected to see the fields covered with
grass, and the hills and valleys with corn and wheat, without the clownish
exercise of labor. With Varlow on Husbandry, in his hands, and a complete
collection of philosophical farming utensils, he has forgotten that by the
"sweat of his brow he was to eat his bread," and is hourly expecting to "reap
where he has not sown, and gather where he has not strawed." -- Still here
and there an old fashioned fellow, and New England abounds with them, "will
rise early and set up late, and eat the bread of industry; will sow his seed in
the morning and in the evening withhold not his hand," and is secretly
flattering himself that this is the surest road to peace and plenty.

HYPOCRATES, Galen and Sydenham, have been successively and conjointly attacked
by the Physicians of the present refined age, and the medical learning of
ancient times, or even of the last century, pronounced quackery and nonsense. A
few years since, if a man were attacked with a most violent disease he was
directed to stimulate. Stimulants, powerful stimulants, were all the fashion;
and, instead of Apothecaries shops and Lancets, the nurse was directed to the
brandy pipe and the gin-case. Thus the Brownonian system had superceded all
others, and it was proved demonstrably, that the reason why the children of men
were subject to death was, that they did not sufficiently fortify against its
attacks, with beef steaks and wine. These principles had slain but a few when
they were universally exploded, and men, going into the opposite extreme, were
literally bled to death; and thus, lest the system should be overcharged, all
its props were cautiously, but entirely removed.

AT length reason, unerring reason, appeared, and patients, writhed with
agonies by the most subduing maladies, were solemnly directed to the Points.
Yes, to the Points, as the great antidote against disease, and the certain
restorer of health; and thus it was found, to the everlasting contempt of all
the learned of the faculty of ancient and modern days, that the materia medica
was useless, for that being pluss electrified, in one part of the body, and
minus in the other, was the true radix of every disease, and that the sovereign
remedy was, to restore an equilibrium by an external application of brass and
steel.

YET there are many so bigoted to the customs and practices of their
ancestors, that they insist on the foolish habit of temperance, industry and
exercise, and express some doubts respecting the entire efficacy of tractors.

A MORE extensive field for the operation of these principles, has been opened,
in the new theories of the education of children. It has been lately discovered
that the maxim, "Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it," is an erroneous translation, and should read thus
-- "Let a child walk in his own way, and when he is old, he will be perfect."
Volumes have been written, and much time and labor expended, to show that all
reproof, restraint and correction, tend directly to extinguish the fire of
genius, to cripple the faculties and enslave the understanding. Especially we
are told, (and the system of education now adopted in the great gallic nursery
of arts, is entirely on this plan) that the prejudices of education, and an
inclination to imitate the example of parents and other ancestors, is the great
bane of the peace, dignity and glory of young men, and that reason will conduct
them, if not fettered with habits, to the perfection of human nature. Obedience
to parents is expressly reprobated, and all the tyranny and despotism in the
world ascribed to parental authority. This sentiment is explicitly avowed by
Mr. Volney, who is the friend and associate of many distinguished men in the
United States, and who has, in this opinion, showed that Paul was a fool or
knave when he said, "Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right."

IF any person, groping in darkness, should object to these sentiments and
enquire, how it is possible that children should become thus excellent if left
entirely to themselves, when the experience of ages has been, that with great
and continued exertions, no such facts have existed, it may be replied, the
projector of Laputa had not been able in EIGHT YEARS to extract sunbeams from
Cucumbers, but he was certain it would be done IN EIGHT YEARS MORE.

WE all recollect when these principles began to impress our Colleges -- when
it was seriously contended that the study of mathematics and natural philosophy
was ruinous to the health, genius and character of a young gentleman -- That
music, and painting, and dancing, and fencing, and speaking French, were the
only accomplishments worth possessing; and that Latin and Greek were fitted
only for stupid divines, or black letter-lawyers. An indispensable part of this
philosophical, and polite, and genteel, and pretty education was, to travel
into foreign countries, and there reside long enough to forget all the early
habits of life -- to forget all domestic connexions -- to forget the
school-house where he was first taught his New England primer -- to forget the
old fashioned meeting house where he was first led to worship God, and
especially to forget his native country, and to remember only, but remember
always and effectually, that he was a polished cosmopolite, or citizen of the
world.

THE system of morals which has been reared by the care, anxiety, and wisdom of
ages, has, in its turn, been assailed by these Theorists. The language of
modern reformers to those who venerate ancient habits, ancient manners, ancient
systems of morals and education, is, "O fools, when will ye be wise." To first
shake, and then destroy the faith of every man on these interesting subjects,
has been attempted by many distinguished men, with an industry, labor and
perseverance, which deserved a better cause, and has been for many years a
prime object of pursuit in that nation which has been the great hot-bed of
premature and monstrous productions. To particularize on this subject would be
impossible, but I cannot forbear to hint at a few of those doctrines now
strenuously supported.

THAT men should love their children precisely according to their worth, and
that if a neighbor's child be more deserving, it should be preferred.

THAT men are to regard the general good in all their conduct, and of course to
break promises, contracts and engagements, or perform them, as will conduce to
this object.

THAT to refuse to lend a sum of money, when possible, and when the applicant
is in need of it, is an act equally criminal with theft or robbery, to the same
amount.

IF a difficulty should here be started, that men may judge erroneously as to
the desert of a neighbor's child -- the demands of the public as to the
fulfillment of a promise, or the necessity for the loan in the case mentioned,
the answer is ready reason, mighty reason, will be an infallible guide. A plain
old fashioned man will say, this is indeed a beautiful system, but there
appears one difficulty attending it, that is, it is made for a race of beings
entirely different from men. Again, says he -- Why for six thousand years the
love of parents to children, has been considered, as the only tie by which
families have been connected; and families have been considered as the
strongest band and most powerful cement of society -- destroy then this
affection, and what better than miserable vagabonds, will be the inhabitants of
the earth? -- This part of the project really strikes me, he adds, like the
attempt to propagate the breed of naked sheep. Then again, it is quite
doubtful, whether parents, of ordinary nerves, can, at once, divest themselves
of natural affection. -- Indeed, there is a strong analogy between this part of
the scheme, and making a pin-cushion out of a piece of marble. -- But to the
cosmopolite, who belongs no where, is connected with nobody, and who has been
from his youth, progressing to perfection, these sentiments are just, and the
exercise of them, quite feasible.

BUT these modern theories have appeared, in their native beauty, and shone
with the most resplendent luster in the science of politics. We are seriously
told that men are to be governed only by reason. Instruct men and there will be
an end of punishment. It is true, since the world began, not a family, a state
or a nation, has been, on these principles, protected; but this is because
reason has not been properly exercised. The period now approaches when reason
unfolds itself -- one more hot-bed will mature it, and then behold the glorious
harvest!

BUT it may be stupidly asked what shall be done in the mean time? men are now
somewhat imperfect -- Theft, burglary, robbery and murder, are now and then
committed, and it will be some years before the perfection of human nature will
shield us from these evils. This interregnum will be somewhat calamitous. --
And also, is it certain that the commission of crimes has a tendency to refine
and perfect the perpetrator? These questions never should be asked at the close
of the eighteenth Century. -- They are manifestly too uncivil.

AGAIN, say modern theories, men are all equal, and of course no restraints are
imposed by society -- no distinctions can exist, except to gratify the pride of
the ambitious, the cruelty of the despotic. Hence it is the plain duty of every
individual, to hasten the reign of liberty and equality. It is not a novel
opinion, that men are by nature possessed of equal rights, and that "God has
made of one blood all nations of men to dwell on the face of the earth," but
it is somewhat doubtful whether every man should be permitted to do as he
pleases. -- Such liberty, it may be said, is unsafe with men who are not
perfect. -- A cosmopolite, to be sure, will not abuse it, because he loves all
mankind in an equal degree: but the expediency of the general principle may be
questioned -- any opinion of great and learned men in any wise, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

IF, however, by liberty and equality is intended, the power of acting with as
much freedom as is consistent with the public safety -- and that each man has
the same right to the protection of law as another, there is no controversy;
but these terms, as now explained, advocated and adopted, mean the power of
acting without any other restraint, than reason, and the levelling all
distinctions by right or wrong, and thus understood, they are of rather too
suspicious a character for men, of ordinary talents, to admit.

BUT these principles extend still farther -- their grasp is wider. They aim at
the actual destruction of every government on earth.

KINGS are the first object of their attack -- then a nobility -- then commons.

TO prepare the way for the accomplishment of these objects, all former systems
of thinking and acting, must be annihilated, and the reign of reason firmly
established.

BUT it will be enquired, where have these novel theories appeared? I answer --
They have dawned upon New England -- they have glowed in the southern states --
they have burnt in France. We have seen a few projectors in Boats, Balloons and
Automatons -- A few philosophical farmers -- A few attempts to propagate the
breed of naked sheep -- and we have at least one Philosopher in the United
States, who has taken an accurate mensuration of the Mammoth's bones -- made
surprising discoveries in the doctrine of vibrating pendulums, and astonished
the world with the precise guage and dimensions of all the aboriginals of
America.

BUT in France, for many years, these speculations in agriculture, the mechanic
arts, education, morals and government, have been adopted and pursued. It is
there declared and established, by law, that ancient habits, customs and
manners, modes of thinking, reasoning and acting, ought to be ridiculed,
despised and rejected, for that a totally new order of things has taken place.
All those rules of action which civilized nations have deemed necessary to
their peace and happiness, have been declared useless or arbitrary, unnecessary
or unjust. The most distinguished treatises on the laws of nations -- treatises
which have been considered as containing rules admirably adapted to the
situation of different countries, and therefore of high authority, have not
only been disregarded, but publicly contemned as musty, worm-eaten productions.
Even that accomplished Cosmopolite, Mr. Genet, who came the messenger of peace
and science to this guilty and deluded people, and who treated us precisely
according to those assumed characters, opened his budget with an explicit
renunciation of the principles of Puffendorf, Vattel, and other writers of that
description, and declared that his nation would be governed by none of their
obsolete maxims.

INDEED, this learned nation, have yielded implicitly to the sentiments of Mr.
Volney, Mr. Pain, and Mr. Godwin, in all questions of morals and policy; and
in all matters of religion there is associated with them that learned and pious
divine, the Bishop of Autun, who had the Cosmopolitism to boast that he had
preached twenty years, under an oath, without believing a word which he uttered.

TO aid the establishment of these projects, the credulity of the present age
has become truly astonishing. There appears to be a new machinery for the mind,
by which its capacity (...) believing certain things is perfect. It is believed
that Socrates, and Plato, and Seneca -- Bacon, Newton and Lock, and all who
lived and died prior to the commencement of the French Revolution, were either
fools or slaves. That in no country but France is there science or virtue. That
the body of the people in England are now groaning under the most oppressive
bondage and tyranny. That this was precisely the case in Holland, Italy and
Switzerland, till France introduced them to their present happy condition. It
is believed by all the Cosmopolites in Europe, and by many in America -- by all
genuine Jacobins, by many Democrats, by the greater part of the readers of the
Aurora, the Argus and the Be, and by an innumerable multitude who don't read
at all, that the Citizens of these States, and particularly of New England, are
miserable, benighted, enslaved and wretched dupes* and that the President and
his adherents, are in a firm league to injure and destroy them. That our
members of Congress, and the Heads of departments, are bribed with British
gold, and are exerting all their faculties to forge chains for their posterity.
That all, in any way, connected with the government, are constantly plundering
the Treasury -- amassing wealth -- becoming independent -- and thus
establishing an abominable, cruel, wicked, despotic and devilish aristocracy,
which is to continually enlarge its grasp, till it shall embrace all the
valuable interests of America, and leave the people "destitue, afflicted,
tormented." And, finally, it is believed by many, that John Adams has entered
into co-partnership with John Q. Adams, his son, now Minister at Berlin, for
the express purpose of importing Monarchy, by wholesale, into this country: And
to increase and perpetuate the stock of the house, that the son is to marry one
of the daughters of the King of England.

IF you enquire respecting the truth of these things, they cite Gallatin,
Nicholas and Lion -- They quote from the Aurora, the Argus and the Be; and who
can doubt these sources of information, since the various publications, within
a year past, respecting Connecticut, this City, and our College?

BUT it may be asked, where is your proof that the sentiments and theories
which you have been describing, in fact, have an existence? Where is your
proof, Sir, that the modern Literati are attempting to extract sunbeams from
Cucumbers -- to travel without exertion -- to reap without sowing -- to educate
children to perfection -- to introduce a new order of things as it respects
morals and politics, social and civil duties, and to establish this strange
species of credulity? I reply -- those who have not yet become Cosmopolites,
need no proof. They have seen, and heard, and read these wild vagaries, and are
therefore satisfied of their existence. As to the others, I have only to
remark, that this same new machinery of the mind, by which certain things are
believed, necessarily, and by the plain axiom, that action, and reaction, are
equal, produces absolute incredulity, as to certain other things, and of
course, no testimony will have any effect. Thus genuine Jacobins do not believe
a word published in the Spectator, the Connecticut Journal, the Connecticut
Courant, or the Sentinel. They do not believe that France has any intention to
destroy the government of this country -- They do not believe that our
Ministers at Paris were treated with any neglect, or contempt. -- Indeed, some
doubt whether Mr. Pinckney ever was in France. They do not believe that Italy,
or Holland, or Germany, has ever been pillaged by the armies of the Republic,
or that the path of those armies has been marked with any scenes of calamity
and distress. In short, they do not believe but that the Directory, with their
associates, are a benevolent society, established in that regenerated country,
for the great purpose of propagating religion and good government through the
world; and that their armies are their missionaries to effect these glorious
objects.

AND now, my Fellow-Citizens, let me ask, what effects have been produced by
these theoretic, speculative, and delusive principles? France has made an
experiment with them. Under pretense of making men perfect -- of establishing
perfect Liberty -- perfect Equality -- and an entirely new order of things, she
has become one great Bedlam, in which some of the inhabitants are falling into
the water, some into the fire, some biting and gnashing themselves with their
teeth, and others beholding these acts, are chanting "RIGHTS OF MAN! CA-IRA!"

WITH the pleasant, but deceptive sounds, of Liberty and Rights of Man, on
their tongues, they have made an open and violent war upon all the valuable
interests of society.

THEIR own country, Italy, Belgium, Batavia and Switzerland, making together,
the fairest portion of Europe, have been despoiled by the arms of these
reformers, and they are now plundering the wretched Arabs.

NO place has been too sacred for them to defile -- no right too dear for them
to invade -- no property too valuable for them to destroy.

THEY have robbed and plundered, because they could rob and plunder.

THEY have conquered, not to bless their subjects, but to aggrandize the
Republic, and gratify a lust of domination.

THERE is not a man, woman or child, whom they have attempted to render wiser,
better or happier. There is not a family, a neighborhood, a village or a
country, from which there now ascends, to God, one act of sincere praise, for
the establishment of this new order of things, among them: but to weep and
bewail their condition, is the ceaseless employment of millions.

WHEN their conduct, from any circumstance, in their opinion, needed
justification, they have resorted to that unmeaning defense, "imperious
necessity."

WE have seen the treatment of the Republic toward other nations -- we have
experienced it toward ourselves. There is no man, except the slaves of the
credulity or incredulity, which I have mentioned, who doubts but their wish and
object is, to destroy our government, and subject us entirely to their control.

THEY have robbed us on the sea, without law, or pretense of law.

THEY have declared, by a legislative act, that they will treat us as we may be
compelled to suffer other nations to treat us.

THEY have attempted to influence the election of our great officers, and
particularly of President and Vice President.

THEY have, through their Ministers, and other agents, been creating a party in
this country, which has, once and again, threatened us with the horrors of a
civil war, and which has smitten us with a disease worse than the plague.

FROM the day Mr. Genet landed on this Continent 'till the poisonous,
debauching diplomatic intercourse between us and France was prohibited, French
emissaries and American jacobins, have been constantly plotting and executing
treasons against our government, which according to the laws of every well
regulated society, would subject the authors to the punishment of death.

WHEN we have complained, the Directory have, with the most pointed abuse or
sullen contempt, rejected our complaints.

ONE minister has been refused an audience, and three, were met with a mixture
of the most foul and debasing intrigue.

THEY demand, in terms, that the speeches of the President should be
accommodated to a Directorial ear. Yes, Americans! They demand that the
speeches of your President, delivered at the opening of Congress, in conformity
to the Constitution, and in which it is his duty to declare the state of the
Union, should be modified and accommodated to the ear of a juggling Directory.

AND why this imperious conduct? -- Why this insufferable insolence? Come thou
MAGNANIMOUS REPUBLIC, "show thy strong reasons!" -- Let us hear them! --

THE Republic is great! Terrible to its enemies! -- Beneficent to its friends!
BENEFICENT TO REPUBLICANS! Witness the blood and groans and universal
desolation of Switzerland! BLOOD AND GROANS AND DESOLATION, ARE THE TROPHIES OF
THY BENEFICENCE, THOU MAGNANIMOUS REPUBLIC.

BUT the Republic is irresistible to support the rights of man! -- She will
cause the rights of man every where to be respected! -- Rights of Man! I am
astonished that the utterance of those words " don't blister their tongues."
Since the combination against France was defeated, she has uniformly been the
aggressor, and Europe has become one great slaughterhouse. Within this period,
it is computed, that more than four millions of people have perished by the
revolution, and this mighty destruction has been effected in ways, by means and
under circumstances so afflicting and distressing, that it is hardly possible to
conceive how four millions of people could have perished, with more infamy to
the Republic.

BUT the Directory proclaim, Liberty and Equality. Liberty and Equality! -- Was
the earth ever before insulted with such mockery! -- The Directory, each of
whom, assumes a haughtiness, and appears with a pomp and splendour unequalled by
any potentate in Europe, insult the world by the pretense of establishing
Liberty and Equality!

BUT they have opened prisons and bastiles, given freedom to the miserable
captive, broken down the images of idolatry, and driven error and superstition
from the earth. That they have unloosed bands, is not denied -- that they have
destroyed the strongest ligaments by which individuals and societies were
connected, is not denied, but that the cause of genuine liberty is promoted, I
do deny. Is there a single country in Europe, in which their arms have
triumphed, less oppressed, or less wretched now than ten years ago?

THAT they have driven men from one species of error and superstition to
another, is agreed. But what consolation is it to the wretched worshippers of
stones to forget these Gods, and adore reason, fortitude and virtue?

IF they found in Egypt those who were bowing down to onions and leeks, have
they rendered them any essential service, by telling them henceforth to believe
in the liberty and equality of man -- in the perfectability of human nature,
and in the eternal sleep of death. Paul, whose character they so heartily
despise, acted a much more civil and kind, (not to say christian) part. He
found an altar among the Athenians, inscribed to the "Unknown God;" and
beholding their devotions, cried, "Whom therefore, ye ignorantly worship, him
declare I unto you." Let the advocates for the reformation, in religion, which
this nation are effecting, compare the plain and unadorned account of Paul's
God, with the address of the French Apostle, Buonaparte, to the ignorant
Egyptians. "There is no God but God. He has no son or associate in his kingdom."

BUT it is said, these mighty events, which now astonish the world, are in exact
conformity to the will of Heaven. What do the asserters of this proposition
mean? That it is, in itself, right, and therefore agreeable to the will of
heaven, for one nation to destroy the government of another, be that government
ever so bad? -- If they mean this, I answer directly, the proposition is false.
All writers, on the laws of nation, without an exception, teach a directly
opposite doctrine. Nay, this principle would place France above reproach. -- It
would give her the ground she has assumed, viz. That power is the only rule of
action. This is her creed. -- This her friends, (I have, once and again heard
them) declare to be her standard. And what is this but a principle which has
ever been the single rule of conduct in Hell! --

BUT it is said, these events tend directly, to fulfill a great plan, for the
good of the Universe. Do these apologists, for Frenchmen, mean, that the
Directory, and their subordinates, are commissioned by God, to destroy all the
governments on earth? If they mean this, I beg them to show, first, that they
are the privy counselors of Heaven; and, secondly, that such commissions have
actually issued. But do they mean that these horrid acts of plunder, treachery
and murder, are under the divine control, and therefore we must acquiesce and
rejoice? If they mean this, I congratulate them on their resignation, and wish
that it may increase, till it produces a spirit of reconciliation to our own
government. But is it a just principle, that we are to be thankful, for all
events, because they are under the divine control? I think the friends of this
new theory, should praise God for all the evil and misery, which men commit,
and suffer, and they will be entitled, then, to the credit of being consistent.

BUT is it meant that these events WILL produce good, and therefore are the
subject of rejoicing? -- Thunder and lightning, volcanos and earthquakes,
pestilence and famine, which affrighten, astonish and destroy, may produce
good! The fire and plague, of 1665 and 1666, which desolated the first city in
the world, probably, have been followed with salutary consequences! But what
assembly, ever yet, seriously engaged in mutual congratulation, that the
pestilence was slaying its thousands, or that millions of old and young,
innocent and guilty, were consumed by a conflagration, or swallowed up by an
earthquake?

NAY, there was a murder, once committed, on Mount Calvary, which has produced
all the good in the Universe. Who has yet been found, to applaud these
murderers? -- Mark the difference, in the conduct of Heaven, at the birth and
death of the Savior. At the one, "all the sons of God shouted for joy." At the
other, in direct disapprobation thereof, the Heavens were veiled in darkness,
and the earth shook to its center!

IF many of our countrymen approve the measures of France, and applaud them in
their mad career of domination, I speak, with confidence, the body of our
citizens entertain different opinions. Such will cordially join in protecting
our government, and in supporting an energetic administration. They will,
particularly, as a mean to accomplish this object, and the only one I shall now
urge, discountenance that unparallelled abuse of all those to whom is entrusted
the management of our national interests, which is now so prevalent.

NOT a man, though his private character were like tried gold, has escaped the
most malignant censure. -- The President, each head of department, each member
of the Legislature, and every other man, who supports the administration, is
daily charged with the most vile and degrading crimes. They are openly
vilified, as parties to a conspiracy, against the peace, the dignity, and the
happiness of the United States.

AND who are these reformers, that exhibit these charges? -- Are they the
virtuous, meek, unspotted and holy of the earth?

WHO are these thus reproached? They are your neighbors, chosen to protect your
interests. -- What is their object? Wealth? -- If so, they are miserably
employed. There is not a man among them, who can, with the utmost economy,
secure as much money as hundreds of merchants, lawyers, physicians, masters of
vessels, and farmers, annually make, by their various pursuits.

BUT alas! they wish to enslave us. Is this their character in private life?
Have they not, with you, houses and lands, character and liberty to defend? --
Have they not wives and children, whose happiness is near their hearts? -- And
do they, indeed, labor and toil, to forge chains and fetters for their
children, and children's children, that their names and memories, may go down
to future generations, covered with the bitterest curses.

I HAVE made these observations, my Fellow-Citizens, that we may, on this
anniversary of our National existence, a day which I hope may be kept sacred to
that solemn employment, contemplate the labors, the exertions, and the
characters of those venerable men, who founded, and have, hitherto, protected
this nation. I wish them to be seen, and compared with the speculating
theorists, and mushroom politicians of this age of reason.

IT is now less than two hundred years, since the first settlement of white
people was effected, in these United States; less than one hundred and eighty,
since the first settlement was made, in New England, and less than one hundred
and seventy, since the first settlement was made, in Connecticut. The place
where we are now assembled, was then, a wild waste. Instead of cultivated
fields, dens and caves. Instead of a flourishing city, huts and wigwams.
Instead of polite, benevolent, and learned citizens, a horde of savages.
Instead of a seat of science, full of young men, qualifying to adorn and bless
their country, here was only taught the art of tormenting ingeniously, and here
were only heard the groans of the dying.

WHAT is here said of New Haven, may, with little variation, be said of all
New England, and of many other parts of the United States.

WE have now, upwards of four millions of inhabitants, cultivating a fertile
country, and engaged in a commerce, with 876,000 tons of shipping, and second
only, to that of Great Britain.

HOW has this mighty change been effected? -- Was it by magic? By supernatural
aid? or was it by ingenious theories in morals, economics and government? My
Fellow-Citizens, it was accomplished by the industry, the labor, the
perseverance, the sufferings and virtues, of those men, from whom we glory in
being descended. See Trumbull's history of Connecticut -- a book which ought to
be in every family.


THESE venerable men spent no time in extracting sunbeams from cucumbers -- in
writing letters to Mazzei, or perplexing the world with the jargon of the
perfectability of human nature.

THEY and their illustrious descendants pursued directly, and by those means
which always will succeed, for they always have succeeded, those which common
sense dictate, the erection and support of good government and good morals. To
effect these great objects, they stood like monuments, with their wives, their
children, and their lives in their hands. -- They fought -- they bled -- they
died. -- At this expense of ease, happiness and life, they made establishments
for posterity -- they protected them against savages -- they cemented them with
their blood -- they delivered them to us as a sacred deposit, and if we suffer
them to be destroyed by the tinselled refinements of this age, we shall deserve
the reproaches, with which, impartial justice will cover such a pusillanimous
race.

LOOK particularly at the various complaints, remonstrances and petitions made
by these States, on various occasions, from the first settlement of this
country, to the 4th of July 1776, and compare them with the state papers, of
the great Republic. In the one, you will see the plain, pointed language of
injured innocence, demanding redress -- in the other, the sly, wily, ambigious,
camelion dialect of Jesuits, curiously wrought up to mean every thing, and
nothing, by a set of mountebank politicians, headed by a perjured Bishop of
Autun.

AT this day there exist two parties in these United States. At the head of one
are Washington, Adams, and Ellsworth. -- The object of this party is to protect
and defend the government from that destruction, with which, they believe it
threatened, by its enemies. To preserve and transmit to posterity those
establishments, which they believe important to the happiness of society.

AT the head of the other, is the gentleman who drank toasts at (...) in May
1798, in direct contempt of our government, who wrote the letter to Mazzei,
with Gallatin, and Nicholas, and Lion, and to grace the company they shine,
with the borrowed luster of Talleyrand, that dissembler to God and Man. The
object of this party is to destroy ancient systems -- ancient habits -- ancient
customs -- to introduce a new liberty, new equality, new rights of man, new
modes of education, and a new order of things.

LET them meet and make a full, fair, and perfect exposition of their
principles -- their objects, and the means by which they are to be accomplished
-- And let there be present at this display, the departed spirits of Davenport,
Hooker, Winthrop, Wolcott, Hopkins, Haynes, and Heaton, and let there also
appear a Lawrence, a Warren, a Mercer, and a Wooster, and to which of these
parties would they give their blessing? -- For which of these causes, if it
were possible to bleed and die again in the cause of America, would the beloved
WARREN AGAIN BLEED AND DIE?


