Entertaining, Moral, and Religious REPOSITORY; Written in a simple yet
pleasing Style, EMINENTLY CALCULATED FOR THE Amusement and Instruction OF THE
YOUTH OF BOTH SEXES.

Published by a Society in Great Britain, instituted for the beneficent purpose
of aiding the intention of HIS MAJESTY, as expressed in his royal proclamation
for the suppression of vice and immorality.

VOL I.

ELIZABETH TOWN: PRINTED BY SHEPARD KOLLOCK FOR CORNELIUS DAVIS, NO. 94,
WATER-STREET, NEW YORK. 1798.

THE SHEPHERD OF SALISBURY PLAIN
PART I.
MR. JOHNSON, a very worthy charitable gentleman, was traveling some time ago
across one of those vast plains which are well known in Wiltshire. It was a
fine summer's evening, and he rode slowly that he might have leisure to admire
God in the works of his creation; for this gentleman was of opinion, that a
walk or a ride was as proper a time as any to think about good things, for
which reason, on such occasions, he seldom thought so much about his money, or
his trade, or public news, as at other times, that he might with more ease and
satisfaction enjoy the pious thoughts which the visible works of the great
Maker of heaven and earth are intended to raise in the mind.

His attention was all of a sudden called off by the barking of a shepherd's
dog, and looking up he spied one of those little huts, which are here and there
to be seen on these great Downs; and near it was the shepherd himself busily
employed with his dog in collecting together his vast flock of sheep. As he
drew nearer he perceived him to be a clean, well looking, poor man, near fi^ty
years of age. His coat, though at first it had probably been of one dark
color, had been in along course of (...) so often patched with different sorts
of clo^h, that it was now become hard to say which had been the orginal color.
But this, while it gave a plain proof of the shepherd's poverty, equally proved
the exceeding neatness, industry and good management of his wife. -- His
stockings no less proved her good house wifery, for they were entirely covered
with darns of different colored worsted, but had not a hole in them; and his
shirt, though nearly as coarse as the sails of a ship, was as white as the
drifted snow, and nearly mended where time had either made a rent, or worn it
thin. This is a rule of judging, by which one shall seldom be deceived. If I
meet with a laborer hedging, ditching, or mending the highways with his
stockings and shirt tight and whole, however mean and bad his other garments
are, I have seldom failed, on visiting his cottage, to find that also clean and
well ordered, and his wife notable, and worthy of encouragement. Whereas a poor
woman, who will be lying a-bed, or gossipping with her neighbors, when she
ought to be fitting out her husband in a cleanly manner, will seldom be found
to be very good in other respects.

This was not the case with our shepherd; and Mr. Johnson was not more struck
with the decency of his mean and frugal dress, than with his open honest
countenance, which bore strong marks of health, cheerfulness, and spirit.

Mr. Johnson, who was on a journey, and somewhat fearful from the appearance of
the sky, that rain was at no great distance, accosted the shepherd with asking
what sort of weather he thought it would be on the morrow. -- "It will be such
weather as pleases me," answered the shepherd. Though the answer was delivered
in the mildest and civilest tone that could be imagined, the gentleman thought
the words themselves rather rude and surly, and asked him how that could be,
"Because," replied the shepherd "it will be such weather as shall please God,
and whatever pleases hun always pleases ^ic."

Mr. Johnson, who delighted in good men and good things, was very well
satisfied with his reply: for he justly thought, that though an hypocrite may
easily contrive to appear better than he really is to a stranger; and that no
one should be too soon ^alted, merely for having a few good words in his mouth;
yet as he knew that "out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks," he
always accustomed himself to judge favorably of those who had a serious
deportment and solid manner of speaking. "It looks as if it proceeded from a
good habit," said he, "and though I may now and then be deceived by it, yet it
has not often happened to me to be so. Whereas, if a man accosts me with an
idle, dissolute, vurgar, indecent, or profane expression, I have never been
deceived in him, but have generally, on enquiry, found his character to be as
bad as his language gave me room to expect."

He entered into conversation with the shepherd in the following manner. Yours
is a troublesome life, honest friend, said he. To be sure, sir, replied the
shepherd, it is not a very lazy life; but it is not near so toilsome as that
which my GREAT MASTER led for my sake, and he had every state and condition of
life at his c^^^ce, and chose a hard one, while I only submit to the lot that
is appointed me. You are exposed to great cold and near, said the gentleman;
true, sir, said the shepherd; but then I am not exposed to great temptations;
and so throwing one thing against another, God is pleased to contrive to make
things more equal than we poor, ignorant, short-sighted creatures are apt to
think. David was happier when he kept his father's sheep on such a plain as
this, and singing some of his own ps^^ms, perhaps, than ^^^r he was when he
became king of Israc^ and Judah. And I dare say we should never have had some
o^ t^^ (...) beautiful texts in all those fine psalms, if he had not (...) a
^hepherd, which enabled m^n to make so many (...) comparisons and similitudes,
as one may say, (...) country life, flocks of sheep, hills, and valleys, and
fountains of water.

You think then, said the gentleman, that a laborious life is a happy one. I
do, sir, and more so especially, as it exposes a man to fewer sins. If King
Saul had continued a poor laborious man to the end of his days, he might have
lived happy and honest, and died a natural death in his bed at last, which you
know, sir, was more than he did. But I speak with reverence, for it was divine
Providence over-rul^^ all that, you know, sir, and I do not presume to make
comparisons. Besides, sir, my employment has been particularly honored -- Moses
was a shepherd in the plains of Midian. It was to "shepherds keeping then
flocks by night," that the angels appeared in Bethlehem, to tell the best news,
the gladdest tidings, that ever were revealed to poor sinful men: often, and
often has the thought warmed my poor heart in the coldest night, and filled me
with more joy and thankfulness than the best supper could have done.

Here the shepherd stopped, for he began to feel that he had made too free, and
had talked too long. But Mr. Johnson was so well pleased with what he said, and
with the cheerful contented manner in which he said it, that he desired him to
go on freely, for that it was a pleasure to him to meet with a plain man, who,
without any kind of learning but what he had got from the Bible, was able to
talk so well on a subject in which all men, high and low, rich and poor, are
equally concerned.

Indeed I am afraid I make too bold, sir, for it better becomes me to listen to
such a gentleman as you seem to be, than to talk in my poor way; but as I was
saying, sir, I wonder all working men do not derive as great joy and delight as
I do from thinking how God has honored po^^^ty! -- Oh! sir, what great, or
rich, or mighty men have had such honor put on them, or their condition, as
shepherds, tent-makers, fi^herm^n, and carpenters have had!

My honest friend, said the gentleman, I perceive you are well acquainted with
scripture. Yes, ^^r, pretty w^ll, blessed be God! through his mercy I learnt to
read when I was a little boy; though reading was not so common when I was a
child, as, I am tol^, through the goodness of Providence, and the generosity of
the rich, it is likely to become nowadays. I believe there is no day for the
last thirty years, that I have not peeped at my Bible. If we cannot find time to
read a chapter, I defy any man to say he cannot find time to read a verse; and a
single text, sir, well followed and put in practice every day, would make no
bad figure at the year's end; three hundred and sixty-five texts, without the
loss of a moment's time, would make a pretty stock, a little golden treasury,
as one may say, from new year's day to new year's day; and if children were
brought up to it, they would look for their text as naturally as they do for
their breakfast. No laboring man, it is true, has so much leisure as a
shepherd, for while the flock is feeding, I am obliged to be still, and at such
times I can now and then tap a shoe for my children or myself, which is a great
saving to us, and while I am doing that I repeat a bit of a chapter, which
makes the time pass pleasantly in this wild solitary place. I can say the best
part of the Bible by heart, I believe I should not say the best part, for every
part is good, but I mean the grea^est part. -- I have led but a lonely life,
and have often had but little to eat, but my Bible has been meat, drink, and
company to me, as I may say, and when want and trouble had come upon me, I
don't know what I should have done indeed, sir, if I had not had the promises
of this book for my stay and support.

You have had great difficulties then? said Mr. Johnson. Why, as to that, sir,
not more than neighbors fare, I have but little cause to complain, and much to
be thankful, but I have had some little struggles, as I will leave you to
judge. -- I have a wife and eight children, whom I bred up in that little
cottage which you s^e under the hill about hal^ (...) mile off. What, that with
the smoke coming out of the chimney, said the gentleman. O no, sir, replied the
shepherd smiling, we have seldom smoke in the evening, for we have little to
cook, and firing is very dear in these parts. It is that cottage which you see
on the left hand of the church, near that little tuft of hawthorns. What, that
hovel with only one room above and one below, with scarcely any chimney, how is
it possible you can live there with such a family! O! it is very possible and
very certain too, cried the shepherd. How many better men have been worse
lodged! how many good christians have perished in prisons and dungeons, in
comparison of which my cottage is a pal^ce. The house is very well, sir, and if
the rain did not sometimes beat down upon us through the thatch when we are
a-bed, I should not desire a better; for I have health, peace, and liberty, and
no man makes me afraid.

W^ll, I will certainly call on you before it be long; but how can you contrive
to lodge so many children? -- We do the best we can, sir. My poor wife is a
very sickly woman, or we should always have done tolerably well. There are no
gentry in the parish, so that she has not met with any great assistance in her
sickness. The good curate of the parish, who lives in that pretty parsonage in
the valley, is very willing, but not very able to assist us on these trying
occasions, for he has little enough for himself and a large family into the
bargain. Yet he does what he can, and more than many richer men do, and more
than he can well afford. Besides that, hi^ prayers and good advice we are
always sure of, and we are truly thankful for that, for a man must give, you
know, ^ir, according to what he has, and not according to what he has not.

Are you in any distress at present? said Mr. Johnson. No, sir, thank God,
replied the shephered. I g^t my shilling a day, and most of my children will
soon be able to earn something; for we have only three under five years of age.
Only! said the gentleman, that is a heavy burden. Not at all; God fits the back
to it. -- Though my wife is not able to do any out of door work, yet she breeds
up our children to such habits of industry that our little maids, before they
are six years old can first get a halfpenny, and then a penny a day by
knitting. The boys who are too little to do hard work, get a trifle by keeping
the birds off the corn; for this the farmers will give them a penny or
twopence, and now and then a bit of bread and cheese into the bargain. -- When
the season of crow-keeping is over, then they glean or pick stones; any thing
is better than idleness, sir, and if they do not get a farthing by it, I would
make them do it just the same, for the sake of giving them early habits of
labor.

So you see, sir, I am not so badly off as many are; nay, it it were not that
it costs me so much in 'Petecary's stuff for my poor wife, I should reckon
myself well off. Nay, I do reckon myself well off, for blessed be God, he has
granted her li^e to my prayers, and I would work myself to a 'nato^^y, and live
on one meal a day to add any comfort to her valuable life; indeed I have often
done the last, and thought it no great matter neither.

While they were in this part of the discourse, a sine p^^mp cherry-check
little gul ran up out of breath, with a same on her young happy face, and,
without taking any notice of the gentleman, cried out with great joy -- Look
here, father, only see how much I have got today! Mr. Johnson was much struck
with her simplicity, but puzzled to know what was the occation of this great
joy. On looking at her he perceived a small quantity of coarse wool, some of
which had found its way through the holes of her clean, but scanty and ragged
wooll^n apron. The father said;, (...) has been a successful day indeed, Molly,
but don't you see the gentleman? Molly, now made a curtsey down to the very
ground; while Mr. Johnson equired into the cause of the mutual satisfaction
which both father and daughter had expressed, at the unusual good fortune of
the day.

Sir, said the shepherd, poverty is a great sharpener of wits. -- My wife and I
cannot endure to see our children (poor as they are) without shoes and
stockings, not only on account of the pinching cold which cramps their poor
little limbs, but because it degrades and debases them; and poor people, who
have but little regard to appearances, will seldom be found to have any great
regard for honesty and goodness; I don't say this is always the case, but I am
sure it is so too often. Now shoes and stockings being very dear, we could
never afford to get them without a little contrivance. I must show you how I
manage about the shoes, when you condescend to call at our cottage, sir; as to
stockings, this is one way we take to help get them. My young ones who are too
little to do much work, sometimes wander at odd hours over the hills for the
chance of finding what little wool the sheep may drop when they rub themselves,
as they are apt to do, in the bushes This piece of frugal industry is not
imaginary, but a real fact, as is the character of the shepherd, and his
uncommon knowledge of the scriptures.
These scattered bits of wool the children pick out of the brambles, which, I
see, have torn sad holes in Molly's apron today; they carry this wool home, and
when they have got a pretty parcel together, their mother cards it; for she can
sit and card in the chimney corner, when she is not able to wash, or work about
house. The biggest, girl then spins it; it does very well for us, without
dyeing, for poor people must not stand for the color of their stockings. After
this our little boys knit it for themselves, while they are employed in keeping
crows in the fields, and after they get home at night. As for the knitting the
girls and their mother do, that is chiefly for sale, which helps to pay our
rent.

Mr. Johnson lifted up his eyes in silent astonishment at the shifts which
honest poverty can make rather than beg or steal, and was surprised to think
how many ways of subsisting there are which those who live at their ease little
suspect. He secretly resolved to be more attentive to his own petty expenses
than he had hitherto been, and to be more watchful that nothing was wasted in
his family.

But to return to the shepherd. Mr. Johnson told him, that as he must needs be
at his friend's house, who lived many miles off, that night, he could not, as
he wished to do, make a visit to his cottage at present. -- But I will
certainly do it, said he, on my return, for I long to see your w^^ and her nice
little family, and to be an eyewitness of her neatness and good management.
The poor man's tears started into his eyes on hearing the commendation bestowed
on his wife; and wiping them off with the sleeve of his coat, for he was not
worth a handkerchief in the world, he said -- Oh! sir, you just now, I am
afraid, called me an humble man, but indeed I am a very proud one. Proud!
exclaimed Mr. Johnson, I hope not -- Pride is a g^^^^ sin, and as the poor are
liable to it as well as the rich, so good a man as you seem to be, ought to
guard against it, Sir, said he, you are right but I am not proud of myself, God
knows, I have nothing to be proud of. I am a poor sinner, but, indeed, sir, I
am proud of my wife: -- She is not only the most tidy, notable woman on the
Plain, but she is the kindest wife and mother, and the most contented, thankful
christian that I know. Last year I thought I should have lost her in a violent
fit of the rheumatism, caught by going to work too soon after her lying in, I
fear; for it is but a bleak coldish place, as you may see, sir, in winter, and
sometimes the snow lies so long under the hill, that I can hardly make myself a
path to get out and buy a few necessaries in the next village; and we are
afraid to send out the children, for fear they should be lost when the snow is
deep. So, as I was saying, the poor soul was very bad indeed, and for several
weeks lost the use of all her limbs except her hands: a merciful Providence
spared her the use of these, so that when she could not turn in her bed, she
could contrive to patch a rag or two for her family. She was always saying, had
it not been for the great goodness of God, she might have had the palsy instead
of the rheumatism, and then she could have done nothing -- but nobody had so
many mercies as she had.

I will not tell you what we suffered during that bitter weather, sir, but my
wife's faith and patience during that trying time, were as good a lesson to me
as any sermon I could hear, and yet Mr. Jenkins gave us very comfortable ones
too, that helped to keep up my spirits.

One Sunday afternoon, when my wife was at the worst, as I was coming out of
church, for I went one part of the day, and my eldest daughter the other, so my
poor wife was never left alone. As I was coming out of church, I say, Mr.
Jenkins, the minister, called out to me, and asked me how my wife did, saying,
he had been kept from coming to see her by the deep fall of snow, and, indeed,
from the parsonage-house to my hovel it was quite impassable. I gave him all
the particulars he asked, and, I am afraid, a good many more, for my heart was
quite full. He kindly gave me a shilling, and said, he would certainly try to
pick out his way and come and see her in a day or two.

While he was talking to me, a plain farmer-looking gentleman in boots, who
stood by, listening to all I said, but seemed to take no notice. It was Mr.
Jenkins's wife's father, who was come to pass the Christmas holidays at the
parsonage house. I had always heard him spoken of as a plain frugal man, who
lived close himself, but was remarked to give away more than any of his
show-away neighbors.

Well! I went home with great spirits at this seasonable and unexpected supply;
for we had tapped our last sixpence, and there was little work to be had on
account of the weather. I told my wife I was not come back empty-handed. No, I
dare say not, says she, you have been serving a master "who fills the hungry
with good things, though he sends the rich empty away." True, Mary, says I;
we seldom fail to get good spiritual food from Mr. Jenkins, but today he has
kindly supplied our bodily wants. She was more thankful when I showed her the
shilling, than, I dare say, some of your great people are when they get a
hundred pounds.

Mr. Johnson's heart smote him when he heard such a value set upon a shilling;
surely, said he to himself, I will never waste another; but he said nothing to
die shepherd, who thus pursued his story.

Next morning before I went out, I sent part of the money to buy a little ale
and brown sugar to put into her water gruel, which you know, sir, made it nice
and nourishing. I went out to cleave wood in a farm-yard, for there was no
standing out on the plain, after such a snow as had fallen in the night. I went
with a lighter heart than usual, because I had l^^t my poor wife a little
better; and comfortably supplied for this day, and I now resolved more than
ever to trust in God for the supplies of the next. When I came back at night,
my wife fell a crying as soon as she saw me. This I own I thought but a bad
return for the blessings she had so lately received, and so I told her. O^ said
she, it is too much, we are too rich, I am now frightened, not lest we should
have no portion in this world, but for fear we should have our whole portion in
it. Look here, John! So saying she uncovered the bed whereon she lay, and
showed two warm, thick, new blankets. I could not believe my own eyes, (...)
because when I went out in the morning, I had left her with no other covering
than our little old thin blue rug. I was still more amazed when she put half a
crown into my hand, telling me she had had a visit from Mr. Jenkins and Mr.
Jones, the latter of whom had bestowed all these good things upon us. Thus,
sir, have our lives been crowned with mercies. My wife got about again, and I
do believe, under Providence, it was owing to these comforts; for the
rheumatism, sir, without blankets by night and flannel by day, is but a baddish
job, especially to people who have little or no fire. She will always be a
weakly body; but, thank God, her soul prospers, and is in health. But I beg
your pardon, sir, for talking on at this rate. -- Not at all, not at all, said
Mr. Johnson, I am much pleased with your story, you shall certainly see me in a
few days. Good night. So saying, he slipped a crown into his hand and rode off.
Surely, said the shepherd, goodness and mercy have followed me all the days of
my life, as he gave the money to his wife when he got home at night.

As to Mr. Johnson he found abundant matter for his thoughts during the rest of
his journey. On the whole he was more disposed to envy than to pity the
shepherd. I have seldom seen, said he, so happy a man. It is a sort of
happiness which the world could not give, and which, I plainly see, it has not
been able to take away. This must be the true spirit of religion. I s^e more
and more, that true goodness is not merely a thing of words and opinions, but a
living principle brought into every common action of a man's life. What else
could have supported this poor couple under every bitter trial of want and
sickness? No, my honest shepherd, I do not pity, but I respect and even honor
thee, (...) I will visit thy poor hovel, on my r^^urn to Salisbury with as much
pleasure as I am now going to the house of my friend.

If Mr. Johnson keeps his word in sending me the account of his visit to the
shepherd's cottage. I shall be very glad to entertain my readers with it, and
shall conclude this first part with

THE SHEPHERD's HYMN.
THE Lord my pasture shall prepare,
And feed me with a shepherd's care;
His presence shall my wants supply,
And guard me with a watchful eye:
My noonday walks he shall attend,
And all my midnight hours defend.
When in the sultry gl^be I faint,
Or on the thirsty mountain pant;
To fertile vales and dewy meads,
My weary wandering steps he leads*
Where peac^^^^ rivers, s^ft and slow,
Amid the verdant lands^ip flow.
Though in the paths of death I tread,
With gloomy horrors overspread,
My steadfast heart shall fear no ill;
For thou, O Lord, art with me still;
Thy friendly crook shall give me aid,
And guide me through the dreadful shade.
Though in a bare and rugged way;
Through devious lonely wilds I stray,
Thy bounty shall my pains beguile,
The barren wilderness shall smile,
With sudden greens and herbage crowned,
And s^ea^^s shall murmur all around.
THE SHEPHERD OF SALISBURY PLAIN.
PART II.
I AM willing to hope that my readers will not be sorry to hear some farther
particulars of their old acquaintance the Shepherd of Salisbury Plain. They
will call to mind that at the end of the first part, he was returning home full
of gratitude for the favors he had received from Mr. Johnson, whom we left
pursuing his journey, after having promised to make a visit to the shepherd's
cottage.

Mr. Johnson, after having passed some time with his friends, sat out on his
return to Salisbury, and on the Saturday evening reached a very small inn, a
mile or two distant from the shepherd's village; for he never traveled on a
Sunday. He went the next morning to the church nearest the house, where he had
passed the night; and after taking such refreshment as he could g^t at that
house, he walked on to find out the shepherd's cottage. His reason for visiting
him on a Sunday was chiefly, because he supposed it to be the only day which
the shepherd's employment allowed him to pass at home with his family, and as
Mr. Johnson had been struck with his talk, he thought it would be neither
unpleasant nor unprofitable to observe how a man, who carried such an
appearance of piety, spent his Sunday; for though he was so low in the world,
this gentleman was not above entering very closely into his character, of which
he thought he should be able to form a better judgment, by seeing whether his
practice at home kept pace with his professions abroad: for it is not so much
by observing how people talk, as how they live, that we ought to judge of their
characters.

After a pleasant walk Mr. Johnson got within sight of the cottage, to which he
was directed by the clump of hawthorns and the broken chimney. He wished to
take the family by surprise; and walking gently up to the house he stood awhile
to listen. The door being half open, he saw the shepherd, (who looked so
respectable in his Sunday coat, that he should hardly have known him) his wife,
and their numerous young family, draw round their little table, which was
covered with a clean though very coarse cloth. There stood on it a large dish
of potatoes, a brown pitcher, and a piece of coarse loaf. The wife and children
stood in silent attention, while the shepherd, with uplifted hands and eyes,
devoutly begged the blessing of heaven on their homely fare. Mr. Johnson could
not help sighing to reflect, that he had sometimes seen better dinners eaten
with less appearance of thankfulness.

The shepherd and his wife then sat down with great seeming cheerfulness, but
the children stood; and while the mother was helping them, little
fresh-coloured Molly, who had picked the wool from the bushes with so much
delight, cried out, "Father, I wish I was big enough to say grace, I am sure I
should say it very heartily today, for I was thinking what must poor people do
who have no salt to their potatoes, and do but look our dish is quite full." --
"This is the true way of thinking, Molly," said the father, "in whatever
concerns bodily wants, and bodily comforts, it is our duty to compare our own
lot with the lot of those who are worse off, and this will keep us thankful. On
the other hand, whenever we are tempted to set up our own wisdom or goodness,
we must compare ourselves (...) those who are wiser and better, and that will
keep u^^^^ble." Molly was now so hungry, and found the potatoes so good, that
she had no time to make any more remarks; but was devouring her dinner very
heartily, when the barking of the great dog drew her attention from her
trencher to the door, and spying the stranger, she cried out, "Look father, see
here, if yonder is not the good gentleman!" Mr. Johnson finding himself
discovered, immediately walked in, and was heartily welcomed by the honest
shepherd, who told his wife that this was the gentleman to whom they were so
much obliged.

The good woman began, as some very neat people are rather too apt to do, with
making many apologies that her house was not cleaner, and that things was not
in fitter order to receive such a gentleman. Mr. Johnson, however, on looking
round, could discover nothing but the most perfect neatness. The trenchers on
which they were eating were almost as white as their linen; and,
notwithstanding the number and smallness of the children, there was not the
least appearance of dirt or litter. The furniture was very simple and poor,
hardly indeed amounting to bare necessaries. It consisted of four brown wooden
chairs, which, by constant rubbing, were become as bright as a looking-glass;
an iron pot and kettle; a poor old grate which scarcely held a handful of
coals, and out of which the little fire that had been in it appeared to have
been taken, as soon as it had answered the end for which it had been lighted,
that of boiling their potatoes. Over the chimney stood an old fashioned broad
bright candlestick, and a still brighter spit; it was pretty clear that this
last was kept rather for ornament than use. An old carved elbow chair, and a
chest of the same date, which stood in the corner, were considered as the most
valuable part of the shepherd's goods, having been in his family for three
generations. But all these were lightly esteemed by him, in comparison of
another possession, which added to the above, made up the whole of what he had
inherited from his father; and which last he would not have parted with, if no
other could have been had, for a king's ransom: this was a large old Bible,
which lay on the wind^w seat, neatly covered with brown cloth, variously
pat^^ed. This sacred book was most reverendly preserved from dog'^ ears, dirt,
and every other injury, but such as time and much use had made it suffer, in
spite of care. On the clean white walls were pasted a hymn on the crucifixion
of our Savior, a print of the prodigal son, the shepherd's hymn, and a New
History of a True Book.

After the first salutations were over, Mr. Johnson said, that if they would go
on quietly with their dinner he would sit down. Though a good deal ashamed,
they thought it more respectful to obey the gentleman, who having cast his eye
on their slender provitions, gently rebaked the shepherd for not having
indulged himself, as it was Sunday, with a morsel of bacon to relish his
potatoes. The shepherd said nothing, but poor Mary colored and hung down her
head, saying, "indeed, sir, it is not my fault, I did beg my husband to allow
himself a bit of meat today out of your honor's bounty; but he was too good to
do it, and it is all for my sake." -- The shepherd seemed unwilling to come to
an explanation, but Mr. Johnson desired Mary to go on. So she continued, "you
must know, sir, that both of us, next to a sin, dread a debt, and indeed, in
some cases, a debt is a sin; but with all our care and p^ins we have never been
able quite to pay off the doctor's bill, for that bad fit of the rheumatism
which I had last winter. Now when you were pleased to give my husband that kind
present the other day, I heartily desired him to buy a bit of meat for Sunday,
as I said before, that he might have a little ref^eshment for himself out of
your kindness. -- But answered he, Mary, it is never out of my mind long
together that we still owe a few shillings to the doctor, (and thank God it is
all we did owe in the world.) -- Now if I carry him this money directly, it
will not only show him our honesty and our good will, but it will be an
encouragement to him to come to you another time in case you should be taken
once more in such a bad sit; for I must own, added my poor husband, that the
thought of your being so terribly ill without any help, is the only misfortune
that I want courage to face."

Here the grateful woman's tears ran down so fast that she could not go on. She
wiped them with the corner of her apron, and humbly begged pardon for making so
free. "Indeed, sir," said the shepherd, "though my wife is full as unwilling to
be in debt as myself, yet I could hardly prevail on her to consent to my paying
this money just then, because, she said, it was hard I should not have a taste
of the gentleman's bounty myself. But for once, sir, I would have my own way.
-- For you must know, as I pass best part of my time alone, tending my sheep,
it is a great point with me, sir, to get comfortable matter for my own thoughts;
so that it is rather self-interest in me to allow myself no pleasures and no
practices that will not bear thinking on over and over. For when one is a good
deal alone, you know sir, all one's bad deeds do so rush in upon one, as I may
say, and so torment one, that there is no true comfort to be had but in keeping
clear of wrong doings, and false pleasures; and that I suppose may be one
reason why so many folks hate to stay a bit by themselves. But as I was saying,
when I came to think the matter over on the hill yonder, said I to myself, a
good dinner is a good thing I grant, and yet it will be but cold comfort to me
a week after, to be able to say -- to be sure I had a nice shoulder of mutton
last Sunday for dinner, thanks to the good gentleman, but then I am in debt --
I had a rare dinner, that is certain, but the pleasure of that has long been
over, and the debt still remains -- I have spent the crown, and now if my poor
wife should be taken in one of those fits again, die she must, unless God work
a miracle to prevent it, for I can get no help for her. This thought settled
all; and I set off directly and paid the crown to the doctor with as much
cheerfulness as I should have felt on sitting down to the fattest shoulder of
mutton that ever was roasted. And if I was contented at the time, think how
much more happy I have been at the remembrance! O sir, there are no pleasures
worth the name but such as bring no plague or penitence after them."

Mr. Johnson was satisfied with the shepherd's reasons; and agreed, that though
a good dinner was not to be despised ^et it was not worthy to be compared with
a contented mind, which (as the Bible truly says) is a continual feast." "But
come," said the good gentleman, "what have we got in this brown mug?" -- "As
good water," said the shepherd, "as any in the king's dominions. I have heard
of countries beyond sea in which there is no wholesome water; nay, I have been
myself in a great town not far off where they are obliged to buy all the water
they get, while a good Providence sends to my very door a spring as clear and
fine as Jacob's well. When I am tempted to repine that I have often no other
drink, I call to mind, that it was nothing better than a cup of cold water
which the woman of Samaria drew for the greatest guest that ever visited this
world."

"Very well," replied Mr. Johnson; "but as your honesty has made you prefer a
poor meal to being in debt, I will at least s^nd and get something for you to
drink. I saw a little public house just by the church, as I came along. Let
that little rosy-faced fellow fetch a mug of beer."

So saying he looked full at the boy, who did not offer to stir; but cast an
eye at his father to know what he was to do. "Sir," said the shepherd, "I hope
we shall not appear ungrateful if we seem to refuse your favo^^ my little boy
would, I am sure, fly to serve you on any other occasion. But, good sir, it is
Sunday, and should any of my family be seen at a public house on a Sabbath Day,
it would be a much greater grief to me than to drink water all my life. I am
often talking against these doings to others, and if I should say one thing and
do another, you cannot think what an advantage it would give many of my
neighbors over me, who would be glad enough to report that they caught the
shepherd's son at the alehouse, without explaining how it happened.
Christians, you know, (...), must be doubly watchful, or they will not only
bring disgrace on themselves, but what is much worse, on that ^^^ly name by
which they are called."

"Are you not a little too cautious, my honest friend?" said Mr. Johnson. "I
humbly ask your pardon, sir," replied the shepherd, "if I think that is
impossible. In my poor notion I no more understand how a man can be too
cautious, than how he can be too strong, or too healthy."

"You are right, indeed," said Mr. Johnson, "as a general principle, but this
struck me as a very small thing." "Sir," said the shepherd, "I am afraid you
will think me very bold, but you encourage me to speak out." "'It Is what I
wish," said the gentleman. -- "Then, sir," resumed the shepherd, "I doubt if,
where there is a temptation to do wrong, any thing can be called small; that
is, in short, if there is any such thing as a small wilful sin. A poor man,
like me, is seldom called out to do great things, so that it is not by a few
great deeds his character can be judged by his neighbors, but by the little
round of daily customs he allows himself in." -- While they were thus talking,
the children, who had stood very quietly behind, and had not stirred a foot,
now began to scamper about all at once, and in a moment r^n to the window-seat
to pick up their little old hats. Mr. Johnson looked surprised at this
disturbance; the shepherd asked his pardon, telling him it was the sound of the
church bell which had been the cause of their rudeness: for their mother had
brought them up with such fear of being too late for church, that it was but
who could catch the first stroke of the bell, and be first ready. He had always
taught them to think that nothing was more indecent than to get into church
after it was begun; for as the service opened with an exhortation to
repentance, and a confession of sin, it looked very presumptuous not to be
ready to join in it -- it looked as if people did not feel themselves to be
sinners. And though such as lived at a great distan^^ might plead difference of
clocks as an excuse, yet those who lived within the sound of the bell, could
pretend neither ignorance nor mistake.

Mary and her children set forward. Mr. Johnson and the shepherd followed,
taking care to talk the whole way on such subjects as might fit them for the
solemn duties of the place to which they were going. "I have often been sorry
to observe," said Mr. Johnson, "that many who are reckoned decent, good kind of
people, and who would on no account neglect going to church, yet seem to care
but little in what frame or temper of mind they go thither. They will talk of
their worldly concerns till they get within the door, and then take them up
again the very minute the sermon is over, which makes me ready to fear they lay
too much stress on the mere form of going to a place of worship. Now, for my
part, I always find that it requires a little time to bring my mind into a
state fit to do any common business well, much more this great and most
necessary business of all." "Yes sir," said the shepherd, "and t^en I think too
how busy I should be in preparing my mind, if I was going into the presence of
a great gentleman, or a lord, or the king; and shall the King of Kings be
treated with less respect? Besides one likes ^^^sce people ^eel as if going to
church was a thing of (...) ^oice and pleasure, as well as a duty, and that
they were as desirous not to be the last there, as they would be if they were
going to a feast or a fair."

After service, Mr. Jenkins, the clergyman, who was well acquanted with the
character of Mr. Johnson, and had a great respect for him, accosted him with
much civility; expressing his concern that he could not enjoy just now so much
of his conversation as he wished, as he was obliged to visit a person at a
distance, but hoped to have a little talk with him before he left the village.
-- As they walked along together, Mr. Johnson made such enquiries about the
shepherd, as served to confirm him in the high opinion he entertained ^f his
piety, good sense, industry, and self-denial. They parted, the clergyman
promising to call in at the cottage in his way home.

The shepherd, who took it for granted that Mr. Johnson was gone to the
parsonage, walked home with his wife and children, and was beginning in his
usual way to catechize and instruct his family, when Mr. Johnson came in, and
insisted that the shepherd should go on with his instructions, just as if he
were not there. -- This gentleman, who was very desirous of being useful to his
own servants and workmen in the way of religious instruction, was sometimes
sorry to find that though he took a good deal of pains, they did not now and then
quite understand him, for though his meaning was very good, the language was
not always very plain; and though the things he said were not hard to be
understood, yet the words were, especially to such as were very ignorant. And
he now began to find out, that if people were ever so wise and good, yet if
they had not a simple, agreeable, and familiar way of expressing themselves,
some of their plain hearers would not be much the better for them. For this
reason he was not above li^tening to the plain humble way in which this honest
^^^n caught his family, for though he knew that he himself had many advan^ages
over the shepherd, had more learning, and could teach him many things, yet he
was not too proud to learn even of so poor a man, in any point where he thought
the shepherd might have the advantage of him.

This gentleman was much pleased with the knowledge and piety he discovered in
the answers of the children; and desired the shepherd to tell him how he
contrived to keep a sense of divine things in his own mind and in that of his
family with so little leisure and so little reading. "O as to that, sir," said
the shepherd, "we do not read much except in one book to be sure; but by hearty
prayer for God's blessing on the use of that book, what little knowledge is
needful seems to come of course, as it were. And my chief study has been to
bring the fruits of the Sunday reading into the week's business, and to keep up
the same sense of God in the heart, when the bible is in the cupboard as when
it is in the hand. In short to apply what I read in the book, to what I meet
with in the field."

"I don't quite understand you," said Mr. Johnson, "Sir," replied the shepherd,
"I have but a poor gift at conveying these things to others, though I have much
comfort from them in my own mind; but I am sure that the most ignorant and hard
working people, who are in ^arnest about their salvation, may help to keep up
devout thoughts and good affections during the week, though they have harely
any time to look at a book. -- And it will help them to keep out bad thoughts
too, which is no small matter. But then they must know the Bible; they must
have read the word of God; that (...) a ^and of stock in trade for a christian
to set up with; and it is this which makes me so diligent in teaching it to my
children: and even in storing their memories with psalms and chapt^rs. This is
a great help to a poor ^ard-working man, who will hardly meet with any thing
but w^^^ he may turn to some good account. If o^ (...) in the ^^^r and love of
God, almost every thing one sees abroad will teach one to adore his power and
goodness, and bring to mind some texts of scripture, which shall fill the heart
with thankfulness, and the mouth with praise. When I look upwards the heavens
declare the glory of God; and shall I be silent and ungrateful? if I look round
and see the valleys standing thick with corn, how can I help blessing that
Power, who gives me all things richly to enjoy? I may learn gratitude from the
beasts of the field, for the ox knows his owner, and the ass his master's
crib, and shall a christian not know, shall a christian not consider, what
great things God has done for him? I, who am a shepherd, endeavor to fill my
soul with a constant remembrance of that good shepherd, who feeds me in green
pastures, and makes me to lie down beside the still waters, and whose rod and
staff comfort me."

"You are happy," said Mr. Johnson, "in this retired life by which you escape
the corruptions of the world." "Sir," said the shepherd, "I do not escape the
corruptions of my own evil nature. Even there on that wild solitary hill, I can
find out that my heart is prone to evil thoughts. I suppose, sir, that
different states have different temptations. You great folks that live in the
world, perhaps are exposed to some, of which such a poor man as I am, know
nothing. But to one who leads a lonely life like me, evil thoughts are a chief
besetting sin; and I can no more withstand these without the grace of God, than
a rich gentleman can withstand the snares of evil company, without the same
grace. And I feel that I stand in need of God's help continually, and if he
should give me up to my own evil heart I should be lost."

Mr. Johnson approved of the shepherd's sincerity, for he had always observed
that where there was no humility, and no watchfulness against sin, there was no
religion, and he said that the man who did not feel himself to be a sinner in
his opinion, could not be a christian.

Just as they were in this part of their discourse, Mr. Jenkins, the clergyman
came in. After the usual salutations, he said, "Well Shepherd, I wish you joy;
I know you will be sorry to gain any advantage by the death of a neighbor; but
old Wilson my clerk, was so infirm, and I trust so well prepared, that there is
no reason to be sorry for his death. I have been to pray by him, but he died
while I staid. I have always intended you should succeed to his place; it is no
great matter, but every little is something."

"No great matter, sir," cried the shepherd, "indeed it is a great thing to me;
it will more than pay my rent. Blessed be God for all his goodness." Mary said
nothing, but lifted up her eyes full of tears in silent gratitude.

"I am glad of this little circumstance," said Mr. Jenkins, "not only for your
sake, but for the sake of the office itself. I so heartily reverence every
religious institution, that I would never have even the Amen added to the
excellent prayers of our church, by vain or profane lips, and if it depended on
me, there should be no such thing in the land as an idle, drunken, or
irreligious parish clerk. Sorry I am to say, that this matter is not always
sufficiently attended to, and that I know some of a very different character."

Mr. Johnson now inquired of the clergyman, whether there were many children in
the parish. "More than you would expect," replied he "from the seeming
smallness of it, but there are some little hamlets which you do not see." "I
think," returned Mr. Johnson, "I recollect that in the conversation I had with
the shepherd on the hill yonder, he told me you had no Sunday school." "I am
sorry to say we have none," said the minister; "I do what I can to remedy this
misfortune by public chatechising; but having two or three churches to serve, I
cannot give so much time as I wish to private instruction; and having a large
family of my own, and no assistance from others, I have never been able to
establish a school."

"There is an excellent institution in London," said Mr. Johnson, "called the
Sunday-School Society, which kindly gives books and other helps, on the
application of such pious ministers as stand in need of their aid, and which I
am sure would have assisted you, but I think we shall be able to do something
ourselves. -- Shepherd," continued he, "if I was a king, and had it in my power
to make you a rich and a great man, with a word speaking, I would not do it.
Those who are raised by some sudden stroke, much above the station in which
divine Providence had placed them, seldom turn out very good, or very happy. I
have never had any great things in my power, but as far as I have been able, I
have been always glad to assist the worthy, I have however never attempted or
desired to set any poor man much above his natural condition, but it is a
pleasure to me to lend him such assistance as may make that condition more easy
to himself, and to put him in a way which shall call him to the performance of
more duties than perhaps he could have performed without my help, and of
performing them in a better manner. -- What rent do you pay for this cottage?"

"Fifty shillings a year, sir.

"It is in a sad tattered condition, is there not a better to be had in the
village?"

"That in which the poor clerk lived," said the clergyman, "is not only more
tight and whole, but has two decent chambers, and a very large light kitchen."
"That will be very convenient," replied Mr. Johnson, "pray what is the rent?"
"I think," said the shepherd, "poor neighbor Wilson gave somewhat about four
pounds a year, or it might be guineas." -- "Very well," said Mr. Johnson, "and
what will the clerk's place be worth, think you?" "About three pounds," was the
answer.

"Now," continued Mr. Johnson, "my plan is, that the shepherd should take that
house immediately; for as the poor man is dead, there will be no need of
waiting till quarter-day, if I make up the difference." -- "True, sir," said
Mr. Jenkins, "and I am sure my wife's father, whom I expect tomorrow, will
willingly assist a little toward buying some of the clerk's old goods; and the
sooner they remove the better, for poor Mary caught that bad rheumatism by
sleeping under a leaky thatch." The shepherd was too much moved to speak, and
Mary could hardly sob out, "Oh, sir, you are too good, indeed this house will
do very well," "It may do very well for you and your children Mary," said Mr.
Johnson, gravely, "but it will not do for a school; the kitchen is neither
large nor light enough. Shepherd," continued he, "with your ^^od minister's
leave, and kind assistance, I propose to set up in this parish a Sunday school,
and to make you the master. It will not at all interfere with your weekly
calling, and it is the only lawful way in which you could turn the Sabbath into
a day of some little profit to your family, by doing, as I hope, a great deal
of good to the souls of others. The rest of the week you will work as usual. --
The difference of rent between this house and the clerk's I shall pay myself,
for to put you into a better house at your own expense would be no great act of
kindness. As for honest Mary, who is not fit for hard labor, or any out-of-door
work, I propose to endow a small weekly school, of which she shall be the
mistress, and employ her notable turn to good account, by teaching ten or a
dozen of girls to knit, sew, spin, card, or any other useful way of getting
their bread; for all this I shall only pay her the usual price, for I am not
going to make you rich but useful."

"Not rich, sir?" cried the shepherd. "How can I ever be thankful enough for
such blessings? And will my poor Mary have a dry thatch over her head? And
shall I be able to send for the doctor when I am like to lose her? Indeed my
cup runs over with blessings, I hope God will give me humility." Here he and
Mary looked at each other and burst into tears. The gentleman saw their
distress, and kindly walked out upon the little green before the door, that
these honest people might give vent to their feelings. As soon as they were
alone, they crept into one corner of the room, where they thought they could
not be seen, and fell on their knees, devoutly blessing and praising God for
his mercies. Never were heartier prayers presented, than this grateful couple
offered up for their benefactors. The warmth of their gratitude could only be
equalled by the earnestness with which they besought the blessing of God on the
^^rk in which they were going to engage.

The two gentlemen now l^ft this happy family, and walked to the parsonage,
where the evening was spent in a manner very edifying to Mr. Johnson, who, the
next day, took all proper measures for putting the shepherd in immediate
possession of his now comfortable habitation. Mr. Jenkins's father-in-law, the
worthy gentleman who gave the shepherd's wife the blanket^, in the first part
of this history, arrived at the parsonage before Mr. Johnson lest it, and
assisted in fitting up the clerk's cottage.

Mr. Johnson took his leave, promising to call on the worthy minister and his
new clerk once a year, in his summer's journey over the plain, as long as it
should please God to spare his life. -- We hope he will never fail to give us
an account of these visits, which we shall be glad to lay before our readers,
if they should contain instruction or amusement.

THE HISTORY OF TOM WHITE, THE POSTILION.
PART I.
TOM WHITE, was one of the best drivers of a post-chaise on the Bath road. --
Tom was the son of an honest laborer at a little village in Wiltshire: he was
an active industrious boy, and as soon as he was big enough he left his father,
who was burdened with a numerous family, and went to live with Farmer Hodges,
a sober worthy man in the same village. He drove the wagon all the week, and
on Sundays, though he was now grown up, the farmer required him to attend the
Sunday school, carried on under the inspection of Dr. Shepherd, the worthy
vicar, and always made him read his Bible in the evening, after he had served
his beasts, and would have turned him out of his service if he had even gone to
the alchouse for his own pleasure.

Tom, by earring some waggon-loads of faggots to the Bear Inn at Devizes, soon
made many acquaintances in the stable-yard. He compared his own cotter's frock,
and shoes thick set with nails, with the smart red j^cket and tight boots of
the post-boys, and grew asha^^^l of his own homely dress; he was resolved to
drive a chaise, to g^t money, and to see the world. -- Foolish fellow! he never
considered, that, though it is true, a waggoner works hard all day, yet he gets
a quiet evening, and undisturbed rest at night. However as there must he
chaise-boys as well as plough-boys, there was no great harm in the change. The
evil company to which it exposed him, was the chief mischief. He left farmer
Hodges though not without sorrow at quitting so kind a master, and got himself
hired at the Black Bear.

Notwithstanding the temptations to which he was now exposed, Tom's good
education stood by him for some time. At first he was frightened to hear the
oaths and wicked words which are too often uttered in a stable-yard. However,
though he thought it wrong, he had not the courage to reprove it, and the next
stop to being easy at ^^eing others sin, is to sin ourselves. By degrees he
began to think it manly, and a mark of spirit in others to swear; though the
force of good habit was so strong, that at first when he swore himself it was
with sear and in a low voice. But he was soon laughed out of his sheepishness,
as they called it; and though he never became so profane and blasphemous as
some of his companions, (for he never swore in cool blood or in mirth as so
many do,) yet he would too often use a dreadful bad word when he was in a
passion with his horses. And here I cannot but drop a hint on the great folly
as well as wickedness of being in a great rage with poor beasts, who not having
the gift of reason, cannot be moved like human creatures, with all the wicked
words that are said to them; but who unhappily having the gift of feeling,
suffer as much as human creatures can do, at the cruel and unnecessary beatings
given them. He had been bred up to think that drunkenness was a great sin, for
he never saw farmer Hodges drunk in his life, and where a farmer is sober, his
men are less likely to drink, or if they do, the master can reprove them with
the better grace.

Tom was not naturally fond of drink, yet for the sake of being thought merry
company, and a hearty fellow, he often drank more than he ought. As he had been
used to go to church twice on a Sunday whole he lived with the farmer, who
seldom used his horses on that day except to carry his wife to church behind
him, Tom felt a little uneasy when he was sent the very first Sunday a long
journey with a great family; for I cannot conceal the truth, that too many
gentlefolks will travel when there is no necessity for it on a Sunday, and when
Monday would answer the end just as well. This is a great grief to all good and
sober people, both rich and poor. However he kept his thoughts to himself,
though he could not now and then help thinking how quietly things were going on
at the farmer's, whose waggoner on a Sunday led as easy a life as if he had
been a gentleman. But he soon lost all thoughts of this kind, and did not know
a Sunday from a Monday. Tom went on prosperously, as it is called, for three or
four years, got plenty of money, but saved not a shilling. As soon as his
horses were once in the stable, whoever would might see them fed for Tom. -- He
had other fish to fry. -- Fives, cards, cudgel playing, laying wagers, and
keeping loose company, each of which he at first disliked, and then practiced,
ran away with all his money, and all his spare time; and though he was
generally in the way as soon as the horses were ready, (because if there was no
driving there was no pay,) yet he did not care whether the carriage was clean
or the horses looked well, if the harness was whole, or the horses were shod.
The certainty that the gains of tomorrow would make up for the extravagance of
today, made him quite thoughtless and happy, for he was young, active, and
healthy, and never foresaw that a rainy day might come, when he would want what
he now squandered away.

One day being a little flustered with liquor as ^e was driving his return
chaise through Brentford, he saw just before him another empty carriage, driven
by one of his acquaintances: he whipped up his horses, resolving to outstrip
the other, and swearing dreadfully that he would be at the Red Lion first --
for a pint -- done, cried the other -- a wager. -- Both cut and spurred the
poor beasts with the usual fury, as if their credit had been really at stake,
or their lives had depended on this foolish contest. Tom's chaise had now got
up to that of his rival, and they drove along-side of each other with great
fury and many imprecations. But, in a narrow part, Tom's chaise being in the
middle, with his antagonist on one side, and a cart driving against him on the
other, the horses reared, the carriages got entangled, Tom roared out a great
oath to the other to stop, which (...) either could not, or would not do, but
returned a horrid imprecation that he would win the wager if he was alive.
Tom's horses took fright, and he was thrown to the ground with great violence.
As soon as he could be got from under the wh^^^s, he was taken up s^^seless;
his leg was broke in two places, and his body much bruised. Some people whom
the noise had bro't together, put him into the post-chaise, in which the
waggoner kindly assisted, but the other driver seemed careless and indifferent,
and drove off, observing with a brutal coolness, "I am sorry I have lost my
pint; I should have beat him hollow, had it not been for this little ac^^^^at."
Some gentlemen who came out of the ^^n, after reprimanding this savage,
inquired who he was, wrote to inform his master, and got hun discharged:
resolving that neither they, nor any of their friends, would ever employ him,
and he was long out of place.

Tom was taken to one of those excellent hospitals with which London abounds.
His agonies were dreadful, his leg was set, and a high fever came on. As soon
as he was left alone to reflect on his condition, his first thought was that he
should die, and his horror was inconceivable. -- "Alas!" said he, "what will
become of my poor soul? I am cut off in the very commission of three great
sins: -- I was dr^^k, I was in a horrible passion, and I had oaths and
blasphemies in my mouth." -- He tried to pray, but he could not, his mind was
all distraction, and he thought he was so very wicked that God would not
forgive him: "because," says he, "I have sinned against light and knowledge,
and a sober education, and good examples, and I deserve nothing but
punishment." -- At length he grew lightheaded, and there was little hopes of
his life. Whenever he came to his senses for a few minutes, he cried out, "O
that my old companions could now see me, surely they would take warning by my
sad sat, and repent before it is too late."

By the blessing of God, on the skill of the surgeon, and the care of the
nurses, he however grew better in a few days. And here let me stop to remark,
what a mercy it is that we live in a christian country, where the poor, when
sick, or lame, or wounded, are taken as much care of as any gentry; nay, in
some respects, more, because in hospitals and infirmaries there are more
doctors and surgeons to attend, than most private gentle-folks can afford to
have at their own houses, whereas there never was an hospital in the whole
heathen world. Blessed be God for this, among the thousand other excellent
fruits of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION!

It was eight weeks before Tom could be taken out of bed. This was a happy
affliction; for this long sickness and solitude gave him time to reflect on his
past life. He began seriously to hate those darling si^s which had brought him
to the brink of ruin. He could now pray heartily; he confessed and lamented his
iniquities with many tears, and began to hope that the mercies of God, through
the merits of a Redeemer, might yet be extended to him on his sincere
repentance. He resolved never more to return to the same evil courses, but he
did not trust in his own strength, but prayed that God would give him grace for
the future, as well as p^^^^^ for the past. He remembered, and he was hu^^^^
(...) the thought, that he used to have short fits of (...) and to form
resolutions of amendment, in his (...) ^^d thoughtless days, and often when he
had a (...) ^^ache after a drinking bout, or had lost his money a^^^l-fours, he
vowed never to drink or play again. But as soon as his head was well or his
pockets recruited, he forgot all his resolutions. And how should it be
otherwise? for he trusted in his own strength, he never prayed to God to
strengthen him, nor even avoided the next temptation.

The case was now different. Tom began to find that his strength was perfect
weakness, and that he could do nothing without the divine assistance, for which
he prayed heartily and constantly. He sent home for his Bible, and Prayer Book,
which he had not opened for two years, and which had been given him when he
left the Sunday school. He spent the chief part of his time in reading them,
and thus derived great comfort, as well as great knowledge. The study of the
Bible filled his heart with gratitude to God, who had not cut him off in the
midst of his sins, but given him space for repentance; and the agonies he had
lately suffered with his broken leg increased his thankfulness, that he had
escaped the more dreadful pain of eternal misery. And here let the remark what
encouragement this is for rich people to give away Bibles and good books, and
not to lose all hope, though for a time they see little or no good effect from
it. According to all appearance, Tom's were never likely to do him any good,
and yet his generous benefactor, who had cast his bread upon the waters, found
it after many days, for this Bible which had lain untouched for years, was at
last made the means of h^^ reformation. God will work in his own good time.

As soon as he got well, and wa^ discharged from the hospital, Tom began to
think he must return to get his bread. At first he had some scruples about
going back to his old employ; but, says he, sensibly enough, gentlefolks must
travel, travelers must have chaises, and chaises must have drivers; it is a
very honest calling, and I don't know that goodness belongs to one sort of
business more than another: and he who can be good in a state of great
temptation, provided the calling be lawful, and the temptations are not of his
own seeking, and he be diligent in prayer, may be better than another man for
aught I know; and all that belongs to us is to do our duty in that state of
life in which it shall please God to call us. Tom had rubbed up his catechism
at the hospital, and it is a pity that people don't look at their catechism
sometimes when they are grown up; for it is full as good for men and w^^^en as
it is for children; nay, better, for though the answers contained in it are
intended for children to repeat, yet the duties enjoined in it are intended for
men and women to put in practice.

Tom now felt grieved that he was obliged to drive on Sundays. But people who
are in earnest, and have their hearts in a thing, can find helps in all cases.
As soon as he had set down his company at their stage, and had seen his horses
fed, says Tom, "A man who takes care of his horses will generally think it
right to let them rest an hour or two at least. In every town it is a chance
but there may be a church open during part of that time. If the prayers should
be over, I Will try hard for the sermon; and if I dare not stay to the sermon, it
is a chance but I may catch the prayers; it is worth trying for, however; and
as I used to make nothing of making a push, for the sake of getting an hour to
gamble, I need not grudge to take a little pains extraordinary to serve God. By
this watchfulness he soon got ^o know (...) hours of ^^^vice at (...) ^^^ns on
the road he trav^^^^, and while the horses (...) I can went to church; and it
became a favorite proverb with him, that prayers and provender hinder no man's
journey.

At first his companions wanted to laugh and make sport of this; but when they
saw that no lad on the road was up so early or worked so hard as Tom; when they
saw no chaise so neat, no glasses so bright, no harness so tight, no driver so
diligent, so clean, or so civil, they found he was no subject to make sport at.
Tom indeed was very careful in looking after the linch pine, in never giving
his horses too much water when they were hot; nor, whatever was his haste,
would be ever gallop them up hill, strike them across the head, or when tired,
cut and slash them in driving on the stones, as soon as he got into a town, as
some foolish fellows do. What helped to cure Tom of these bad practices, was
that remark he (...) with in the Bible, that a good man is merciful to his
beast. He was much moved on reading the prophet Jonah, to observe what
compassion the great God of heaven and earth had for poor beasts: for one of
the reasons there given, why the Almighty was unwilling to destroy the great
city of Ninevah was, because there was much cattle in it. After this, Tom never
could bear to see a wanton stroke inflicted.

Tom soon grew rich for one in his station; for every gentleman on the road
would be driven by no other l^^ if careful Tom was to be had. Being diligent,
he got a great deal of money; being frugal, he spent but little; and having no
vices, he wasted none. He soon found out that there was some meaning in that
text which says, that Godliness has the promise of the lif^ that now is, as
well as of that which is to come: for the same principles which makes a man
sober and honest, have also a natural tendency to make him healthy and rich;
while a d^^^^ and a spendthrift (...) hardly escape being sick, and a beggar in
the end. Vice is the parent of misery here as well as hereafter.

After a few years Tom begged a (...) ^ay, and made a visit to his native
village: his good character had got thither before him. He found his father was
dead, but during his long illness Tom had supplied him with money, and by
allowing him a trifle every week, ^^^d had the honest satisfaction of keeping
him from (...) parish. Farmer Hodges was still living, but being grown old and
infirm, he was desirous to retire from business. He retained a great regard for
his old servant, Tom; and finding he was worth money, and knowing he knew
something of country business, he offered to let him a small farm at an easy
rate, and promised his assistance in the management for the first year, with
the loan of a small sum of money, that he might set out with a pretty stock.
Tom thanked h^^ with tears in his eyes, went back and took a handsome leave of
his master, who made him a present of a horse and cart, in acknowledgement of
his long and faithful services; for, says he, "I have saved many horses by
Tom's care and attention, and I could well afford to do the same by every
servant who did the same by ^^e; and should be a richer man at the end o^ every
year by the same generosity, provided I could meet with just and faithful
servants who deserved the same rewards."

Tom was soon settled in his new farm, and in less than a year had got every
thing neat and decent about him. Farmer Hodges' long experience and friendly
advice, joined to his own industry and hard labor, soon bro't the farm to great
perfection. The regularity, sobriety, peaceableness, and piety of his daily
life, his constant attendance at church twice every Sunday, and his decent and
devout behavior when there, soon recommended him to the notice of Dr. Shepherd,
who was still living, a pattern of zeal, activity, and benevolence to all
parish priests. The Dr. soon begun to hold up Tom, or as we must now more
properly ter^ him, Mr. Thomas White, to the imitation of the whole parish, and
the frequent and condescending conversation of this worthy clergyman,
contributed no less than his preaching to the improvement of his new
parishioner.

Farmer White soon found out that a dairy could not well he carried on without
a mistress, and beg^^ to think seriously of marrying; he prayed to God to
direct him in so important a business. He knew that a tawdry, vain, dressy
girl, was not likely to make good cheese and butter, and that a worldly and
ungodly woman would make a sad wife and mistress of a family. He soon heard of
a young woman of excellent character, who had been bred up by the vicar's lady,
and still lived in the family as upper maid. She was prudent, sober,
industrious, and religious. Her neat, modest, and plain appearance at church,
(for she was seldom seen any where else out of her master's family) was an
example to all persons in her station, and never f^lled to recommend her to
strangers, even before they had an opportunity of knowing the goodness of her
character. It was her character, however, which recommended her to farmer
White. He knew that favor is deceitful, and beauty is ^ain, but a woman that
fears the Lo^d, she shall be praised: -- "aye, and not only praised, but
chosen too," says Farmer White, as he took down his hat from the nail on which
it hung, in order to go and wait on Dr. Shepherd, to break his mind and ask his
consent; for he thought it would be a very unhandsome return for all the favors
he was receiving from his minister, to decoy away his faithful servant from her
place without his consent.

This worthy gentleman, though sorry to lose so valuable a member of his little
family, did not scruple a moment about parting with her, when he found it would
be so greatly to her advantage. Tom was agreeably surprised to hear she had
saved fifty pounds by her frugality. The doctor married them himself, Farmer
Hodges being present.

In the afternoon Dr. Shepherd condescended to ca^^ on Farmer and Mrs. White,
to give a few words of advice on the new duties they had entered into; a common
custom with him on those occasions. He often took an opportunity to drop, in
the most kind and tender way, a hint on the great indecency of making
marriages, christenings, and, above all, funerals, days of riot and e^^^ss, as
is too often the case in country villages. -- The expectation that the vicar
might possibly drop in, in his walk^, on these festivities, sometimes
restrained excessive drinking, and improper conversation, even among those
farmers who were not restrained by higher motives, as Farmer and Mrs. White
were.

What the doctor said was always in such a cheerful, good-ho^noured way, that
it was sure to increase the pleasure of the day, instead of damping it. Well,
Farmer, said he, and you my faithful Sarah, any other friend might recommend
peace and agreement to you on your marriage; but I, on the contrary, recommend
cares and strifes. See Dodd's Sayings.
The company stared -- but Sarah, who knew that her old master was a facetious
gentleman, and ^^ways had some good meaning behind, looked serious. -- "Cares
and strifes, sir, said the farmer, what do you mean?" I mean, said he, for the
first, that your cares shall be who shall please God most, and your strifes,
who shall serve him best, and do your duty most faithfully. Thus, all your
cares and strifes being employed to the highest purposes, all petty cares and
worldly strifes shall be at an end,

"Always remember, both of you, that you have still a better friend than each
other." -- The company stared again, and thought no woman could have so good a
friend as nor husband. "As you have chosen each other from the best motives,"
continued the doctor, "you have every reasonable ground to hope for happiness;
but as this world is a soil, in which troubles and misfortunes will spring up;
troubles from which you cannot save one another: then remember, it is the best
wisdom to go to that friend who is always near, always willing, and always able
to help you, and that friend is God."

"Sir," said Farmer White, "I humbly thank you for all your kind instructions,
of which I shall stand more in need than ever, as I shall have more duties to
fulfill. I hope the remembrance of my past offenses will keep me humble, and the
sense of my remaining sin will keep me watchful. I set out in the world, sir,
with what is called a good natural disposition, but I soon found, to my cost,
that, without God's grace, that will carry a man but a little way. A good
temper is a good thing, but nothing but the fear of God can enable one to bear
up against temptation, evil company and evil passions. The misfortune of
breaking my leg, as I then thought it, has proved the greatest blessing of my
life. It showed me my own weakness, sir, the value of the Bible, and the
goodness of God. How many of my brother drivers have I seen since that time cut
off in the prime of life by drinking, or by some sudden accident, while I have
not only been spared, but blessed and prospered. O, sir! it would be the joy of
my heart, if some of my old comrades, good-natured, civil fellows, (whom I
cannot help loving) could see, as I have done, the danger of evil courses before
it is too late. Though they may not hearken to you, sir, or any other minister,
they may believe me, because I have been one of them; and I can speak from
experience, of the great difference there is, even as to worldly comfort,
between a life of sobriety and a life of sin. I could tell them, sir, not as a
thing I have read in a book, but as a truth I feel in my own heart, that to
fear God and keep his commandments, will not only "bring a man peace at the
last," but will make him happy now. And I will venture to say, sir, that all
the stocks, pillories, prisons, and gibbets in the land, though so very needful
to keep bad men in order, yet will never restrain a good man from committing
evil, half so much as that single text, "how shall I do this great wickedness
and sin against God?" Dr. Shepherd condescended to approve of what the farmer
had said, kindly shook him by the hand, and took leave.

Thomas White had always been fond of singing, but he had for many years
despised that vile trash which is too often sung in a stable-yard. One Sunday
evening he heard his mistress at the Bear read some verses out of a fine book
called the Spectator. He was so struck with the picture it contains of the
great mercies of God, of which he had himself partaken so largely, that he took
the liberty to ask her for these verses, and she being a very good natured
woman, made her daughter write out for the postilion the following

HYMN ON DIVINE PROVIDENCE.
WHEN all thy mercies, O my God,
My rising soul surveys,
Transported with the view I Am lost
In wonder, love, and praise.
O how shall words with equal warmth
The gratitude declare,
That glows within my ravished heart?
But thou can read it there.
Thy providence my life sustained,
And all my wants redrest,
When in the silent womb I lay,
And hung upon the breast.
To all my weak complaints and cries,
Thy mercy lent an ear,
Ere yet my feeble thoughts had learnt
To form themselves in prayer.
Unnun ber'd comforts to my soul
Thy tender care bestowed,
Before my infant heart conceived
From whom those comfort, flowed.
When in the slippery path of youth
With heedless steps I ran,
Thine arm, unseen, conveyed me safe,
And led me up to man.
Through hidden dangers, toils, and deaths,
It gently cleared my way,
And through the pleasing shares of vice,
More to be feared than they.
When worn with sickness, often have thou
With health renewed my face;
And when in sins and sorrow sunk,
Revived my soul with grace.
Thy bounteous hand, with worldly bliss,
Have made my cup run over;
And in a kind and faithful friend,
Has doubt'd all my store.
Ten thousand thousand precious gifts,
My daily thanks employ,
Nor is the least a thankful heart
That tastes those gifts with joy.
Through every period of my life
Thy goodness I Will pursue,
And fte^d^^^, in asistant wodds,
The glorious theme (...).
When nature fails, and day and night
Divide thy works no more,
My ever grateful heart, O Lord!
'Thy mercy shall adore.
Through all eternity to thee
A joyful song I Will raise,
For O eternity's too short
To utter all thy praise.
THE WAY TO PLENTY; OR THE SECOND PART OF TOM WHITE.
TOM WHITE, as we have shown in the first pass of this history, from an idle
post-boy was become a respectable farmer. God had blessed has industry, and he
had prospered in the world, He was sober and temperate, and, as was the natural
consequence, he was active and healthy. He was industrious and frugal, and he
became prosperous in his circumstances. This is in the ordinary course of
providence. But it is not a certain and necessary rule. God makes his sun to
shine on the just and the unjust. A man who uses every honest means of thrift
and industry, will, in most cases, find success attend his labors. But still
the race is not always to the s^^ift, nor the battle to the strong. God is
sometimes pleased, for wise ends, to disappoint all the worldly hope, of the
most upright man. His corn may be smitten by a blight. His barns may be
consumed by ^i^e. His cattle may be carried off by ^^le^^per. And to these and
other mi^^ortun^^, he is as liable as the spend thrift or the knave, Success is
the common reward (...) industry, but if it were its constant reward, the
in^^^^rious would be tempted to look no further than the present state. They
would lose one strong ground of their faith. It would set aside the scripture
scheme. This world would be looked on as a state of reward, instead of a state
of trial, and we should forget to look to a day of final retribution.

Farmer White never took it into his head, that because he paid his debts,
worked early and late, and ate the bread of carefulness, he was therefore to
come into no misfortune like other folk, but was to be free ^^om the common
trials and troubles of life. He knew that prosperity was far from being a sure
mark of God's favor, and had read in good books, and especially in the Bible,
of the great poverty and afflictions of the best of men. Though he was no great
scholar, he had sense enough to observe, that a time of public prosperity was
not always a time of public virtue; and he thought that what was true of a
whole nation might be true of one man. So the more he prospered the more he
prayed that prosperity might not corrupt his heart. And when he saw lately
signs of public distress coming on, he was not half so much frightened as some
others were, because he thought it might do us good in the long run; and he was
in hopes that a little poverty might bring on a little penitence. The great
grace he labored after was that of a cheerful submission. He used to say, that
if the Lord's Prayer had only contained those four little words THY WILL BE
DONE, it would be worth more than the biggest book in the world without them.

Dr. Shepherd, the worthy vicar, (with whom the farmer's wife had formerly
lived as housekeeper) was very fond of taking a walk with him about his
grounds, and used to say, that he learnt as much from the farmer as the farmer
did from him. If the doctor happened to observe, I am afraid these long rains
will spoil this ^^ne piece of outs, the farmer would answer, "but then, (...)
how good it is for the grass." If the doctor seated sure the rye would turn out
well. When grass failed, he did not doubt but turnips would be plenty. Even for
floods and inundations he would find out some way to justify Providence. "'It Is
better," said he "to have our lands a little overflowed, than that the springs
should be dried up, and our cattle faint for lack of water." When the drought
came, he thanked God that the season would be healthy; and high winds, which
frightened others, he said served to clear the air. Whoever or whatever was
wrong, he was always su^^ that Providence was in the right. And he used to say,
that a man with ever so small an income, if he had but frugality and
temperance, and cast off all vain desires, was richer than a lord who was
tormented by vanity and covetousness. When he saw others in the wrong, he did
not however abuse them for it, but took care to avoid the same fault. He had
sense and spirit enough to break through many old but very bad customs of his
neighbors. "If a thing is wrong in itself," (said he one day to Farmer Hodges)
"a whole parish doing it cannot make it right. And as to it is being an old
custom, why if it be a good one I like it the better for being old, because it
has the stamp of ages and the sanction of experience on its worth. But if it be
old as well as bad, that is another reason for my trying to put an end to it,
that we may not mislead our children as our fathers have misled us."

THE ROOF-RAISING.
Some years after he was settled, he built a large new barn. All the workmen
were looking forward to the usual holiday of roof-raising. On this occasion it
was a custom to give a dinner to the workmen, with so much liquor after it that
they got so drunk that they not only lost the remaining half day's work, but
they were not always able to work the next day.

Mrs. White provided a plentiful dinner for roof-raising, and gave each man his
mug of beer. After a hearty meal they began to grow clamorous for more drink.
The farmer said, "My lads, I don't grudge you a few gallons of ale merely for
the sake of saving my liquor, though that is some consideration; but I never
will, knowingly, help any man to make a beast of himself. I am resolved to
break through a bad custom. You are now well refreshed. If you will go
cheerfully to your work, you will have half a day's pay to take on Saturday
night more than you would if this afternoon were wasted in drunkenness. For
this your families will be the better: whereas, were I to give you more liquor
when you have already had enough, I should help to rob them of their bread. But
I wish to show you, that I have your good at heart full as much as my own
profit. If you will now go to work, I will give you all another mug at night,
when you leave off. -- Thus your time will be saved, your families helped, and
my ale will not go to make reasonable creatures worse than brute beasts."

Here he stopped. -- "You are in the right on it, master," said Tom the
thatcher. "You are a hearty man, farmer," said John Plane the carpenter." "Come
along, boys," said Tim Brick the mason; so they all went merrily to work,
fortified with a good dinner. -- There was only one drunken surly fellow who
refused, that was Dick Guzzle, the smith. Dick never works above two or three
days in the week, and spends the others at the Red Lion. He swore, that if the
farmer did not let him have as much liquor as he liked at roof-raising, he
would not strike another stroke, but would leave the job unfinished, and he
might get hands where he could. Farmer White took him at his word, and paid him
off directly: glad enough to get rid of such a sot, whom he had only employed
from pity to a large and almost starving family. When the men came for their
mug in the evening, the farmer brought out the remains of the cold gammon: they
made a hearty supper, and thanked him for having broke through a foolish
custom, which was afterward much left off in that parish, though Dick would
not come into it, and lost most of his work.

Farmer White's laborers were often complaining, that things were so dear that
they could not buy a bit of meat. He knew it was partly true, but not entirely,
for it was before these very hard times. One morning he stepped out to see how an
outhouse which he was thatching went on. He was surprised to find the work at a
stand. He walked over to the thatcher's house. "Tom," said he, "I desire that
piece of work may be finished directly. If a shower comes my grain will be
spoiled." "Indeed, master, I shall not work today, nor tomorrow, neither," said
Tom. "You forget that it is Easter Monday, and tomorrow is Easter Tuesday. And
so on Wednesday I shall thatch away master. But it is hard if a poor man who
works all the year, may not enjoy these few holidays."

"Tom," said the farmer, "when these days were first put into our prayer book,
the good men who did it, little thought that the time would come when holy day
should mean drunken-day. How much do think now I shall pay thee for this
piece of thatch?" "Why you know master you have let it to me by the great. I
think between this and tomorrow night, as the weather is so fine, I could
clear about four shillings, after I had paid my boy. But thatching does not
come often, and other work is not so profitable." "Very well, Tom; and how much
now do you think you may spend in these two holidays?" "Why master, if the ale
is pleasant, and the company merry, I do not expect to get off for less than
three shillings." "Tom, can you do pounds, shillings, and pence?" "I can make a
little score, master, behind the kitchen door with a bit of chalk, which is as
much as I want." "Well, Tom, add the four shillings you would have earned, to
the three you intend to spend, what does that make?" "Let me see! three and
four make seven. Seven shillings, master." "Tom, you often tell me the times
are so bad that you can never buy a bit of meat. Now here is the cost of two
joints at once; to say nothing of the sin of wasting time and getting drunk."
"I never once thought of that," said Tom. "Now Tom," said the farmer, "if I
were you, I would step over to Butcher Jobbin's, buy a shoulder of mutton,
which being left from Saturday's market you will get a little cheaper. -- This
I would make my wife bake in a deep dish full of potatoes. I would then go to
work, and when the dinner was ready I would go and enjoy it with my wife and
children; you need not give the mutton to the children -- the potatoes will
have all the gravy, and be very savory for them." "Aye, but I Have got no beer
master, the times are so hard that a poor man cannot afford to brew a drop of
drink now as we used to do."

"Times are bad, and malt is very dear, Tom, and yet both don't prevent your
throwing away seven shillings in keeping holiday. Now send for a quart of ale,
as it is to be a feast; and you will even then be four shllings richer than if
you had gone to the public house. I would put by these four shillings, till I
could add a couple to them; with this I would get a busnel of malt, and my wife
should brew it, and you may take a pint at home of a night, which will do you
more good than a gallon at the Red Lion." "I have a great mind to take your
advice, master, but I shall be made such fun of at the Lion; they will so laugh
at me if I don't go." "Let those laugh that win, Tom." "But, master, I have got
a friend to meet me there." -- "Then ask your friend to come and eat a bit of
your cold mutton at night, and here is sixpence for another pot, if you will
promise to brew a small cask of your own." "Thank you, master, and so I will;
and I will not ^o to the Lion. -- Come boy, bring the helm, and fetch the ladder."
And so Tom was upon the roof in a twinkling.

THE SHEEP-SHEARING.
Dr. Shepherd happened to say to Farmer White one day, "that there was nothing
he disliked more than the manner in which sheep-shearing and harvest-home were
kept by some in his parish. What, said the good doctor, just when we are blessed
with these natural riches of our land, the fleece of our flocks; when our barns
are crowned with plenty, and we have reaped the fruits or the earth in due
season; is that very time to be set apart for ribaldry, and riot, and
drunkenness? Do we thank God for his mercies by making ourselves unworthy and
unfit to enjoy them?"

"I thank you for the hint, sir," said the farmer, "I am resolved to rejoice,
though, and others shall rejoice with me, and we will have a merry night on it."

So Mrs. White dressed a very plentiful supper of meat and pudding; and spread
out two tables. The farmer sat at the head of one, consisting of s^^e of the
neighbors, and all his work-people. At the other sat his wife, with two long
benches on each side of her. -- at these sat all the old and infirm poor,
especially those who lived in the workhouse, and had no day of festivity to
look forward to in the whole year but this. On the grass, in the little court,
sat the children of his laborers, and of the other poor, whose employment it
had been to gather flowers, and dress and adorn the horns of the ram; for the
farmer did not wish to put an end to any old custom, if it was innocent. His
own children stood by the table, and he gave them plenty of pudding, which they
carried to the children of the poor, with a little draught of cider to every
one.

This feast, though orderly and decent, was yet hearty and cheerful. Dr.
Shepherd dropped in with a good deal of company he had at his house, and they
were much pleased. When the doctor saw how the aged and the infirm poor were
enjoying themselves, he was much moved; he shook the farmer by the hand, and
said, "But thou, when thou make a feast, call the blind, and the lame, and
the halt; they cannot recompense thee, but thou shall be recompensed at the
resurrection of the just."

"Sir," said the farmer, "'it is no great matter of expense -- I kill a sheep of
my own; potatoes are as plenty as blackberries, with people who have a little
forethought. I save much more cider in the course of a year, by never allowing
any carousing in my kitchen or drunkenness in my fields, than would supply many
such feasts as these, so that I shall be never the poorer at Christmas. It is
cheaper to make people happy, sir, than to make them drunk. The doctor and the
ladies condescended to walk from one table to the other, and heard many merry
stories, but not one profane word, or one indecent song: so that he was
not-forced to the painful necessity either of reproving them, or leaving them
in anger. When all was over they sung the sixty-fifth psalm, and the ladies all
joined in it; and when they got home to the vicarage to tea, they declared they
liked it better than any concert.

THE HARD WINTER.
In the famous cold winter of the present year, 1795, it was edifying to see
how patiently Farmer White bore that long and severe frost. Many of his sheep
were frozen to death, but he thanked God that he had still many left. He
continued to find in-door work, that his men might not be out of employ. Mrs.
White was so considerate, that just at that time she lessened the number of her
hogs, that she might have mo^e whey and skim-milk to assist poor familes. --
Nay, I have known her live on boiled meat for a long time together, in a sickly
season, because the pot-liquor made such a supply of broth for the sick poor.
As the spring came on, and things grew worse, she never had a cake, a pie, or a
pudding in her house; though she used to have plenty of these good things, and
will again, I hope, when the present scarcity is over; though the says she
never will use such white flour again, even if it should come down to five
shillings a bushel.

All the parish now began to murmur. Farmer Jones was sure the frost had killed
the wheat. Farmer Wilson said the rye would never come up. Brown, the maltster,
insisted the barley was dead at the root. Butcher Jobbins said beef would be a
shilling a pound. All declared there would not be a hop to brew with. The
orchards were all blighted, there would not be apples enough to make a pie: and
as to hay, there would be none to be had for love nor money. -- "I Will tell you
what," said Farmer White, "the season is dreadful. -- The crops are unpromising
just now; but it is too early to judge. Don't let us make things worse than they
are. We ought to comfort the poor, and you are driving them to despair. Don't
you know how much God was displeased with the murmurs of his chosen people? And
yet, when they were tired of manna he sent them quails; but all did not do.
Nothing satisfies grumblers. We have a promise on our side, that there shall be
seed time and harvest time to the end. Let us then hope for a good day, but
provide against an evil one. Let us rather prevent the evil before it comes
upon us, than sink under it when it comes. Grumbling cant help us. Activity
can. Let us set about planting potatoes in every nook and corner, in case the
corn should fail, which, however, I don't believe. Let us mend our management
before we are driven to it by actual want. And if we allow our honest laborers
to plant a few potatoes for their families in the head-lands of our ploughed
fields, or other waste bits of ground, it will do us no harm, and be a great
help to them."

The farmer had many temptations to send his corn at an extravagant price to a
certain seaport town; but as he knew that it was intended to export it against
law, he would not be tempted to encourage unlawful gain; so he threshed out a
small mow at a time, and sold it to the neighboring poor far below the market
price. He served his own workmen first. This was the same to them as if he had
raised their wages, and even better, as it was a benefit of which their
families were sure to partake. If the poor in the next parish were more
distressed than his own, he sold to them at the same rate. "For," said he,
"there is no distinction of parishes in heaven; and though charity begins at
home, yet it ought not to end there."

He had been used in good times now and then to catch a hare or a partridge, as
he was qualified. But he now resolved to give up that pleasure. So he parted
from a couple of spaniels he had; for he said he could not bear that his dogs
should be eating the meat or the milk, which so many men, women, and children
wanted.

THE WHITE LOAF.
One day, it was about the middle of last July, when things seemed to be at the
dearest, and the rulers of the land had agreed to set the example of eating
nothing but coarse bread. Doctor Shepherd read, before sermon, in the church,
their public declaration, which the magistrates of the county sent him, and had
also signed themselves. Mrs. White, of course, was at church, and commended it
mightily. Next morning the doctor took a walk over to the farmer's, in order to
settle further plans for the relief of the parish. He was much surprised to
meet Mrs. White's little maid Sally with a very small wheat loaf, which she had
been buying at a shop. He said nothing to the girl, as he never thought it
right to expose the faults of a mistress to her servant, but walked on,
resolving to give Mrs. White a severe lecture for the first time in his life.
He soon changed his mind, for on going into the kitchen the first person he saw
was Tom the thatcher, who had had a sad fall from a ladder; his arm, which was
slipped out of his sleeve, was swelled in a frightful manner. Mrs. White was
standing at the dresser making the little wheat loaf into a poultice, which she
laid upon the swelling in a large clean old cloth.

"I ask your pardon, my good Sarah," said the doctor, "I ought not, however
appearances were against you, to have suspected that so humble and prudent a
woman as you are, would be led either to indulge any daintiness of your own, or
to fly in the face of your betters, by eating white bread while they are eating
brown. Whenever I come here I see it is not needful to be rich in order to be
charitable. A bountiful rich man would have sent Tom to a surgeon, who would
have done no more for him than you have done; for in those inflammations the
most skilful surgeon could only apply a poultice. Your kindness in dressing the
wound yourself will, I doubt not, perform the cure at the expense of that
threepenny loaf and a little hog's lard. And I will take care that Tom shall
have a good supply of rice from the subscription." "And he shall not want for skim
milk," said Mrs. White; and was he the best lord in the land, in the state he
is in, a dish of good nice milk would be better for him than the nicest meat.

THE PARISH MEETING.
On the tenth of August the vestry held another meeting, to consult on the best
method of further assisting the poor. The abundant crops now cheered every
heart. Farmer white had a mind to be a little jocular with his desponding
neighbors. "Well, neighbor Jones," said he, "all the wheat was killed, I
suppose. The barley all dead at the root." Farmer Jones looked sheepish, and
said, "to be sure the crops had turned out better than he thought." "Then,"
said Dr. Shepherd, "let us learn to trust Providence another time."

Among other things, they agreed to subscribe for a large quantity of rice,
which was to be sold out to the poor at a very low price, and Mrs. White was so
kind as to undertake the trouble of selling it. After this day's work was over,
all who wished to buy at these reduced rates were ordered to come to the farm
on the Tuesday evening. Dr. Shepherd dropped in at the same time, and when Mrs.
White had done weighing her rice, the doctor spoke as follows:

"My honest friends, it has pleased God to visit this land with a scarcity, to
which we have been little accustomed. There are some idle evil-minded people
who are on the watch for public distresses, not that they may humble themselves
under the mighty hand of God, (which is the true use to be made of all
troubles) but that they may benefit themselves by disturbing the public peace.
These people, by riot and drunkenness, double the evil which they pretend to
cure. Riot will complete our misfortunes, while peace, industry, and good
management, will go near to cure them. Bread, to be sure, is uncommonly dear.
Among the various ways of making it cheaper, one is to reduce the quality of
it, another, to lessen the quantity we consume. If we cannot get enough of
coarse wheaten bread, let us make it of other grain. Or let us mix one half of
potatoes, and one half of wheat. This last is what I eat in my own family. It
is pleasant and wholesome. Our blessed Savior ate barley bread you know, as we
were told in the last month's Sunday Reading of the Cheap Repository, which I
hope you have all heard, as I desired the matter of the Sunday school to read
it just after evening service, when I know many of the parents are apt to call
in at the school. This is a good custom, and one of those little books shall be
often read at that time.

"My good women, I truly feel for you at this time of scarcity; and I am going
to show my good will, as much by my advice as my subscription. It is my duty,
as your friend and minister, to tell you, that one half of your present
hardships is owing to BAD MANAGEMENT. I often meet your children without shoes
and stockings, with great luncheons of the very whitest bread, and that three
times a day. Half that ^^antity, and still less-if it were coarse, put into a
dish of good onion or leek porridge, would make them an excellent breakfast.
Many too of the very poorest of you eat your bread hot from the oven; this
makes the difference of one loaf in five; I assure you it is what I cannot
afford to do. Come, Mrs. White, you must assist me a little. I am not very
knowing in these matters myself; but I know that the rich would be twice as
charitable if the poor made a better use of their bounty. Mrs. White do give
these poor women a little advice how to make their pittance go farther than it
now does. When you lived with me you were famous for making us nice, cheap
dishes, and I dare say you are not less notable now you manage for yourself."

"Indeed, neighbors," said Mrs. White, "what the good doctor says is very true.
A halfpenny worth of oatmeal or groats, with a leek or onion, out of your own
garden, which costs nothing, a bit or salt, and a little coarse bread, will
breakfast your whole family. It is a great mistake at any time to think a bit
of meat is so ruinous, and a great load of bread so cheap. A poor man gets
seven or eight shillings a week; if he is careful he brings it home. I dare not
say how much of this goes for tea in the afternoon, now sugar and butter are so
dear, because I should have you all upon me, but I will say that too much of
this little goes even for bread, from a notion that it is the hardest fare.
This, at all times, but particularly now, is bad management. Dry pease, to be
sure, have been very dear lately! but now they are plenty enough. I am certain
then, that if a shilling or two of the seven or eight was laid out for a bit of
coarse beef, a sheep's head, or any such thing, it would be well bestowed. I
would throw a couple of pound of this into the pot, with two or three handfuls
of gray pease, an onion, and a little pepper. Then I would throw in cabbage, or
turnip, and carrot, or any garden stuff that was most plenty; let it stew two
or three hours, and it will make a dish fit for his majesty. The working man
should have the meat, the children don't want it, the soup will be thick and
substantial, and requires no bread.

RICE MILK.
"You who can get skim milk, as all our workmen can, have a great advantage. A
quart of this, and a quarter of a pound of the rice you have just bought, a
little bit of all-spice, and brown sugar, will make a dainty and cheap dish."

"Bless your heart!" muttered Amy Grumble, who looked as dirty as a
cinder-wench, with her face and fingers all daubed with snuff; "rice milk
indeed; it is very nice, to be sure, for those who can dress it, but we have
not a bit of coal; rice is of no use to us without firing." "And yet," said the
doctor, "I see your tea-kettle boiling twice every day, as I pass by the
poor-house, and fresh butter at eleven pence a pound on your shelf." "O dear,
sir," cried Amy, "a few sticks serve to boil the tea-kettle." "And a few more,"
said the doctor, "will boil the rice milk, and give twice the nourishment at a
quarter of the expense."

RICE PUDDING.
"Pray Sarah," said the doctor, "how did you use to make that pudding my
children were so fond of? And I remember, when it was cold, we used to have it
in the parlour for supper." "Nothing more easy," said Mrs. White. "I put half a
pound of rice, two quarts of skim milk, and two ounces of brown sugar." "Well,"
said the doctor, "and how many will this dine?" "S^ven or eight, sir." "Very
well, and what will it cost?" "Why, sir, it did not ^ost you so much, because
we baked it at home, and I used our own milk; it will not cost above seven
pence to those who pay for both. Here too bread is saved."

"Pray, Sarah, let me put in a word," said Farmer White. "I advise my men to
raise each a large bed of parsnips. They are very nourishing, and very
profitable. Six penny worth of seed, well sowed, and trod in, will produce more
meals than sour sacks of potatoes; and what is material to you who have so
little ground, it will not require more than an eight part of the ground which
the four sacks will take. Parsnips are very good the second day warmed in the
drying pan, and a little rasher of pork or bacon will give them a nice flavor."

Dr. Shepherd now said, "as a proof of the nourishing quality of parsnips, I
was reading in a history book this very day, that the American Indians make a
great part of their bread of parsnips, though Indian corn is so famous; it will
make a little variety too."

"I remember," says Mrs. White, "a cheap dish, so nice that it makes my mouth
water. I peel some raw potatoes, slice them thin, put the slices into a deep
drying pan, or pot, with a little water, an onion, and a bit of pepper. Then I
get a bone or two of a breast of mutton, or a little s^^ip of salt pork, and
put into it. Cover it down close, keep in the steam, and let it stew for an
hour."

"You really get me an appetite, Mrs. White, by your dainty receipts," said the
doctor. "I am resolved to have this dish at my own (...)." "I could tell you
another very good dish, and still cheaper," answered she. "Come, let us have
it," ^^^ed the doctor. "I shall write (...) down as soon as I get (...), and I
will favor any body with a copy of these re^^ipts who w^^^ ^all at my house."
"And I will do more, sir," said Mrs. White, "for I will put any of these women
in the way how to dress it, the first time, if they are at a loss. But this is
my dish:

"Take two or three pickled herrings, put them into a stone jar, fill it up
with potatoes, and a little water, and let it bake in the oven till it is done.
I would give one hint more," added she; "I have taken to use nothing but
potatoe starch; and though I say it, that should not say it, nobody's linen in
a common way looks better than ours."

The Doctor now said, "I am sorry for one hardship which many poor-people labor
under, I mean the difficulty of getting a little milk. I wish all farmer's
wives were as considerate as you are, Mrs. White. A little milk is a great
comfort to the poor, especially when their children are sick. And I have known
it answer to the seller as well as to the buyer, to keep a cow or two on
purpose to sell it out by the quart."

"Sir," said Farmer White, "I beg leave to say a word to the men, if you
please, for all your advice goes to the women. If you will drink less gin you
may get more meat. If you abstain from the alehouse you may, many of you, get a
little one-way beer at home." "Aye, that we can, Farmer," says poor Tom the
thatcher, who was now got well. "Easter Monday for that -- I say no more. -- A
word to the wise." The farmer smiled and went on. "The number of public houses
in many a parish brings on more hunger and rags than all the taxes in it, heavy
as they are. All the other evils put together hardly make up the sum of that
one. We are now raising a fresh subscription for you. This will be our rule of
giving. We will not give to sots, gamblers, and sabbath breakers. Those who do
not set their young children to work on week days, and send them to school on
Sundays, deserve little favor. No man should keep a dog till he has more food
than his family wants. If he feeds them at home they rob his children; if he
starves them, they rob his neighbors. We have heard in a neighboring city that
some people carried back the subscription loaves because they were too coarse;
but we hope better things of you." Here Betty Plane begged, with all humility,
to put in a word. "Certainly," said the doctor, "we will listen to all modest
complaints, and try to redress them." "You were pleased to say, sir," said she,
"that we might find much comfort from buying coarse bits of beef. And so we
might, but you do not know, sir, that we can seldom get them, even when we had
the money, and times were not so bad." "How so, Betty?" "Sir, when we go to
butcher Jobbins for a bit of shin, or any other lean piece, his answer is, 'you
cannot have it today. The cook at the great house has bespoke it for gravy, or
the doctor's maid (begging your pardon, sir,) has just ordered it for soup.'
Now, sir, if such kind gentlefolks were aware that this gravy and soup not only
consume a great deal of meat, (which, to be sure, those have a right to use who
can pay for it) but that it takes away those coarse pieces which the poor would
buy, if they bought at all, I am sure they would not do it. For indeed the rich
have been very kind, and I don't know what we should have done without them."

"I thank you for the hint, Betty," said the doctor, "and I assure you I will
have no more gravy soup. -- My garden will supply me with soups, that are both
wholesomer and better: and I will answer for my lady at the great house that
she will do the same. I hope this will become a general rule, and then we shall
expect that the butchers will favor you in the prices of the coarse piece^, if
we buy nothing but the prime. In our gifts we shall p^^fe^ (...) the ^a^mer has
told you, those who keep steadily to their work: Such as come to the vestry for
a loaf, and do not come to church for the sermon, we shall marl^; and prefer
those who come constantly whether there are any gifts or not. But there is one
rule from which we never will depart. Those who have been seen aiding or
abetting any RIOT, any attack on butchers, bakers, wheat mows, mills, or
millers, we will not relieve. With the quiet contented, hard-working man I will
share my last morsel of bread. I shall only add, that though it has pleased God
to send us this visitation as a punishment, yet we may convert this short trial
into a lasting blessing, if we all turn over a new leaf. Prosperity had made
most of us careless. The thoughtless profusion of some of the rich, could only
be exceeded by the idleness and bad management of some of the poor. Let us now
at last adopt that good old maxim, EVERY ONE MEND ONE. And may God add his
blessing!"

The people now cheerfully departed with their rice, resolving, as many of them
as could get milk, to put one of Mrs. White's receipts in practice that very
night; and a rare supper they had.

I hope soon to give a good account how this parish improved in ease and
comfort, by their improvement in frugality and good management.

THE LIFE OF WILLIAM BAKER. BY THE REV. MR. GILPIN.
WILLIAM BAKER was born in the year 1710, in the parish of Boldre, near
Lymington, in Hampshire. His father dying when he was two years old, left him
and a sister to the care of his widow; who by taking in washing, maintained her
two children without any relief from the parish. -- In these days such industry
would exceed belief.

At seven years of age young Baker began that life of labor, which he continued
through the space of seventy years afterward. He worked first for a penny a
day in the vicarage garden; but soon thought himself equal to more profitable
labor. He used to say he always considered himself as a poor friendless lad;
and from the beginning depended only on himself.

In the mean time his mother grew old and infirm. -- Her legs swelled, and she
could no longer stand at her was^ tub. But nothing hurt her like the thoughts
of going to the poor-house, or living on alms.

Her son was now about eighteen. He was healthy and strong; and assured his
mother, that while he was able to work for her, she should be obliged to
nobody, He took a little cottage therefore on the edge of the forest; carried
her to it; and got into the service of a farmer in the neighborhood, as a day
laborer. His mother lived nine years after this; during which time he
maintained her with great cheerfulness, and kindness: nor had she ever
assistance from any other person. He denied himself every little indulgence
which young fellows of that age often take, that he might maintain his mother.
-- We do not often see such an instance of goodness in a poor lad. It marked
his character as something uncommon. He might, if he had pleased, have had her
maintained by the parish.

About the time of his mother's death he thought of marrying. At a little
distance from him, under the hill, lived a laborer of the name of Brooks. His
daughter Joanna was the person whom Baker fixed on for a wife; and no objection
being made, he married her, and bro't her to his cottage. Joanna had lived
under a careful mother, just in the way in which he himself had always lived;
and with the same notions of industry and frugality. She entered therefore into
all her husband's intentions. What he gained, she put to the best use. -- "We
both pulled the rope," he used to say "by the same end; and so we compassed
many things which they cannot do, who pull at different ends."

In the mean time, his family increased; and his industry increased with it. He
now never worked "by the day," if he could help it; but took the hardest
"taskwork" he could get, by which the most money was to be earned. And that he
might "never" be idle, he took, at a small rent, of Mrs. John Burrard, of
Lymington, a piece of rough ground, about nine or ten acres, on which he might
employ his leisure. Many a time he was seen working in it before sunrise; and
if his day's work had not been hard, in an evening by moonlight. In a few
years he made it worth much more, than when he took it; and he found it of
great u^e to his family in furnishing him sometimes with a crop of potatoes --
or a little corn -- or a few loads of hay; which enabled (...) to keep two or
three cows, and as many forest-colts. -- Some years after, his good landlady
died; and this piece of land fell into the hands of Mr. Brailsfield, of Kentish
town; who finding it was tenanted by a man, who had taken so much pains to
improve it, promised neither to raise his rent nor to take it from him; which I
mention to his honor. -- Thus a kind of providence blessed all Baker's designs;
and he was richer than many a man who is born to thousands. There are few men,
who may not live comfortably, if they live "according to their station:" and if
they "do not," the highest stations will not secure from difficulties. I have
often heard Baket say, he never knew what want was: but then he never relaxed
his usual frugality. When wheat was dear, to make all ends meet, he lived on
barley; and when he could not with convenience compass a bushel of malt, he
contented himself with milk, or water.

He had now sive children, who were a constant claim upon all his industry and
frugality. But he had other claims. He had been kind to his sister, though her
behavior did not entirely please him: and he was now called on from a quarter,
he did not expect. His wife's father, grown old, applied to him for assistance.
Of this man he never had a high opinion; but for his mother-in-law he had
always the greatest esteem. "She was as good a woman," he used to say, "as his
wife; and could not say more for any woman on earth." However, though he could
not pretend, with the encumbrance of so large a family, to maintain them
entirely, he agreed with the overs^ers of the parish, that if they would pay
them a shilling a week, he would do the rest. Accordingly he built them a
little cottage; and was as kind to them as he could. Soon after, on the old
man's death, he took his mother-in-law into his house, and kept her till she
died ^^^o' she lived till she was upwards of ninety; and (...) many years.

About the time that his children were pretty well grown up, a fortunate
circumstance happened. He received a legacy of seventy pounds, and a clock.
This money came very happily to settle some of his children. "They had it all,"
he said, "among them: he never had a belly full of meat out of it himself." The
clock alone he kept. A clock was the only piece of furniture he ever coveted;
and he always intended, if it should be in his power, to have purchased one;
though, it is probable, if a clock had not been thus thrown in his way, he
would always have found something more useful for the employment of his money.

Nor was he kind only to his relations, as he got forward in the world, he was
very friendly among his neighbors, and lent many a little sum to assist them in
their distresses, But as he was a very shrewd, intelligent man, he lent only
where he saw his money could be of use; to the spendthrift he would lend
nothing, nor to any man who frequented an alehouse. So judicious was he in
these loans, that although he helped many a man out of a difficulty, I have
heard him say, he never lost a farthing by lending money in his life. Often
indeed he received the worth of what he had lent in a little corn, a pig, a
calf, or something that was more convenient for the borrower to pay with than
money.

He was now advancing into years, and his good Joanna began to feel the effects
of age more than he did. -- Her ailment was a mere decay of nature; but she was
so entirely weakened, that she could do nothing for herself. Her husband hired
a woman into the house to attend her near seven years, in which she continued
in this helpless state, Every thing he could do, he did for a woman, "who," he
said, "had been kinder to every body than herself. In the year 1776 she died,
and left him greatly afflicted for the loss or a faithful friend, who had
followed close by his side, through all his laborious life, for the space of
forty years. I have seen him speak of her with tears in his eyes, and agitation
in all he said, at the age of eighty.

He had now the world, in a manner, to begin again. His children were all
married, or dispersed; and he had nobody with him, on whose arm he could lean
in descending the hill. He thought the wifest thing he could do, was to draw
his little matters into as small a compass as he could, and rid himself, as
much as possible, of the cares of the world. Accordingly he sold his cows, and
horses, and a little tenement or two, which he had purchased, and brought one
hundred and ten pounds to a friend to put to some use. "For as I cannot now,"
said he, "work myself, I must make my money," as he phrased it, "work for me."
His friend made him understand, as well as he could, what was meant by the
funds, and advised him to put his money into consolidated annuities for
twenty-eight years from January, 1780. As this transaction was in the year
1782, when the funds were low, he was made to understand, that the interest
would be considerable, (about eight pounds a year) but that the whole would be
lost if he should live twenty-six years. However, as he did not look forward to
that time, he took his friend's advice. Besides this property, he had two or
three other little sums put out to interest in private hands; and a little
tenement, which he reserved for himself to live in; with two or three patches
of ground, which lay near him, and served to employ him.

He had a good opinion of the charitable societies or clubs, as they are
called, in the several parishes around him; but he thought them useful chiefly
to those, who could not depend upon themselves. If young fellows could depend on
themselves, and lay the same money by, without breaking into it, he thought it
might generally be more useful to them. Four pence a week would amount to near
a pound in the year. At harvest some little matter might be added to it. And if
this practice were begun early in life, in a few years, it might amount to
^^co^^^^table support in sickness, or old age. "But few young fellows," said
he, "looked forward to those times. They never thought of more than of living
from hand to mouth."

His manner now of spending his time, was somewhat different from what it used
to be. He worked only a little, every morning, in his grounds, or in his
garden, or in precuring fuel. The rest of his time he spent in reading and
a^d^votion. He had always been a serious me, but a busy life had never allowed
him much time for any thing but business. He had now gotten above the world --
had his time much to himself -- and spent a great part of it in reading the
Bible, which was the only book he did read. He had the use of his eyes to the
last, and generally, though by himself, read out, which he thought made the
more impression on his memory. Oftener than once, as I have approached his
lonely cottage, I have thought I heard voices, but when I entered the old man
was sitting alone, with his Bible before him. He had as strong natural parts as
I almost ever met with, and easily understood, not only the general meaning and
intention of the gospel, but many of the most difficult passages in it. What
our Savior said, he though it, was very easy, and much of what St. Paul said. And
he told me, he had a very good book of prayers, in his phrase, "for all intents
and purposes."

As he grew more and more infirm, his friends though it it comfortless for him to
live entirely by himself, and endeavored to persuade him to get some good old
woman to live with him, who might take care of his house, and likewise of him,
if any thing should ail him. "Aye," said he, "if I could get some good old
woman* but where is she to be sound?" He had tried the experiment, he said, but
had no encouragement to try it again. People would not, he added, live now as
he lived. Perhaps he had bad luck in his choice, but he found, that a woman now
would spend as much in junketting in one day, as would serve him for two. Then,
he said, there was such constant gossipping, and noise in his house, that he
could never have his time at his own disposal. -- In short, he was obliged to
live as they chose, not as he chose himself. Then fetching a deep sigh, he
would say, "His good Joanna had spoiled him for living with any other woman."

It was then proposed to him to live with one of his daughters, who was married
in the neighborhood. He had thought of that, he said, but an old man was always
giving offense to one or another, and one or another was always giving offense
to him. Besides, he said, his daughter had several children, and so much noise
did not suit his quiet way of living. He could now, at his own ease, follow his
own inclination. In short, it appeared, that while he lived, he wished to live
entirely to himself; and that it was very indifferent to him when, and where,
and how he died.

The destitute condition, however in which he lived, laid him open to the
depredations of a dishonest neighborhood. Many little thefts, when he was
watched out of his house, were committed. Among other things his pewter flaggon
was stolen. It hung over his dresser, and contained all his little securities,
and promissory notes. -- He had, however, with his usual sagacity, placed his
money in such safe hands, that he had, on this occasion, no loss.

But among the petty thefts, which were committed in his house, was a robbery
of a very serious nature. -- On the day before Lymington fair the old man had
received some interest money (about five guineas) to purchase a few
necessaries. This being probably known, two men, at midnight, broke into his
house. His fastening indeed was only such as a good shake might easily
^^^lodge. They soon entered, and one of them pressing a bolster over his face,
pinned him down with his knee, while the other sought for the money, which was
presently found. I heard him speak of the transaction the next day, and his
behavior raised him in my opinion. He spoke with the caution of an honest man.
The thieves had a dark lantern, he said, with them, and he thought he could
swear to one of them, but he durst not venture it, where a man's life and
character were concerned.

From several circumstances, however, it became more probable, that the man,
whom Baker suspected, was guilty. And indeed he himself soon after confirmed
the suspicion; for as the neighbors began more to talk of the thing, and to lay
facts together, he thought it prudent to leave the country. -- Indeed if wicked
men would only consider before hand the many circumstances that lead to
discovery, and the almost impossibility of providing against them all, they
would be more cautious, on the mere principles of prudence, in committing any
desperate wickedness. One circumstance which tended to six the suspicion of the
fact on this man, was, that a child accidentally mentioned having seen a cut
cheese in his house the day after the robbery. Baker had lost a cut cheese, and
it was well known the man had no cheese in his house before. The other person
too was suspected; but if either of them had been taken up, it would, most
probably, have discovered both: for a knave cannot be depended on. And, indeed,
it is probable, that both would have been discovered, had it not been for the
the old man's scruples. -- I mention all these circumstances, to show that, in
fact, it requires more care and caution to commit a wicked action than most men
possess. It is, indeed, l^ss difficult to be Industrious, and by that means to
make a wicked action unnecessary.

Notwithstanding, however, the old man was thus so frequently preyed on by
wicked people, he still continued to live alone. As to any farther losses, he
had one w^^, he said or preventing them, and that was, to keep nothing about
him that was worth ^tealing. He fastened, therefore, the old bolt upon his
door, and went to sleep in his lonely cottage as quietly as if he had b^^n in a
castle.

Though he had now enough before him, he continued still to live with his usual
frugality. Many of his neighbors thought he might have indulged his age a
little more, as he had the means to do it; and as they themselves probably
would have done in the same circumstances, by which they might have spent all
they had laid up for their old age, not knowing how long God might have
lengthened out their lives. He lived, however, as he had been accustomed to
live, in the best of his days; for in many parts of his life he had been put to
shifts. He had always good cheese in his house, and good bread which was his
common food. He used to brew also now and then a bushel of malt; so that he was
seldom without a little cask of beer. His garden produced him plenty of
cabbages, which was the only plant he reared; and every year he bought at
Lymington fair a side of bacon, a bit of which he would now and then put into
his pot with a cabbage. Fresh meat he never tasted, nor were butter and tea
among his necessaries. On this provision he never had a day's sickness; and
even at those times when his food was less nourishing, he was able to do every
thing to which the strength of man is equal -- What can the art of cookery do
more?

He was now near eighty; his limbs began to fail; and he was subject to
rheumatic pains, which seized his right leg, and made exercise very troublesome
to him. -- Notwithstanding, however, this infirmity, and his living a mile from
the church, he rarely missed taking a painful walk to it every Sunday. The
weather must have been very bad to prevent him. And though he was now become
very deaf, he did not think even that a reason for keeping from church -- What
an example did he set to those, who, though in perfect health, instead of
making the sabbath a day for obtaining instruction, and begging God's blessing
on the week, profane it by making it a day of pastime, and often a day of
drinking and other wickedness. He was constant also at the sacrament, which he
always esteemed a part of his duty.

He was confined to his house about six weeks before he died. His illness was a
mere decay of nature. His legs swelled, and his constitution was broken up. He
now submitted to have somebody live in his cottage with him. He was pressed to
send for a physician, as he had the means to pay him, but he was resolute
against it. -- "If you could find me a doctor," said he, "who would tell me at
once, I can do you good -- or I cannot do you good, I would send for him; but
else, why should I send for a man to be paid for giving me physic, when I
cannot take victuals?" -- In short, he knew he was dying, and wished to die
with as little molestation as he could.

He kept his bed about three days; and was sensible to the last. He was in
considerable pain, but he bore it with that firmness and manliness with which
he had supported all the hard duties of a constant life of industry. He died on
the 15th day of May, 1791, and desired that the 51st psalm might be sung before
his corpse, as he was carried through the churchyard to his grave. The though it
was new, and the decency and propriety of it had a good effect.

On his death his effects amounted to about four hundred pounds. That a man, in
the lowest station, with a constant attention to money, should, in the course
of a long life, raise that sum, or a greater, is not wonderful: but that a man,
in the lowest station, should leave such a sum behind him, after discharging
all the offices of life with uprightness and propriety, is such an example of
an independent spirit, and of the force of industry and frugality, as deserves
to be recorded for the benefit of others. -- The following inscription stands
over his grave in Boldre churchyard.

HERE RESTS FROM HIS LABOR WILLIAM BAKER; WHOSE INDUSTRY AND FRUGALITY, WHOSE
HONESTY AND PIETY, WERE LONG AN EXAMPLE TO THIS PARISH. HE WAS BORN IN 1710;
AND DIED IN 1791. FUNERAL SERMON.
MATTHEW XXV. 23. Well done, good and faithful servant; thou have been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the
joy of thy lord.


IT is the happiness of our religion, that all mankind, poor and rich, are
equally able to please God. The lowest may be as acceptable in his Maker's
sight as the highest; nor are any man's services so mean, as to be overlooked
by his great Master. Before christianity, indeed, men were apt to think, that
such only as had the powerful means of doing good, could obtain the favor of
God, and that low people could do little to please him. But the gospel informs
us, that God does not regard the action without the heart, from which the
action proceeds; and that the willing mind, though unaccompanied by the action,
is as pleasing in God's fight, as the action itself. So that, you see, the rich
and poor are all equally in God's favor. Let each of us only do his duty in his
proper station, as to the Lord, and not unto man -- that is, with a desire to
please God, who has placed us in our several stations, and the lowest of us
shall be amongst those, to whom the text is applied: Well done, good and
faithful servant; thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

But now, my brethren, among the duties of our several stations, there are
some, which equally belong both to rich and poor; and there are some which
belong to one station rather than the other. -- Let me explain my meaning to
you.

Among these duties, which belong to both, may be reckoned those duties which
we owe to God -- love, trust, reverence, prayer. Such also are the duties of
reading, and meditating on scripture -- of observing the sabbath -- of faith in
our Redeemer -- of attending the Lord's Supper. Such also are humility --
honesty -- a desire to serve our neighbor, as far as we can -- the care of our
families -- and other duties that might be mentioned. -- All these are equally
required from the poor and rich; because the poor may perform them as well as
the rich.

But there are other duties which are not thus equally required. As the rich
man abounds in the things of this world, it is required of him to be generous
and charitable; because God has enabled him to be so. But as the poor man
cannot be generous and charitable, like the rich man, it is rather required of
him to be industrious and frugal.

On the present occasion, therefore, I shall make the duties of industry and
frugality the subject of my discourse. I mention them together, because they
must always keep company, to be of any use. Frugality can do little without
industry: and industry as little without frugality. -- I shall give you the
chief reasons, which should incline you to the practice of these duties.

In the first place, I would have you consider what the scripture says on this
subject. It is often touched upon; but one of the most remarkable passages is
that of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. When we were with you, this we commanded
you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat: for we hear there are
some among you which walk disorderly, working not at all. Now such we command,
and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat
their own bread. -- Now this command that we should all eat our own bread is
plainly founded on this reason, that nobody has a right to eat the bread of
others, if he be able to procure his own. -- In some cases, no doubt, the
parish allowance is a necessary relief -- as when the father of a family is
taken off, while his children are yet young -- or when a family, perhaps, is
greatly visited by sickness -- or when a family is uncommonly large. But how
many are there who shamefully run to the parish for relief, without any
necessity of this kind? These are people who either want industry in providing
for their families -- or frugality, in not making the best use of what they
provide. They frequent the alehouse, or they spend what they have in good
eating, or in other things, which are not necessary. Let them consider how
directly they break a scripture command, by eating other men's bread for
naught, and by becoming chargeable without necessity.

It may be hoped, that with christians a scripture command may have sufficient
weight. However, I shall endeavor to show you more at large, on what reason
this scripture command is founded.

In the first place, how desirable is it to see your little habitations as
clean, neat, and well furnished as any of your neighbors -- to see your
children decently clothed -- to give them what little education you can -- to
have them taught to read, which may be a comfort to them during their lives --
to have them taught to spin and work, which may give them early habits of
diligence. But all this cannot be done without great industry and frugality in
the parent. -- You have a choice, therefore, before you, whether it is better
to do all this -- at least to do it in the best manner you can -- or to idle
away your time, or spend your money in drinking at alehouses? How often are the
children of idle parents sent to poor-houses, where their fathers' sins are
visited upon them in all the wretchedness, misery, and neglect which the poor
little sufferers are too often obliged to undergo. -- Much have those parents
to answer for! -- I have myselt heard some of these idle parents allege, that,
as they made their money themselves, they had a right to spend it as they
pleased. -- To tell such people, that no man has a farther right to any thing,
which God has given him, than to make a proper use of it, would be to little
purpose, yet surely they must see the force of this, that if they marry, and
have families, their families should be considered as a part of themselves, and
have surely a right not only to their maintenance, but to the best instruction
and care their parents can bestow. Who is the proper person to take care of the
children but the parent?

I would have you consider farther, that industry and frugality are virtues
which have a particular tendency to keep you out of the way of temptation and
mischief. Where, think you, is lewdness, and drunkenness, and profaneness, and
sabbath breaking, and cursing, and swearing, and all other wickedness best
taught? Its best school, I believe, is the alehouse. The devil tempts you to be
idle first, and to love drink, then all wickedness follows naturally. He cannot
so easily get hold of a frugal, industrious man. The industrious man is
otherwise employed. When the day's labor is over, be wishes for the night's
rest. Between both he has hardly time to (...) wicked. I believe, if you would
look round your (...) quaintances, you will find the most industrious and the
most frugal people to be also the best.

Consider farther, that industry and frugality raise your characters in the
parish, and give you consequence. -- You are often inclined to think yourselves
of more consequence than you really are. You are often ready to take offense
when you hear any little story told of you, which you think you do not deserve,
though probably the story may be very true. All this however shows you wish to
preserve your characters. But you take the wrong way. It is not believing
yourselves of consequence, or desiring to stop people's mouths, that will give
you credit with your neighbors. Leave your neighbors to talk as they will; and
do you act as you ought, and you need take no farther care about your
characters. Honesty, industry, and frugality will give character, and
consequence to the lowest among you. He who supports himself by his own labor,
is equal to any body. The richest man in the country is not more independent.
While his idle neighbor, abject and base-minded, is pitifully going about
begging relief of a parish-officer, he feels his own consequence, and is
beholden only to his heavenly Master; he wants no assistance, but God's
blessing and the use of his limbs.

Lastly, I should wish you to consider, that industry and frugality are the
best means of making you happy. I might say this with regard to the next world
(for all virtues are generally more or less linked together, but I am speaking
now only of the happiness of this life. -- With what pleasure may a poor man
look round him, and see all his family out in the world, and by the blessing of
God, doing well through his precepts and example; and himself with some little
matter still before him, if God should lengthen out his time a little longer?
-- There are many cases, no doubt, where it is impossible that any thing can be
saved; but in many families, even in this parish, I know, something might. If
people would only save what they spend at alehouses, or in things unnecessary,
something might be laid by against a sit of sickness! or (if God should bless
them with health) against old age. And is the pleasure, think you, of sotting
at an alehouse equal to this comfortable independence? I know there are many
who reason with themselves, that if they can maintain their families, while
they are well, it is all they desire: when they are sick, or old, the parish is
obliged to maintain them. It may be a person's misfortune to come to the
parish; but when a man in the prime of his strength reasons in this way, I dare
take upon me to say, he is, at the bottom, an idle, good-for-nothing fellow,
and his reasoning is only an excuse for drinking, or some other extravagance^
In general, such people go on in a regular progress to ruin. At first they get
a love for liquor. They will sit whole days and nights in alehouses. They next
get into debt. If they have farms to manage, their affairs go wrong. If they
are laborers, their families want bread; their children are half-starved and
half-naked. I need not point out these people to you, they point out
themselves. You see them loitering about the parish, languid wretches, with
faces sodden, pale, and dropsical, the objects equally of pity and contempt. --
Many, no doubt, frequent sotting houses, who have not yet gone this length; but
they are in the high way toward it; let them take care in time, their ruin is
coming on. There is no real happiness, my neighbors, you may depend upon it, in
such a life as this. However you may be enticed by the pleasures of idleness
and drinking, (which last is commonly the beginning of all mischief) you may be
assured, that all these things bring their bitter moments, not only at last,
but continually; and that nothing can make a man so happy, as living in his
station as he ought, with honesty, sobriety, industry, and frugality. No man
can live happily, who lives at the will, and under the control of others. These
virtues allow a man to live, independent of others, and in the manner he wishes
to live himself.

Such was the life of our very respectable neigh^^^^ whose remains lie before
us. His station in life, you know, was only that of a common day-laborer: but,
as far as I could judge, he set just such an example in that station: and
behaved exactly as he ought to have done. He had that generous independent
spirit, which I have been recommending to you, that scorned to live upon the
labors of others; and seemed to lay it down as a principle from the beginning
of his life, to be obliged, under God, only to his own labor. By this alone he
bred up a large family, without receiving a single farthing from the parish.
But this could not have been done without great industry, and frugality. He
worked hard; he lived hard: denying himself every indulgence in eating and
drinking, that he might not be a burden to others. -- When his family was off
his hands, he though it, for the same reason, it was proper for him to lay up a
little for his old age. While he could, therefore, he continued still to work;
and lived in the same hard manner; which was now become quite easy; and
habitual to him. -- It pleased God to bless his labor; he laid up so much as
maintained him, during his old age; and he has left something behind him to be
a comfort to his children, if they make a right use of it. He never could be
said to be wholly past his labor. Till within a few weeks of his death, he
every day worked a little; and it became an agreeable amusement to him. He had,
all his life, been used to laborious working. Many a time I have heard him say,
that, in general, laborers now did not know what it was to work: and I have
heard others say, who knew him better than I did, that he would have done as
much in one day, as many people, do in two.

I have heard some of his neighbors tax him with being a miser and covetous;
and say, that as he might have lived more comfortably in his old age, his hard
living could be owing only to a covetous temper. He might it is true, have
lived more comfortable in his old age, as they may think, who accuse him -- and
who are fonder of indulgence than he was: but he could not have lived more
comfortably to himself, than he did: and I am persuaded no man had ever less of
the miser in his heart, But let me defend the character of my good old neighbor
in this particular: let me show you the difference between his temper, and that
of a miser.

A miser hoards money for its own sake. He does not consider the use it is to
answer; not indeed puts it to any use at all. Hoarding it up is all he has in
view. He loves money. You remember an instance of a person, not many years ago
in this parish, who expired grasping his purse, under his bed-cloths, to his
heart. Perhaps he meant to secure it, if he should recover; but it plainly
appeared to be his first care; and if any should charge him with a love of
money, I should not know how to defend him.

With covetousness, or a love of money, there is often mixed -- indeed, I
believe generally, a little knavery. If he who loves money do not openly cheat,
he has many, ways of practicing little underhand, dirty tricks, which an
upright man would hardly call honest. -- I give you the best side of him, for
the miser is generally a very wicked character. The apostle indeed tells us,
that the love of money is the root of all evil.

Had our worthy deceased neighbor these signs of a miser about him? As to his
integrity, I dare take upon me to say, a more upright, honest man never lived.
Many dishonest practices, I have heard of in the parish -- many little knavish
tricks, I have seen, to take advantages, and get money, but I never heard of
one action in the whole long life of our deceased neighbor, that was not fair,
and honest, and upright in the highest degree: and I doubt not but you can all
join with me in bearing this testimony. So far then you will allow, that
nothing of the temper of a miser yet appears. How should there? there was no
foundation for it. He had no love for money, merely for its own sake, but as it
might be the means of carrying him independently to the end of his life -- and
if he did not spend it all, that the remainder might be of some little use to
his family. I have known him to do what in his circumstances were even generous
things. Where he thought it necessary to spend his money, he spent it freely.
He lived hard indeed, but whom did that hurt? It enabled him to do many a kind
thing; but nobody ever suffered from it but himself. It is not living hard, it
is not laying up money, that makes a man a miser; but it is the intention with
which he lives hard -- it is the intention with which he lays up the money. Our
late neighbor's intention was merely that of an independent spirit, which could
not bear to be supported by other people's labor. He lived hard himself, lest,
if he had indulged himself, he should afterward have been obliged to live on
the labors of others. -- And is there any thing in this like a love for money?
He had no love for money that interfered, I dare take upon me to say, with any
one duty that belonged to his station. How little he valued it for its own
sake, I had many opportunities of seeing, as most of his money passed through my
hands. Some years ago, you remember his house was broken open: he mentioned his
loss to me, not like a raiser, but as far as his money was concerned, with
christian indifference. His chief distress was for those, who had done the
deed. To him, he said, they had done little injury. By the blessing of God, he
doubted not but he had enough to support him while he lived; and it was owing,
I believe, more to his lenity and scruple^ than to the want of evidence, that
the thieves were not convicted. So far from having any thing covetous about
him, he appeared always to me entirely disengaged from, all worldly thoughts,
strongly impressed with a sense o^ religion, and ready to leave all behind him
with the utmost indifference, and begin his great journey to eternity at a
moment's warning, whene^^^ it should p^^^^ God to call him. He used to talk of
death, just as he would of one of the commonest events of life; and left with
me a few directions about carrying his body to the grave, with as much
indifference as a farmer would give directions about carrying a load of corn to
his barn.

Thus, through a very long life he passed innocently, religiously,
inoffensively, and quietly to that grave, to which we now consign him. Let me
earnestly exhort all you, who, this day, follow his corpse thither, to follow
also his example -- that, when it becomes your turn to be brought dead into the
church, your neighbors may point out your example, as they may his, for others
to follow, and apply to you, as I hope you may with justice apply to him, Well
done, good and faithful servant; thou host been faithful over a few things, I
will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

THE TWO SOLDIERS.
TWO soldiers, Robert Wells and Isaac Clark, had obtained a three month's
furlow from their colonel, to visit their relations and friends in a very
distant part of England. On their return to join their regiment, which was
quartered at Gloucester, having traveled till they were weary, they proposed
lying by for the night, at a little alehouse called the Green Dragon, near the
road-side.

Wells observing the house was pretty much thronged with company, proposed to
his companion to journey on to the next, where they might spend the night in
more quiet, than the present prospect of things offered at the Green Dragon.

I Will not stir a step further tonight, said Clark, for where there is good
company and good liquor, there I Will make my headquarters; so throwing his
knapsack on the horse-block, down he sat himself.

The Green Dragon was famous for brewing the best ale in those parts, and of
course became the general rendezvous of all the five-players, and
skittle-players in the country; so very famous indeed was the liquor, that it
introduced beggary and famine amongst the wives and children in all the
neighboring cottages.

A silver-laced hat had been bowled for that evening, and the prize was won by
a young farmer, who spying our travelers, swore a tremendous oath they should
drink a bumper to the king's health.

After they had drunk plentifully, Wells twiched his comrade by the shoulder,
and proposed that they should proceed on their march, now they had been
refreshed with a friendly mug; Clark, with an oath, refused to comply, again
repeating "the soldier's best headquarters was at the head of the beer
barrel;" it shall never be said, Wells, that Isaac Clark was a starter, where
the liquor was found, and the company good.

The liquor is very good sure enough, said Wells, who was naturally a very
sober fellow, but enough is as good as a feast: and as to the company, I never
beheld a worse set of drunken, swearing rebrobates in my life, for which reason
let us on, for if we cannot make them better, they may make us worse.

Thou art always for preaching Bob, said Clark, as if a body were going to die;
why I was never In better health in my life; and it is time enough to be sorry
for one's sins, when the lass glass is out, so halloo Tap, bring us another pot.

Thus in spite of the persuasions of poor Wells, he went on calling for another
mug, and another till he was as drunk as a beast; and his brains whirled round
like the vanes of a windmill. Unhappily in some degree, Wells fell into the
same error; but unaccustomed to take more than his pint, and being quite
overcome with fatigue, he felt himself extremely disordered, and staggering
into the fresh air; he fell flat on the grass plat, where he lay in a dead
sleep all night; nor did he awake till the day was pretty far advanced; when
his teeth chattered in his head, and his limbs shivered with cold, for the
night was damp and misty. As soon as he was able to stand, he staggered in
search of Clark, whom he found in a still more deplorable state, for he had
continued drinking till he was as mad as the rest of his companions: They grew
quarrelsome at length, and each took offense at the other, till words proceeded
to blows, and Move ended in blood; for a very profligate young butcher, struck
his neighbor the shoemaker such a violent blow across the head with a quart
pot, that his skull was fractured: This unlucky circumstance bro't the landlord
to interfere, who was alarmed for the honor of his house, or to speak truly,
the fear of losing his license at next sessions; so he very prudently sent for
a surgeon, whilst the rest of the joyous crew made their escape, for fear of
falling into the hands of justice.

Our travelers left the Green Dragon, Clark's head was still too confused with
liquor to permit him to think; but Wells, who was now quite come to himself,
was overcome with shame; and inwardly vowed, that if the entertainment he met
with at the Dragon was called a merry making, he would never desire to be merry
again for the rest of his days; for what good have we obtained by it, said he,
but empty pockets, bloody noses, aching bones, and the rod of justice hanging
over our heads? Besides what is still worse, muttered he to himself, by being
overtaken in liquor, we have lost our reason, which was the gift of God, and
was given man as a precious token of his favor, to distinguish him from the
brute-beast that perishes.

Clark as they journeyed on, was spiteful, sullen, and sulky: Now and then
muttering, that spite of the past he would get good ale wherever it was to be
had.

And I, said Wells, would make a vow to drink water for the rest of my days,
rather than ever make myself a beast again, for I have a character to maintains
and a soul to be saved. -- And I Will tell thee Bob what is my design, rejoined
Clark, to swim in strong beer whenever I can find it, if poverty and death both
stared me in the face.

Thou talkest like a bold fellow, said Wells, and y^^^ thou may tremble when
death comes in sight pr^thee where do think to go when thou diests I have
never once thought about dying. Bob, I as^me th^e. -- Then it is best thou
should begin Isaac, for in the miest of life, we are in death, as I heard
the parson say at my grandfather's funeral. Time too is short when measured
against eternity; and if we make in the spring great preparations for a
summer's campaign in the army, what constant preparations ought we not to be
making for death!

We soldiers, Isaac, should be particularly careful to keep our accounts
between God and our souls very short, since at the beat of the drum, on the day
of battle, ten thousand may ruth, in a moment, into eternity, and the best
Christian then may be reckoned the bol^^st man. Why, I would rather spend the
next night in battle, for there I should be performing my duty to my king and
country, than in another such a riot at the Green Dragon.

Thou art a wish^ washy fellow, replied Clark, thou with never die GAME, if for
every little offense thou art so plagued with qual^^s of conscience: I am
acre-mined to live my own way, both, come on it what will. Then take my word for
it, said Wells, thy ruin is nor far off; for though in a fit of bravery thou
may nopear to snake off the fear of God, the Devil may give up thy
indentures at the last, and the law may take hold of thee in the mean time.

Then coming to a fine stream of water, Wells stooped down, and taking up some
in his hat, drank plentifully of it, saying it cooled the fever in his stomach.
-- Clark said he was feverish also, but he should cool his think with a glass
of best Holland's at the next alehouse, which they saw at some distance on the
side of the bill.

There, however, they agreed to stop: After having made a plentiful breakfast,
they called for their bill, when, to their great dismay, they found their
pockets entirely emptied of cash, except two shillings and a few halfpence,
each having lost between two and three guineas, which had been given them by
their friends to defray the expenses of their journey.

By what means they had been stripped of their cash, they could not imagine;
whether the landlord had made free with their pockets to pay himself, or that
it had slipped out in the general scuffle; they were greatly dismayed, however,
by their misfortune, for they had more than fifty miles to travel, and not more
than ten pence left after the present expenses were discharged; and when the
night came on, they were compelled to seek the most comfortable lodging they
could find under a hay-stack.

We ought not to complain of our hard fate, said Wells, since what we are about
to suffer is but part of the punishment due to our folly. With sobriety, and
good management, our money would have enabled us to travel comfortably, and at
the end of our journey we should have had plenty to spare, to have given a
treat to our comrades, who have been often kind to us on a like occasion.

I Will never return to the regiment to be laughed at, said Clark mutteringly: I
am almost famished to death -- I Will desert. Prithee Isaac, said Wells, look
well to thy words, and before thou art tempted to commit a great sin, ask
thyself, how thou shall like to bear the punishment when thou art sound out:
and if thou should escape being brought to justice while on earth, it will
find thee out in the day of judgment. Take my word for it, he is the only free,
and, I may add, happy man, who is always doing the work of Him who made him.
Talk no more of desertion then, dear Isaac, let us cear our misfortune like
men, and as our catechisin says, patiently resolve to do "our duty in that
state of life unto "which it has pleased God to call us."

When I was a child, Be, said Clark, I never learnt my catechism; learning,
which I have heard thee say, has kept thee out of so many scrapes, I hated; for
I was a boy of spirit, I loved boxing, five-playing -- and robbing of orchards
a deal better th^^ my book.

So much the worse for thee Isaac, a sober education to a poor man will help
him on in the world much more creditably than a little estate without it; for
laziness and drunkenness will soon bring a pretty property to nothing, and thou
may have heard that "When land is gone, and money spent,
"Then learning is most excellent."


Honesty is the best policy, Isaac, and a good name is better than great
riches. Think no more of deserting then, thou have taken the king's money, and
a strong oath to serve him faithfully, take care, then, that thy ^^d coat be
not stained with black spots. Consider we are all GENTLEMEN soldiers, then let
us not disgrace ourselves by carrying the bloody marks of the rod of correction
on our backs; if thou art resolved to behave so as to deserve punishment, don't
murmur against the laws which must inflict it. The laws, Isaac, are only made
to protect honest men from the snares of villians. -- Courage man, don't
despair of finding a breakfast in the morning; mayhap we may meet with some
good, charitable, well disposed people, to whom we will relate our misfortune,
and our disgrace, for I shall not be ashamed to ask for bread, now my folly has
reduced me to ask for it.

This is fine talking, replied Clark, do as thou will, Bob, but my pride is
above it; in this beggarly starved condition I Will never join the regiment, to
be sneered and jeered at by every one; so I am resolved to have my own way for
once.

Then remember, Isaac, it is a dangerous thing for a man to give himself up to
the evil of his ways: I am only talking to thee for thy good, and since thou
art determined to have thy own way in every thing, I will only further advise
thee to think, how thou can bear punishment before thou committest a sin
which will sooner or later bring down the vengeance of the law against thee.
Have a good heart man, pluck up, that we may be able to begin our march by
break of day; and, as I said before, we may meet with some kind assistance on
the road; this is a charitable land, Isaac, and there are few people in it who
are not ready to relieve distress, when it is known to be real; and if we
should be repulsed at a surly door, we must not be angry, and unforgiving,
since the kind hearts of the wealthy are so often imposed upon, by false
stories of misfortunes, that it often shuts up their bowels of compassion, when
real misery stands before them. -- Man's nature, Clark, becomes suspicious,
when it has often been imposed upon.

My pride now is to meet our regiment before the time of our furlow is expired;
it will give us great credit with our colonel, who is the very best of men, and
who, seeing that we have made a generous use of the power entrusted to us, will
not be afraid to indulge us again, at a sit time. For seven years that I have
been in the regiment, I have never received an ill word, or an unkind look from
my officers, because I always made it my pleasure to do my duty.

My pleasure then, replied Clark, is to have my own way; I don't care a rush
for any man, I don't care for the general, I don't care for the colonel, nor I
don't care for the captain -- so I have made up my mind as to that matter --
I Will have food whilst I can eat it -- drink when I can get it -- and money and
pleasure wherever I can find them.

Clark, thou do make me tremble sadly, said Wells, to hear thee talk so
desperately; do turn thy thoughts toward God, for there seems to be a strong
temptation upon thee -- humble thyself before him, tell him thou art a
miserable sinner, and beg his mercy to assist thee in thy distress -- don't go
on adding sin to sin; we have been both guilty of an heinous fault; let us take
this lesson of instruction out of it, and resolve to do so no more. My father
was an honest laborer, and he used to tell all his children, that drunkenness
was sure to bring three evils to every laboring man, namely. -- sickness,
hunger, and rags; besides no sin makes the heart so hard as drunkenness. A
drunkard is without pity, since he can behold his wife and children dying of
famine, because his own beastly appetite must have its fill of liquor at the
village alehouse.

Thou ^rt preaching to a deaf man, interrupted Clark, I Will have my own way I
tell thee again and again; it is time enough to rail against pleasure, when one
has no power left to enjoy it.

Thou will live to repent thy sayings, take my word for it, said Wells; for my
part I would rather eat a hard crust for my dinner, than dine with the officers
on roast beef and plum pudding, if I must do dirty work to obtain it. I would
dine with any man, said Clark, who would give me a dinner, and drink with any
man that would offer me his cup, though, perhaps, he did expect a little
underhand business of me in return; I am resolved to serve myself, Bob, and
there is an end of my chapter.

And a sorrowful ending it is, answered Wells, and so good night; drawing some
of the loose hay about him, and placing his knapsack under his head for a
pillow: I shall say my prayers, Isaac, for if I am taken off in my sleep, it is
a good thing for a man to have had his last waking thoughts employed on the
goodness of God.

Wells slept sweetly, till the rising sun shining on his face awakened him: he
called aloud to his companion, telling him it was time to prepare for their
journey; he called again and again, but still no answer was made him; he then
rose to go in search of him, but he was no where to be found.

After waiting his return for near an hour, and finding he did not appear, he
set forward on his journey; after traveling some miles he began to find hunger
very keen, and seeing a low farm house at a distance, he struck across a field
and made up to it. Wells rapped at the door, which being opened by the mistress
of the house, he very modestly asked her to give him a cup of whey, or a
draught of small beer, for he was a good deal disstressed.

Distressed -- aye, to be sure, said she, the times are so hard, the world is
full of distress.

The hardness of the times, ma'am, said Wells, has nothing to do with my
distress, since it is all the consequence of my own folly.

You must be an extraordinary man, Master Soldier, said Mrs. Jenkins, to
confess that your own crimes have brought you to hunger.

I tell you nothing but the truth, said Wells, and hungry as I am, I would not
impose a lie upon you, to obtain the best mouthful in your house; people in
general rail at the badness of the times, when nine times out of ten they owe
their misery to their extravagance; two nights ago my fellow traveller, and
myself, accidently fell into bad company, we got drunk, and we lost our money;
I have a journey of more than forty miles to make, and I have not a sixpence
left to furnish me with provisions.

Follow me to the kitchen, said the good woman, and I will give you the best my
house affords; I love a soldier to my heart, because he fights for my country;
but when I find a soldier to be a christian, I love him to my soul, because our
country may stand a better chance to be preserved from the enemy in time of
war, if our soldiers are christians; and since, my honest friend, you have not
the courage to tell a lie to God, I Am certain sure you will never fail in doing
your duty toward your country.

Wells now fed heartily on some cold pork and cabbage, and drank prudently of
an excellent mug of cider that stood before him.

After silently thanking the Giver of all good for a blessing so little
expected, and so little deserved, he was about to take his leave of his kind
hostess, when a hustling was heard in the passage, and soon after the room was
filled by a crowd of people, in the midst of whom Wells saw his unfortunate
comrade Clark, with his hands tied behind him. His heart now misgave him, and
it was as clear to him as the light, before it was explained to him, that Clark
had been as good as his word, and would have his own way let come on it what
would. He was as pale as death, his jaws trembled, and the tears ran down his
cheeks.

The farmer now explained to his wife that they had taken the villain who last
night would have robbed the post-chaise, but was prevented by a gentleman
within it, who let fly a brace of pistols at him, which made him keep his
distance; that early this morning, as he was riding to market, he himself had
been attacked by him, before it was light, but some of the neighbors coming to
his assistance, they determined to pursue the rogue, and came up with him about
two miles off, as he was entering an alehouse. I have sent to the squire's,
added the farmer, to advertise the gentleman who is at his house, that the
robber is taken, and I hope he will soon be here.

Here poor Clark wept bitterly: Ah! Bob, Bob! said he, spying Wells, had I
taken thy kind advice, I should never have been brought to this -- I should
have lived like a man, and died like a christian, but Lord have mercy upon me,
what have I brought myself to! I have brought my life into danger, and may be
have ruined my own soul.

Honest Wells was grieved at heart: O Isaac! cried he, could I have preserved
thee from such a grievous misfortune, I would have shared my last morsel with
thee; my prayers are now all I can offer thee, and ^y prayer only thou can
serve thyself, for the prayer of a penitent, even when offered up in a prison,
may be accepted: If by timely repentance, Isaac thou can win the favor of
Heaven, thou will find comfort under every affliction.

Here the gentleman arrived whose carriage had been stopped the preceding
evening: Clark no sooner caught a glimpse of him than he knew him to be his own
colonel. A man whom every person in the regiment loved and honored as a parent,
O my gracious father! exclaimed Clark, seeing this honorable gentleman enter,
my punishment is already greater than I can bear, if I have offended the man I
would die to serve. He then fainted away, but a little warm ale being given
him, he soon recovered, when the noble colonel spoke so mildly, and kindly to
him, that Mrs. Jenkins put her apron to her eyes.

Here Wells related to the colonel what had passed, he shook like an aspen
leaf, when he came to relate the sorrowful adventures which befell them at the
Green Dragon, and all the grief and affliction which had befallen him in
consequence (...)

When Wells had finished his story -- your father, Clark, said the colonel,
could not feel more concern at your present situation than I do: I have always
regarded every man in my regiment as my son, for I have always tried to win
their affection by kindness rather than enforce their obedience by severity. A
man of true courage, Clark, abhors the thought of a base action, but if he
lives without principle in his heart, he must not be surprised, if sooner or
later he is betrayed by his passions into the blackest sins; and if he is taken
in the commission of a crime he must expect to pay the penalty of the law.

Poor Clark groaned and wept bitterly, while the colonel thus continued -- I am
thankful that I wounded no man, when I fired my pistol^ on being stopped last
night in my carriage. As the night was much too dark for me to be able to give
evidence as to the identity of the person who stopped me, you may expect,
Clark, that no bill of indictment will be preferred against you by me; it is a
most dreadful thing for any man to take an oath, when he is not positive as to
the fact he is going to swear to: the farmer, I fear, from having secured your
person, has certain evidence to bring against you, but that is a business in
which I have no right to interfere, as your examination must take place before
a neighboring justice of the peace. Whether the fact be, or be not proved
against you, here is a title to support you, in case you should get your
discharge, that you may not plead your wants as an excuse for committing such a
dreadful outrage against society. After what is past it will be highly improper
to admit you again into the regiment; in future ^arn to labor with diligence,
live soberly, then you will live honestly; be steady and constant in attending
on all the duties which your church enjoins you -- learn to fear God, honor the
king, and be just to your neighbor.

Tears now filled the eyes of all present, Mrs. Jenkins sobbed aloud, and every
one declared, they had never heard so moving a sermon in their born days; they
all said, what a fine thing scholarship was when applied to christian uses, and
what a pity it was the noble colonel could not be made a bishop.

The colonel condescended to speak to Wells as kindly as if he had been his
equal. As for you, honest Robert, said he, your steady conduct has long been
the subject of my observation, and my praise amongst all my brother officers;
the sobriety of your life, and your regularity at church makes you always ready
in the performance of your duty. I have long had it in my tho'ts to procure you
some promotion, without being able to obtain the means. An occasion has
presented itself in your absence: Sergeant Jefferson is dead, and I have
reserved his place for you. I know you can both write and cast accounts well:
In this post I doubt not but you will exercise power with as much humility, as
you have hitherto practiced obedience with cheerfulness; and since this little
affray has caused you much disappointment, and much delay on your journey, I
will pay your fare, and your expenses in the stage-coach, which I find will
pass this afternoon, that agreeably to your intentions you may join the
regiment before the time of your furlow is expired, in order that your conduct
may stand as an example to your comrades, that having been entrusted with
power, you had too high a sense of duty to abuse it.

What makes the end of this little story very moving, and very instructive is,
that while Wells, for his honesty and good conduct, was enabled by his colonel
to finish his journey by the coach; at the very moment in which he ^^^unted the
^ox, he saw his unfortunate comrade, Clark, with (...) hands tied behind him,
carried off to the county ^^ol, to take his trial at^^^e next assizes, sorely
lamenting his unhappy fate, a^^ the wilful obstinacy that made him deaf to the
excellent advice of ^o ^ood a friend.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
Entertaining, Moral, and Religious REPOSITORY; CONTAINING UPWARDS OF THREE
SCORE SEPARATE PERFORMANCES, ALL OF WHICH Are written in a simple yet pleasing
Style, AND ARE EMINENTLY CALCULATED FOR THE Amusement and Instruction OF THE
YOUTH OF BOTH SEXES.

Published by a Society in Great Britain, instituted for the beneficent purpose
of aiding the intention of HIS MAJESTY, as expressed in his royal proclamation
for the suppression of vice and immorality.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL II.

ELIZABETH-TOWN: FRINTED BY SHEPARD KOLLOCK FOR CORNELIUS DAVIS, NO. 94,
WATER-STREET, NEW YORK. 1798.

THE HISTORY OF CHARLES JONES, THE FOOTMAN.
WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.
MY Father, George Jones, commonly called Black George, on account of his
swarthy complexion, was one of the most industrious men in the whole village.
-- His cottage, which was his own, and partly built by his own hands, stands on
the Common, about a stone's cast from the road, near the great oak-tree, in the
parish of King's Charleston, in somersetshire. -- The lord of the manor having
granted him leave to enclose a bit of the common for a garden, my father had
got a thriving young orchard, and a long strip of potatoes, besides his
cottage, all the produce of his own industry. It used to be a favorite saying
with him, that no man, to whom God had given two hands, had ever need to want.
"For my part, says he, I never knew what want was. -- When I am sick, the club
supports me; and when I am well. I warrant I Will support myself." My mother,
besides being equally industrious, was much more religious, and therefore much
happier. She was as good and as sweet tempered a woman as any in the world, be
the next where she will. For constancy at her place of worship, civility to her
neighbors, cleanliness in her own person, her house, and her children, she had
not her fellow. But the most remarkable thing in her (I am afraid a very
uncommon thing) was her steady and uninterrupted practice of family prayer. It
must have been a hard day's work indeed that hindered her from her prayers. --
At six in the morning, and eight in the evening, as regularly as ever the hour
came, she always knelt down, with her children round her (four of us) and read
with great solemnity and devotion, a short form given her by the clergyman,
which concluded with the Lord's prayer, in which we all joined. And she used to
say after she had finished -- "Now I can go to bed o^^^^ work in peace; for now
we may hope God will protect us." -- I am sorry to say my father seldom joined
with us. He used to pretend he was busy or tired; and yet it would not have
detained him long neither, for we were never more than six minutes about it,
and surely twelve minutes a day (six in the morning and six in the evening) is
no great time to give to God. One thing has often struck me, that if any thing
went wrong, and ruffled my dear mother's temper, or made her uneasy, the
prayers seemed to set it all to rights. When she had been to prayers, all her
grief seemed to be fled away. And, indeed, I observed the same thing with
respect to my father; if he ever did join with us, it always seemed somehow to
compose and sweeten his mind, and make him a great deal kinder to my mother and
us.

As my father and mother were very industrious themselves, they were very
desirous to make their children so; every child was employed, as soon as he was
able, in something or other. At about thirteen years of age, my employment had
been for some time to weed in the parson's garden, and run of errands for him.
At fourteen he took me into his house, and not a little proud was I at
obtaining the title of his "little footman." The morning I left my father's
cottage, my dear mother, who was as kind as she was good, appeared to be very
much affected; she said she could not commit me to the wide world, without
first committing me to God, who governed it; and then she knelt down with me by
her side, and prayed, "Gracious Lord, be pleased to have mercy on my dear boy.
To thy care I commend him. Guard him, I beseech thee, in the many temptations
he is now beginning to encounter. May he with solid piety and honest diligence
do his duty in that state of life in which it has pleased thee to place him."
She then gave me her blessing, put a Testament into my pocket, bid me fear God,
and always act for my master as I would do for myself.

In my new situation there were, to be sure, some sew things disagreeable. My
mistress was peevish and fretful; the cook violent and passionate. But what
service is there, or indeed, what situation in life, howsoever much above
servitude, in which there is not something unpleasant. Every state has its
trials: servants have theirs; but if they cannot learn to put up with some
little inconveniences, they may charge their places every year of their lives,
and never be satisfied after all. This is a lesson I have learnt by long
experience.

Though, by God's blessing, I had received a more religious education than most
children, it yet soon appeared that I had many faults, which it was necessary
for me to be corrected of before I could become a good servant. At first, when
I was sent upon an errand, I was much given to loitering. I was then too young
to consider that by loitering in errands, I was wasting what was not my own, my
master's time. -- Besides this fault, as every thing which I saw and heard in
my master's house, was such as I had never seen and heard before. I was too apt
to talk of it to my old play-fellows, or at the village shop. But as soon as
ever I became a little older, I began to reflect that this was very wrong. One
Sunday evening, whon I had leave to go home to see my parents, I was beginning
to tell my mother how there had been a great uproar at the parsonage the day
before about --. Here she put her hand upon my lips, and said, "Charles, not a
word more of what has passed at the parsonage. Whatsoever happens in your
master's house is never to be spoken of out of your master's doors. A
tale-bearing servant is always an unfaithful servant; he betrays the trust
which his master puts in him."

My mother's vehemence surprised me a little, but it made so much impression
upon me that I was pretty well broken of the fault from that very time. Into
how many scrapes has this talkative temper brought many servants of my
acquaintance! There was poor Nick Jarrett, the Squire's under footman, that
lost his place, a new suit of black broad cloth, and a legacy of five pounds,
which he would soon have had by reason of his master's death, only for saying
at a neighbor's house, that his mistress sometimes fell asleep while the squire
was reading to the family on a Sunday night.

Nick and I were at one time rather too intimate; I remember one day, when I
was about sixteen, having attended my master to the Squire's house, Nick
prevailed on me after dinner to play with him at pitch and toss. I was worth at
that time five shillings and twopence, more money than I had ever possessed
before in my life. In about two hours Nick reduced me to my last shilling. But
though it was a heavy stroke at the time; yet it proved in the end a happy
event, for, by my mother's persuasions, I resolved thenceforward never to game
again as long as I lived, which resolution, by God's grace, I have hitherto
happily kept. I wish from my heart that all other servants would resolve the
same. The practice of card-playing, so common amongst servants in large
families, is the worst custom they could possibly fall into. -- My poor brother
Tom suffered enough for it. One day, having received in the morning a quarter's
wages, he lost the whole of it before night at All-fours; and what was the
consequence? -- Why, from that very time, he took to those practices of
cheating his master which ended in his ruin. How much better would it be for
all servants, if instead of wasting their leisure in card-playing, they would
amuse themselves in reading some godly book, or improve themselves in writing
or cyphering. It was by this means, for I was never taught to write, that I
qualified myself for the place of Bailiff, which I now fill.

I remember Nick used to say, "Whilst my master plays cards in the parlour, why
should thou be so squeamish as not to play in the kitchen." But Nick did not
consider that his master being rich, and playing for small sums, his losses
laid him under no temptation of dishonesty in order to repair them; besides,
the Squire could read and write at any time, whereas this was our only leisure
time, and if we did not improve ourselves than we never could; what might be
comparatively innocent in him, might be ruinous to us. And even if my master be
a professed gambler, that is no reason I should be so too. A servant is to do
what is right, let his master do what he will. If a master swears and gets
drunk, and talks at table with indecency, or against God and religion, to God
he must account for it, and a sorry account it will be I doubt; but his example
will not excuse our crimes, though it will aggravate his. We must take care of
our own souls, whether our masters take care of theirs or not.

But to return to my history; I am ashamed to say that I was guilty more than
once in the earlier part of my servitude, of the shocking and detestable crime
of lying in order to excuse or screen my faults. -- Happily I was cured of it
in the following manner: Having been one day ordered to carry a bottle of wine
to a sick man, one of my master's parishioners, I accidentally broke the
bottle, and of course, lost the wine. What was to be done? Should I confess my
misfortune and acknowledge my carelessness, or conceal it by a lie? After some
deliberation, I resolved upon the lie. I therefore had made up my story, "how
the poor man sent his duty to my master, and thanked him a thousand times, and
that he was a little better, and that his wife said she thought this wine would
save his life." Being thus prepared, as I was returning home, I met a pedlar,
of whom I bought for a penny a little book, containing a story of a woman at
Devizes, who was struck dead on the spot for telling a lie. To be sure it was
heaven that sent the pedlar to me, to save me from the sin I was going to
commit. "If this woman was struck dead for a lie," said I to myself, "why may
not I?" -- I therefore went directly home, and made a confession of my
negligence and misfortune. And it was well for me I did; for the sick man,
whose duty and thanks I had wickedly intended to carry my master, was dead, as
I understood afterward, three hours before the bottle was broken. From this
time, therefore, I began to see what I am now fully convinced of, that besides
the sinfulness of lying, it was always more for the interest and lasting
comfort of servants, to consess the truth at once, than to conceal a fault by
falsehood. When a servant has told a lie, he is always in danger of its being
found out, and sooner or later it generally is sound out, and then his
character is rumed. Whereas, if he confesses the truth at once, he probably
escapes without any anger at all, or it worst it is soon over, and the fault
itself is forgotten.

Having now lived seven years at the parsonage, and being twenty-one years of
age, my master called me one day into his study, where he spent a good deal of
his time, and said to me, "Charles, you have lived with me a considerable time,
and it has been always with much pleasure that I have remarked the decency,
sobriety and diligence of your conduct. Those few faults which you have,
farther experience and more years will I doubt not, cure. You are now qualified
for a better place than mine, and are entitled to higher wages than it is in my
power to give. I have therefore recommended you to a friend of mine in London,
for which place you are to set out, if you approve it, in a month. But I should
think it a crime to dismiss you to a situation so full of temptations, without
giving you some little advice. Listen, therefore, my dear Charles, to what I
shall say as I mean it only for your good. In the first place fear God, and
then you will never have any occasion to be afraid of man. Act always as in his
presence. Never enter or quit your bed without prayer. Do always for your
master, as you would your master, if you were to change places, should do for
you. Endeavor to get a pious friend, but avoid, as you would the plague, all
wicked company. Be cautious of too great familiarity with your female
fellow servants; an unlawful intercourse of this kind will ruin you, body and
soul. Flee from an alehouse as you would from the Devil; if you once get into
it, you will never be out of it. Keep your money and your money will keep you.
Here, Charles, is a bible for you; the more you read it, the more you will love
it, and the more you love it, the better you will be and the happier. I have
written some directions for you in the first page of it. God! less you; and
when my race which is now drawing to its end, shall finish, may we meet in
heaven." My master's kindness so affected me, that I could not answer him for
tears. I was indeed very glad of going to so fine a place as London, though, at
the same time. I could not leave a house where I had been treated more like a
child than a servant, without great regret. I shall not attempt to describe my
parting with my mother. No description, I am sure, could do justice to the
solemn and affectionate manner in which she exhorted me to be pious and just,
and recommended me to God in prayer. Her last words I shall never forget. "I
know my dear son," said she, "that you love me tenderly, and that you would not
give me unnecessary pain on any account. Remember then, that whenever you do
any wrong thing, you are planting a dagger in your mother's heart." With these
words, her eyes brim full of tears, and her hands lifted up in silent prayer,
to God she turned away from me and went into the cottage.

And now, reader, you find me in the great and dangerous city of London, in the
service of a very wealthy master, who kept twelve servants besides myself. If
country people knew London as well as I do, how cautious they would be of
exchanging their safe and peaceful situations in the country, for the perils
and temptations of a great city. How many young fellows have I known, who lived
honestly and happily in their native place, come up to London in hopes of
higher wages, and there forfeit their integrity, their peace of mind, their
health, their character and souls. Workmen in particular are very fond of
getting into large cities, because they think their labor will turn to better
account there than in their own villages. They do not consider that in a city
they must give as much for a filthy room in a filthy house, inhabited by half a
dozen families, situated in a close, smoky, dirty, street, as in the country
would pay the rent of a cottage and a garden. They do not consider the dearness
of provisions in a city, the temptations they are under from bad women, wicked
company, and the great number of alehouses. In short, I am fully persuaded
that a laborer in the country, on a shilling a day, is better off than one in
the city on two shillings.

When I came to my place, I found every thing for the first three or four days
very smooth and very pleasant, plenty of provisions, plenty of drink, little
work, and a very merry servant's hall. But soon the face of things, with
respect to me, changed very much, and I underwent a severer temptation than I
ever experienced before or since in my life. I had always hitherto been taught
to consider that sobriety and diligence, and piety were virtues. I therefore
never swore, I never got drunk, I never gamed, I went to church as often as I
could, I said my prayers night and morning, and on Sunday at least, if not on
other days, I read a little in my good old master's bible. But here I soon
found that all this was the worst vice I could be guilty of. As soon as they
found me out, it seemed to be a trial of skill amongst them who should plague
me most. One called me the Parson; another, Methodist; a third, a conceited
Prig; a fourth, a canting Hypocrite. If I went into any other gentleman's
kitchen it was all the same; my character always slew before me, and many were
the jests and laughs raised both at home and abroad at my expense. In short,
during three months, my life was a constant state of anxiety and torment; so
that at last I was almost tempted, God forgive me for the thought, to do as
they did, and forfeit my everlasting soul in order to avoid present uneasiness.
But while things were in this state, I felt myself greatly and unexpectedly
relieved one Sunday morning, by a sermon which I happened to hear from our
parish minister, on the following text -- Blessed are ye when men shall revile
you and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil of you falsely for my
sake, for great is your reward in heaven. The excellent discourse which this
pious man delivered on these words was so exactly suited to my circumstances
and feelings, that it seemed as if it had been addressed solely to me; and it
pleased God so to apply what had been said to my heart and understanding, that
I not only determined to bear in future the sneers and scoffs of my
fellow servants, with patience and fortitude, but even those very sneers which
I formerly considered as my heaviest calamity, were now no longer grievous.
From this time, therefore, my uneasiness was pretty well at an end. And I
earnestly recommend it to all other servants, who have been so happy as to
acquire sober and virtuous habits, not to suffer themselves to be laughed out
of their sobriety and virtue, by the jests and ridicule of their
fellow servants. They may depend upon it that their cause is a good one, and
though they suffer for it at first, they will finally triumph. In a short time
all my persecution was at an end. "To be sure," said the coachman one day to
the cook, "Charles is a little too religious, but upon my word I don't think he
is any the worse for it. Mayhap it might be better for us if we were more like
him. I don't see but that he is as humble, friendly and worthy a fellow as any
amongst us. For my part I shall laugh at him no longer." This speech which I
happened accidentally to overhear, gave me great pleasure, and I soon found by
the agreeable change in my fellow servants' conduct toward me, that the
coachman had expressed the opinion of the whole hall. It is true I did every
thing to obtain their good will, that lay in my power. I was as civil and
obliging to every one among them, as I possibly could. Was any thing to be
done? If nobody else would do it, I never stopped to consider whether it
belonged to my place or not, but did it out of hand. If any body took it into
his head to fall out with me, I generally disarmed him of his wrath by saying
nothing. If any little quarrels or misfortunes, or misconduct, happened in the
hall, I always endeavored to hush it up, and never carried any tales to the
master, unless when I saw any body wronging him, and then I thought it my duty,
or unless the thing was very bad indeed. In short by pursuing always this line
of conduct, I found my situation very comfortable and agreeable. My master
treated me with great confidence and kindness: my fellow servants with great
friendliness and respect.

In about two years time, the footman that used to go to market being turned
away for drunkenness, which vice soon proved his ruin, my master told me that
as he believed I was an honest and careful young man, and perceiving that I
could write and keep an account, he should in future employ me in marketing. To
market, therefore, I went every day, and as I had now a good deal of my
master's money always in my hands, I prayed heartily to God that he would be
pleased to preserve me under the temptation to which this exposed me. My first
exploit in this way was the purchase of ten shillings worth of fruit at a
fruiterer's. When I had finished my bargain and was coming out of the shop, the
fruiterer slipped a shilling into my hand. As I had never to the best of my
recollection, seen him before, I was somewhat surprised at his generosity; but
fortunately had the presence of mind to ask him whether he had charged his
fruit the higher on account of this present to me. "Why young man," said he,
"that is an honest question, and I will give you an honest answer. The fact is,
that as we know that gentlemen of your cloth expect some complement from the
tradesmen they deal with, we are obliged in our own defense, to charge our
articles the higher on that account to their masters." "And so," said I, "the
money you give us, comes finally from the pockets of our masters?" -- To be
sure it does." "Why then," said I, "I will take your shilling, but shall charge
my master only nine shillings." And this method I constantly pursued in the
like case ever after; for I think the above mentioned practice of footmen,
which, however, I hope is not very common with them, is just the same thing in
conscience as if they should rob their master's bureau.

One Monday morning, having settled my account for the last week with my
master, I found that he had made a mistake against himself of twenty shillings.
As soon as I discovered it, I said to myself, here now is an opportunity of
getting twenty shillings without any risk of detection: but God forbid that I
should do it, as it would ruin my peace of mind, and destroy my soul. I
therefore pointed out the error to my master the first opportunity. "Charles,"
said he, "you are right, the mistake is obvious, I acknowledge I made it
purposely to try your honesty. You shall find that this affair will turn out,
before long, to your advantage." Now, though I do not think it quite fair for
masters to lay this kind of trap for their servants' integrity, yet as I know
by experience they sometimes do it, we must be doubly on our guard. Indeed
dishonesty is never safe; it always will out somehow or other. I have seen
surprising instances of the discovery of it, when it, seemed to have been
committed with such cunning as to be impossible to be detected. One day, as I
was going to market, I met Sir Robert S's butler, who told me, that having long
observed my sobreity and diligence, he was happy to have it now in his power to
offer me a place in his master's family where my wages should be raised two
guineas a year. I thanked him, and told him he should have his answer next
evening. In the mean time, I called upon a pious and worthy friend, whom I
consulted in all difficulties, and asked his opinion. After mature
deliberation, he said, "Charles don't go. When you are once got into a good
place, stick to it like a le^^h. The rolling stone gets no moss. The more years
you continue in one service, the more you are respected by your master and all
the world. A good, family considers an old servant as one of themselves, and
can no more see him want than a near relation. Whereas servants that are
continually roving from place to place, have no friend in distress, and seldom
get a provision for old age." Happy it was for me that I followed this good
advice. If I had not I should probably been nothing more than a poor footman
all my life.

But before I bring my own story to an end, I must beg my reader's patience, to
listen to the sad fate of my poor brother Tom. Alas! poor Tom, he was a great
favorite in our kitchen, because he sung the best song, and told the merriest
tale, and paid his card money the most f^e^ly of any gentleman footman about
town. And then he swore so much like a gentleman, and was so complaisant to the
ladies, and pushed about the strong beer so merrily that he was, said our
servants, the most argeeable company in the world. And yet all those
enter-^^ning qualities did not preserve my poor brother from the most
distressful state of distress and ruin. One morning he came to me about ten
o'clock with a very woeful face, which was a thing very unusual for him, and
told me that he had just been turned away from his place without a character,
and that he had no money, many debts, and no real friends, and what was worse
than all, that he was laboring under disease.

Tom grew worse every day, and was at length given over. In the morning of that
day, while I was sitting at his bedside, who should come in but my dear
mother. She had walked 130 miles, except now and then a list in the wagon, to
attend upon and comfort her undeserving son. When she saw him, pale and
emaciated, and his face half consumed by disease, it so shocked her that she
sainted away. As soon as she recovered, and was a little relieved by a
plentiful flood of tears, she said, "my dear Tom, I am come to take care of
thee, and make thee better if I can." "Alas! mother," answered he, putting his
clay-cold hand into here is, "it is all too late. I have but a few hours to live.
It is by neglecting your advice that I am brought to this. Gaming and drink,
and bad company, and bad women, have been my ruin. O! what will become of my
soul! If I could but live my life over again." Here he was seized with a sudden
fit, and though he lived some hours, he never spoke after, and died that
evening in my mother's arms.

After recounting the sorrowful history of my unhappy brother, I must now
hasten to conclude my own. About a twelvemonth after the offer of a place in
Sir Robert S -- 's family, my master, in consideration, as he said, of my
faithful services, made me his butler. He was indeed so kind and friendly to me
on all occasions, that I found it necessary to be extremely cautious lest I
should grow proud, or saucy, or familiar, which some servants, when they live
long in a place, and find themselves in favor, are apt to do. After enjoying
this post about six years, our family being now removed into the country, I
made acquaintance with a farmer's daughter living near the great house, whom,
on account of her religious and industrious principles, and her amiable and
cheerful temper, I wished to make my wife. She was no flaunter in fine clothes,
none of your dancing, flirting, forward lasses, that run about to christenings,
and revels, and hops, that will ruin a man before he knows where he is; but a
pious, sober, stay-at-home, industrious young woman; else I am sure any body
might have had her for me. As I had never been guilty of any unnecessary
expense, for nobody will call that unnecessary which I sent yearly to my
parents, my sayings, the interest being added yearly to the principal in the
hands of my master, amounted to 200 pounds. And as Fanny's father promised to
give her another hundred, I thought we might with this take a small farm, and
maintain ourselves comfortably and decently. I therefore communicated the
affair to my master. -- "Charles," said he, "though I am loath to part with so
good a servant, yet I think it an act of gratitude due to you for your long and
faithful services, to consent to any thing which may be for your welfare. But I
do not think it necessary to part at all. I am at present in want of a bailiff.
You may, if you approve it, undertake that office and still retain your present
wages. Your father-in-law, who is an experienced farmer, will instruct and
assist you in the duties of it. I will, besides, let you a small farm on an
advantageous lease, which you may make the most of for yourself.

To this kind and generous offer I joyfully assented. And Fanny and myself have
now lived together six years in the farm-house, near the park-gate, happy and
prosperous. My father being dead, and my brother and sister settled, my mother,
who is now very old, lives with me, and by her example and exhortation, I find
a sense or religion sink deeper and deeper into my soul everyday; and, indeed,
I am firmly convinced by long experience, that there is nothing in this world
can make us truly happy but that.

I address this little book, which I wrote by little and little in the long
evenings of the last hard winter, to all footmen. I hope they will not be angry
with my well-meant endeavors, but take kindly what is intended only for their
good.

The CHEAPSIDE APPRENTICE; or the HISTORY of Mr. FRANCIS H --.
F^lly setting forth the danger of playing with Edge Tools. Showing a^^, how a
gay life may prove a short one, and that a marry evening may produce a
sorrowful morning.
ATTEND, ye young men, who are about to enter into trade, for to you I write my
story. I was bound apprentice to a respectable tradseman in Cheapside. My
master, Mr. Vincent, had acquired ^^very f^^r character, whilst he was making a
comfortable for^^ne. His wise was a dressy, flashy woman, who liked visiting
and jaunting more than taking care of her family, whilst my master was plodding
late at night in the compting house, Mrs. Vincent and her daughters were either
making parties abroad, or giving entertainments at home. As we kept no footman,
I was allowed when the ^hop was shut, to run from one public place to another
to call a coach, to bring Mrs. Vincent and her daughters home. To lounging
about the purlieus of a play^^^se I owe my ruin. I was generally allowed to be
a handsome well-made young man; this unfortunately ^^ew upon me the notice of a
set of those wretched wo^^n, who nightly crowd the theaters; I should have been
delighted with the notice they took of me, had not my ^^^^ty whispered me that
Miss Vincent was in love with me. This suspicion was sully confirmed to me by
(...) Porter, an elder apprentice, but for whose wicked (...) I might have
lived happily, and died virtuoustly.

The idea that Miss Vincent was in love with me at once completed me for the
coxcomb: I now neglected my ^^^^ess, and to dress out my person became the on^^
object of my thoughts: I began to commit little frauds on my master, in order
to obtain money to dress (...); for ever since Potter had laughed me out of my
religion every principle of moral honesty sat loosely upon me.

I am sorry to say the holy Sabbath in our family was only disdinguished from
other days by the ^u^^^ing of the^^ (...) my master spent the greater part of
it in posting his books, and my mistress and her daughters were either dressing
to go abroad, or else to receive company at home. We young me indeed were sent
to church; but as we had no examples set us by the heads of the family going
thither themselves, Potter and I generally hired a gig and dashed away from one
tea-drinking place to another; these scenes soon made me lose all respect for
virtue and religion. It was at the Dog and Duck I first saw the infamous Miss
West; she was many years older than myself: her person was as lovely as her
heart was wicked. She was no sooner informed that I was to come into possession
of 3000 l. the day I came of age, than she made use of all her deceitful arts
to ensnare both my soul and body, as she often prompted me to defraud my master
to supply her extravagance. My attachment to Miss Vincent was now on 01 the
decline, for Miss West had so far wrought upon my vanity, as to make me belive
that so handsome a young fellow as I was, should look higher than a tradesman's
daughter, from that moment I treated Miss Vincent with the most marked neglect,
although I saw my conduct cut her to the heart; yet, at the same time was I
base enough to borrow money of her, which I wantonly squandered away on Miss
West.

When Potter's apprenticeship expired, instead of improving his fortune by
throwing it into trade, he plunged at once into all the vices of the town. He
possessed a plausible kind of prate, which caused him to be appointed Chairman
to our Club, which was chiefly composed of clerks and apprentice boys. Potter's
principal excellence consisted in singing a merry song, telling an indecent
story, and teaching his heaters to laugh at morality, and set all religion at
defiance; ser religion, he maintained, was only an old woman's tale, invented
by cunning heads to keep children and fools in order.

There was an honest old porter lived in our family, who for some time had set
himself to watch my conduct, and at length he made such a faithful report of it
to my master, that he gave up my indentures, and turned me out of doors.

I was too much delighted with my liberty to feel any sense of shame at the
means by which I obtained it.

I was sorry, however, to break off entirely with Miss Vincent, for I still had
a lurking affection for her; I told Potter so: his inventive genius soon laid a
plan whereby I might get her into my power, and take a complete revenge on her
whole family at the same time. This was by writing her a letter, setting forth
the violence of my love, the unmerited disgrace I had received from her family,
and at the same time requesting her to grant me a private meeting, in order
that I might justify my conduct to her, as otherwise I feared the violence of
my passion would drive me to a fit of despair.

This poor imprudent girl met me at the time and place appointed. I will not
here shock my readers with relating the vile stratagems I made use of to
complete the ruin of this young lady, nor the tremendous oaths I swore to
repair her wrongs by marriage, as soon as I came of age, which would be in a
very few months; this somewhat abated her sorrow for the very indiscreet step
she had taken.

The day I became of age, I went down into the country. My friends having been
apprized of my profligate life, received me very coldly. I practiced the
deepest hypocrisy on my good mother, to make her believe I was quite a reformed
man, in order to wheedle her out of a sum of money, telling her at the same
time, I had an immediate prospect of entering into a very profitable concern
with a partner of great responsibility, if I could but increase my capital.

"Frank," said she, with firmness, "there is no trusting to your promises; as
long as your conduct deserved my love, you ever sound me an indulgent mother;
but you shall never have cause to say, I acted toward you like a weak woman,
by robbing my virtuous children, to supply the wanton extravagance of a
profligate son. -- Your wicked life, Frank, has nearly broken my heart, but it
shall not shake my justice." The well known steadiness of my mother's temper
convinced me at once she was not further to be imposed upon by the fallacy of
my arguments.

As soon as I had settled my business, I returned to London to Miss Vincent,
who had waited for me with the utmost patience, fully expecting I was come to
fulfill my promise of marriage to her. "I can struggle with want, dear Frank,"
said she, "but I will never consent to live in shame." Nothing I am certain
hardens the heart like vice, for although this poor young creature was brought
into a very trying situation by the prospect of her soon becoming a mother, I
swore I would never make her my wife, who had disgraced herself by living with
me as a mistress. On hearing this, in all the tender agonies of grief, she
urged me to repair the wrongs I had done her, reminding me at the same time, of
the wicked arts I had made use of to beguile her of her innocence, and then
with clasped hands and streaming eyes, she threw herself on her knees before
me, beseeching me to pity the agonies which rent her soul, yet still my
hardened nature was untouched by her sorrow; again I solemnly swore I never
would marry her.

Through excess of grief she fainted away, in which pitiable state I left her
to the care of a servant, went out and spent the rest of the evening with Miss
West, whose flinty heart turned into ridicule the sorrowful tale I related to
her.

On returning to my lodgings the next morning, I was informed Miss Vincent had
left them without leaving behind her the least information where she was to be
found, and much did I rejoice when I heard it, that she had taken herself off
so quietly.

I now lavished my money as though it would never have an end. By all I was
esteemed the most noble spirited fellow in the world, and even little wits
would be silent in my presence, because I was sure to pay for the wine upon
which they were to riot. My cash at length beginning to run low, as I had been
all along drawing from the principal, I advised with Potter how to get
furnished with future supplies. He advised the gaming table as a never failing
friend, saying, it had long since been the only resource from whence he derived
his subsistence.

I took his advice and for some months was so successful, that I began to dash
away in higher life at the West end of the town. -- I bought an elegant
phaeton, which I drove every Sunday in Hyde Park, with Miss West by my side.
One day as I was driving furiously through Temple Bar, I had the misfortune to
overturn a poor man with a heavy load on his back; on his getting up, I
perceived him to be Mr. Vincent's old porter, to whom I formerly owed my
disgrace.

"Ah! ah! what, is it you young hopeful?" cried he, on seeing to whom he owed
his misfortune, "well, he must needs go whom the devil drives; thy prancing
nags may die a natural death, master Frank, but verily, I think it is more than
thou will, boy, for if thou die in thy shoes, the gallows will be robbed of
its due. What is become of poor Patty Vincent, thou profligate dog, have thou
broken her heart, as thou have that of her poor afflicted parents!"

The sudden recollection of that unfortunate girl caused such a swimming in my
head, that the reins dropped from my hands, my horses took fright, and it was
almost a miracle that I get home alive. -- The porter's words had made such an
impression on my mind that I could not shake them off. Soon after, Potter
calling upon me, I told him of my interview with the old porter, and also the
effect it had on me. "Frank," said he, "if a fellow of thy spirit can be thus
easily overcome by qualms of conscience, let us instantly adjourn to the
tavern, since good wine is the best remedy in the world to drown all uneasy
recollections in." I gladly accepted his proposal: we called a coach, and off
we went. He no sooner saw my spirits inflamed with wine, than he drew me to the
gaming table, where, before morning, I lost every shilling I had in the world;
I applied to Potter to lend me 50 guineas, as he had won more than 200 of me.

Laughing heartily, he told me, it had ever been a maxim with him, never to
lend his money to a man who had not prudence to keep his own; "but, harkee,
Frank," said he, "I Will give thee my best advice gratis: such a noble spirited
young fellow as thou art, needs never be at a loss for money while he can snap
a trigger, and the highway is left open for him to practice upon. Men who
follow the same course of pleasure, are the last people in the world to help
each other in the hour of distress; virtuous men, Frank, only feel for the
wants of their friends, and they alone find pleasure in relieving them." He
then whistled himself off.

When I got home, I sat revolving in my mind how to get myself out of my
present difficulties, when in a fatal moment, Satan whispered in my ears the
word FORGERY. At first I started at the thought, but my poverty was clamorous,
my pride startled at disgrace, although my conscience did not shudder at the
crime. I know I could copy Mr. Vincent's hand exactly, I snatched up the pen to
draw a bill upon him for 500 l. but a cold shivering seizing me, it dropped from
my fingers, a strong sense of my guilt now overtook me, I tore what I had
written to pieces, and exclaimed, I am a free man again; and for a moment felt
thankful that I had been enabled to resist the violence of temptation. I sat
pondering, however, how I should maintain myself; again I was assaulted with
the dread of poverty, and again I snatched up the pen, drew the fatal bill, and
instantly went and got it accepted.

But the moment I sought to take rest at night on my pillow, I felt as if all
the horrors of hell had seized me. I jumped out of bed in my sleep, and was
going to throw myself out of the window, having dreamt that I was apprehended,
the people of the house, awakened by my cries, ran into the room, concluding
some villains had broken in, and were going to murder me.

I never afterward went into the street, but my fears told me I was the
subject of conversation of all the people I met. Once I happened to hear one
man say to another, pointing to a third, "that is he, that is he," I took to my
heels, concluding that I myself was meant, and ran from one street to another,
without knowing whither, till my sight failed me, and, through loss of breath,
I dropped down in a fit. Some humane people however, recovered me, and put me
into a hackney coach which carried me home.

One day, a sudden gust of wind blew open my chamber door, again I concluded
the officers were coming to take me. Snatching up the poker to defend myself, I
swore I would not be taken alive, when turning about suddenly, I caught a
glimpse of myself in the glass, my eyes looked wild, my lips quivered, my jaws
dropped, my teeth chattered, and my body shook, as though the last agonies of
death were upon me. On finding I was once more become the dupe of my fears, my
spirits rallied again, I dressed and went to the play; there I met Sally West,
whom I had not seen for some weeks; for, to say the truth, I dreaded to meet an
old acquaintance from the time I committed the forgery: after the play, we went
off together to sup at a tavern* we had not been there a quarter of an hour
when she made an excuse for quitting the room; in about ten minutes she
returned to me, expressing in the tenderest terms the satisfaction she had to
see me again.

We were, as I believed, just going to set down to supper, when the waiters
came in followed by two of Sir John Fielding's men. Immediately with the
greatest coolness, Miss West arose, and laying her hand on my shoulder
exclaimed, "the Philistines be upon thee Sampson. Gentlemen," continued she to
the officers, "this is my good friend Mr. Francis H -- of whom you have been
sometime in search. Perhaps, Frank," continued she, "you do not know that your
forgery is discovered, and that 100 l. reward is offered for taking you, when I
left the room just now it was to write a note to these gentlemen, signifying to
them where you were to be found; I see you are terrified, but hear me for the
last time perhaps, and you will the less wonder at my conduct. Early in life,
Frank, I was betrayed to ruin, by a base designing man; my reputation once
blasted, I was deserted by all the virtuous part of my own sex; by having had
examples always before my eyes, I soon became hardened in sin and abandoned to
shame. I have lately contracted debts; if they are not immediately discharged I
shall be sent to a jail; this jail I know not how to avoid but by sending you
thither in my stead; as the reward offered for taking you will just set me free
from my creditors."

I was struck motionless with terror, and fainted away on the officers
approaching to tie my hands behind me; nor had I the least recollection of what
passed, till I found myself safe locked in my prison. About a week after this,
the keeper came to tell me, there was a prisoner lately brought in who was very
desirous of seeing me, and as she appeared an object of great pity, he offered
to conduct me to her. On entering the chamber, I saw a young woman very
shabbily dressed, lying on a miserable bed, in a very weak condition.

"Do thou not know me, Frank?" said she, in a hollow broken voice. Have thou
lost all recollection of Patty Vincent." I felt instantly as if struck with a
thunderbolt. "Merciful Heaven!" cried I, falling on my knees by the bedside; "I
am unable to bear the punishment my crimes have brought upon me! O God of mercy
support my troubled soul." She kindly urged me to be comforted, said she wished
not to see me to reproach me for the evils I had brought upon her, but only to
tell me with her last breath that she forgave me. -- "It is not an hour since,
Frank," continued she, "that I heard you was my fellow-prisoner, and what is
worse at my father's suit. I will not reproach you, Frank, I tell you again,
for all the miseries you have brought upon me, because you are a prisoner and
in chains. If my breath will hold out, I will endeavor to give you a short
history of myself since we parted. On your refusing to make me your lawful
wife, I quitted your lodgings, resolving by my labor to eat the bread of
industry rather than follow a course of vice for a wretched subsistence. I
hired a garret in Holborn, where I applied for needle work, and soon obtained
it. In about three months after our separation, my infant came into the world,
I sold my clothes for my support during my confinement, but that resource soon
failed me. My health and strength declined, I was seized with a constant fever
and cough, and quite unable to supply the scanty morsel of bread for the day,
yet resolved to die rather than afflict my dear parents with the knowledge of
my misery. At length being too weak to labor, I contracted several small debts,
for which I was seized and brought hither. I have however since been prevailed
upon to send my poor half-furnished baby to my parents, hoping they will afford
her that bread which her dying mother dared not ask for herself." Observing I
was speechless with agony, poor Patty went on. "I did not wish to see you,
Frank, to afflict you, (...) ^^ish only to warn you with my dying breath to
repent the evil of your ways, and humble your soul before God. Repentance for
sin, Frank, though bitter for the m^ment, yet I have found healthful to the
soul, (...) the wicked who are at ease, may de^ide th^^ ^^^d who ^ade them, yet
the sighing and the sorrowi^^ heart will flee unto him, as the only present
help in (...) time of trouble; I shall very soon lay down my heavy burden of
sickness and sorrow, and escape from a d^ksome prison, as I humbly trust, to
everlasting rest. -- O Frank! Frank! it is far safer to die a penitent in a
jail, than to live in a palace, with a heart untouched by God's grace."

Here she was interrupted by the unexpected entrance of Mr. and Mrs. Vincent. O
ye, who shall hereafter read my story, drop a tear of pity at the agony I now
endured! They no sooner beheld their child, than each by turns tenderly
embraced her, assuring her of their forgiveness, and gently chid her, for
having concealed herself so long, adding, that as a penitent child they would
most gladly have received her, though they would have shunned her, if they
found her living in prosperous wickedness. She thanked them and said,

"Mourn not for my death, my dearest parents, but rather rejoice that I die
penitent for my transgression, and since I have received your blessing and
forgiveness I have but one favor more to ask in life, which is, that you, my
kind father, will extend your pity toward that young man," pointing to me. "O
save him, if possible, from an ignominious death, and remember, that my child
is also his. My business in life is done, and now, O Heavenly Father! receive
my spirit, and pardon my sin, through Jesus Christ my Redeemer." Here her
speech failed her, and after a few convulsive struggles she expired.

Great Heaven! is there any punishment for me to suffer hereafter beyond what I
endured at the moment? A dead silence succeeded for some time, my groans only
were heard. As soon as Mr. Vincent had somewhat recovered the shock, he raised
himself from the body of his child, and spoke to me as follows:

"Behold, O young man, the calamities which thy crimes have brought on my
family! Behold, my departed child lying on the bosom of her fainting mother;
yet I am not insensible to the agonies which rend thy soul, and sorry am I to
add to them, by telling thee, thy excellent mother went out of her senses, on
hoaring thou had committed a crime, by which thou had forfeited thy life to
the laws of thy country. O Frank! Frank! what deep distress can one profligate
child bring on whole families! Thy crimes, alas! have brought on thy own
destruction, for I fear it will not be in my power to befriend thee on thy
trial, much as I am disposed to do it in consideration of thy relations. Too
late, Frank, thou must now see, how fatal an excessive love of pleasure must
prove to a young tradesman. Honest industry is generally a sure road to wealth;
as a sober, religious life is to happiness. To thy cost thou must already have
experienced, that the wicked can have no dependence upon each other, since thou
art betrayed and brought to shame, by those very friends who first led thy
youth astray."

"O Sir," cried I, "few and evil have been my days, but the great God above,
who knows the secrets of all hearts, can alone judge of the sorrows of mine;
it is not, Sir, the punishment of death which I fear, but the just vengeance of
offended Heaven, which must follow it; for though a very young man, I am a very
old sinner. Alas! my dear, and honored mother, is it then true, that the crimes
of your own child have robbed you of your senses? And yet the merciful hand of
God has hitherto withheld his vengeance from striking me dead. To whom shall I
fly for mercy and pity in my distress? From the law I cannot expect it, and
from the offended Majesty of high Heaven I dare not hope it, since my present
punishment is but the certain wages of my sin." Here I am told I fell into
strong convulsion fits, and in that condition was conveyed to my cell.

Written the night before my execution.

It is a month since I was put on my trial, and my guilt being fully proved by
the court, I am condemned to hang by the neck till I am Dead! Dead! Dead!

O, ye thoughtless young men who have forsaken the God of Heaven to follow
after the enticing pleasures of this world, attend to my words, as to those of
a man speaking to you from the grave, since the dawn of that day is now
breaking on the world, in which I shall be numbered with the dead. Although, at
the instant I write, I am in all the prime of youth, and all the vigor of
health, I shall this day die a just victim to the broken laws; and my precious
soul may be consigned over to everlasting torments, unless the great judge of
all things will be graciously pleased to accept my sorrow for my sin, through a
gracious Redeemer.

My days are numbered, my hours are few, and the solemn tolling bell will soon
be summoning me to meet my God in judgment. The convulsive struggles of death
are already upon me before I reach the gallows, whereon I must shortly hang as
a warning spectacle to gaping thousands, and from whence I must shoot the great
gulf which parts TIME from ETERNITY!

O, blessed Lord, have mercy on my soul!

The above story was found in the young man's pocket after his execution.

THE HYMN.
FATHER of light, O cleanse my stains,
Look on a sinner vile;
In dungeon dark, oppressed with chains,
Deign thou on me to smile.
Condemned to die by human laws,
I own my sentence just,
With mercy mild, judge thou my cause,
Who art my only trust.
Though great my crime and short my race,
My faith and hope receive;
Since souls enriched with pard'ning grace,
With thee shall ever live.
Then farewell all beneath the skies,
The sting of death is over;
O May my trembling spirit rise,
Where sin shall be ^o more.
THE STORY OF POOR TRICKET, THE GAMESTER.
Slewing ^ow he first lost his place by gaming, and then had well nigh been the
death of his wife through the same cause, and how, lastly, his gaming was the
occasion of his being transported as a convict to Botany Bay.
"I CANNOT, for my life, imagine (said Mr. Smith to his opposite neighbor, Mr.
Tomson) what those fellows can be about on the top of my house. -- They have
been these two days employed there in repairing the damage done by the high
wind the other night; a job which I think might have been done in a very few
hours." Step over the way to my door," said Tomson "and I will presently
explain to you why the job is so long in hand." Smith did so -- " turn about
and look up," said Tomson, "and you will see the two men sitting over against
each other on the ridge of your house." -- "Why they are playing at cards!"
said Smith -- "no wonder my business is so long in doing." Away went Smith to
the master bricklayer to complain of his men. The master was very angry, as he
well might be, and dismissed the idle fellows from his service; and as he made
known the story, the men found no one willing to employ them, so they had full
leisure for their gaming, and Betsworth lost all his money with Tricket --
Betsworth's wife in vain asked him for cash, provisions were scarce, and they
had lived on short commons several days.

On Saturday Betsworth had no wages to receive, nevertheless, he desired his
wife would get a bit of meat for a hot Sunday's dinner; "for" said he, "we have
lived hardly enough this week, and I shall ask my friend Tricket to eat a bit
with us." The wife said nothing, but when her husband and Tricket came in to
dinner on Sunday, she laid the cloth, and set upon the table a dish with a
cover. "What have thou got under thy cover, wife?" said Betsworth, "something
nice I hope." "As good as I could get," said the wife, "had you brought me
money you should have had something better." Upon this he lifted up the cover
and behold! the dish contained nothing but some dirty old cards scattered about
it! "Is this," said Betsworth, "what you provide for me and my friend?" "It is
all that you and your friend have left us," said she; "I have nothing to eat
myself, and these are the only tools you work with to provide for my
maintenance and your own." "Bu^n the cards," said Betsworth, "they have been
the ruin of me: forgive me wife, I deserve a more bitter reproof." "Tricket,"
added he, "my poor Molly has served us rightly enough; for my part, I am
resolved to go to my master tomorrow, confess my fault, and try to get his
work again; and I hope God will pardon me for the distress I have brought upon
my family by my love of gaming; and that he will mercifully strengthen me to
resist every temptation to return to such a horrid practice." -- Tricket did
not relish the jest, but went surlily out of the house. Betsworth, however, is
said to have taken a hint from this little trick of his wife, and, as far as I
have heard, he has never since been found amongst the Gamesters.

I must now proceed to tell you something more of Tricket, who continued his
evil practices, and who is the only one of these two Gamesters whose history I
mean to speak of any farther.

Having lost his former gull whom he tried once or twice to draw into another
game, by saying that the man wanted spirit, Tricket happened to light upon a
second brother gamester, whom he hoped to drain as he had done Betsworth; but
either through a sad run of ill-luck, or, as I rather think, by his being not a
little cheated, he soon lost every farthing of his former booty, and he had
nothing now left for him to stake at the next gaming party, except what little
he could get by stripping his poor wife of the earnings of her hard labor. --
She had two children of four and five years of age, for whom, as well as
herself, she contri^ed to get bread by taking in washing.

She bore with patience her husband's spending all he got upon his own
pleasures, and leaving her to shift for herself; but when he came home and tore
from her what she had worked so hard for, she could not help weeping and
complaining, though her complaints were mild and far from the language of
scolding; but her brutal husband, instead of being moved by her tears, only
made them a pretense for running from her to the alehouse; "since," as he
said, "he could not have comfort at home."

One of the families for which she washed would often carelessly make her wait
a month or two for the payment of her bills, instead of discharging them
weekly, when she brought home the linen. This is a cruel inconsideratency, and
very contrary to the merciful spirit of the law of God, which forbids to keep
back the hire of the laborer. The truth is, persons whose only support is hard
labor, can seldom do more than live from hand to mouth, and whilst their pay is
kept back by a thoughtless customer, they are likely enough to be starving for
the want of it.

It happened that she had just received a washing bill of six weeks standing,
which she had long been sighing for, and was counting her money, when her
husband came home in a terrible humor, declared he had not a farthing in the
world, and laid his violent hands on this money, every shilling of which he
carried off. -- She screamed after him, begging that he would leave her some of
it at least, or how could she get bread for her children? But he was quickly
out of hearing, and hastily returned to his play-mate, who waited for him at
the alehouse. Tricket's cruelty struck his wife to the heart; she sat down in
dumb despair and could not ease her full heart by weeping; the children looked
up in her face with terror, and soon began to cry, and to tell her they were
hungry; this gave a free passage to her tears; she hugged them both to her
breast, and told them that they should have all the food their cruel father had
left them: she brought out the remainder of her loaf, and divided it between
them; for her part, she could swallow none.

By being obliged to trust her customers, she had been reduced to borrow a
little from her landlady, and she owed some rent besides, so that she was
ashamed to apply to her again, and she had not sixpence in the world to supply
food, or to buy soap for her washing. He who should assist her was her worst
enemy, and, careless of her wants, took from her the fruits of her industry to
throw it away in gaming and drinking.

This barbarous treatment hurt her the more because, with all his faults, she
retained more affection for him than he deserved; and had often cheerfully
supplied his extravagance with a share of what she got, when she could do it
without starving herself and her children. -- But now provisions were so dear
that she found it not easy to get necessaries even by working early and late at
her laborious business. No money could she get from her husband, and this day
his antagonist had refused to play with him any longer upon tick; and the
alehouse-keeper, at whose house this gaming commonly went on, would draw no
more beer without present pay. His character was become so bad, that he could
not get employed when necessity would have urged him to work. In this situation
he had come home desperate and provoked at his ill-fortune, when he found his
wife with two guineas and a good deal of silver before her. The sight of this
money renewed his hopes, and his eagerness for trying once more to recover his
losings. With this only object in view, he flew like a vulture on his prey, and
without a thought of the distressful state of those who should have been dear
to him as his life, snatched from them all the means of subsistence. Thus does
gaming harden the heart and swallow up every good affection! whilst the hateful
passions of avarice and envy are continually fed and strengthened by it!

Poor Mrs. Tricket, cold and fasting, put her children to bed and, sat weeping
over them whilst her husband spent his hours in greedy wishes, hopes, and
fears; in rage, in oaths, and curses, over his cards, with the tankard at his
side, often drained by the thirsty passion burning in his stomach, and raging
in his mind. -- At past midnight he came staggering home, and found his wife
sitting up for him, pale and shivering, and her face swelled with weeping. --
"I thought you had left us for good and all," said she, "left us to perish; how
could you be so barbarous as to rob me of all, and leave me without a penny in
the house? -- I beseech you to give me back some of that money, which was all I
had in the world, unless you do indeed desire to see me and your children die
with want." "If that was your all," he replied, " die you must; for it is every
penny gone, and more after it than I shall ever be able to pay." So saying, he
turned his pockets inside out, to show her they were perfectly empty. At this
sight the poor woman, whose spirits were before nearly exhausted with grief and
fasting, fell in a fainting fit at his feet; as he had never seen her so before
he thought she was dead, and alarmed the house with his cries; though he was
much in liquor, and his mind almost distracted, yet the idea of having been the
cause of her death struck him with horror. The children, awakened by his
outcry, started up, and seeing her on the floor, cried, "Mammy! Mammy!" with
all their might.

This dreadful noise awakened both the landlady, who slept above stairs, and
also a widow lady, who lodged on the first floor, but before either of these
could run down stairs, Tricket was at their doors, crying in a horrible tone,
"My wife! my wife! come to her if you have any pity! I have killed her! help!
help!" He then ran back, and found her lying where he had left her, and the two
children on the ground with her, kissing her cold hands and face, sobbing and
drowning her with their tears. The lady and landlady reached Tricket's room at
the same instant, and looked with amazement on this wretched groupe, whilst the
man cried out, "See! see! what I have done! -- I have murdered my wife!" "Sure
you could not be such a monster, said the lady, "how have you murdered her?
where is her wound? help to raise her up, and let us see the hurt." They then
lifted her up, and perceived returning life in her. "Where is your hurt my poor
dear creature?" said the landlady; "where did that inhuman villain strike you?"
The poor woman looked wildly: "what do you mean?" said she, "he did not strike
me, though I almost wish he had to the heart." Her husband, now, with the most
lively joy and gratitude, thanked God that she was alive, and on his knees
begged her forgiveness. She assured him, as well as her weakness would allow,
that she forgave him all.

The good women now hastened to make a fire, and to warm her bed, for they
found she shivered violently; when they had put her into it, the lady brought
her a glass of warm wine and water, some of which she prevailed on her to
swallow. -- Tricket, whose anguish had taken off his intoxication, put his
children again into their little bed; he gazed upon them and their mother by
turns; whilst his heart was wrung with the sense of their wants and his own
wickedness. His wife fell asleep soon after the refreshment she had taken; but
in a few hours awoke in a burning fever. -- Tricket watched by her side: when
he felt her hand and head as hot as fire, his fears returned, and he ran out of
the house to fetch an apothecary; though he recollected that he had nothing to
pay for help, or even necessary food for her: however, he went into the street,
taking a club stick in his hand, and had not gone half way to the apothecary's,
when, on turning a corner, he saw a gentleman, walking alone before him.
Tricket at that moment looking round the street, saw no creature near. Suddenly
it darted into his mind, that he might now get bread for his wife and children,
and that he could escape home again before any one could detect him; he stopped
not for recollection, but striking the gentleman with all his force on the back
of his head, felled him to the ground, and was rifling his pockets, when a
watchman, turning the same corner Tricket had done, ran up, winding his rattle
as he ran.

Tricket tried to escape; but the rattle brought watchmen from so many
quarters, that he was soon secured; whilst some of them conveyed him to the
round-house, others assisted the gentleman to rise; having been only stunned,
he soon recovered his speech, and directed the men to lead him to his house,
which was not far off. -- There they asked him whether he was robbed? and on
examining his pockets, he found that he had lost his watch, and his purse, both
of which he particularly described. The watch he could swear to, if he saw it;
and he told the color of the purse, and what money it contained, of which he
gave the watchmen a memorandum. -- They then returned to the round-house,
where, on searching the prisoner, the watch and purse were found upon him. --
He would not answer any of their questions, but remained in gloomy silence.

When the day was more advanced, they carried him before a Justice of the
Peace, and gave in their information. Tricket was now obliged to speak; and
seeing clearly that he must be convicted, he burst into an agony of grief, and
confessed the whole; but he pleaded the distress to which his wife and family
were reduced, which alone, he said, "had led him to this rash action:" and he
repeatedly observed, that since he was driven to it by necessity, he hoped that
both his Worship and the Gentleman would let him go: and he protested that,
till the fatal moment when he saw the Gentleman, and thought he might rescue
his wife from death, and his children from starving, he had never entertained a
thought of committing such a crime.

In answer to this speech of Tricket, the Justice (who was well acquainted with
Tricket's whole character and history) remarked, "that although the crime in
question, was committed on the sudden, and though it arose out of the man's
distress, yet, that distress had been brought upon him evidently by gaming."
"My friend," said he, "you have gone from one step to another, as almost every
other person has done, that has been brought before me. First, when you were in
a good place you were negligent of your work through the love of gaming; and
when for this cause you lost your employment, you then took to gambling more
desperately than ever, through a necessity which you brought upon yourself.
Your necessities next led you to take from your wife her little earnings, and
when you had thus nearly driven her to distraction, then it was that you began
to feel for the wants of your wife and children; and thus you were driven by
another necessity of your own making to rob on the highway for her relief.

"I cannot help therefore tracing your crime entirely to your gaming, for it is
this which has brought you into temptation; and no man can tell when he has
once trespassed, as you have done, to what lengths the Devil at one time or
other may suddenly drive him. Instead, therefore, of excusing yourself, let me
advise you to consider how happy for you it is, that the gentleman whom you
struck is not killed; for in that case you would have been brought before me,
not for the robbery and assault only, but for murder.

Poor Tricket was much affected by these remarks, and did not utter a word more
in the way of excuse for his crime; but he begged and prayed the Gentleman, for
his dear wife's sake, not to hang him. Upon which the Justice interfered, and
told Tricket, that "as to the nature of his punishment, that must depend upon
circumstances that would appear on the trial;" and he immediately bound the
Gentleman over to prosecute.

While this scene was passing at the Justice's, poor Mrs. Tricket was left in a
doleful case. She was told by her husband, when he went away, that he was only
going to run to the apothecary's, in order to bring some help to her, and that
he would be back instantly; two hours passed and she heard nothing of him: she
began to suspect something dreadful, and her mind gr^w so agitated, that her
brain seemed on fire, and her senses forsook her. -- It happened that a
gentleman who had been present at the Justice's (having been drawn thither by
the crowd) called, from motives of humanity, in the course of the day to
inquire into the state of Tricket's family; and he was the first person who
brought intelligence of the horrible event that had taken place. As Mrs.
Tricket was so ill, the only step that could be taken at present, was to bring
the apothecary to her; who, by laying on a blister, and giving her proper
medicines, abated the fever, and took off the delirium: but as her reason
returned, her anxiety about her husband returned also, and she incessantly
begged to know what was become of him. Still it was thought that the dreadful
truth must not be told her, lest it should bring back her distraction; and it
was not till three days after, when the apothecary declared her to be much
better, that the sad condition of her husband was revealed to her.

No sooner was this affecting discovery made to Mrs. Tricket, than she grew
eager to get out of bed, to go to her husband in the prison; but her weakness
made it impossible. -- It was with great difficulty that she was kept in the
house after she was able to rise; and the first moment that she could extort
from the apothecary permission to stir out, she put herself into a coach (for
she had not strength to walk) and leaving her children in the care of her
humane landlady, arrived at the prison. The sight of her threw Tricket into an
agony, yet he was glad to see her alive, and by degrees was soothed and
comforted by her kindness and affection. -- She entreated him with many tears,
to make his peace with God by sincere repentance, and to trust in his mercy for
forgiveness. She then, through her natural fondness and partiality for her
husband, endeavored to find out some circumstances of mitigation; and
particularly remarked, "that since it was his affection for her and for his
starving family, that had put him on this rash action, she hoped that when the
trial came on, the Judge would show mercy to him." "Oh! If that could be," said
Tricket, "I think I should never again fall into my former vices; but I dare
not hope it; the robbery is fully proved, and it is no thanks to me, as his
worship very justly observed, that murder was not also the consequence of my
villainous action; my trial soon comes on; prepare your mind for the sad
sentence, and pray for me that I also may be prepared for a more awful trial
after death." She now fell on her knees, and he knelt by her, and both implored
forgiveness at the throne of Grace, with such feelings of contrition, that they
rose up, hoping that their prayers had been heard through the great Savior of
mankind: and their minds now became more calm and more resigned to the event,
whatever it might be.

Tricket was convicted at the next assines on the clearest evidence, and
sentenced to death; but some favorable circumstances in his case were reported
to his Majesty by the Judge, and the sentence was in consequence changed from
death to transportation.

The fear of death at first made even Botany Bay appear a deliverance, but when
he was to depart thither, bitter indeed was the affliction of his faithful
wife; for since he had appeared a penitent, she had become so much endeared to
him, that all his past injuries being quite forgotten, his leaving her was
worse than death.

She was earnestly desirous to go with him, but finding that she could not be
allowed to take her children, she though it it her duty not to forsake them; at
least under the present circumstances, nor indeed would he consent to her
departure. The excellency of Mrs. Tricket's character was the occasion of
raising her up many friends, who furnished her with work, and who assisted both
in educating and apprenticing her children.

Her mind was restored in some measure to peace and tranquillity; and she found
that they who faithfully do their own duty, and put their trust in God are not
forsaken by him, however unhappy they may be in their outward circumstances.

Such is the sad story of poor Tricket, the Gamester! Let each reader lay to
heart the dreadful consequences of Gambling; for by first bringing a man to
want, it will harden his heart even against his most beloved wife and children;
and who knows whether it may not also drive him to those criminal acts, for
which his very life may be justly forfeited to the laws of his country.

BETTY BROWN, THE St. GiLES's ORANGE GIRL: WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF Mrs. SPONGE,
THE MONEY LENDER.
BETTY Brown, the Orange Girl, was born nobody knows where, and bred nobody
knows how. No girl in all the streets of London could drive a barrow more
nimbly, avoid pushing against passengers more dexterously, or cry her "Fine
China Oranges" in a shriller voice. -- But then she could neither sew, nor
spin, nor knit, nor wash, nor iron, nor read, nor spell. Betty had not been
always in so good a situation as that in which we now describe her. She came
into the world before so many good gentlemen and lad^es began to con^ern
themselves so kindly that the poor might have a little learning. There was no
charitable Society then, as there is now, to pick up poor friendless children
in the streets, and put them into a good house, and give them meat, and drink,
and lodging, and learning, and teach them to get their bread in an honest way
into the bargain. Whereas, this now is often the case in London, blessed be God
for all his m^rcies.

The longest thing that Betty can remember is, that she used to crawl up out of
a night cellar, stroll about the streets, and pick cinders from the scavenger's
carts. Among the ashes she sometimes found some ragged gauze and dirty ribbons;
with these she used to dizen herself out and join the merry bands on the first
of May. This was not however quite fair, as she did not lawfully belong either
to the female dancers who foot it gaily round the garland, or to the footy it
be, who, on this happy holiday, forget their whole years toil; she often,
however, got a few scraps, by appearing to belong to both parties.

Betty was not an idle girl; she always put herself in the way of doing
something. -- She would run of errands for the footmen, or sweep the door for
the maid of any house where she was known; she would run and fetch some porter,
and never was once known either to sip a drop, or steal the pot. Her quickness
and fidelity in doing little jobs, got her into favor with a lazy cook-maid,
who was too apt to give away her master's cold meat and beer, not to those who
were most in want, but to those who waited upon her, and did the little things
which she ought to have done herself.

The cook, who found Betty a dextrous girl, soon employed her to sell ends of
candles, pieces of meat and cheese, and lumps of butter, or any thing else she
could crib from the house. These were all carried to her friend Mrs. Sponge,
who kept a little shop, and a kind of eating house for poor-working people, not
far from the Seven Dials. She also bought as well as sold many kind of second
hand things, and was not scrupulous to know whether what she bought was
honestly come by, provided she got it for a sixth part of what it was worth.
But if the owner presumed to ask for its real value, she had sudden qualms of
conscience, suspected the things were stolen, and gave herself airs of honesty,
which often took in poor silly people, and gave her a sort of half reputation
among the needy and the ignorant, whose friend she pretended to be.

To this artful woman Betty carried the cook's pilferings, and as Mrs. Sponge
would give no great price for these in money, the cook was willing to receive
payment for her eatables in Mrs. Sponge's drinkables; for she dealt in all
kinds of spirits. I shall only just remark here, that one receiver, like Mrs.
Sponge, makes many pilferers, who are t^li^pted to these petty thieveries, by
knowing how easy it is to dispose of them as such iniquitous houses.

Betty was faithful to both her employers, which is extraordinary, considering
the greatness of the temptation, and her ^tter ignorance of good and evil. One
day, she ventured to ask Mrs. Sponge if she could not assist her to get into a
more settled way of life. She told her, that when the rose in the morning, she
never knew where she should lie at night, nor was she ever fare of a meal
before hand. Mrs. Sponge asked her what she thought herself sit for. Betty with
fear and trembling, said, there was one trade for which she thought herself
qualified, but she had not the ambition to look so high. It was far above her
humble views. This was to have a barrow, and sell fruit, as several other of
Mrs. Sponge's customers did, whom she had often looked at with envy.

Mrs. Sponge was an artful woman. Bad as she was she was always aiming at
something of a character, this was a great help to her trade. While she wa^ched
^eenly to make every thing turn to her own profit, she had a false fawning way
of seeming to do all she did out of pity and kindness to the distressed; and
she seldom committed an extortion, but she tried to make the person she cheated
believe themselves highly obliged to her kindness. By thus pretending to be
their friend, she gained their considence, and she grew rich herself whi^e^
they though it she was only showing favor to them. Various 07 were the arts she had
of getting rich. The money she got by grinding the poor, she spent in the most
laxurious living; and, while she would haggle with her hungry customers for a
farthing, she would spend pounds on the most costly delicacies for herself.

Mrs. Sponge, laying aside that haughty look and voice, well known to such as
had the misfortune to be in her debt, put on the hypocritical smile and soft
tone, which she always assumed when she meant to take in her dependents.
"Betty" said she, "I am resolved to stand your friend. These are sad times to
be sure. -- Money is money now. Yet I am resolved to put you into a handsome
way of living. You shall have a barrow, and well furnished too." Betty could
not have felt more joy or gratitude, if she had been told that she should have
a coach. "O, madam," said Betty, "It is impossible. I have not a penny in the
world toward helping me to set up." "I will take care of that," said Mrs.
Sponge; "only you must do as I bid you. You must pay me interest for my money.
And you will, of course be glad also to pay so much every night for a nice hot
supper which I get ready, quite out of kindness, for a number of poor working
people. This wll be a great comfort for such a friendless girl as you, for my
victuals and drink are the best; and my company the merriest of any house in
all St. Giles's." Betty thought all this only so many more favors, and
courtesying to the ground, said, "to be sure, Ma'am, and thank you a thousand
times into the bargain."

Mrs. Sponge knew what she was about. Betty was a lively girl, who had a knack
at learning any thing; and so well looking through all her dirt and rags, that
there was little doubts she would get custom. A barrow was soon provided, and
five shillings was put into Betty's hands. Mrs Sponge kindly condescended to go
to show her how to buy the fruit, for it was a rule with this prudent
gentlewoman, and one from which she never departed, that no one should cheat
but herself. -- Betty had never possessed such a sum before. -- She grudged to
lay it out all at once, and was ready to fancy she could live upon the capital.
The crown, however, was laid out to the best advantage. -- Betty was carefully
taught in what manner to cry her Oranges: and received many useful lessons how
to get off the bad with the good, and the stale with the fresh. -- Mrs. Sponge
also lent h^^ (...) few bad sixpences, for which she ordered her to bring ^^me
good ones at night. Betty stared. Mrs Sponge said, "Betty, those who would get
money, must not be too nice about trifles. Keep one of these sixpences in your
hand, and if an ignorant young customer gives you a good sixpence, do you
immediately slip it into your other hand, and give him the bad one, declaring
that is the very one you have just received, and that you have not another
sixpence in the world. You must also learn how to treat different sorts of
customers. To some you may put off with safety, goods which would be quite
unsaleable to others. Never offer bad fruit, Betty, to those who know better:
never waste the good on those who may be put off with worse; put good Oranges
at top and the moldy ones under."

Poor Betty had not a nice conscience, for she had n^er learnt that grand but
simple rule of all moral obligation, "Never do that to another which you would
not have another do to you." -- She set off with her barrow as proud and as
happy as if she had been set up in the finest shop in Covent Garden. Betty had
a sort of natural good nature, which made her unwilling to impose, but she had
no principle which told her it was a sin. She had such good success, that when
night came, she had not an Orange left. With a light heart, she drove her empty
barrow to Mrs. Sponge's door. She went in with a merry face, and threw down on
the counter every farthing she had taken, "Betty" said Mrs. Sponge, "I have a
right to it all, as it was got by my money. But I am too generous to take it.
-- I will therefore only take sixpence for this day's use of my five shillings.
This is a most reasonable interest, and I will lend you the same sum to trade
with tomorrow, and so on; you only paying (...) sixpence for the use of it
every night which will be a great bargain to you. -- You must also pay me my
price every night for your supper, and you shall have an excellent lodging
above stairs; so you see every thing will now be provided for you in a genteel
manner, through my generosity."

Poor Betty's gratitude blinded her so completely that she forgot to calculate
the vast proportion which this generous benefactress was to receive out of her
little gains. She thought herself a happy creature, and went in to supper with
a number of others of her own class. For this supper, and for more porter and
gin than she ought to have drank, Betty was forced to pay so high, that it eat
up all the profits of the day, which added to the daily interest, made Mrs.
Sponge a rich return for her five shillings.

Betty was reminded again of the gentility of her new situation, as she crept
up to bed in one of Mrs. Sponge's garrets, five stories high. This loft, to be
sure, was small, and had no window, but what it wanted in light was made up in
company, as it had three L^ds, and thrice as many lodgers. Those gentry had one
night in a drunken frolic, broke down the door, which h^ppily had never been
replaced; for since that time, the lodgers had died much seldomer of infectious
dis^e^^pers. For this lodging, Betty paid twice as much to her good friend as
she would have done to a stranger. Thus she continued, with great industry and
a th^^^ing trade, as poor as on the first day, and not a bit nearer to saving
money enough even to buy her a pair of shoes, though her feet were nearly on
the ground.

One day, as Betty was driving her barrow through a street near Holborn, a lady
from a window called out to her that she wanted some Oranges. While the servant
went to fetch a plate, the lady entered into some talk with Betty, having been
struck with her honest countenance and civil manner. She questioned her as to
her way of life, and the profit of her trade -- and Betty, who had never been
so kindly treated before by so genteel a person, was very communicative. She
told her little history as far as she knew it, and dwelt much on the generosity
of Mrs. Sponge, in keeping her in her house, and trusting her with so large a
capital as five shillings. At first it sounded like a very good natured thing,
but the lady, whose husband was one of the Justices of the new Police, happened
to know more of Mrs. Sponge than was good, which led her to enquire still
further. Betty owned, that to be sure it was not all clear profit, for that
besides that the high price of the supper and bed ran away with all she got,
she paid sixpence a day for the use of the five shillings. "And how long have
you done this," said the lady? "About a year Madam."

The lady's eyes were at once opened. "My poor girl," said she, "do you know
that you have already paid for that single five shillings the enormous sum of 7
l. 10 s.? I believe it is the most profitable five shillings Mrs. Sponge ever
laid out." "Oh, no, Madam," said the girl, "that good gentlewoman does the same
kindness to ten or twelve other poor friendless creatures like me." "Does she
so?" said the lady, "then I never heard of a better trade than this woman
carries on, under the mask of charity, at the expense of her poor
fellow creatures."

"But Madam," said Betty, who did not comprehend this lady's arithmetic, "what
can I do? I now contrive to pick up a morsel of bread without begging or
stealing. Mrs. Sponge has been very good to me, and I don't see how I can help
myself."

"I will tell you" said the lady. "If you will follow my advice, you may not
only maintain yourself honestly, but independently. Only oblige yourself to
live hard for a little time, till you have saved five shillings out of your own
earnings. -- Give up that expensive supper at night, drink only one pint of
porter, and no gin at all. As soon as you have scraped together the five
shillings, carry it back to your false friend, and if you are industrious, you
will at the end of the year have saved seven pounds ten shillings. If you can
make a shift to live now, when you have this heavy interest to pay, judge how
things will mend when your capital becomes your own. -- You will put some
clothes on your back, and by leaving the use of spirits, and the company in
which you drink them, your health, your morals, and your condition will mend."

The lady did not talk thus to save her money. She would gladly have given the
girl the five shillings; but she thought it was beginning at the wrong end. She
wanted to try her. Besides, she know there was much more pleasure as well as
honor in possessing five shillings of one's own saving than of another's
giving. -- Betty promised to obey. She owned she got no good by the company or
the liquor at Mrs. Sponge's. She promised that very night to begin saving the
expense of the supper, and that she would not taste a drop of gin till she had
the five shillings before hand. The lady, who knew the power of good habits,
was contented with this, thinking, that if the girl could abstain, for a
certain time, it would become easy to her. -- She therefore at present said
little about the sin of drinking.

In a very few weeks, Betty had saved up the five shillings. -- She went to
carry back this money with great gratitude to Mrs. Sponge. This kind friend
began to abuse her most unmercifully. She called her many hard names not fit to
repeat, for having forsaken the supper, by which she swore she got nothing at
all; but as she had the charity to dress it for such beggarly wretches, she
insisted they should pay for it whether they ate it or no. She also bro't in a
heavy score for lodging, though Betty had paid for it every night, and given
notice of her intending to quit her. By all these false pretenses, she got from
her not only her own five shillings, but all the little capital with which
Betty was going to set up for herself. As all was not sufficient to answer her
demands, she declared she would send her to prison, but while she went to call
a constable, Betty contrived to make off.

With a light pocket and a heavy heart, she went to the lady, and with many
tears, told her sad story. The lady's husband, the Justice, condescended to
listen to Betty's tale. He said Mrs. Sponge had long been upon his books as a
receiver of stolen goods. Betty's evidence strengthened his bad opinion of her.
-- "This pe^ty system of usury," said the gentleman, "may be thought trifling,
but it will no longer appear so, if you reflect, that if one of these female
sharpers possesses a capital of seventy shillings, or 3 l. 10 s. with fourteen
steady regular customers, she can realize a fixed income of 100 guineas a year.
Add to this the influence such a loan gives her over these friendless creatures
by compelling them to eat at her house, or lodge or buy liquors, or by taking
their pawns, and you will see the extent of the evil. I pity these poor
victims: You, Betty, shall point out some of them to me. I will endeavor to
open their eyes on their own bad management. It is one of the greatest acts of
kindness to the poor to mend their economy, and to give them right views of
laying out their little money to advantage. -- These poor blinded creatures
look no farther than to be able to pay this heavy interest every night, and to
obtain the same loan on the same hard terms the next day. Thus are they kept in
poverty and bondage all their lives; but I hope as many as hear of this will
get on a better plan, and I shall be ready to help any who are willing to help
themselves." This worthy Magistrate went directly to Mrs. Sponge's with proper
officers, and he got to the bottom of many iniquities. He not only made her
refund poor Betty's money, but committed her to prison for receiving stolen
goods, and various other offenses, which may perhaps make the subject of
another history.

Betty was now set up in trade to her hearts content. She had found the benefit
of leaving off spirits, and she resolved to drink them no more. -- The first
fruits of this resolution was, that in a fortnight she bought her a new pair of
shoes, and as there was now no deduction for interest or for gin, her earnings
became considerable. The lady made her a present of a gown and a hat, on the
easy condition that she should go to church. She accepted the terms, at first,
rather as an act of obedience to the lady, than from a sense of a higher duty.
But she soon began to go from a better motive. This constant attendance at
church, joined to the instructions of the lady, opened a new world to Betty.
She now heard, for the first time, that she was a sinner; that God had given a
law which was holy, just, and good; that she had broken this law; had been a
swearer, a sabbath-breaker, and had lived without God in the world. All this
was sad news to Betty; she knew indeed that there were sinners, but she thought
they were only to be sound in the prisons or at Botany Bay, or in those
mournful carts which she had sometimes followed with her barrow, with the
unthinking crowd, to Tyburn. She was most struck with the great truths revealed
in the scripture, which were quite new to her. She was desirous of improvement,
and said she would give up all the profits of her barrow, and go into the
hardest service, rather than live in sin and ignorance.

"Betty," said the lady, "I am glad to see you so well disposed, and will do
what I can for you. Your present way of life, to be sure, exposes you to much
danger; but the trade is not unlawful in itself, and we may please God in any
calling, provided it be not a dishonest one. In this great town there must be
barrow-women to sell fruit. Do you, then, instead of forsaking your business,
set a good example to those in it, and show them, that though a dangerous
trade, it need not be a bad one. Till Providence points out some safer way of
getting your bread, let your companions see, that it is possible to be good
even in this. Your trade being carried on in the open street, and your fruit
bought in an open shop, you are not so much obliged to keep sinful company as
may be thought. Take a garret in an honest house, to which you may go home in
safety at night. I will give you a bed and a few necessaries to furnish your
room; and I will also give you a constant Sunday's dinner. A barrow woman,
blessed be God and our good laws, is as much her own mistress on Sundays as a
Duchess; and the Church and the Bible are as much open to her. -- You may soon
learn all that such as you are expected to know. -- A barrow woman may pray as
heartily morning and night, and serve God as acceptably all day, while she is
carrying on her little trade, as if she had her whole time to spare.

To do this well, you must mind the following rules for Retail Dealers:

Resist every temptation to cheat.

Never impose bad goods on false pretenses.

Never put off bad money for good.

Never use profane or uncivil language.

Never swear your goods cost so much, when you know it is false. By so doing
you are guilty of two sins in one breath, a lie and an oath.

To break these rules, will be your chief temptation. God will mark how you
behave under them, and will reward or punish you accordingly. -- These
temptations will be as great to you as higher trials are to higher people; but
you have the same God to look to for strength to resist them as they have. --
You must pray to him to give you this strength. You shall attend a Sunday
School, where you will be taught these good things, and I will promote you as
you shall be found to deserve.

Poor Betty here burst into tears of joy and gratitude, crying out, "What,
shall such a poor friendless creature as I be treated so kindly, and learn to
read the word of God too? Oh, Madam, what a lucky chance brought me to your
door." "Betty," said the lady, "what you have just said, shows the need you
have of being better taught; there is no such thing as chance, and we offend
God when we call that luck or chance which is brought about by his will and
pleasure. None of the events of your life have happened by chance -- but all
have been under the direction of a good and kind Providence. He has permitted
you to experience want and distress, that you might acknowledge his hand in
your present comfort and prosperity. Above all, you must bless his goodness in
sending you to me, not only because I have been of use to you in your worldly
affairs, but because he has enabled me to show you the danger of your state
from sin and ignorance, and to put you in a way to know his will and to keep
his commandments.

How Betty, by industry and piety, rose in the world, till at length she came
to keep a handsome Sausage shop near the Seven Dials, and was married to an
honest Hackney Coachman, may be told at some future time, in a Second Part.

BLACK GILES, THE POACHER;
With some account of a Family who had rather live by their Wits than their
Work.
PART I.
POACHING GILES lived on the borders of one of those great Moors in
Somersetshire. Giles, to be sure, has been a sad fellow in his time; and it is
none of his fault if his whole family do not end either at the gallows or at
Botany Bay. He lives at the Mud Cottage with the broken windows, stuffed with
dirty rags, just beyond the gate which divides the upper from the lower Moor.
You may know the house at a good distance by the ragged tiles on the roof, and
the loose stones which are ready to drop out from the chimney; though a short
ladder, a hod of mortar, and half an hour's leisure time would have prevented
all this, and made the little dwelling tight enough. But as Giles had never
learnt any thing that was good, so he did not know the value of such useful
sayings as, that "a tile in time saves nine."

Besides this, Giles fell into that common mistake, that a beggarly looking
cottage, and filthy ragged children raised most compassion, and of course drew
most charity. But as cunning as he was in other things, he was out in his
reckoning here; for it is neatness, housewifery, and a decent appearance, which
draws the kindness of the rich and charitable, while they turn away disgusted
from filth and laziness; not out of pride, but because they see that it is next
to impossible to mend the condition of those who degrade themselves by dirt and
sloth.

The common on which Giles's hovel stands is quite a deep marsh in a wet
winter, but in summer it looks green and pretty enough. To be sure it would be
rather convenient when one passes that way in a carriage, if one of the
children would run out and open the gate, as it would save the post boy from
getting off, which is not very safe for the people within the chaise; but
instead of any one of these children running out as soon as they hear the
wheels, which would be quite time enough, what does Giles do, but set all his
ragged brats, with dirty faces, matted locks, and naked seet and legs, to lie
all day upon a sand bank hard by the gate, waiting for the slender chance of
what may be picked up from travelers. At the sound of a carriage, whole coveys
of these little scare-serows start up, rush to the gate and all at once thrust
out their hats and aprons; and for fear this, together with the noise of their
clamorous begging, should not sufficiently frighten the horses, they are very
apt to let the gate slap full! against you, before you are half way through, in
their eager scuffle to snatch from each other the halfpence which you may have
thrown out to them. I know two ladies who were one day very near being killed
by these abominable tricks.

Thus five or six little idle creatures, who might be earning a trifle by
knitting at home; who might be useful to the public by working in the field,
and who might assist their families by learning to get their bread twenty
honest ways, are suffered to lie about all day, in the hope of a few chance
halfpence, which after all, they are by no means sure of getting. Indeed, when
the neighboring gentlefolks found out that opening the gate was the family
trade, they soon left off giving any thing. And I myself, though I used to take
out a penny ready to give, had there been only one to receive it, when I see a
whole family established in so beggarly a trade, quietly put it back again into
my pocket, and give nothing at all. -- And so few travelers pass that way,
that sometimes, after the whole family have lost a day, their gains do not
amount to twopence.

As Giles had a far greater taste for living by his wits than his work, he was
at one time in hopes that his children might have got a pretty penny by
tumbling for the diversion of travelers, and he set about training them in
that indecent practice; but unluckily, the Moors being level, the carriages
traveled faster than the children tumbled. -- He envied those parents who
lived on the London road, over the Wiltshire Dowas, which being very hilly,
enables the tumbler to keep pace with the traveller, till he sometimes extorts
from the light and the unthinking, a reward instead of a reproof. I begleave,
however, to put all gentlemen and ladies in mind that such tricks are a kind of
apprenticeship to the trades of begging and thieving.

Giles, to be sure, as his children grew older, began to train them to such
other employments as the idle habits they had learned at the gate very properly
qualified them for. The right of Common, which some of the poor Cottagers have
in that part of the country, and which is doubtless a considerable advantage to
many, was converted by Giles into the means of corrupting his whole family, for
his children, as soon as they grew too big for the trade of begging at the
gate, were promoted to the dignity of thieving on the Moor. Here he kept two or
three asses, miserable beings, which, if they had the good fortune to escape
death by starving, did not fail to meet with it by beating. Some of the biggest
boys were sent out with these lean and galled animals to carry sand or coals
about the neighboring towns. Both sand and coals were often stolen before they
got them to sell, or if not, they always took care to cheat in selling them. By
long practice in this art, they grew so dextrous, that they could give a pretty
good guess how large a coal they could crib out of every bag before the buyer
would be likely to miss it.

All their odd time was taken up under the pretense of watching these asses on
the Moor, or running after five or six half starved geese; but the truth is,
these boys were only watching for an opportunity to steal an odd goose of their
neighbor's. They used also to pluck the quills or the down from these poor live
creatures, or half milk a cow before the farmer's maid came with her pail. They
all knew how to calculate to a minute what time to be down in a morning to let
out their lank, hungry beasts, which they had turned over night into the
farmer's field, to steal a little good pasture. They contrived to get there
just time enough to escape being caught in replacing the stakes they had pulled
out for the cattle to get over. For Giles was a prudent, longheaded fellow, and
wherever he stole food for his colts, took care never to steal stakes from the
hedges at the same time. He had sense enough to know that the gain did not make
up for the danger; he knew that a loose faggot, pulled from a neighbor's pile
of wood after the family were gone to bed, answered the end better, and was not
half the trouble.

Among the many trades which Giles professed, he sometimes practiced that of a
rat-catcher; but he was addicted to so many tricks that he never followed the
same trade long. Whenever he was sent for to a farmhouse, his custom was to
kill a few of the old rats, always taking care to leave a little stock of young
ones alive sufficient to keep up the breed; for said he, "If I were to be such
a fool as to clear a house or a barn at once, how would my trade be carried
on?" And where any barn was overstocked, he used to borrow a few from thence,
just to people a neighboring granary which had none; and he might have gone on
till now, had he not unluckily been caught one evening emptying his cage of
young rats under Parson Wilson's barn door.

This worthy Minister, Mr. Wilson, used to pity the neglected children of Giles
as much as he blamed the wicked parents. He one day picked up Dick, who was far
the best of Giles's bad boys. Dick was loitering about in a field behind the
Parson's garden in search of a hen's nest, his mother having ordered him to
bring home a few eggs that night by hook or by crook, as Giles was resolved to
have some pan-cakes for supper, though he knew that eggs were a penny a piece.
Mr. Wilson had long been desirous of snatching some of this vagrant family from
ruin, and his chief hopes were bent on Dick, as the least hackneyed in knavery.
He had once given him a new pair of shoes, on his promising to go to school
next Sunday; but no sooner had Rachel, the boy's mother, got the shoes into her
clutches, than she pawned them for a bottle of gin, and ordered the boy to keep
out of the Parson's sight, and to be sure to play his marbles on Sundays for
the future, at the other end of the parish, and not near the Churchyard. Mr.
Wilson, however, picked up the boy once more, for it was not his way to despair
of any body. Dick was just going to take to his heels, as usual, for fear the
old story of the shoes should be brought forward; but finding he could not get
off, what does he do but run into a little puddle of muddy water which lay
between him and the Parson, that the sight of his naked feet might not bring on
the dreaded subject. -- Now it happened that Mr. Wilson was planting a little
field of beans, so he thought this a good opportunity to employ Dick; he told
him he had got some pretty easy work for him. Dick did as he was bid; he
willingly went to work, and readily began to plant his beans with dispatch and
regularity, according to the directions given him.

While the boy was busily at work by himself, Giles happened to come by, having
been skulking round the back way, to look over the Parson's garden wall, to see
if there was any thing worthy climbing over for on the ensuing night. He spied
Dick, and began to rate him for working for the stingy old Parson, for Giles
had a natural antipathy to whatever belonged to the Church. "What has he
promised thee a day?" said he, "little enough, I dare say." "He is not to pay
me by the day," said Dick, "but says he will give me so much when I have
planted this peck, and so much for the next." "Oh, oh! that alters the case,"
said Giles. "One may, indeed, get a trifle by this sort of work. -- Come, give
me a handful of the beans. I will teach thee how to plant when thou art paid
for planting by the peck. All we have to do in that case is to dispatch the
work as fast as we can, and get rid of the beans with all speed; and as to the
seed coming up or not, that is no business of ours; we are paid for planting,
not for growing. At the rate thou go on, thou would not get sixpence to
night. Come along, bury away." So saying, he took his hat full of the seed, and
where Dick had been ordered to set one bean, Giles buried a dozen. So the beans
were soon out. But though the peck was emptied, the ground was unplanted. But
cunning Giles knew this could not be found out till the time when the beans
might be expected to come up, "and then, Dick," said he, "the snails and the
mice may go shares in the blame; or we can lay the fault on the rooks or the
blackbirds." So saying, he sent the boy into the Parsonage to receive his pay,
taking care to secure about a quarter of the peck of beans for his own colt he
put both bag and beans into his own pocket to carry home, bidding Dick tell Mr.
Wilson that he had planted his beans and lost the bag.

In the mean time Giles's other boys were busy in emptying the ponds and trout
streams in the neighboring manor. They would steal away the carp and tench when
they were no bigger than gud^eons; by this untimely depredation they plundered
the owner of his property, without enriching themselves. But the pleasure of
mischief wa^^ (...) ^ard enough. These, and an hundred other little ^^^everies,
they committed with such dexterity, that old Tom Crib, whose son was
transported last assizes for sheep-stealing, used to be often reproaching his
boys, that Giles's sons were worth a hundred of such blockheads as he had; for
scarce a night past but Giles had some little comfortable thing for supper,
which his boys had pilfered in the day, while his undutiful dogs never stole
any thing worth having -- Giles in the mean time, was busy in his way, but as
busy as he was in laying nets, starting coveys, and training dogs, he always
took care that his depredations should not be confined merely to game.

Giles's boys had never seen the inside of a church since they were christened,
and the father thought he knew his own interest better than to force them to
it; for church time was the season of their harvest. Then the hens' nests were
searched, a stray duck was clapped under the smock frock, the tools which might
have been left by chance in a farm yard, were picked up, and all the
neighboring pigeon-houses were thinned, so that Giles used to boast to his
wife, that Sunday was to them the most profitable day in the week. With her it
was certainly the most laborious day, as she always did her washing and ironing
on the Sunday morning, it being, as she said, the only leisure day she had, for
on other days she went about the country, telling fortunes, and selling
dream-books, and wicked songs. Neither her husband's nor her children's clothes
were ever mended, and if Sunday, her idle day, had not come about once in every
week, it is likely they would never have been washed neither. You might,
however, see her as you were going to church, smoothing her own rags on her
best red cloak, which she always used for her ironing cloth on Sundays, for her
cloak when she traveled, and for her blanket at night; such a wretched manager
was Rachel! among her other articles of trade one was to make and sell
pepper-mint, and other distilled waters. -- These she had the cheap art of
making without trouble, and without expense, for she made them without herbs
and without a still. Her way was to fill so many quart bottles with plain
water, putting a spoonful of mint water in the mouth of each; these she corked
down with rosin, carrying to each customer a phial of real distilled water to
taste, by way of sample. This was so good that her bottles were commonly bought
up without being opened; but if any suspicion arose, and she was forced to
uncork a bottle, by the few drops of distilled water lying on the top, she even
then escaped detection, and took care to get out of reach before the bottle was
opened a second time. She was too prudent ever to go twice to the same house.

There is hardly any petty mischief that is not connected with the life of a
poacher. -- Mr. Wilson was a ware of this; he was not only a pious clergyman,
but an upright justice. He used to say that people who were truly
conscientious, must be so in small things as well as in great ones, or they
would destroy the effect of their own precepts, and their example would not be
of general use. For this reason he never would accept of a hare or a partridge
from any unqualified person in his parish. He did not content himself with
shuffling the thing off by asking no questions, and pretending to take it for
granted in a general way, that the game was fairly come at; but he used to say
that by receiving the booty, he connived at a crime; made himself a sharer in
it, and if he gave a present to the man who brought it, he even tempted him to
repeat the fault.

One day poor Jack Weston, an honest fellow in the neighborhood, whom Mr.
Wilson had kindly visited and relieved in a long sickness, from which he had
but just recovered, was brought before him as he was sitting on the justice's
bench; Jack was accused of having knocked down a hare, and of all the birds in
the air, who should the informer be but Black Giles, the poacher? Mr. Wilson
was grieved at the charge, he had a great regard for Jack, but he had a still
greater regard for the law. The poor fellow pleaded guilty. He did not deny the
fact, but said he did not consider it a crime, he did not think game was
private property, and he owned he had a strong temptation for doing what he had
done which he hoped would plead in his excuse. The justice desired to know what
this temptation was. "Sir," said the poor fellow, "you know I was given over
this spring in a bad fever. I had no friend in the world but you, Sir, under
God you saved my life by your charitable relief; and I trust also you may have
helped to save my soul by your prayers and your good advice. I know I can never
make you amends for all your goodness, but I thought it would be some comfort
to my full heart if I could but once give you some little token of my
gratitude. So I had trained a pair of nice turtle doves for Madam Wilson, but
they were stolen from me, Sir, and I do suspect Black Giles stole them.
Yesterday morning, Sir, I was crawling out to my work, for I am still but very
weak, a fine hare ran across my path. I did not stay to consider whether it was
wrong to kill a hare, but I felt it was right to show my gratitude; so, Sir,
without a moment's thought, I did knock down the hare which I was going to
carry to your worship, because I knew Madam was fond of hare. I am truly sorry
for my fault, and will submit to whatever punishment your worship may please to
inflict."

Mr. Wilson was much moved with this honest confession, and touched with the
poor fellow's gratitude. What added to the effect of the story, was the weak
condition and pale sickly looks of the offender. But this worthy justice never
suffered his feelings to bias his integrity* he knew that he did not sit on
that bench to indulge pity, but to administer justice. And while he was sorry
for the offender he would not justify the offense. "John" said he, "I am
surprised that you could for a moment forget that I never accept any gift which
causes the giver to break a law. On Sunday I teach you from the pulpit the laws
of God, whose minister I am. At present I fill the chair of the magistrate, to
enforce and execute the laws of the land. Between those and the others there is
more connection than you are aware. I thank you, John, for your affection to
me, and I admire your gratitude; but I must not allow either affection or
gratitude to be brought as a plea for a wrong action. It is not your business
nor mine, John, to settle whether the game laws are good or bad. Till they are
repealed we must obey them. Many, I doubt not, break these laws through
ignorance, and many I am certain, who would not dare to steal a goose or a
turkey, make no scruple to knock down a hare or a partridge. You will hereafter
think yourself happy that this your first attempt has proved unsuccessful, as I
trust you are too honest a fellow ever to intend to turn poacher. With poaching
much moral evil is connected; a habit of nightly depredation; a custom of
prowling in the dark for prey produces, in time, a disrelish for honest labor.
He whose first offense was committed without much thought or evil intention, if
he happen to succeed a few times in carrying off his booty undiscovered, grows
bolder and bolder; and when he fancies there is no shame attending it, he very
soon gets to persuade himself that there is also no sin. While some people
pretend a scruple about stealing a sheep, they partly live by plundering of
warrens. But remember that the warrener pays a high rent, and that therefore
his rabbits are as much his property as his sheep. Do not then deceive
yourselves with these false distinctions. All property is sacred, and as the
laws of the land are intended to fence in that property, he who brings up his
children to break down any of these fences, brings them up to certain sin and
ruin. He who begins with robbing orchards, rabbit warrens, and fish ponds, will
probably end with horse-stealing or highway robbery. Poaching is a regular
apprenticeship to bolder crimes. He whom I may commit as a boy to sit in the
stocks for killing a patridge, may be likely to end at the gallows for killing
a man.

"Observe, you who now hear me, the strictness and impartiality of justice. I
know Giles to be a worthless fellow, yet it is my duty to take his information;
I know Jack Weston to be an honest youth, yet I must be obliged to make him pay
the penalty. Giles is a bad man, but he can prove this fact; Jack is a worthy
lad, but he has committed this fault: I am sorry for you, Jack; but do not let
it grieve you that Giles has played worse tricks a hundred times, and yet got
off, while you were detected in the very first offense, for that would be
grieving because you are not so great a rogue as Giles. At this moment you
think your good luck is very unequal; but all this will one day turn out in
your favor. Giles is not the more the favorite of heaven because he has
hitherto escaped Botany Bay, or the Hulks; nor is it any mark of God's
displeasure against you, John, that you were found out in your very first
attempt."

Here the good justice left off speaking, and no one could contradict the truth
of what he had said. Weston humbly submitted to his sentence, but he was very
poor, and knew not where to raise the money to pay his sine. His character had
always been so fair, that several farmers present kindly agreed to advance a
trifle each to prevent his being sent to prison, and he thankfully promised to
work out the debt. The justice himself, though he could not soften the law, yet
showed Weston so much kindness, that he was enabled, before the year was out,
to get out of this difficulty. He began to think more seriously than he had
ever yet done, and grew to abhor poaching, not merely from fear, but from
principle.

We shall soon see whether poaching Giles always got off so successfully. Here
we have seen that prosperity is no sure sign of goodness. Next month we may,
perhaps, see that the triumphing of the wicked is short; for I then promise to
give the second part of the poacher, together with the entertaining story of
the widow Brown's apple tree.

BLACK GILES, THE POACHER;
With the History of the Widow Brown's Apple Tree.
PART II.
I THINK my readers got so well acquainted, last month, with Black Giles the
Poacher, that they will not expect this month to hear any great good either of
Giles himself, his wife Rachel, or any of their family. I am sorry to expose
their tricks, but it is their fault, not mine. If I pretend to speak about
people at all I must tell the truth. I am sure if folks would but turn about
and mend, it would be a thousand times pleasanter to me to write their
histories; for it is no comfort to tell of any body's faults. If the world
would but grow good, I should be glad enough to tell of it; but till it really
becomes so, I must go on describing it as it is; otherwise, I should only
mislead my readers, instead of instructing them.

As to Giles and his boys, I am sure old Widow Brown has good reason to
remember their dexterity. -- Poor woman! she had a fine little bed of onions in
her neat and well-kept garden; she was very fond of her onions, and many a
rheumatism has she caught by kneeling down to weed them in a damp day,
notwithstanding the little flannel cloak and the bit of an old mat which Madam
Wilson gave her, because the old woman would needs weed in wet weather. Her
onions she always carefully treasured up for her winter's store; for an onion
makes a little broth very relishing, and is indeed the only savory thing poor
people are used to get. She also had a small orchard, containing about a dozen
apple trees, with which, in a good year, she has been known to make a couple of
barrels of cider, which she sold to her landlord toward paying her rent,
besides, having a little keg which she was able to keep back for her own
drinking. Well! would you believe it, Giles and his boys marked both onions and
apples for their own; indeed, a man who stole so many rabbits from the warren
was likely enough to steal onions for sauce. One day, when the widow was abroad
on a little business, Giles and his boys made a clear riddance of the onion
bed; and when they had pulled up every single onion, they then turned a couple
of pigs into the garden, who allured by the smell, tore up the bed in such a
manner, that the widow, when she came home, had not the least doubt but the
pigs had been the thieves. To confirm this opinion, they took care to leave the
little hatch half open at one end of the garden, and to break down a bit of a
fence at the other end.

I wonder how any body can find in his heart not to pity and respect poor old
widows. There is something so forlorn and helpless in their condition, that me
thinks it is a call on every body, men, women and children, to do them all the
kind services that fall in their way. -- Surely their having no one to take
their part, is an additional reason for kind hearted people not to hurt and
oppress them. But it was this very reason which led Giles to do this woman an
hurt.

It happened unluckily for this poor widow that her cottage stood quite alone.
On several mornings together (for roguery gets up much earlier than industry,)
Giles and his boys stole regularly into her orchard, followed by their Jack
Asses. She was so deaf that she could not hear the asses if they had brayed
ever so loud, and to this Giles trusted; for he was very cautious in his
rogueries; since he could not otherwise have contrived to keep out of prison;
for though he was almost always suspected, he had seldom been taken up, and
never convicted. The boys used to fill their bags, load their asses, and then
march off; and if in their way to the town where the apples were to be sold,
they chanced to pass by one of their neighbors who might be likely to suspect
them, they then all at once began to scream out, "buy my coal! -- buy my sand!"

Besides the trees in her orchard, poor Widow Brown had in her small garden one
apple tree particularly sine; it was a Redstreak, so tempting and so lovely,
that Giles's family had watched it with longing eyes, till at last they
resolved on a plan for carrying off all this sine fruit in their bags. But it
was a nice point to manage. The tree stood directly under her chamber-window,
so that there was some danger that she might spy them at the work. They
therefore determined to wait till the next Sunday morning, when they knew she
would not fail to be at church. Sunday came, and during service Giles attended.
It was a lone house, as I said before, and the rest of the parish were safe at
church. In a trice the tree was cleared, the bags were filled, the asses were
whipped, the thieves were off, the coast was clear, and all was safe and quiet by
the time the sermon was over.

Unluckily, however, it happened that this tree was so beautiful and the fruit
so sine, that the people as they used to pass to and from church, were very apt
to stop and admire Widow Brown's Redstreaks; and some of the farmers rather
envied her, that, in that scarce season, when they hardly expected to make a
pie out of a large orchard, she was likely to make cider from a single tree. I
am afraid, indeed, if I must speak out, she herself rather set her heart too
much upon this tree, and had felt as much pride as gratitude to a good
providence for it; but this failing of here is was no excuse for Gil^s. The
covetousness of this thief had for once got the better of his caution; the tree
was too completely stripped though the youngest boy Dick did beg hard that his
father would leave the poor old woman enough for a few dumplings, and when
Giles ordered Dick in his turn to shake the tree, the boy did it so gently that
hardly any apples fell, for which he got a good shake of the stick with which
the old man was beating down the apples.

The neighbors, on their return from church, stopped as usual, but it was not,
alas! to admire the apples, for apples there were none left; but to lament the
robbery and console the widow: meantime the Red streaks were safely lodged in
Giles's hovel, under a few bundles of hay which he had contrived to pull from
the farmers mow the night before, for the use of his jackasses. Such a stir,
however, began to be made about the widow's apple tree, that Giles, who knew
how much his character laid him open to suspicion, as soon as he saw the people
safe in church again in the afternoon, ordered his boys to carry each a hatful
of the apples, and thrust them in at a little casement window which happened to
be open in the house of Samuel Price, a very honest carpenter in that parish,
who was at church with his whole family. Giles's plan, by this contrivance, was
to lay the theft on Price's sons, in case the thing should come to be further
enquired into. Here Dick put in a word, and begged and prayed his father not to
force them to carry the apples to Price's. But all that he got by his begging,
was such a knock as had nearly laid him on the earth. -- "What, you cowardly
rascal," said Giles, "you will go and peach I suppose, and get your father sent
to gaol." Poor Widow Brown, though her trouble had made her still weaker than
she was, went to church again in the afternoon; indeed she rightly thought that
trouble was a new reason why she ought to go. During this service she tried
with all her might not to think of her Redstreaks, and whenever they would come
into her head she took up her prayer book directly, and so she forgot them a
little, and indeed she found herself much easier when she came out of the
church than when she went in. Now it happened oddly enough, that on that
Sunday, of all the Sundays in the year, she should call in to rest a little at
Samuel Price's, to tell over again the lamentable story of the apples, and to
consult with him how the thief might be brought to justice. But, O reader!
guess if you can, for I am sure I cannot tell you, what was her surprise, when
on going into Samuel Price's kitchen she saw her own Redstreaks lying in the
window! The apples were of a sort too remarkable for color, shape, and size to
be mistaken. There was not such another tree in the parish. Widow Brown
immediately screamed out, "lass-a-day! as sure as can be here are my
Redstreaks; I could swear to them in any court." Samuel Price who believed his
sons to be as honest as himself, was shocked and troubled at the sight. He knew
he had no Redstreaks of his own; he knew there were no apples in the window
when he went to church. He did verily believe them to be the widow's. But how
they came there he could not possibly guess. He called for Tom, the only one of
his sons who now lived at home. Tom was at the Sunday school, which he had
never once missed since Mr. Wilson the minister had set up one in the parish.
Was such a boy likely to do such a deed?

A crowd was by this time got about Price's door, among which was Giles and his
boys, who had already taken care to spread the news that Tom Price was the
thief. Most people were unwilling to believe it. His character was very good,
but appearances were strongly against him. Mr. Wilson, who had staid to
christen a child, now came in. He was much concerned that (...) Price, the best
boy in his school, should stand accused of such a crime. He sent for the boy,
examined and cross examined him. No marks of guilt appeared. But still though
he pleaded not guilty, there lay the Redstreaks in his father's window. All the
idle fellows in the place, who were likely to have committed such a theft
themselves, fell with great vengeance on poor Tom. The wicked seldom give any
quarter. "This is one of your sanctified ones!" cried they. "This was all the
good that Sunday schools did! For their parts they never saw any good come by
religion. Sunday was the only day for a little pastime, and if poor boys must
be shut up with their godly books when they ought to be out taking a little
pleasure, it was no wonder they made themselves amends by such tricks." Another
said, he should like to see Parson Wilson's righteous one well whipped. A third
hoped he would be clapped in the stocks for a young hypocrite as he was, while
old Giles, who thought to avoid suspicion by being more violent than the rest,
declared, that "he hoped the young dog would be transported for life."

Mr. Wilson was too wise and too just to proceed against Tom without full
proof. He declared the crime was a very heavy one, and he feared that heavy
must be the punishment. Tom, who knew his own innocence, earnestly prayed to
God that it might be made to appear as clear as the noonday, and very fervent
were his secret devotions on that night.

Black Giles passed his night in a very different manner. He set off as soon as
it was dark with his sons and their jack-asses laden with their stolen goods.
As such a cry was raised about the apples, he did not think it safe to keep
them longer at home, but resolved to go and sell them at the next town;
borrowing without leave, a lame colt out of the moor to assist in carrying off
his booty.

Giles and his eldest sons had rare sport all the way in thinking, that while
they were enjoying the profit of their plunder, Tom Price would be whipped
round the market place at least, if not sent beyond sea. But the younger boy,
Dick, who had naturally a tender heart, though hardened by his long familiarity
with sin, could not help crying when he thought that Tom Price might perhaps be
transported for a crime which he himself had helped to commit. He had no
compunction about the robbery, for he had not been instructed in the great
principles of truth and justice. Nor would he, therefore, perhaps, have had
much remorse about accusing an innocent boy. But though utterly devoid of
principle, he had some remains of natural feeling and of gratitude. Tom Price
had often given him a bit of his own bread and cheese; and once, when Dick was
like to be drowned, Tom had jumped into the pond with his clothes on, and saved
his life when he was just sinking: the remembrance of all this made his heart
heavy. He said nothing: as he trotted barefoot after the asses, he heard his
father and brothers laugh at having outwitted the godly ones; and he grieved to
think how poor Tom would suffer for his wickedness, yet fear kept him silent;
they called him sulky dog, and lashed the asses till, they bled.

In the mean time Tom Price kept up his spirits as well as he could. He worked
hard all day, and prayed heartily night and morning. "It is true," said he to
himself, "I am not guilty of this sin; but let this accusation set me on
examining myself, and truly repenting of all my other sins, for I found enough
to repent of, though I thank God I did not steal those apples."

At length Sunday came. Tom went to school as usual. As soon as he walked in
there was a deal of whispering and laughing among the worst of the boys; and he
overheard them say, "who would have thought it? This is master's favorite! This
is Parson Wilson's sober Tommy! We shall not have Tommy thrown in our teeth again
if we go to get a bird's nest, or gather a few nuts of a Sunday." "Your demure
ones are always hypocrites," says another. "The still sow sucks all the milk,"
says a third.

Giles's family had always kept clear of the school. -- Dick, indeed, had
sometimes wished to go, not that he had much sense of sin, or desire after
goodness, but he thought if he could once read, he might rise in the world, and
not be forced to drive asses all his life. -- Through this whole Saturday night
he could not sleep. He longed to know what would be done to Tom. He began to
wish to go to school, but he had not courage; sin is very cowardly; so on the
Sunday morning he went and sat himself down under the church wall. Mr. Wilson
passed by. It was not his way to reject the most wicked, till he had tried
every means to bring them ever, and even then he pitied and prayed for them. He
had indeed long left off talking to Giles's sons; but seeing Dick sitting by
himself, he once more spoke to him, desired him to leave off his vagabond life,
and go with him into the school. The boy hung down his head, but made no
answer. He did not, however, either rise up and run away, or look sulky, as he
used to do. The Minister desired him once more. "Sir," said the boy, "I cannot
go; I am so big I am ashamed." "The bigger you are the less time you have to
loose." "But, Sir, I cannot read." "Then it is high time you should learn." "I
should be ashamed to begin to learn my letters." -- "The shame is not in
beginning to learn them, but in being contented never to know them." "But, Sir,
I am so raggod!" "God looks at the heart, and not at the coat." "But, Sir, I
have no shoes and stockings." "So much the worse. I remember who gave you
both," (here Dick colored.) "It is bad to want shoes and stockings; but still
if you can drive your asses a dozen miles without them, you may certainly walk
to school without them." "But, Sir, the good boys will hate me, and will not speak
to me." "Good boys hate nobody, and as to not speaking to you, to be sure they
will not keep you company while you go on in your present evil courses; but as
soon as they see you wish to reform, they will help you, and pity you, and
teach you, and so come along." Here Mr. Wilson took this dirty boy by the hand,
and gently pulled him forward, kindly talking to him all the way.

How the whole school stared to see Dick Giles come in! No one, however, dared
to say what he thought. The business went on, and Dick slunk into a corner,
partly to hide his rags, and partly to hide his sin, for last Sundays
transaction sat heavy at his heart, not because he had stolen the apples, but
because Tom Price had been accused. This, I say, made him slink behind. Poor
boy! he little thought there was One saw him who sees all things, aad from
whose eye no hole nor corner can hide the sinner.

It was the custom in that school for the master, who was a good and wise man,
to mark down in his pocket book all the events of the week, that he might turn
them to some account in his Sunday evening instructions, such as any useful
story in the newspaper, any account of boys being drowned as they were out in a
pleasure boat on Sundays; any sudden death in the parish, or any other
remarkable visitation of Providence, insomuch, that many young people of the
place, who did not belong to the school, and many parents also, used to drop in
for an hour on a Sunday evening, when they were sure to hear something
profitable. The Minister greatly approved this practice, and often called in
himself, which was a great support to the master, and encouragement to the
people.

The master had taken a deep concern in the story of widow Brown's apple tree.
He could not believe Tom Price was guilty, nor dared he pronounce him innocent;
but he resolved to turn the instructions of the present evening to this
subject. He began thus; "My Dear boys, however light some of you may make of
robbing an orchard, yet I have often told you there is no such thing as a
little sin, if it be wilful or habitual. I wish now to explain to you also,
that there is hardly such a thing as a single, solitary sin. You know I teach
you not merely to repeat the commandments as an exercise for your memory, but
as a rule for your conduct. If you were to come here only to learn to read and
spell on a Sunday, I should think that was not employing God's day for God's
work; but I teach you to read that you may by this means come so to understand
the Bible and the Catechism, as to make every text in the one, and every
question and answer in the other, to be so fixed in your hearts, that they may
bring forth the fruits of good living.

Master. How many commandments are there?


Boy. Ten.


Master. How many did that boy break, who stole widow Brown's apples?


Boy. Only one, Master. The eighth.


Master. What is the eighth?


Boy. Thou shall not steal.


Master. And you are very sure that this was the only one he broke? Now,
suppose I could prove to you that he probably broke no less than six out of
those ten commandments, which the great Lord of Heaven himself stooped down
from his eternal glory to deliver to men; would you not then think it a
terrible thing to steal, whether apples or guineas?


Boy. Yes, Master.


Master. I will put the case. Some wicked boy has robbed widow Brown's orchard.
(Here the eyes of every one were turned on poor Tom Price, except those of Dick
Ciles, who fixed his on the ground.) I accuse no one, continued the master, Tom
Price is a good boy, and was not missing at the time of the robbery; these are
two reasons why I presume he is innocent; but whoever it was, you allow that by
stealing these apples he broke the eighth commandment.


Boy. Yes, Master.


Master. On what day were these apples stolen?


Boy. On Sunday.


Master. What is the fourth commandment?


Boy. Thou shall keep holy the Sabbath Day.


Master. Does that person keep holy the Sabbath Day who loiters in an orchard
on Sunday, when he should be at church, and steals apples when he ought to be
saying his prayers?


Boy. No, Master.


Master. What command does he break?


Boy. The fourth.


Master. Suppose this boy had parents who had sent him to church, and that he
had disobeyed them by not going, would that be keeping the fifth commandment?


Boy. No, ^^aster the fifth commandment says, Thou shall bon^^ thy father and
thy mother.

This was the only part of the case in which poor Dick Gi^es's heart did not
smite him; for he knew that he had disobeyed no father; for his father, alas!
was still w^^eder than himself, and had brought him to commit the sin. But what
a wretched comfort was this! The master went on.


Master. Suppose this boy earnestly coveted this fruit, though it belonged to
another person, would that be right.


Boy. No, master; for the tenth commandment says Thou shall not covet.


Master. Very well. Here are four of God's positive commands already broken.
Now do you think thieves ever scruple to use wicked words?


Boy. I am afraid not, master.


Here Dick Giles was not so hardened but that he remembered how many curses had
passed between him and his father while they were filling the bags, and he was
afraid to look up. The master went on.

"I will now go one step further. If the thief, to all his other sins, has
added that of accusing the innocent to save himself, if he should break the
ninth commandment, by bearing false witness against a harmless neighbor, SIX
COMMANDMENTS ARE BROKEN FOR AN APPLE! But if it be otherwise, if Tom Price
should be found guilty, it is not his good character shall save him. I shall
shed tears over him, but punish him I must." -- "No, that you shall not, roared
out Dick Giles, who sprung from his hiding place, fell on his knees, and burst
out a crying, "Tom Price is as good a boy as ever lived; it was father and
(...) the apples!"

It would have done your heart good to have seen the joy of the master, the
modest blushes of Tom Price, and the satisfaction of every honest boy in the
school. -- All shook hands with Tom, and even Dick got some portion of pity. I
wish I had room to give my readers the moving exhortation which the master
gave. But while Mr. Wilson left the guilty boy to the management of the master,
he thought it became him, as a Minister and a Magistrate, to go to the extent
of the law in punishing the father. Early on the Monday morning he sent to
apprehend Giles; in the mean time, Mr. Wilson was sent for to a gardener's
house, two miles distant, to attend a man who was dying. This was a duty to
which all others gave way in his mind. He set out directly, but what was his
surprise on his arrival to see, on a little bed, on the floor, poaching Giles
lying in all the agonies of death! Jack Weston, the same poor young man against
whom Giles had informed for killing a hare, was kneeling by him, offering him
some broth, and talking to him in the kindest manner. Mr. Wilson begged to know
the meaning of all this, and Jack Weston spoke as follows:

"At four this morning, as I was going out to mow, passing under the high wall
of this garden, I heard a most dismal moaning. The nearer I came, the more
dismal it grew. At last, who should I see but poor Giles groaning and
struggling under a quantity of bricks and stones, but not able to stir. The day
before he had marked a fine large not on this old wall, and resolved to steal
it, for he thought it might do as well to ketch partridges as to preserve
cherries; so, Sir, standing on the very top of this wall, and tugging with all
his might to loosen the net from the hooks which fastened it, down came Giles,
net, wall and all, for the wall was gone to decay. It was very high indeed, and
poor Giles not only broke his thigh, but has got a terrible blow on his brain,
and is bruised all over like a mummy. On seeing me, Sir, poor Giles cried out,
'O Jack! I did try to ruin thee by lodging that information, and now thou will
be revenged by letting me lie here and perish.' -- God forbid, Giles, cried I:
thou shall see what sort of revenge a Christian takes. So, Sir, I sent off the
gardener's boy to fetch a surgeon, while I scampered home and brought on my
back this bit of a hammock, which is indeed my own bed, and put Giles upon it,
we then lifted him up bed and all, as tenderly as if he had been a gentleman,
and brought him in here. My wife has just brought him a drop of nice broth, and
now, Sir, as I have done what I could for his poor perishing body, it was I who
took the liberty to send to you to come to try to help his poor soul, for the
Doctor says he cannot live."

Mr. Wilson could not help saying to himself, "Such an action as this is worth
a whole volume of comments on that precept of our blessed Master, 'Do good to
them that hate you." Giles's dying groans confirmed the sad account Weston had
just given. The poor wretch could neither pray himself nor attend to the
Minister. He could only cry out, "Oh Sir, what will become of me? I don't know
how to repent. Oh my poor wicked children! Sir, I have ^^ed them all up in sin
and ignorance. Have mercy on them, Sir; let me not meet them in the place of
torment to which I am going." -- He languished a few days and died in the
greatest misery.

Except the -- Minister and Jack Weston, no one came to see poor Giles, besides
Tom Price, who had been so sadly wronged by him. Tom often brought him his own
rice milk or apple dumpling, and Giles, ignorant and depraved as he was, often
cried out, that he thought now there must be some truth in religion, since it
taught even a boy to deny himself and to forgive an injury. -- Mr. Wilson the
next Sunday made a moving discourse on the danger of what are called "petty
offenses." -- This, together with the awful death of Giles, produced such an
effect, that no Poacher has been able to show his head in that parish ever
since.

SOME NEW THOUGHTS FOR THE NEW-YEAR.
Showing how Mr Thrifty the great Mercer, succeeded in his Trade by always
examining his Books soon after Christmas, and how Mr. Careless, by negrecting
this rule, let all his assai^s run to ruin before he was aware of it. After
which some Christian help is offered to all those persons, high-or low, who
have a mind to examine into the account of their own lives during the last year.
WHEN Mr. Thrifty (who keeps that great Mercer's shop in London, which has been
getting on so famously of late) was once asked to dine two days after Christmas
by his neighbor Careless (who I have heard by-the-by has been since made
bankrupt.) Thrifty answered, that it was quite impossible to dine out then, for
that he was settling his Christmas accounts, "which," added he, "must not be
neglected for the world, for I should never know where I was; I should not
understand whether I was going forward or backward, getting rich or growing
ever so poor, if I was to neglect casting up and balancing and examining into
every thing at Christmas." -- "Why to be sure," answered Careless, "you have a
large business Mr. Thrifty, and a large business must be looked after." --
"'It Is by my looking after it that it has become so large," returned Thrifty,
with a look of great shrewdness, "and if I were not to look after it still, it
would soon grow little again I warrant you."

I am persuaded that my readers and I shall one and all of us allow, that this
was a very right observation of Mr. Thrifty's, and yet I doubt whether we shall
equally agree in the following remark, though it has nearly the same
foundation; namely, that if we hope to be ^^ved from ruin in the next world,
and to sucee^d in our everlasting interests, it is necessary that we should use
the very same kind of diligence in examining the state ^^u^ souls, which Mr.
Thrifty used in examining the ^^ate of his worldly business.

There is also a manner of deceiving ourselves in our religious concerns, which
is very like that in which they who fail in business are apt to be deceived. No
^^^n mean's entirely and at all times to neglect his soul; (...), he merely
puts off his self-examination, or he is ^^e and slovenly about it. Mr. Careless
used always to be of opinion, that a regular yearly balancing of his books was
not necessary. He thought that he could form a pretty fair general guess at the
state of his affairs, without taking all the trouble that Mr. Thrifty took in
going particularly into them. It proved, however, when Mr. Careless broke, that
the few goods he had to show had been most strangely over-valued, and on the
other hand, that the debts he owed amounted to about five times the sum he
expected. Now I am persuaded, that those of my readers who never examine their
hearts, will, on the day of judgment, find themselves as much mistaken, in
respect to the worth of their supposed virtues as well as the number of their
sins (which are like so many debts due to God) as ever Mr. Careless was, and
the only way of recovering from their danger, will be to do immediately what
the friends of Mr. Careless advised him to do the Christmas before he broke --
I mean to look their affairs fully in the face, to take instant measures for
getting at a true and just estimate of them, and then to adopt some wise and
prudent plan for their effectual relief.

I will add one other observation. This Mr. Careless, as I have heard, did not
break through any violent misconduct: he never was guilty of any scandalous and
immediately ruinous transactions like some others, but then he was inattentive
to his business, and by this mere inattention he was year after year dropping
down, without being aware of it, into sure and certain ruin: he never could be
persuaded to look carefully into his affairs, which was owing at first to
idleness, and latterly to this additional cause, that a certain kind of
fearfulness and false shame had got about him, insomuch, that when some friends
of his, who perceived his ignorance of book-keeping, offered, on the Christmas
before he broke, to lend him some assistance, he absolutely declined it, which
was considered always as one of the most unpardonable parts of his whole
conduct.

I propose now, after the example of these friends of Mr. Careless, to hold out
to my readers some assistance in entering into that self-examination which I am
here pressing upon them, and if they think proper to neglect the help that is
offered them, I can only say, that I think they really so much resemble Mr.
Careless, that they ought to come forward and take his part, and to defend his
character from those severe censures which I am told that his neglect of a like
offer has every where brought upon him.

But let me first add a sew more words to prove that the kind of comperison
which I have spoken of, is really a just one; for many people seem by no means
to be convinced, that a man may be ruined in his soul by mere neglect, in the
same manner as he may in his trading business. -- I will venture to observe on
this head, that neglect is apt to bring on ruin not in a mercer's shop only,
but even in every thing. Name me now, if you can, any trade or profession in
life which can thrive without diligence. Has not God so made the world, as to
show that man must be diligent, and that it is at his peril to be neglectful?
There is no business that will do itself; moreover, if a man be ever so
diligent in one thing, but quite neglectful of another, he is sure to feel the
consequence even of this partial carelessness. If a farmer was to look well to
his laborers in the field, but not to mind his marketing; or if trader Thrifty
was to be always bringing up his books in the counting house, but was never to
go forward into the shop and wait upon his customers, do you think he would not
suffer by it? -- So if a man minds this world only, and never thinks of the
next, the business of the next world will certainly not be done, as he will
find hereafter to his cost. Some men, if any one should enquire into the state
of their souls, and should ask for a reason of the hope that is in them, would
merely answer in general, that God is merciful, and that Christ died for them,
and add the like general reasons, which any man in Christendom may give as well
as they; and if you were to press them further, they could only say, "I know
not much about the matter, I hope well, I trust God with my soul: I shall fare
as well as other men do: I thank God I never made any doubt of my Salvation."
Now what do all such kind of sayings discover, but a wilful neglect of their
Salvation? It is as if a shipmaster should let his vessel alone and say, "I
will venture it among the rocks, and waves, and winds: I will trust God with
it: it will fare as well as other vessels." I say, what horrible abuse of God's
mercy is this! He commands us to give diligence to make our calling and
election sure, and in this way of diligence trust him.

It may further be added, that in general we find in all our affairs in this
life, that whatever is most important, requires the highest degree of care and
diligence: ought we not, therefore, to fear least negligence should prove the
most fatal of all in the concerns of the immortal soul, which are certainly the
greatest of our concerns? What care is necessary to keep alive our body: it
must be daily fed, and clothed, and cherished, and provided for in a vast
variety of ways; and it is not necessary to lay violent hands upon it in order
to destroy it. If due care be not taken of it, it perishes of course. So it is
with a man's soul; it is certainly perishing if its interests are neglected and
forgotten by him, and it may be as effectually destroyed without any great sin,
as the body may without any great blow.

Once more I beg leave to add, that it is no proof our souls are safe, that we
feel at present no harm or inconvenience from our neglect of them. Mr. Careless
felt no inconvenience from his neglect at the time when he asked Thrifty to
dinner. His bankruptcy ^ame upon him quite like a thunderclap: his things,
indeed, were in confusion before, but the same idleness which kept him from
examining them, kept him from knowing beforehand the misery that awaited him. I
apprehend, therefore, that the cheerfulness of which some thoughtless and
irreligious people make their boast, is no proof of their safety, but is merely
like the gaiety of Mr. Careless on the day when he was making merry with his
company, instead of casting up his books and minding the main chance, as it is
called.

But I must observe further, that there is one great error which a vast number
of people fall into, and by which they are apt to be made very easy under the
most complete neglect of their souls. The mistake I mean is the following one
-- they are diligent, as they call it, at their duty: thus, for instance, they
dig hard, if digging is their business; they write and cast accounts, and keep
shop diligently, if they are clerks or shopkeepers; or they do their exercise
briskly, and follow orders readily, if they are soldiers or sailors, and having
done this their daily work, they think they have done all that can be required
of them. Religion they possibly allow to be a good thing, but this they say is
religion: nay, to do their work well, is the best sort of religion, and they
desire to know no other. Let us now combat this error, which has a very fair
appearance, and which has also some mixture of truth with it.

Presuming my readers to believe the Bible, I will here, in the first place,
quote Scripture on the subject. If to labor merely in our calling, is one and
the same thing as to labor for our souls, how comes our Savior to have used
for instance such expressions as the following? Labor not for the meat that
perishes, but for the meat which endures to everlasting life. I grant our
Savior does not hereby mean, that we ought not in any sense to labor for the
meat that perishes, but he certainly must mean that we ought not to labor for
this only, nor even for this chiefly; he must also mean, that there is a duty
called by him "laboring for everlasting life," which is a distinct thing from
laboring to support our bodies; for if these things were not distinct, he would
not have mentioned them so distinctly. Again our Savior speaks of a man who
had been filling his garners and laying up goods for many years, who evidently,
therefore, was a very diligent man in his business, and yet this is the very
man who is pointed out as one whose soul had been neglected: for it is said,
Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee. I will add another
remarkable saying of our Savior on the same subject. He describes the general
invitation to attend to the Gospel by comparing it to "a Marriage Supper," to
which, said he, when men were asked to come, they all with one consent began to
make excuse, for one went to his farm, another to his merchandise. One said, I
have bought a yoke of oxen, and I must needs go and prove them, and another
said, I have married a wife, and therefere I cannot come. Nothing can prove
more plainly than this parable the point we are now urging; for it shows, that
attention to our worldly business, so far from being the same thing as
attention to religion, is often the main hindrance to it. I am going to my
farm, said the men in Christ's time, and therefore I cannot attend to the
Gospel. I am going to my farm, say these men now; but they have the face even
to pretend that this is the same thing as attending to the Gospel, than which,
nothing can be more contrary to our Savior's declaration. Our Savior ends his
parable by assuring all the people who put him off by any such excuses, that
none of those men that were bidden shall taste of his Supper; which is as if he
had said, "You who give no attention to the Gospel, shall have no share in the
benefits of it. You have been invited indeed, but since you do not come, you
shall never taste of its salvation."

And indeed it seems quite agreeable to reason to suppose, that God, who has
made man to consist both of body and mind, is not likely to be satisfied with
his mere bodily labor, but that he must require the affections of the mind to
be given to Him also. If mere diligence in our calling is all in all, I see not
why a man may not be allowed even to deny the being of God: for an Atheist may
very possibly be led to mind his business tolerably well from mere worldly
motives, and just in like manner some persons who call themselves Christians,
may be induced to go on regularly with their work, all the while forgetting God
as much as if they were downright Atheists.

Having thus proved, as I trust, the necessity of attending to the interests of
the soul, and having also shown that it is not sufficient to carry on our
worldly business merely on worldly principles, I shall proceed to the main
point which is before us, namely, to offer the reader some help toward a
serious examination of his conduct during the last year; and I trust that what
will be further said, will throw much additional light on the general sebject.

First, then, I desire the reader seriously to ask himself, What has been the
ordinary ground and motive of his actions during the last year? You prosess, I
doubt not, to believe in God, and you expect hereafter to be judged by Him; but
have you in the last year made it the leading motive of all your actions, to
endeavor to please Him? It is in vain to think that you have pleased Him, if
you have not intended to please Him. How is it that we judge in cases that
arise between a man and his fellow creatures? I believe a wise, for instance,
would not much thank her husband for doing her a kindness, if she thought he
never intended her a kindness, and had her not at all in his thoughts when he
did it. Her husband's affection is the thing she chiefly wants, and the kind
action is only so far pleasing to her, as it is a symptom of this affection in
the mind. Now all this is extremely reasonable; there is some nicety, I grant,
in the distinction, but it is a nicety we all very well understand in our own
case, and we have no right, therefore, to say that we cannot understand it when
God is concerned. My son (says God to us in the Scripture) give me thine
heart. And again, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all
thy soul, and all thy strength; this is the first and great commandment.
Disregarding this claim, we toil, we dig, we labor for our daily bread, without
almost thinking of God in it, and at the year's end we expect him to accept
this bodily service (though performed with a mere view to our own worldly
benefit) instead of the affections he has required of us.

Now as this is a very great and awful subject, and as it is one on which every
thing else that we shall add will be made to rest, let us endeavor to lead the
reader to dwell very seriously upon it. God is that being in whose character is
to be found every possible perfection: He is most great and glorious, and holy,
and excellent, and bountiful, and benevolent; and he is also full of compassion
and tender mercy. Has any fellow creature a claim to our regard? God has a
still clearer and more undoubted claim; and if we refuse to pay regard to God,
we may on much the same ground refuse to honor our father, to love our nearest
relations, and to render thanks to all our earthly benefactors. They that never
think of God, may, on a like principle, excuse themselves from ever thinking of
them also: for is He not our Benefactor? Is He not our Father? Is it not He
that sends us those very friends who are such comforts to us, and who bestows
upon us all our blessings? Endeavor now to count all His mercies to you during
the past year. Number first all the blessings that have come to you by the
means of friends, and all your various family comforts; these all have
proceeded originally from God: Think next of the success which you may have had
in your calling. It is not your own hand that has gotten you the guineas which
perhaps you have been lately numbering -- It is the Lord. Think next of the
health you have had, and the degree of freedom from bodily pain. It is God also
that defends us from the noisome pestilence, from the arrow that flies by
night, and from the pestilence that walks at noonday. Again, think of the
dangers of other kinds which you may in the last year have escaped, whether
from secret enemies or open violence: the dangers to your person, to your
property, and to your reputation. Why is it that you are alive and well, and in
so much security, at the year's end? It is because the Lord has been with you
by night and by day, to watch over you, and guard and protect you, and keep you
from evil. To these mercies, if you add your own particular and special
mercies, and if you add, moreover, all the infinite blessings of the gospel,
such as the promise of the forgiveness of sins, through Jesus Christ, and the
hope of everlasting life, surely you must own that the Lord's goodness is vast
and unspeakable, and that his mercies are over all his works, and that they are
more in number than the hairs of your head, and as the sands on the seashore,
innumerable. Do you not now, therefore, begin to see the nature of your
obligation to him, and the reasonableness of endeavoring to please a Being who
is thus great and good also? What becomes, then, of that observation, so
plausible to an irreligious mind, namely, that if we have but done our work
regularly, we have fulfilled our duty, even though God has not been thought of
in it? Surely it is an observation full of baseness and ingratitude. I believe
no man, who loves his family and friends, forbears to think of them now and
then, while his hand is at its labor; and why are not our thoughts to ascend in
like manner to God, as the great father of mercies, while the day's business is
going forward; and why may not the desire to please Him well in all things,
form the very motive and spur to all our industry? Has this, then, been the
ground and motive of your diligence during the last year? This is the first
question that is proposed to you.

When this duty of regarding God in all things is well settled and understood
(a duty which, by-the-by, is of all duties the strongest and clearest) then it
becomes easy to prove a number of further points, which are apt otherwise to be
neglected; as for instance, the obligation to worship God in public and in
secret. If we seel that regard to God which has been spoken of, we shall be
naturally, as it were, disposed to pray to him. If we feel the obligations that
have been mentioned, we shall be ready to kneel down and thank him; and if we
are sensible that it is He who not only supplies our wants, but also forgives
us our sins, and likewise that it is by Him alone, as the Scripture tells us,
that we are enabled to think a good thought, and to fulfill any one duty aright,
it follows that we shall be continually enlarging our petitions to Him, and
that we shall call upon Him daily for all these important and indisp^nsible
blessings. Have you then been thus leading a life of dependence on God, and
truly devout prayer to Him, both in the public congregation, in your family,
and in secret, during the last year?

When this duty to God is well understood, then the sin of neglecting the
Sabbath begins to seem very plain also. This is that day which has been
mercifully set apart for religious uses, it therefore is the day for more
particular and earnest prayer in private and in public, and also for more
regular self-examination than can always take place on other days; and it may
be remarked, that as on every Sunday we ought to call ourselves to account for
our behavior during the week, so at the year's end it may be proper to take
ourselves to task for all our conduct on the Sabbaths; for if they have been
neglected, it is more than probable that our whole duty has been neglected by
us.

We will next speak of reading the Scriptures. The difuse of this practice
arises from the same cause which we have before referred to, namely the want of
a due regard to God. Many of those who are most negligent in this point,
nevertheless acknowledge the Bible to be the word of God. It is plain therefore
that the negligence of these persons must arise from their feeling no desire to
know what is the will of their Heavenly Father; for if they felt a desire to
know his will, they certainly would take all means of knowing it. If a servant
had got a letter directed to him which he believed to be from his master, and
was zealous to do his master's will, do you think he would not be eager to open
and read the letter? And if we are earnest in like manner to know and do the
will of God, shall we not be eager to open and read the scriptures? I believe
it is the excuse of some that the scriptures are difficult to be understood,
and that their meaning in many places is doubtful; to which I answer, that so
is the meaning of all books more or less to some kind of persons. The objection
proves only at the most, that you should read for the present those parts of
them which are more easy, and which have the most manifest tendency to do you
good. In fact, however, it is the want of a deep concern about the salvation of
our souls, (which is the chief subject the bible treats of) that causes it to
appear so difficult, as well as insipid and unimproving as it does to some
people.

We have spoken hitherto only of religious duties. -- We will now say something
of the ordinary duties of life, and if we describe them truly, it will
immediately appear that even these are not likely to have been fulfilled in any
respect as they ought, unless there has been a religious principle for the
foundation.

First, how have you performed the duties of your own calling in the last year?
Here it may perhaps be answered by some people, "We have no calling, for we are
able through the money which we have saved, or which our fathers have saved for
us, to live without work. We have therefore had nothing to do; we are
independent persons." What, then, are you independent of God? It is the
business of religion to put an end to this fancied right to independence, and
to subject eevery thought, word, and action, to the will of a superior, to the
will I mean of a strict and holy God. What a blessing to society is religion
when considered in this view! It turns all those persons who are otherwise the
drones of the community, into some of the most for ^i^^ able people in it. O,
how many troubles and miseries are there in this land, which, if a few more of
our independent ladies and gentlemen would be so good as to turn Christians, (I
mean zealous Christians!) would presently be relieved. What a great number of
poor cottagers are there who drag on life both in wickedness and misery, for
the want of being overlooked, and instructed, and advised, and now and then
assisted by their superiors who dwell near them? Here perhaps a whole parish is
neglected through want of a Christian paris^ officer; there the accounts of an
hospital need examining, or a work house is given up to vice and ruin; here a
useful club wants a treasurer or patron, or a declining charity school is
without an inspector, or a new school ought to be set up? here again a private
quarrel is raging which the interference of a superior, if he should also be a
Christian, might presently heal. What innumerable opportunities also has an
independent person of distributing religious books, or conveying serious advice
to those whom Providence has placed under his influence. Now these are the
employments which constitute the calling of independent people. Christianity
brings them to a strict sense of their responsibility in these and many other
like points, and at the same time enlarge their hearts in love to all their
fellow creatures.

Well then, have you followed this your Christian calling, and followed it
diligently during the last year? Oh! no, you are one of those perhaps who have
spent the whole year in some triffling employment, merely to gratify your own
taste, or to please your own vanity. These are the things which have formed
your chief calling, and while the vices of the poor have been dreadfully
increasing in your parish, and the groans of the miserable have been almost
reaching your door, you have been spending your little independent income on
yourself and fancying that all was well.

But let us next address the more laboring part of the community, and if they
will allow us to examine them closely, I believe it will equally appear, that a
Christian principle is necessary in their case, in order to carry them through
their business with real faithfulness and integrity. First, have none of you
been on the whole very idle during the last year? Are there none who have
slackened in their work because they thought the Parish must relieve them
whenever their idleness should have brought them to want? Are there none who
have chosen rather to burden some charitable friend than to buckle heartily to
their work? And has every one of you been as diligent just after he had got a
week's wages in hand as before? Now, Christianity will have led you to work at
all times, not on Saturday only, but on Monday also, making conscience of
habitual diligence; nay, you will have been ready (as the apostle exhorts) to
work with your hands in the things that are good that you may have to give to
him that needs. And how have you employed both your time and thoughts when
the regular hours of work has been over? Which of you, says Christ, having a
servant ploughing or feeding cattle will say unto him by and by, when he is
come from the field, go and set thou down to meat, and will not rather say to
him, make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself and serve me. Thus does
our Savior teach us that we are all (rich indeed as well as poor) like so many
servants, who when we have done serving our master in the field, must then go
and serve him in the house. The Christian laborer therefore is one who has no
sooner done serving Christ by his ordinary calling abroad, than he proceeds
next to serve the same master by his christian conduct at home, by useful
conversation with his children, by reading a portion of scripture to them, and
by uniting with them in prayer to the great Father of Mercies for a blessing on
all the family before they lie down to rest.

Again, ask yourself whether you may not have been more or less an eye-servant?
If you are a common gardening man, have you not worked harder when the head
gardener was in the garden, than when he was out of it? And if a clerk or
apprentice, have you not made more speed when your employer has happened to
come into the shop or counting house? If a footman, have you been as faithful
and diligent, have you risen as carly, worked as steadily, gone your errands as
nimbly, and turned your hand to any thing wanted of you, as readily as if your
master had stood by watching you? Now, if you are a Christian servant, you will
have done every thing, under the impression that One who is far greater than
your earthly master, has been always at hand observing you. Servants, says the
Apostle, obey your masters, not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but as the
servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart.

The idleness and eye-service which have been spoken of, necessarily imply also
some injustice to your employer: You have agreed with him to give him so much
work for so much pay; but if you have secretly wasted in idleness, or turned to
your own use, a part of that time which you engaged to give your master, you
have then robbed him of his due; you have as much wronged your master, as your
master would have wronged you, if he had secretly taken back a part of the
wages he had professed to give you, or had knowingly miscounted the money in
his own favor while he was paying you.

Again, there are many kinds of dishonesty which are practiced almost without
reflection, and with a very quiet conscience, because custom is supposed to
authorize them; the new-year, therefore, seems a very proper time for examining
into these points. It may in general be suspected, that all profits or
privileges, as they are called, which are carefully concealed, have something
dishonest in them, for if they are quite honest, why should they not be public?
The difficulty of breaking through these customs, is often much increased by a
certain false shame, which makes people afraid of doing it, least they should
thereupon be charged with pretending to be better than their neighbors.
Religion, however, tends to cure this false shame, for when a deep concern
about the salvation of the soul arises, a man is carried above all those little
feelings which so often interfere with his duty, and being obliged to turn over
a new leaf in many great points, he takes the opportunity of rectifying a
thousand smaller inadvertencies, which many men of the world, though accounted
moral, never think of doing, because they have no motive strong enough to put
them upon any kind of change.

We shall now name a few more subjects for self-examination, which we shall not
do with much particularity; since the reader's own mind may enlarge upon them.

How have you behaved through the last year in respect to relative duties? It
may not be amiss, at this time of the year, to recollect the names of our
relations and connections, one by one, and then to ask ourselves, who is there
of these whom I have either hurt by my misconduct, or neglected, through
idleness or ^^^ret dislike; who is there of them whom I have put off by a
little outward complaisance, when I ought to have been affectionate and kind?
Again, who is there of them with whom I have too much agreed, not dar^^^ to
show any Christian singularity in their presence, ^^d conforming both to them
and to the world, through fear of their ill will? The duty subsisting between
near connections, such as husbands and wives, or parents and children, ought to
form at this reason of year a very great subject of self-examination, and that
which our Christian duty dictates, will be found to contribute exceedingly to
increase our private happiness.

Have you also in the last year been temperate, sober, and chaste, as the
Scriptures require? Have you not allowed yourself to ^ive in any of those vices
of which the Scripture says, that they which do such things, shall not inherit
the kingdom of God. Again, have you been combating with all your evil tempers
in the last year, and what has been your success in the conflict? Every man has
some particular infirmity. Some are apt to be stubborn and self-willed, others
weak and yielding. -- Some are bold and forward, others too fearful and
ashamed. Some are sleepy and inactive, others are too busy and prone to meddle
even in what does not concern them. Some are too silent, and others as much too
talkative. Some have affections that are continually betraying them into
inconveniences if not dangers, and some have an ungracious and disagreeable
harshness with which they ought to contend. Some also have much natural pride,
or a strong turn to vanity. Now if you are used to search out your faults, you
will have long since known in some measure, which of these may be yours, and
you will be glad to be reminded at the year's end that you ought to enquire how
far you have gained ground on that sin which has most easily beset you.

We will only mention further, have you been observant of the hand of
Providence in all the events that have come across you in the last year? Have
you referred your sickness or your health, you losses in trade or your
successes, as well as all the deaths in your family, and among your friends,
together with every other incident of the year, to a Divine Providence, which
has ordered all things that have befallen you. And have you considered the
affronts and injuries of men, the hardships you have suffered, the national
calamities also, of which you may have born^ your part in the same religious
light, namely, as the means by which God has been pleased to try you. And have
you been therefore resigned and patient under sufferings, as well as thankful
for your mercies.

And lastly, while you are now recollecting all the escapes and deliverances
you have experienced, as well as the affecting deaths and changes which you
have perhaps witnessed during the last twelvemonth in your family, are you led
thereby to meditate on the uncertainty of your own future life, and on the
coming of that awful day, when we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, to give an account of the things done in the body, and when both you
and all that are in their graves shall come forth, they that have done good to
the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection of
damnation.

To this subject of self-examination, which is now closed, one important remark
shall be added. Perhaps some reader will have been ready to reply to some of
the strict questions which have been put to him, "Why at this rate who can be
saved? If all this be necessary for salvation, I must despair and give up the
point." -- We would request every such desponding reader to turn this tract to
the following use: let him avail himself of it in the first place in order to
alarm his fears, and to do away that false notion of innocence, which men who
never examine themselves are apt to trust to as the ground of their salvation,
and when what he has read has thus convinced him of his exceeding guilt, let it
then send his thoughts to that Savior of the world whom God has set forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for
the ^emission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. Let him
proceed to think deeply and often on that instructive subject of his being
justified freely by God's grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ: a subject the powerful force of which in turning the whole heart to
God, the reader has perhaps not yet taken into his calculation. Encouraged by
the pardon of which this doctrine assures him if he is penitent, and accepting
most heartily and thankfully its free and undeserved salvation, let him then
account himself to be not his own, but bought with a price, and let him live no
longer to himself, but to him that has died for him. A heart warmed with
gratitude to Christ will stand in place of a thousand arguments; it will make
that labor more pleasant which otherwise seems intolerable: and it will cause
all those duties, which we seemed to describe with so much strictness, to
appear now no more than a just and reasonable service.

An HYMN for the NEW-YEAR.
O GOD our help in ages past,
Our hope in years to come,
Our shelter from the stormy blast,
And our eternal home.
To thee we pay our yearly vow
Of humble thanks and praise;
To thee we freely offer now
The remnant of our days.
Lord, if our sins are counted over,
They strike us with surprise,
Not all the sands upon the shore
To equal numbers rise.
Teach us to feel our guilty state,
To view the path we have trod,
Teach us to sue at mercy's gate
Before we meet our God.
Teach us to walk with ready feet
In thy most holy ways,
To count our Savior's service sweet*
And give him all the praise.
Thus when the sun at thy command,
Shall cease his yearly round,
When at thy bar the world shall stand,
And the last trumpet sound.
Then while the awful sentence rings
In sleepy sinners' ears;
To us our God redemption brings,
And endless are our years.
A TRUE EXAMPLE OF THE INTERPOSITION OF PROVIDENCE, IN THE DISCOVERY AND
PUNISHMENT OF MURDER.
By that famous Magistrate, Mr. Justice Fielding.
IN Liecestershire, not far from Lutterworth, lived a Miller, who having a
grudge against a man, had murdered him in his Mill, and privately buried him in
his Garden. Not long after he had committed this horrible crime, the Miller
found means to change his place of abode, and settled in another country, a
great way off. Here he lived a long time, believing that his villainy would
never be discovered; but this hardened wretch did not reflect, that though no
fellow creature saw him, God did, and that though God is patient and
long-suffering, he seldom fails to bring wicked actions to light in this world,
and never fails to punish them in the next. Twenty years had now passed over
his head in safety, and he thought he might, without any danger, venture to
return to visit some old friends in the village where he had formerly lived.
All is now safe, thought he, and it is impossible the old story should be ever
brought to light.

Just at the very time while he was on this visit in his native village, by the
Providence of God, the Miller who had present possession of the Mill, having
occasion to dig uncommonly deep in his Garden found the body, or rather the
bones of the murdered man. The neighbors then recollected that about twenty
years ago, a man had been missing in the Parish, and was never heard of after.
Some likewise recollected who was then owner of the mill, and that very miller
being now in the parish, they all ran to the house where he was, and
surrounding it, call^^ on him as the murderer of the person whose bones had
been thus providentially discovered. The wretched miller was so shocked and
confounded with the sudden and general accusation: and conscience, which had
slept for twenty years, was now so horribly stung, that he soon confessed the
fact, was tried, found guilty, and executed according to his just deserts.

The following observations of this wise and famous Magistrate, being
unhappily, just as well suited to the present time, as the time when that great
man wrote them, I hope they may be useful to my readers.
That the most dreadful crime of murder, has of late years increased in a very
deplorable degree in this kingdom, is a fact which every man must confess, and
which every good man must very bitterly lament. Till this age, indeed, cruel
and qloody actions were so seldom heard of in England, that when they happened
they appeared as prodigies, and raised not only the astonishment, but the
abhorrence of the people. Murder is but very lately begun to be common among us.

For my part, I sincerely declare I can discover no more than one cause of the
horrid evil of which I am complaining -- One indeed, perfectly capable of
producing every mischief, and which has more than all other causes,
contributed to produce, and to increase all the evils with which the public is
at present extremely afflicted.

My sensible reader will presently guess what I mean. I mean that general
neglect, I fear I may say contempt of Religion, which has within these few
years, so fatally overspread this whole kingdom, till it has reached the very
lowest ranks of men? It cannot be otherwise, for when we think of the solemn
threatenings of Almighty God against the crime of Murder, how is it possible to
think that a creature, who believes that there is a God, should, unless he be a
fool or a madman, thus audaciously fly in the face of that awful being, in
whose words we must be assured is all truth, and in whose right hand is all
power.

THE TOUCH STONE; OR, THE WAY TO KNOW A TRUE CHRISTIAN.
Being a description of the character of our blessed Savior, with an enquiry
whether we are like Him. To which is added, an Appeal first to INFIDELS, and
then to Persons who call themselves by the Name of CHRISTIANS.
IN this Christian Country, or at least among the more Christian part of it,
the duty of imitating him by whose name we call ourselves, is a point which
must be allowed to be clear. I think it must also be admitted by all who
consider themselves as Chris^^^s, that in proportion as a man differs from his
Savior, and turns away from the consideration of his character and conduct, in
the same proportion does he depart from true goodness, and betray the
unsoundness of his whole Christian profession.

We shall proceed, without further preface, to speak of a few of those tempers
and dispositions which most remarkably distinguished our blessed Lord, and they
shall be the following.

First. He was remarkable for his condescension and humility, and for his
indifference to worloly praise. -- He sought not honor from men: he never aimed
at earthly distinction or superiority, but submitted willingly to be considered
as one of the meanest of the people. No lofty high minded thoughts, no aspiring
desires were harbored in his breast. He made himself of no reputation and
appeared as the servant of all. It was most wonderful condescension in Christ,
who is spoken of in Scripture as coming down from Heaven, and as having
partaken in the glory of the Father before the world was, even to visit this
world at all. It was still greater condescension to visit us in the character
of a man like ourselves, but the condescension is increased to a still more
astonishing pitch, by appearing among us even as the poorest and most despised
of mankind. He was destitute of such common conveniences as even the lowest
have. The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of
Man had not where to lay his head. We find him condescending to wash his
disciples' feet, and also warning them not to consider themselves as true
believers in him if they sought honor one of another: at another time we find
him admonishing them to be poor in spirit, and at another not to choose the
highest place, but willingly and contentedly to take the lowest till they
should be called up higher, assuring them that it was a maxim in his kingdom,
that every one that exalts himself shall be abased, but he (...) humbles
himself shall be exalted.

Secondly. Our Savior was also endued with the greatest meekness and patience.
No hastiness of spirit; no rash anger or resentment was found in him. His soul
was meek and gentle as a lamb: all the trials, affronts, and injuries which he
met with were submitted to by him patiently, without the least murmuring or
repining. He gave his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that plucked
off the hair. He hid not his face from shame and spitting. He was oppressed,
and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth. He was brought as a lamb to
the slaughter, and as a sheep before his shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth. St. Peter tells us, that when he was reviled, he reviled not again, when
he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously, and his own admonition to his followers is, take my yoke upon you
and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest for
your souls. When his enemies treated him with the greatest unkindness and
cruelty, he returned them good for evil, and sought to promote their happiness
and salvation. So far was his mind from harboring any malice or revenge, that
he prayed even for his murderers, and recommended them to the Divine Mercy,
saying. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Thirdly. The mind of Christ was also filled with the tenderest compassion and
love. This was manifested throughout his whole conduct, by the kind attention
he showed both to the bodies and souls of men. He went about doing good,
relieving the helpless, healing the diseased, and comforting the afflicted. He
also instructed the ignorant, and gave light to them that sat in darkness and
in the shadow of death. The poor guilty sinner found him a friend indeed. We
never read of any sinner turning from his sins, and calling upon Christ,
without receiving an answer of peace, so that our Savior showed by his conduct
that he came, as he himself expresses it, to seek and to save that which was
lost. He is represented in Scripture as one who was always laboring to promote
the Salvation of those around him; and when men would not hearken to his words,
but determined still to go on in their sins, his soul pitied them, and he was
grieved for their hardness of heart How fully does his pathetic lamentation
over devoted Jerusalem speak the compassionate affection of his mind! O
Jerusalem! Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as
a hen gathers her chickens under her wing, and ye would not.

But his love was shown most eminently in his laying down his life for us: as
he speaks, greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends. This great instance of love he showed, yet this was not all: He
laid down his life for his enemies. St. Paul says, when we were yet without
strength (or when we had fallen, so as to be utterly helpless and ruined) in
due time Christ died for the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man would
one die, yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die. -- But
God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us. Herein is love beyond example. We read of some who have been
induced to die for their country or their friends, but where have we heard or
read of any one, except Jesus Christ, who has willingly died for his enemies;
for those who offended and cruelly injured him.

Fourthly. Christ was remarkable for the most perfect obedience and resignation
to the will of God.

I came down from heaven, he says, not to domine own will, but the will of him
that sent me. And I must work the work of him that sent me while it is day, the
night comes when no man can work. At twelve years old we find him diligently
employed in pursuing the great object for which God sent him into the world,
reasoning with and questioning the Jewish Doctors in the Temple. When his
mother enquired of him concerning the reason of his conduct, his answer was,
Wist ye not thut I must be about my Father's business. He was more intent on
obeying God than on receiving his daily food. I have meat to eat, said he,
which the world knows not of, and immediately after he adds, my meat is to do
the will of God, and to finish the work which he has given me to do. And as he
was active in performing, so was he always patient in suffering whatever God
required. All the severe trials and afflictions which Christ endured, were
endured without reluctance or repining, because he knew that they came upon him
by Divine appointment. Even when his last bitter sufferings drew near, and his
human nature shuddered at the prospect of them, hear with what obedient
resignation he prayed: Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say, Father,
save me from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father,
glorify thy name. Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me;
nevertheless, not my will but thine be done.

If there were room to enlarge on this subject, we might proceed to speak of
our Savior's spotless purity, of his unshaken faith and trust in God, of his
noble courage in the cause of truth, and also of his ardent devotion, as well
as many other shining excellencies in his character; but it is the less
necessary, because they are partly implied in the tempers already treated of.

And now let me put a very simple question to the reader. Who are they that are
the true disciples of this Jesus Christ? The answer is easy. The true disciples
are those undoubtedly who most nearly resemble that character of Christ which
has been spoken of. Those are not the true Christians who merely call
themselves such. Again, those are not the true Christians, who, though they
believe and affirm the Bible to be true, yet never read it, and know nothing of
what is contained in it. Again, those are not the true Christians, who, though
they may read the Bible, and though they can prove by argument that it is no
imposture, are nevertheless no better for all this knowledge. Again, they are
not the true Christians who have had Christian baptism, who attend at Christian
worship, and receive every month the Christian Sacrament, and who are orthodox
even in their Creed, and can see the errors into which other men fall on these
subjects; for a man may still want the main thing which Christianity consists
in, I mean he may want a resemblance to Christ in his turn of character, and
temper, and spirit. But in order to bring this whole subject more distinctly
home to the reader, let us again briefly touch on the several tempers that were
spoken of.

First, then your Savior was remarkable for his condescension, humility, and
indifference to worldly praise. Are you distinguished by the same dispositions?
-- Are you willing to drop down from your rank in life, as Christ did from his
celestial dignity? Are you contented also with a low estate as he was? And is
your heart deadened like his to the desire of worldly praise and reputation? Is
this, I say, your character? Or, on the contrary, are you one of those
Christians who make a point of not stooping to any employment that is judged
beneath them, and who are continually aiming at high acquaintance, whose great
anxiety is also to fare plentifully in this world, and who, in short, are in
full chase of wealth, as well as reputation, honor, and preferment? This is one
test by which you are to judge whether you are a Christian.

Secondly. We spoke of the meekness and patience of Christ. When he was
reviled, he reviled not again. His soul, as we observed, was meek and gentle as
a lamb. Is this also your character? Has your natural temper, if it is hasty,
been brought under, so that affronts and injuries do not much ruffle you? Are
you not made violent in your spirit by the violence of those who are opposed to
you? How do you feel, for instance, toward men of an opposite nation, or of a
contrary party to you in politics, or of another sect in religion? Christ died
for his enemies; how do you feel toward all your enemies? Do you bear the
evils of life also as Christ did, without murmuring and complaining, submitting
cheerfully to a hard and humble lot, if it be the will of your heavenly Father?

Thirdly. Christ was full of tender compassion, and love, both to the bodies
and souls of men. How stands the likeness in these particulars? For instance,
what part of your time and money do you give to the relief of men's bodily
distresses? Is your character that of a father to the fatherless, a visitor of
the sick, a benefactor to the poor, and a comforter of the afflicted? Do you
like your Savior, go about doing good? How do you act also to those who are of
bad character in the world, and who have trespassed, as some judge, past all
forgiveness? Does your benevolence embrace even these outcasts also? It was one
of the reproaches cast on Christ by the Pharisees, that he stooped too low in
this respect, and that he seemed to take the part of wicked and undeserving
people. Behold! said they, a friend to publicans and sinners, and again, this
woman is a sinner. Are you in like manner a friend to the most discreditable
kind of sinners? Is the idea of their unworthiness no argument with you for
declining an opportunity of doing them good? Do you take their part and not
despair of them, notwithstanding the sneers of some unchristian people? Or, on
the contrary, does the dread of suffering in your own reputation continually
check you in the just exercise of your beneficence?

But the love of Christ had respect chiefly to the souls of men. Are you
chiefly concerned about their souls also? Do you do what in you lies to
promote men's eternal interests? Do you labor to enlighten, to instruct, to
invite, and to warn men with all earnestness, as Christ did? and do you weep
over the cause of impenitent sinners, as your Savior wept over Jerusalem? Or,
on the contrary, are you one of those who make light of men's spiritual
interests, who seem almost to forget that their fellow creatures have immortal
souls, and who at the utmost can only be prevailed on to show a little humanity
to their bodies?

Fourthly. Christ was remarkable for his obedience and resignation to the will
of God. He evidently lived only for the purpose of doing the will of his
Heavenly Father. Is this the proposed end of your living? Do you consider all
your employments in this life as the fulfilling of a work which God has given
you to do, and do you labor to know his will in order to your thus fulfilling
it? Or, on the contrary, are you one of those who never think of God's will,
but go their own way and say, they have a right to please themselves provided
they commit no great crime against their neighbor. And again, when crosses or
troubles come upon you, do you bear them with resignation, considering them to
be sent by God, or are you impatient until they are removed, reversing on such
occasions the language of your Savior and saying, "not thy will, O Lord! but
mine be done."

On the subject of our Savior's holiness and purity, his unshaken faith and
trust in God, his boldness in the cause of truth, and his ardent devotion, as
well as his other excellencies, we will not attempt to enter here. -- Let it be
remembered, however, that it is the part of a true Christian to trace out the
whole character of his Savior and to imitate him in every one of those points
in which the Scriptures set him forth as an example.

And now let us make an appeal in a few words to two or three different
descriptions of people. And first to the downright Infidel. You are one who
disbelieve in Christ, but are you one that has duly weighed and considered his
character? What is the fault you find in it? When the unbelieving Jews once
took up stones to cast at Jesus, he answered them by saying, Many good works
have I showed you from my Father, and for which of these good works do you
stone me? And so it may be said to you now. Many excellencies in Christ's
character have been set before you, and for which of these is it that you
disbelieve in him? Surely you cannot deny that there is something very
excellent and unimpeachable, something very pure and holy, something also very
original, something in short that looks very like divine in the character that
has been spoken of, nor can there be any do^^t of the tendency of the
dispositions which have been described to promote the peace and happiness of
mankind. When therefore one man scoffs, when another gravely disbelieves, when
a third doubts about Christianity; when difficulties rise up in the minds of
some, and when profane and blaspheming books are spread abroad to overthrow the
faith of others, to all this host of unbelievers we beg leave in this place
simply to reply, by opposing to them the character of Jesus Christ, a character
which those who are the most violent in running down Christianity, will be
found I believe in general, to take very little trouble in considering.

When those unbelieving Jews of old who were so bent on crucifying Christ were
asked, Why what evil has he done? the grand difficulty was, to get ther^ to
give their attention fairly to the character of the prisoner; the multitude of
them, when this very reasonable question was asked, are said to have returned
to their general abuse, and to have only cried out the more ^et him be
crucified; but when Pilate, though disposed to side with the Jews, was obliged
by his office to examine and cross-examine this Jesus, Verily, said Pilate, I
find no fault in him. Our present difficulty is much the same; for if we could
but persuade our modern infidels and blasphemers to bestow for once a little
time in examining, point by point, the character of this Jesus of Nazareth as
Pilate did, methinks they would be glad to wash their hands also, like Pilate,
of the blame of being his more forward enemies: they would turn over at least
the heavier part of the guilt to the rabble of more uninformed persons saying,
like Pilate after the examination, Take ye him, and crucify him.

But let us next address the merely nominal and false Christians. Now these are
the persons who, though some of them lament perhaps the present growth of
infidelity, have been the principal causes of it. Not a few of these Christians
so called are, it is to be feared, men even of immoral character, and these
must be named among the best friends of infidelity, for the corrupt life of one
who calls himself a Christian, is certainly the greatest of all encouragements
to the unbeliev^rs. But let us not confine our observations (...) immoral
Christians only. You are certainly a promoter of infidelity if you do but fail
of having that peculiar temper and turn of mind which has been described. I
will suppose now that you are a decent moral person -- but must we not own that
so also are many of the infidels -- honorable -- so are the infidels -- humane,
perhaps handsome in your conduct, and very respectable -- but so also are many
of the infidels. If this then be all, you have nothing in your character but
what is common both to you and them, and an infidel at this rate is just as
good as a Christian; and if as good he must be as safe also -- surely then
there is no need of Christianity: and if there is no need of it there arises a
strong suspicion also that there is no truth in it; for to suppose Christianity
to be true, and sent of God, as it professes to be, while nevertheless there is
no need of it, and while the followers of it are no better than the
unbelievers, is to suppose that God acts foolishly and in vain, which
supposition is itself a kind of infidelity, and is an approach even to Atheism.
It follows, therefore, that in order to defend the truth of Christianity, it is
necessary to exclude out of the pale of the true Christian Church every such
merely decent Christian as I have been speaking of, saying to him (as all
serious Christians indeed are used to do) that you have no share in the
privileges of the Gospel any more than the unbelievers, and if he that
believes not shall be condemned, then you, it is to be seared, are involved in
the same condemnation.

We cannot help observing that Christians of this merely decent class,
especially if possessed of a little orthodoxy also, are not seldom the persons
who cry out most violently against infidelity, and who perhaps come forward in
defense of the national faith, as if these were the best champions by whom the
truths of Christ can be defended; whereas I think I have shown, that they are
some of the very persons who have betrayed the cause, and have surrendered up
the ark of our most holy faith into the hands of the modern Philistines.

Let us next address another class of persons, I mean those who are very
remarkable for their attachment to certain Christian doctrines, and are very
zealous for what they call the Gospel. Some of these perhaps carry their zeal
for doctrines so far, that they feel but little interest in any thing that can
be said concerning the example of Christ, and are ready to turn away from what
they call so merely moral a lesson. They desire to hear of nothing else than
the blood and righteousness of Christ, and his atonement, and grace, and
intercession. But has not the same Scripture which speaks on these subjects
said also, Let the same mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, and that
Christ has set us an example that we should tread in his steps: and again,
that he that says he abides in Him ought himself so to walk even as He
walked: and again, that if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, (which
certainly must include the temper or Christ) he is none of His. A plain
Scriptural declaration of the character of Christ, and an appeal to those texts
which assert the necessity of being like Him in our own character and conduct,
may be of admirable use in pulling down the vain confidence of the enthusiast,
in rectifying many errors of the bigot, in exposing the sinful passions of some
who pretend that they are magnifying Christ, in proving in short the faith of
all, and in calming many political as well as religious controversies of the
Christian Church.

But once more. There are some who think indeed that they copy after Christ,
and that they copy him the more because they make light of doctrines and bestow
their whole attention upon practice. But what is their practice? Are they close
and real imitators of all these holy tempers of Jesus? I fear those who neglect
or pervert the doctrinal parts of Scripture in order to suit their own creed,
are prone equally to forget or lower what is practical in Scripture in order to
suit their own practice: many take, for instance, only a part of Christ's
example instead of the whole of it, and even what they take they lower and
deprive of all the spirit that is in it before they can agree to it: thus they
may possibly imitate Christ's benevolence to the bodies of men, but even this
is done only in some small degree, for they cannot be said to go about doing
good, as Christ did, making their benevolence their business, and quitting
their home, like him, in search of wretched people; and as to Christ's
benevolence to the souls of men, they hardly think of it, and are altogether
opposite to him in that particular: thus many also may consider a certain
degree of resignation to Providence in a time of calamity to be a branch of
Christian duty, and may fancy they follow Christ's example in this respect,
while in fact perhaps they are much more influenced by an idea of it is being
necessary to submit to their fate; and as to that other temper of Christ which
we coupled with willingness to suffer. I mean a willingness also to do the
whole will of our Heavenly Father. Here they most l^mentably fail: for do they
look upon the doing of God's will, as Christ did, to be more necessary, as it
were, than their daily meat, and do they count their time, their money, and
their labor, lost except as it is devoted to God's service, and employed for
His glory? In truth, the whole example of Christ, when rightly understood, can
neither be imitated nor approved by the common kind of worldly men; and indeed
we all seem naturally to f^ll into dispositions the most contrary to those
which characterised our Savior; for are men naturally humble, and lowly, and
indifferent, as he was to wo^^^ly praise. Are they naturally prone to forgive
injuries, and to love even their enemies, showing their chief compassion also
to the souls of t^ose whom they love? Are men naturally disposed to renounce
their own will, and to look only to the will of God? And are men naturally
sumissive, and resigned, and devoted altogether, to the Lord's service? The
corruption of our nature then is one of the lessons which we learn by thus
appealing to the example of Christ as the Touchstone of real goodness, and when
through the knowledge of this corruption we are humbled under the sense of
guilt, and are become anxious to find mercy, then, and not till then, we turn
to our Savior's cross, and begin heartily to plead the propitiation of that
Son of God who bare our sins in His own body on the tree, having given His own
life to be a ransom for us.

The distance at which we find ourselves from the Great Standard of perfection,
and the difficulty which we soon begin to feel when we endeavor to copy after
it, cannot fail to teach us another lesson in Christianity of the first
importance: we are now taught, I mean, to bow our knees before the God of all
grace, imploring him to help our infirmities, and to pour down upon us a
portion of that Spirit which was given without measure unto Christ; and thus do
the several parts of Christianity reflect mutual light on each other. He then
is the true Christian who, believing the doctrines of Christ, is also animated
thereby to follow all the precepts of his Master, who heartily approves and
zealously copies after the bright example that is set before him, and who, by
the help of Divine Grace, attains in his humble measure to some true
resemblance of his Savior.

ONESIMUS; OR, THE RUNAWAY SERVANT CONVERTED A TRUE STORY, SHOWING What a
wonderful Improvement in his Condition ONESIMUS experienced after he became a
Christian.
TO WHICH IS ADDED, An affectionate Adddress to all those unhappy Persons, both
Men and Women, who, like ONESIMUS, have left their Home, and have got into a
bad Way of living, and who have also a Mind to hear how they may get out.
ONESIMUS was a servant (or slave) in the house of one Philemon. This Philemon
seems to have been remarkable for being a good Christian, for the Apostle Paul
particularly mentions his love and faith to^^^^s the Lord Jesus, and toward
all saints. It is plain then that Onesimus must have had great advantages by
living in the house of such a master; and one would think that he must have
been a good Christian also. No, he was far otherwise. He was quite insensible
of his advantages. Although there is said to have been a Church, that is, a
collection of worshipping Christians, in Philemon's house, yet Onesimus seems
to have been not at all the better for it. He received no doubt the
instructions, he attended regularly at the family prayers, he also beheld daily
the bright example of Philemon, and yet his heart continued to be hardened. I
should think it probable that Onesimus was very blind and ignorant respecting
religion, and also very careless about it, so that all the spiritual
instruction he received would go in at one ear, as the saying is, and go out at
the other. In the mean time, temptations of various kinds would probably come
upon him, and thus he would advance from bad to worse, for one sin commonly
leads on to another, and at length his heart being dreadfully hardened, he
would be ready for almost any wickedness. It seems by St. Paul's account, that
he became an unfaithful servant, and actually robbed his master, and that he
then ran away (perhaps then taking his booty with him) to the great city of
Rome, where it would be easy for Onesimus to conceal himself, just as it is
easy for a man who has played the villain somewhere at a distance in this
country, to lie hid in London now.

If the present story were to stop here, where then, it might be said is the
use of having all these family prayers and this Church in the house? Why the
very servants you instruct will still cheat you just as much as if they were
not instructed, and it is as well therefore to leave them to go their own way,
without trying to make them religious. I will not stop to reply to this
observation here, because, as we go on with the story, the answer will be plain
enough.

What I have next to remark of Onesimus, is, that when he got to Rome, he went
to hear the Apostle preach. We are not told the reason of his first attending
on the Apostle. It is not improbable, however, that some qualm of conscience
might put him upon this visit. Methinks I see him for a few days o^ weeks
rioting in vice, spending freely the handful of plunder which he had carried
off, and as his pocket grows low, becoming low in spirits also. At length his
last shilling is gone. Alas! he has no Christian master to support him, no
friend to pity him -- and now having first doubted possibly whether to plunge
into some new crime in order to relieve his growing distresses, he bethinks
himself of what he had once so carelessly hear^ in Philemon's house, and says
within his heart "well, there can be no comfort, no hope, no chance of
deliverance for me now, but from the Gospel." I think it ^s also possible that
he might have occasionally overheard the name of Paul mentioned while he was
waiting at Philemon's table, and when pricked in his conscience at Rome. --
Paul therefore is the man to whom he would naturally fly for relief.

Let no master then despair of being an instrument of good to his servants,
even though for a time he should see no fruit of his labors. I am persuaded
there has been many a footman, or stable boy, or other servant, both male and
female, who has continued thoughtless and profane during the whole time of
residence in a religious master's house, and who nevertheless has been struck
to the heart afterward, and has profited materially in the end, by some hint
which appeared to have no effect at the time of receiving it.

But we are next to speak of a new scene which presents itself. Onesimus is
converted to Christianity under Paul's ministry. The sinner is convicted of his
sin. Through God's mercy the runaway is arrested in his mad and-wicked course.
The poor guilty wretch of course cofnesses to Paul his guilt, and through the
infinite grace of God in Christ he obtains pardon, and the hope of eternal life.

Here then is a striking proof of the provision of mercy which there is in the
Gospel. A runaway slave and a thief may become a partaker of it: God can grant
even to the vilest and most miserable sinner repentance unto life; and it is
proper therefore, that all should pray to God for a heart to repent, and that
no one should despair.

It is plain from many signs that the repentance of Onesimus was sincere. In
the first place I think we may take Paul's word that it was so, for Paul would
not have spoken so decidedly as he did, if he had not first enquired into the
case. No; I will warrant you Paul examined Onesimus very closely, for Paul's
charity did not consist in believing in a good-natured way that every one was a
Christian who said that he was so; on the contrary, Paul's charity led him to
be careful and jealous lest he should comfort his flock with a false hope, or
should flatter the person of any one. It made him therefore exceedingly
particular in examining the state of men's souls: and hence it comes to pass
that the words of Paul have so much weight whenever he pronounces any one to be
a Christian.

But the sincerity of Onesimus's repentance is still further proved by a
circumstance which is distinctly mentioned; I mean by his readiness to take
Paul's advice when he bids him to go back again to his injured master. Now a
false penitent would differ from Onesimus in this particular. A false penitent
would make a thousand objections to such a measure. "What," he would say "must
I go back to my master whom I have wronged? I dare not show my face before him,
nor before my fellow servants. I shall sink into the earth when I see them.
Besides, where is the necessity for returning? I am willing to repent indeed,
but may I not repent at Rome? Surely I may be allowed to remain here in my
present obscurity, for the disgrace of seeing my master and all my old friends
again is more than I can bear, but I will bear any thing else; I will live hard
and work honestly, and I will be very sorry for my sin, and I will continue to
attend Paul's preaching. Surely this will suffice." "But go back again in the
first place to your master," says Paul. "Go and own to him what you have done;
away with all this pride and evil shame which is about you. Submit to the
disgrace you have brought on yourself, and try to repair the evil you have done
as well as you can, by working hard for Philemon in the time to come: endeavor
to earn for him as much money as you have stolen from him, and be not afraid of
Philemon's wrath, for I will give you a letter to him. This is the proof I
require of your sincerity."

How wise and judicious was this advice of Paul to Onesimus! Whom, says he in
the letter I have sent again, that is, whom I have sent back again in order
that he may confess his whole fault to you, and return into your service. The
confession of the sin against Philemon was better in this case than any general
confession of faith, or than any plausible tale of Onesimus's conversion; and
so it may be observed in other cases, that a readiness to go back at all
hazards, and to acknowledge our crime to the person we have offended, and to
repair it as well as we are able, is the first proof of sincerity that should
be required; whereas an unwillingness to return implies much remaining pride of
heart, a very sinful sort of shame, a disregard to strict honesty, and a fear
of consequences that is inconsistent with that faith and trust in God which
accompany true repentance.

Onesimus, as I have said, consented to return; and let us not suppose that he
is now to be pitied on that account, or that any great miseries were in
consequence about to fall upon his head. No, let us congratulate him rather on
his right resolution, for I will warrant you, that after the first affecting
scene was over, he would be much the happier for it, and let us remember also,
that we are to consider him now as a Christian, who has got among Christian
people, and that he departs bearing in his hand that letter of St. Paul to
Philemon, which I have spoken of, and which forms one of the short Books or
Epistles of the New Testament. -- How kind, how affectionate, how condescending
does every part of this Epistle appear, when carefully examined! It is a
specimen of the Christian spirit, and we shall therefore now turn from
Onesimus's character to the contemplation of that of Paul, which we have here a
fine opportunity of considering.

Paul was now grown extremely old, and he had suffered much in the cause of the
Gospel. He was at this very time a prisoner, and it was while in prison and in
bonds that he had preached so effectually to Onesimus. It is likewise
remarkable that not only Onesimus the slave, but that Philemon the master also,
to whom the letter was addressed, had been converted through Paul's ministry.
Thus, therefore, this venerable Saint was able to write with the authority that
belonged to him both as an apostle, as an old man, and as Philemon's father in
Christ, as the father in like manner of Onesimus, and as a chief sufferer, who
was soon also to prove a noble martyr, in the cause of their common Savior.

What then is the ground which he may be supposed to take in order to persuade
Philemon to spare the poor converted slave that is sent back to him? The ground
he takes is this: He forbears, he says, from that exercise of his authority
which such a one as he might use; he hints, in a most affecting manner, how
Philemon himself had owed the life of his very soul to the apostle, and he then
entreats Philemon, for love's sake, to comply with the earnest request that is
made to him, briefly intimating also the worldly profit which Philemon would
derive from having now a Christian servant instead of an unbelieving one. But
let us quote the apostle's own words -- wherefore, says he, though I might be
bold in Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient, yet, for love's sake, I
rather beseech thee, being such a one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner
of Jesus Christ; I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my
bonds, which in times past was to thee unprofitable, but is now profitable to
thee and to me, whom I have sent again, thou therefore receive him that is mine
own bowels. And then he adds, Thou therefore receive him not now as a servant,
but above a servant, a brother beloved, especially to me, but how much more
unto thee both in the frish and in the Lord.

What an astonishing difference does Christianity make in men! What a kind of
spirit do we here trace! How strange also must all this love and condescension
seem to some people! A man of the world, whose servant had robbed him and run
away, would never believe Christianity could convert the man, and would disdain
to receive such a kind of letter as I have described. I am persuaded also my
readers will agree, that a worldly correspondent, though naturally ever so
humane, would be very far from writing such a kind of letter as this; and
certainly an unrepenting and worldly minded flave would ill deserve to have it
written. -- But how affectionately does Paul still proceed -- If, says Paul,
thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself. If he has wronged
thee, or owes thee ought, put that on mine account. I Paul have written in
with mine own hand, I will repay it. Albeit, I do not say to thee how thou
owe to me thine own self besides.

And now let it be remarked, what a happy influence had Christianity on the
whole condition of this poor wretched runaway. He was sinking, no doubt, into
the lowest infamy as well as poverty and woe when he first waited on Paul: he
was living, I dare say, among the dregs of the people at Rome; and if he had
remained unconverted, if either he had not gone to Paul, or if having gone to
him, he had again hardened his heart, and returned to his former wickedness, he
would probably have ended his days on the Crucifix or Gibbet, or at least he
would have soon perished through want, unknown and unregarded, for he would
have been swept away among the thousands whom the vice and wickedness of every
great city are continually sending to an untimely grave: A guilty conscience
also would have haunted him in his last hours, and after death he must have
stood before an offended God, and at last he must have had his portion in that
place where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashiug of teeth.

How happy then I say, how transporting was the change! The pride of his heart
being first subdued through that blessed Gospel which was made known to him, he
returns to his master. This was a great step. He returns to slavery indeed, but
to a slavery no doubt that was extremely mild, and that scarcely deserved the
name; for he is immediately received even as a brother into the family from
whence he had fled as a culprit, and the same epistle of Paul which introduced
him to Philemon, would now recommend him, no doubt, to many members of the
Church at Colussus, with whom he would become united in the bonds of Christian
love. Nay, if we believe the report of history, his good conduct as a slave
soon afterward gained him his liberty, and he even rose, as some have supposed
(though of this there may be a certain degree of doubt) to the situation of a
Minister or Teacher of the infant Christian Church.

But whatever his condition may have been during the remainder of his days on
earth (and it is indeed comparatively of little moment) of this at least we are
sure, that his everlasting happiness was secured, and that he is now numbered
among the company or those who have washed their garments, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb; whose offenses in this life are pardoned through the
merits of Christ, and who are standing before the throne of God. There the
great apostle Paul, and his excellent friend. Philemon, and there also the
converted slave Onesimus, unite with one voice in that triumphant song (God
grant that each of us may one day join in it) unto him that has loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and Priests
unto God and the Father, unto him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. --
Amen.

An Application of the above Story to the case of those unhappy Men and Women,
who, like Onesimus, have lest their home and have got into a bad way of life.
THE story which we have related, may be useful to persons of every class, but
there is a very particular application of it which may be made to those who, in
some measure, resemble the runaway and unconverted Onesimus.

I mean now, therefore, to address myself to those who, through some false step
in life, and perhaps by adding one piece of misconduct to another, have sallen
into any very distressful and disgraceful circumstances. I address myself more
especially to those unhappy women, who, like Onesimus, have run away from their
proper home, where once perhaps they may have heard something of the Gospel,
though they did not attend to it, and who are now ruined in their character,
who are also plunged by their growing necessities into a life of open and
allowed sin, and are perishing both as to body and soul, either in our great
towns, or among the dregs of the people of our metropolis.

I would entreat such persons to consider a little the case of this poor
Onesimus, at the time he was plunged, as I have supposed him to have been, in
the debaucheries of Rome, and when he must be viewed as a runaway, and even a
thief and a vagabond. Methinks he resembled, in a few leading particulars, what
some of you may be at present. Now it happened that Onesimus went one day to
hear Paul preach. What if you were for once in your lives, to do the same? I
mean, what if you were to go and hear the preaching of some faithful and
zealous Minister of Christ, some follower of Paul the Apostle? I would advise
you, if you think of doing it at all, to go on the very next Sabbath. --
Onesimus, by hearing Paul preach, was delivered out of all his troubles, for he
was effectually converted to Christianity; and who knows whether if you pursue
the same means, it may not please God to save you both body and soul, in the
same manner, Indeed, I can hardly imagine any other way than that which
Onesimus actually took, by which he could have been recovered; and, depend upon
it, if ever you escape, and are restored to peace, to happiness, and to
society, it must be by the same mighty power of the Gospel. -- Would to God,
that some unhappy creature, who reads this tale, and who has imitated Onesimus
in his wanderings, might imitate him also in his repentance. -- Would to God,
that some lost sheep might thus be brought back into the sold of Christ. Would
to God, that some Prodigal Son, for instance, might be persuaded, like the
Prodigal in the Gospel, to repent, and return to his father's house; or that
some woman, who is a sinner, while she is reading this tale, might find her
eyes begin to stream with tears, like the Magdalen, who wept so plentifully at
the feet of our Savior, and might, like her, attain to a comfortable and well
grounded hope, that her sins, which are many, are forgiven her.

"But what can we do," methinks I hear a whole multitude of such persons reply,
"We long to be restored to all the comforts you speak of; we are charmed at the
very mention of such happiness, but we know not how to get possession of it." I
answer, do then in all respects like Onesimus. Take example as far as your case
will allow, from all the various circumstances which may be supposed to have
belonged to his tale. -- First of all, he attended Paul's preaching, after
which, I suppose, he called on the Apostle, and told him his story. The
Apostle, indeed, was a poor man himself, and a prisoner also; so that a little
good advice (which, however, is a very valuable thing) was all that could be
got from him; except, indeed, that Paul being acquainted with a number of good
Christians, among whom there might be some rich ones also, he was able to give
Onesimus a letter of introduction, if he thought proper. The same thing,
perhaps, may happen now. If you will call on some Minister of the Gospel, after
having for a while attended his preaching, provided he judges you to be truly
penitent, he will be induced, perhaps, if poor himself, to give you a
recommendation to some Christian friend of his, to some capital housekeeper,
like Philemon.

But, shall I tell you what will be his difficulty? A suspicion will
immediately arise about your sincerity, and the removal of this suspicion is
the great thing which you must aim at. Onesimus succeeded in removing this
suspicion from the mind of Paul; for if he had not, I am sure Paul would never
have written such a letter as he did to Philemon.

Let me, then, close with a little advice as to this point, I mean as to the
manner in which you must give proof of your sincerity.

First, when you confess your faults to any one of whom you ask help, do not
confess them by halves. I have known some persons acknowledge a sew things
which they have done wrong, and which, indeed, they could not hide, while they
have been mightily reserved upon other points. They have left out half their
story. They have thought, perhaps, to spare themselves hereby, but, in fact, it
has commonly proved, that what was concealed was afterward discovered, and
they have been rejected, not at all on account of any unwillingness to help
them, though hitherto ever so wicked, but on account of its continuing still to
be impossible to put any trust in them. Onesimus, I warrant you, confessed his
whole sin to Paul, and was not detected afterward in any little reservations,
or excuses, or false colorings.

Again, draw nearer and nearer to religion. Read the Scriptures. Avoid bad
company. Attend diligently on the preaching of the Gospel; and endeavor to make
acquaintance with those who attend also, and who, however poor, are religious.
Onesimus had become one among the little society of the Saints which were at
Rome, at the time when Paul wrote so confidently of his sincerity.

Again, put away your pride and false shame; very forlorn and wicked people are
often very proud, and this pride works in a thousand ways, so as to hinder
their deliverance. Onesimus submitted to go back to his old master,
notwithstanding all the shame that attended his return; and you must show
something of the same temper, if you expect any one who understands the human
heart, so as all Christians do, to put confidence in your sincerity.

Again, put your trust in Crod. Dare to fulfill your present duty; and do not
reason too much about consequences. God has all events, and he has likewise all
hearts in his hand; and he can and will make a way for your escape, as he did
for that of Onesimus, if you reselve fully to fear him, and put your trust in
him.

Again, determine on a life of industry; tor all idleness in you must be
dishonesty. Onesimus went and worked even as a slave. I hope you have no
objection to go and work any where as a servant, and to accept even the lowest
service. I hope too, you desire to be a very diligent and profitable servant.
Onesimus, as St. Paul observes, had been once unprofitable, but was now
profitable. He became a most valuable hard-working man when he became a
Christian.

But, above all things, take care to be what you wish to appear; take care, I
mean, to be a most sincere and true penitent. It is a small matter to seem
sincere in the sight of your fellow creatures, when you are not so in the sight
of God. The heart is deceitrul. Enter, therefore, deeply into this matter.
Consider your own weakness in times past; fly from temptation; be often on your
knees also confessing your sins, and praying to God to strengthen you by his
Holy Spirit; pray to him in short, to search and to try you, to prove you, and
examine your ways, to look well if there be any way of wickedness in you, and
to lead you in the way everlasting.

And now, are you still out of spirits and desponding? Do you still think there
is no friend to pity you, no help near you, and that no Minister, if you should
go to him, will take notice of your case? I will add another hint on this
subject. When Onesimus first went to Paul, I dare say be l^t^le expected to get
such a kind letter as he obtained. Shall I then explain to you what was the
cause which made Paul condescend so readily to this poor, repenting sinner. It
was this. Paul was once a great sinner himself; he could remember a time, when
(though he never (...) as a thief or a runaway) yet he was a hinderer of the
Gospel, and even a persecutor also. But Paul had obtained mercy, and now it
became the happiness of his life to tell of the grace of Jesus Christ. Unto me,
said he, who am less than the least of all Saints, is this grace given that I
should preach among the Gentil^s the unsearchable riches of Christ. -- He
thought it the greatest honor in the world to be allowed to publish among the
vilest Gentiles, the salvation of the blessed Jesus. So is it also now. The
very best men on earth, whether Christian Ministers, or Christian People, like
Paul, owe all to mercy, and they long therefore to commend you to the same
mercy, and to stretch out their hand for your relief.

Learn, then, to understand the true hindrance to your recovery. It is not that
there are no Christians who will help you. It is not there are no means of
deliverance for you, for we have shown you that "if there is a will there is a
way." It is not that you are driven i^to sin by an irresist^^l^ fate, for God
is ^bove fate, and God drives no man into sin. It is, in short, your own fault,
and your own fault alone. Escape, then, immediately. Give no sleep to your
eyes, nor slumber to your eyelids, till you have taken some step toward your
recovery. Remember, in short, that if Onesimus escaped, so may you; and that if
you use not the same means, this very story of Onesimus will rise up in
judgment against you.

LOOK AT HOME; OR, THE ACCUSERS ACCUSED.
Being an account of the manner in which our Savior put to silence the Scribes
and Pharisees, when they brought to him the Woman taken in Adultery.
A Great man used to say that he never saw a criminal dragged to execution
without asking himself, "Who knows whether this poor fellow may not, on the
whole, be guilty of less sin than I am?" This is a question which it would be
well if we would all of us put to ourselves, when we see any of our
fellow creatures punished; for I am persuaded, that many of us have sins, which
all things considered, deserve the rod just as much as the sins of those people
who endure chastisement for them. I am sorry to add, that in general, we are so
far from putting to ourselves any such question as I have spoken of, that we do
what is directly the contrary. We contrive to praise, instead of taking
occasion to blame ourselves, when we see another in fault. We immediately say,
"Well, I thank God, I never did any thing so bad as this. I never in my life
did what Mr. Such-a-one has done. I am not so bad as he, however;" and then we
fall foul on his whole character, and think to show our goodness by the extreme
severity which we use in speaking of him.

Never was this temper better exposed, or the evil of it reproved, than in the
case of which I am now going to speak; I mean on the occasion of the Scribes
and Pharisees bringing before our Savior the woman taken in adultery.

We read, that as Christ was teaching in the temple, they brought to him this
woman, and set her in the midst, saying to him, Master, this woman was taken in
adultery. Now, since adultery is certainly a most dreadful sin, we might at
first view be ready to praise these men, and also to say, " What holy and good
people must these be! wh^t haters of sin! what friends to God and religion!
they, to be sure, must be quite pure and perfect! Alas! how should we be
mistaken if we were to judge thus of them! They were men, no doubt, who had
taken some pains to wash the outside clean, and they were in good repute with
their neighbors; nevertheless, as this story will show, they were all the while
very wicked in their hearts; they brought this woman before Christ, and placed
her in the midst, from a very wrong motive, for they did it not for the sake of
glorifying God, not for the sake of punishing sin in this instance, in order to
prevent it in others; and not therefore through any love to God, or charity to
their neighbor; but, on the contrary, they acted from some of the basest
dispositions, for they felt no compassion for the woman, and they wanted only
to lay a trap for Christ, in order that they might have matter of accusation
against him.

How common is it for people, nowadays, in some respects, to imitate these
Scribes and Pharisees! What curiosity have some men, in the first place, to
discover, and then to publish all the faults and infirmities of their
neighbors! Some there are, who spend half their lives in listening to, and
repeating all the scandal that is passing. When they hear of a man that has
been overtaken by a sin, or of a woman that has lost her reputation, one would
think that they had heard one of the best pieces of news that had ever reached
their ears; for how does conversation run on, and the spirits rise, and the wit
abound, when the fall of a fellow creature is the topic of the company! The
Scribes and Pharisees brought this woman forth, and set her in the midst. Just
so, methinks, would the persons I am blaming set every offender whom they
accuse in the midst of the company, if they were able, for they show by their
language that they delight to expose every one as much as possible. But why, I
repeat it, is all this ill nature? Are these accusers spotless in their own
lives? Are they better even than those whom they accuse? No; I believe it has
often happened that the very man who has been most forward in condemning
another, has been himself guilty of the same fault, and liable to the^ very
same condemnation. It is the most wicked part of the world that is commonly the
most severe. Your harsh judges are often the very worst of men.

The words used by the Scribes and Pharisees, when they brought this woman to
Christ, were the following: Said they, Moses in the law commanded us, that such
should be stoned, but what say thou? The design evidently was to put a
difficulty in the way of Christ, and, if possible, to set him and Moses at
variance; for if, on the one hand, Christ should say that the woman ought to be
released, this would be contradicting Moses, and Christ would then have been
called a false Prophet; but if, on the other hand, Christ should order her to
be stoned, this they might think would diminish something from the mercifulness
of his character as a Savior, and would hurt his credit with the people; so
that, in either case, the Scribes and Pharisees would be gratified. What a
crafty question, therefore, was this! Let us now see how very prudently our
Savior answered it.

At first, he appeared as if he took no notice of what was said to him (for
when wicked men bring their accusations against others merely to indulge their
own malice, it is often best not to lend an ear to them) but our Savior,
stooping down, wrote with his finger on the ground. The Scribes and Pharisees
now thought they had puzzled him, and they therefore pressed their question
again with great earnestness. Ah! how little did they know of the true
character of Christ, for he understood all their thoughts, through that divine
power which belonged to him, and his silence, in fact, was only intended to
draw these his enemies on into a difficulty, and to make his own answer the
more remarkable. Our Savior, after some time, raised himself from the ground,
and said to them, he that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone
at her.

What a heart-searching answer was this -- and, at the same time, what an
unexpected one! They that had just now been accusers, were hereby accused in
their turn. It was as if our Savior had said, "You have brought me a woman
taken in adultery, and you seem to have been very eager in doing it, and you
pretend that you merely want to know what ought to be done with her; I,
however, see into your hearts, and because I know that your motives are
corrupt, I shall not answer you in the manner in which you expect; Moses as you
observe, commanded the adulterer to be stoned: be it so; go then, if you
please, and stone this woman; but take this hint with you, that it becomes
those who are the most forward in blaming others to be particularly free from
blame themselves. Let him, therefore, take the lead in punishing her, who, by
being free from fault himself, has the best right to inflict the punishment:
Let him that is without sin among you, cast the first stone at her. Having thus
spoken, Christ returned to his employment of writing on the ground, leaving his
reproof to work on the minds of the Scribes and Pharisees.

And now, behold the mighty force of a few words -- they which heard it being
convicted by their own consciences, went out one by one, beginning with the
eldest, even unto the least; and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing
in the mi^st. What, are these godly persons gone? all gone? And is the business
on which they came left unfinished? It is even so. The criminal alone remains,
and her accusers are fled; nor have they fled without reason, for they had now
begun to perceive that there was one ready to accuse them in their turn, and
that all things were naked and open before him with whom they had to do. Oh, if
it had pleased our Savior to bring to light all the hidden circumstances of
their lives, and to publish on the spot every secret sin they had committed,
how would they have had to blush before all the people! They thought it
prudent, therefore, to make the best of their way out of the Temple, leaving
our Savior either to condemn or acquit the woman as he might think proper.

Reader, whenever you seem tempted to be severe on any crime or failing of
your neighbor, call to mind what passed between our Lord and these Pharisees;
they were so busy in bringing to light the sin of another, that they had forgot
that they had any sins of their own -- they reflected not that they were some
of the most unfit men in the world to take up the office of accusers, nor do
they seem to have ever considered what was likely to become of themselves
hereafter, when God should call them to judgment. And this is a common evil:
God has given to every man his work; each has an evil heart of his own, which
he ought to look to; each, if not guilty of open crimes, has many a secret sin
that he ought to repent of: instead of which, every one is bestowing his
attention on his neighbor's faults, without giving any heed to his own. We are
all naturally apt to entertain a very good opinion of ourselves, but a strict
examination of our ways might chance to spoil that good opinion, and we are
therefore very backward in entering upon the task. On the contrary, we are very
ready to blame our neighbor, for, in proportion as we blacken his character, we
cause our own to appear in a favorable light.

But how very foolish, as well as vain, is all this self-deceit! We may hide
our sins, for a while, both from ourselves and from others also; just as the
Pharisees concealed their true character, till our Savior sent them this
rebuke; soon, however, a day will come when all that has been kept secret shall
be brought to light; and even now, let me remark, that the same divine person,
who, by a few words, confounded these hypocrites, has his eye upon us; for the
Lord knows our down-sitting and our up-rising, and understands our thoughts
long before; he is about our path, and about our bed, and espieth out all our
ways. From him the darkness cannot hide us, for the darkness is no darkness to
him, but the night is as clear as the day. Before him lies the history of our
whole lives, in which is noted every thing that we have ever said, every thing
that we have ever done, and every thing also that we have ever though it or
imagined in our minds. And now, if the same Jesus should again appear in the
Temple, and reprove us as he did the Pharisees, awakening in like manner our
consciences, and setting them to condemn us, who is there among us that could
abide it? If he should publish among the crowd of our fellow creatures standing
round us, all the secret sins of our lives, or should draw them up in the form
of an accusation against us, and should require us to stand by and hear the
long indictment read, who is there, I say, who could stay to hear it to the
end! -- Who is there, who would not be glad to escape from his presence, and
leave him again alone in the Temple!

Nor let us forget that, although Christ walks not on earth as he once did,
and though he is not present to reprove us with an audible voice, as he did the
Pharisees, yet he still speaks to us by our consciences, and also by the still
voice of his Holy Spirit, which striveth with us: and great is the power of
conscience, when once awakened, and set to work by the power of God's Holy
Spirit; for then nothing can withstand it; from the moment when it is truly
alarmed it begins to discover a man to himself, and it will then find him so
much employment at home, that he will have little leisure and less inclination
to turn accuser of his brethren. Go now into the chamber of him whom sickness
and sorrow have brought low, and have filled with a deep sense of sin; see with
what readiness he confesses his iniquity, and with what earnestness he prays
for pardon; see how entirely he is taken up by the affairs of his own soul, and
how he is laboring to make his peace with God. Tell him that some neighbor has
fallen into a dreadful sin, and how, think you, will be be affected by it? Why,
he will lament, pity, and pray for the person. But if you should try after the
manner of some profane people to raise a joke at the expense of the unhappy
sinner, hoping to divert the sick person with the subject, methinks he would
turn from you as from a man not fit for him to talk with, and he would probably
beg you to go out of the room. To proceed one step farther. Suppose the last
day to be now come. Imagine that you see the Judge upon the Throne, the
generations of mankind assembled before him, and the books opened, out of which
we are all to be judged. Who, in that situation, would have any disposition to
revile, or laugh at the sins of his neighbor, or would have any heart to be
severe upon him? Who is there whose thoughts would not be employed entirely
upon his own case? -- Who would not be anxious to obtain his own pardon; who,
in short, would not leave God to deal as he though it fit with others, hoping and
praying that they also, if possible, might obtain mercy? To this temper,
therefore, it is plain that sickness may soon bring us, and to this temper, may
God grant that we may all be brought before it is too late, since death and
judgment will most assuredly bring us to it at last.

Our Savior having thus dispatched the Pharisees, the woman alone remains: she
was detained in the Temple by the same cause which made the others depart -- I
mean consciousness of guilt. This kept her fixed to the spot even after her
accusers were gone, expecting now to hear her sentence pronounced by Christ;
who, at length, raised himself from the ground, on which he had been writing,
says to the woman, where are those thine accusers? Has no man condemned thee?
She said, no man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, neither do I condemn thee; go,
and sin no more.

Let us not be led by this last speech of Christ, to suppose ^^^t he meant
either to make light of the sin, or to say any thing against the law of God.
No, let us take occasion rather in this place to remark how very dreadful a
crime adultery is considered by our Creator, since he ordered it in the Old
Testament to be punished even with death. This punishment, however, was not to
be inflicted, except after regular proof; an accuser and sufficient witnesses
must come forward in every such case; the proper Judge or Magistrate must also
hear the cause, and must himself pronounce the sentence. If all these necessary
rules had been complied with, Christ would not have thought of stopping the due
course of law, for he was not used to meddle with the civil power, nor is there
any instance of his showing forth his mercy by saving a criminal out of the
hands of public justice. In the present instance no kind of trial had been had;
on the contrary, the accusers and witnesses were all fled; this woman,
therefore, not being accused by those whose office it was to accuse her, was
not accused by Christ neither, whose office it certainly was not. On another
occasion, when Christ was appealed to by one who seems to have been wronged in
his property, he made answer, man, who made me a judge and a divider. Our
Savior came into the world not to settle disputes about property, nor to
meddle in cases of common criminal justice; he left all such things as these to
be managed by the persons whom the state appointed for the purpose. He came to
be a Savior, he came to pardon sins committed against God, for which he made
atonement by his death, and in his life time he taught men how to obtain this
salvation, namely, by repenting and believing in him, and resolving to sin no
more.

In full agreement with these ends of his coming into the world, he, in the
present case, leaves the law of Moses just as it was, neither condemning nor
yet acquitting the woman; but as the publisher of the Gospel of the grace of
God, and, as the author of everlasting Salvation, he comforts, with the hope of
pardon, the wretched person whom the malicious Pharisees had bro't before him,
and he directs her how to escape, not the more punishment of the law, but the
more bitter pains of eternal death. Go, said he, and sin no more. It is as if
he had said, "Be not concerned about the accusation before the magistrate,
which has been brought against you, for your accusers indeed are gone. I have
put them to slight by a single sentence spoken to their consciences; and since
the Pharisees do not accuse you, neither shall I turn prosecutor. Be concerned,
however, about the sin against God which you have committed, and if you would
ever hope for mercy at his hands, be sure that you do not return to your
iniquity. Go then in peace, Go in hope of pardon and salvation, for I am come
in the world to be your Savior, but go and sin no more.

A HYMN.
ALMIGHTY God, thy piercing eye
Strikes through the shade of night;
And our most secret actions lie
All open to thy sight.
There Is not a sin that we commit,
Nor wicked word we s^y,
But in thy dreadful book it is writ
Against the judgment day.
And must the crimes that I have done
Be read and published there;
Be all exposed before the Sun,
While men and angels hear?
Lord, at thy foot ashamed I lie,
Upward I dare not look;
Pardon my sins before I die,
And blot them from thy book.
And since, if ever I see thy face,
Thy mercy bids me live;
O, ^et me learn from this thy grace,
My neighbor to forgive.
Teach me, whenever his wrath begins,
To pity, not to chide;
And all his multitude of sins
With charity to hide.
Teach me, though wronged a thousand times,
To make no anger known;
And when I hear of others crimes,
To think upon my own.
THE GRAND ASSIZES; OR, GENERAL GAOL DELIVERY.
THERE was in a certain country a great king, who was also a judge. He was very
merciful, but he was also very just; for he used to say that justice was the
foundation of all goodness. His subjects were apt enough, in a general way, to
extol his merciful temper, and especially those subjects who were always
committing crimes which made them liable to be punished by his justice. This
last quality they constantly kept out of sight, till they had cheated
themselves into a notion that he was too good to punish at all.

Now it happened a long time before, that this whole people had broken their
allegiance, and had forfeited the king's favor, and had also fallen from a very
prosperous state in which he had placed them, having one and all become
bankrupts; but when they were over head and ears in debt, and had nothing to
pay, the king's son most generously took the whole burden of the debts on
himself; and, in short, it was proposed that all their affairs should be
settled, and their very crimes forgiven, (for they were criminals as well as
debtors) provided only they would show themselves to be sorry for what they had
done themselves, and be thankful for what was done for them. I should however
remark, that a book was also given them, in which a true and faithful account
of their own rebellion was written; and of the manner of obtaining the king's
pardon, together with a variety of directions for their conduct in time to
come; and in this book it was particularly mentioned, that after having lived a
certain number of years in a part of the same king's country, and under his eye
and jurisdiction, there should be a Grand Assize, when every one was to be
publicly tried for his past behavior, and after this trial was over, certain
heavy punishments were to be inflicted on those who should have still persisted
in their rebellion, and certain high premiums were to be bestowed as a gracious
reward upon the obedient.

It may be proper here to notice, that this king's court differed in some
respects from our courts of justice, being indeed a sort of court of appeal, to
which questions were carried after they had been imperfectly decided in the
common courts. And although with us all criminals are tried (and very pro^^^
(...) my opinion) by a jury of their peers, yet in this king's country the mode
was very different; for, since every one of the people had been in a certain
sense criminals, the king did not think it fair to make them judges also. It
would, indeed, have been impossible to follow in all respects, the customs
which prevail with us, for the crimes with which men are charged in our courts
are mere "overt acts," as the lawyers call them, that is, acts which regard the
outward behavior; such as the acts of striking, maiming, stealing, and so
forth. But in the king's court it was not merely outward sins, but sins of the
heart also which were to be punished. Many a crime, therefore, which was never
heard of in the court of king's bench, or at the Old Baily, was here to be
bro't to light, and was reserved for this great day. Among these were pride,
and oppression, and envy, and malice, and revenge, and covetousness, and secret
vanity of mind, and evil thoughts of all sorts, and all evil wishes and
desires. When covetousness, indeed, put men on committing robbery, or when
malice drove them to an not of murder, then the common courts immediately
judged the criminal, without waiting for these Great Assizes; nevertheless
since even a thief and murderer would now and then escape in the common courts,
for want of evidence, or through some fault or other of the judge of jury, the
escape was of little moment to the poor criminal, for he was sure to be tried
again by this great king; and even though the man should have been punished in
some sense before, yet he had now a farther punishment to fear, unless, indeed
he was one of those, who had obtained (by the means I before spoke of) this
great king's pardon. The sins of the heart, however, were by far the most
numerous sort of sins, which were to come before this great tribunal; and these
were to be judged by this great king in person, and by none but himself;
because he possessed a certain power of getting at all secrets.

I once heard of a certain king of Sicily, who built a whispering gallery in
the form of an ear, through which he could hear every word that his rebellious
subjects uttered, though spoken ever so low. But this secret of the king of
Sicily was nothing to what this great king possessed; for he had the power of
knowing every though it which was conceived in the mind, though it never broke out
into words, or proceeded to actions.

Now you may be ready to think, perhaps, that these people were worse off than
any others, because they were to be examined so closely, and judged so
strictly. Far from it: the king was too just to expect bricks without giving
them straw; he gave them, therefore, every help that they needed. He gave them
a book of directions, as I before observed; and because they were naturally
short-sighted, he supplied them with a glass for reading it, and thus the most
dim-sighted might see, if they did not wilfully shut their eyes; but though the
king invited them to open their eyes, he did not compel them; and many remained
stone blind all their lives with the book in their hand, because they would not
use the glass, nor take the proper means for reading and understanding all that
was written for them. The humble and sincere learnt in time to see even that
part of the book which was least plainly written; and it was observed that the
ability to understand it depended more on the heart than the head; and evil
disposition blinded the sight, while humility operated like an eye salve.

Now it happened that those who had been so lucky as to escape the punishment
of the lower courts, took it into their heads that they were all very good sort
of people, and of course very safe from any danger at this Great Assize. This
grand intended trial, indeed, had been talked of so much, and put off so long,
(for it had seemed long at least to these short-sighted people) that many
persuaded themselves that it would never take place at all; and far the greater
part were living away therefore without ever thinking about it; they went on
just as if nothing at all had been done for their benefit; and as if they had
no king to please, no king's son to be thankful to, no book to guide themselves
by, and as if the Assizes were never to come about.

But with this king a thousand years were as one day, for he was not slack
concerning his promises, as some men count slackness. So at length the solemn
period approached. Still, however, the people did not prepare for the
solemnity, or rather, they prepared for it much as some of the people in our
towns are apt to prepare for the Assize times; I mean by balls and feastings,
and they saw their own trial come on with as little concern as is felt by the
people in our streets, when they see the judge's procession enter the town, who
indeed comfort themselves that it is only those in the prisons who are guilty.

But when at last the day came, and every man found that he was to be judged
for himself, and that some how or other, all his secrets were brought out, and
that there was now no escape, things began to take a more serious turn. Some of
the worst of the criminals were got together debating in an outer court of the
Grand Hall, and there they passed their time, not in compunction with tears,
not (...) comparing their lives with what was required in that book which had
been given them, but in comparing themselves with such as had been still more
notorious offenders.

One who had grown wealthy by rapine and oppression, but had contrived to keep
within the letter of the law, insulted a poor fellow as a thief, because he had
stolen a loaf of bread. "You were far wickeder than I was," said a citizen to
his apprentice, "for you drank and swore at the alehouse every Sunday night."
"Yes," said the poor fellow, "but it was your fault that I did so, for you took
no care of my soul, but spent all your Sabbaths in jaunting abroad or in
rioting at home; I might have learnt, but there was no one to teach me; I might
have followed a good example, but I saw only bad ones. I sinned against less
light than you did." A drunken journeyman, who had spent all his wages on gin,
took comfort that he had not sp^^^ a great estate in bribery at elections, as
the lord o^ (...) manor had done, while a perjured elector boasted that he was
no drunkard, like the journeyman.

I have not room to describe the awful pomp of the court, nor the terrible
sounding of the trumpet which attended the judge's entrance, nor the sitting of
the judge, nor the opening the books, nor the crouding of the millions, who
stood before him. I shall pass over the multitudes who were tried and condemned
to dungeons, and chains, and fire, and to perpetual banishment from the
presence of the king, which always seemed to be the saddest part of the
sentence. I shall only notice further, a few who brought some plea of merit,
and claimed a right to be rewarded by the king, and even deceived themselves so
far as to think that his own book of laws would be their justification.

A thoughtless spendthrift advanced without any contrition, and said, "that he
had lived handsomely, and had hated the covetous whom God abhors, and that
he trusted in that passage of the book which said, that covetousness was
idolatry; and that he therefore loped for a favorable sentence." Now it proved
that this man had not only avoided covetousness, but that he had even left his
wife and children in want through his excessive prodigality. The judge
therefore immediately pointed to that place in the book where it is written, he
that provideth not for his household is worse than an infidel. He that lives
in pleasure is dead while he lives; thou, said he, in thy life time
receivedest thy good things, and now thou must be tormented. -- Then a miser,
whom hunger and hoarding had worn to skin and bone, crept forward, and praised
the sentence passed on this extravagant youth, "and surely," said he, "since he
is condemned, I am the man that may make some plea to favor -- I was never idle
or drunk, I kept my body in subjection. I have been so self-denying that I am
certainly a saint: I have loved neither father, nor mother, nor wife, nor
children, to excess; in all this I have obeyed the book of the law." Then the
judge said, " but where are thy works of mercy and thy labors of love? see that
family which perished in thy sight last hard winter, while thy barns were
overflowing; that poor family were my representatives, yet they were hungry and
thou gave them no meat. Go to now thou rich man, weep and howl for the
miseries that are come upon you. Your gold and your silves is cankered and the
rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it
were fire." Then came up one with a most self-sufficient air. He walked up
boldly, having in one hand the plan of (...) hospital which he had built, and
in the other the drawing of a statue which was erecting for him in the country
that he had just left, and on his forehead appeared in gold letters, the list
of all the Public Charities to which he had subscribed. -- He seemed to take
great pleasure in the condemnation of the Miser, and said, Lord, where saw I
thee hungry and fed thee not, or in prison and visited thee not? I have visited
the fatherless and widow in their affliction. Here the Judge cut him short by
saying, "True, thou did visit the fatherless, but did thou fulfill equally
that other part of my command to keep thyself unspotted from the world." No,
thou were conformed to the world in many of its sinful customs, thou did
follow a multitude to do evil; thou did love the world and the things of the
world; and the motive to all thy charities was not a regard to me but to thy
own credit with thy fellow-men. Thou have done every thing for the sake of
reputation, and now thou art vainly trusting in thy works, instead of putting
all thy trust in my Son, who has offered himself to be a surety for thee. Where
has been that humility and gratitude to him which was required of thee. No,
thou would be thine own surety: thou have trusted in thyself: thou have made
thy boast of thine own goodness: thou have sought after and thou have enjoyed
the praise of men, and verily, I say unto thee, thou have had thy reward.

A poor diseased blind cripple, from the very Hospital which this great man had
built, then fell prostrate on his face, crying out, Lord be merciful to me a
sinner! on which the Judge, to the surprise of all, said, well done good and
faithful servant. The poor man replied, "Lord, I have done nothing!" "But thou
have suffered well," said the Judge; "thou have been an example of patience and
meekness and though thou had but few talents, yet thou have well improved
those few; thou had time, this thou did spend in the humble duties of thy
station, and also in earnest prayer, even for that proud Founder of thine
Hospital, who never prayed for himself; thou wast indeed blind and lame, but it
is no where said, my Son, give me thy feet or thine eyes, but give me thy
heart; and even the faculties I did grant thee, were employed to my glory; with
thine ears thou did listen to my word, with thy tongue thou did show forth
my praise; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." There were several who came
forward, and boasted of some single and particular virtue, in which they had
been supposed to excel. One talked of his generosity, another of his courage,
and a third of his fortitude; but it proved, on a close examination, that some
of those supposed virtues were merely the effect of a particular constitution
of body; that others proceeded from a false motive, and that not a few of them
were actual vices, since they were carried to excess; and under the pretense of
fulfilling one duty, some other duty was lost sight of; in short, these partial
virtues were none of them done in obedience to the will of the king, but merely
to please the person's own humor, and they would not therefore stand this
day's trial, for he that had kept the whole law, and yet had wilfully and
habitually offended in any one point, was declared guilty of breaking the whole.

At this moment a sort of thick scales fell from the eyes of the multitude.
They could now no longer ^^ke comfort by measuring their neighbors' conduct
against their own. Each at once saw himself in his true light, and found, alas!
when it was too late, that he should have made the book which had been given
him his rule of practice before, since it now proved to be the rule by which he
was to be judged. Nay, every one now though it himself even worse than his
neighbor, because, while he only saw and heard of the guilt of others, he felt
his own in all its aggravated hor^^s.

To complete their confusion, they were compelled to acknowledge the justice of
the Judge who condemned them; and also to approve the favorable sentence by
which thousands of other crimmals had not only their lives saved, but were made
happy and glorious beyond all imagination, and all this was in consequence of
their sincere repentance, and their humble acceptance of the pardon offered to
them by the King's Son. One thing was remarkable, that whilst most of those who
were condemned, never expected condemnation, but even claimed a reward for
their supposed innocence or goodness, all who were really rewarded and forgiven
were sensible that they owed every thing to a mere act of grace, and they cried
out with one voice, not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name be the praise!!!

BEAR YE ONE ANOTHER'S BURDENS; OR, THE VALLEY OF TEARS. A VISION.
ONCE upon a time methought I set out upon a long journey, and the place
through which I traveled appeared to be a dark Valley, which was called the
Valley of Tears. It had obtained this name not only on account of the many
sorrowful adventures which poor passengers commonly meet with in their journey
through it, but also because most of these travelers entered it weeping and
crying, and left it in very great pain and anguish. This vast valley was full
of people of all colors, ages, sizes, and descriptions. -- But whether white or
black, or tawney, all were traveling the same road; or, rather, they were
taking different little paths which all led to the same common end.

Now it was remarkable, that notwithstanding the different complexions, ages,
and tempers of this vast variety of people, yet all resembled each other in
this one respect, that each had a burden on his back which he was destined to
carry through the toil and heat of the day, until he should arrive by a longer
or shorter course at his journey's end. These burdens would in general have
made the pilgrimage quite intolerable, had not the Lord of the Valley, out of
his great compassion for these poor Pilgrims, provided among other things the
following means for their relief.

In their full view over the entrance of the Valley there were written in great
letters, the following words: Bear ye one another's Burdens.

Now I saw in my vision that many of the travelers hurried on without stopping
to read this instruction, and others, though they had once read it, yet paid
little or no attention to it. A third sort thought it very good advice for
other people, but very seldom applied it to themselves. In short, I saw that
too many of those people were of opinion that they had burdens enough of their
own, and that there was therefore no occasion to take upon them those of
others; so each tried to make his own load as light, and his own journey as
pleasant as he could, without so much as once casting a thought on a pool
over-loaded neighbor. Here, however, I have to make a rather singular remark,
by which I shall plainly show the folly of these selfish people. It was so
ordered and contrived by the Lord of this valley, that if any one stretched out
his hand to lighten a neighbor's burden, in fact he never failed to find that
he at that moment also lightened his own. Besides, the obligation to help each
other, and the benefit of doing so were mutual. If a man helped his neighbor,
it commonly happened that some other neighbor came by-and-by and helped him in
his turn; for there was no such thing as what we call independence in the whole
valley. Not one of all these travelers, however stout and strong, could move
on comfortably without assistance, for so the Lord of the Valley, whose laws
were all of them kind and good, had expressly ordained.

I stood still to watch the progress of these poor wayfaring people, who moved
slowly on, like so many ticket porters, with burdens of various kinds on their
backs; of which some were heavier, and some were lighter, but from a burden of
one kind or other, not one traveller was entirely free.

THE WIDOW.
A sorrowful widow, oppressed with the burden of grief for the loss of an
affectionate husband, would have been bowed down by her heavy load, had not the
surviving children with great alacrity stepped forward and supported her. Their
kindness after a while, so much lightened the load which threatened at first to
be intolerable, that she even went on her way with cheerfulness.

THE HUSBAND.
I next saw a poor old man tottering under a burden so heavy, that I expected
him every moment to sink under it. I peeped into his pack and saw it was made
up of many sad articles; there was poverty, oppression, sickness, debt, and
what made by far the heaviest part, undutiful children. I was wondering how it
was that he got on even so well as he did, till I spied his wife, a kind, meek,
Christian woman, who was doing her utmost to assist him. She quietly got
behind, gently laid her shoulder to the burden, and carried a much larger
proportion of it than appeared to me when I was at a distance. She not only
sustained him by her strength, but cheered him by her counsels. She told him
that through much tribulation we must enter into rest, that he that overcomes
shall inherit all things. In short, she so supported his fainting spirit, that
he was enabled to run with patience the race that was set before him.

THE KIND NEIGHBOR.
An infirm blind woman was creeping forward with a very heavy burden, in which
were packed sickness and want, with numberless other of those raw materials,
out of which human misery is worked up. She was so weak that she could not have
got on at all, had it not been for the kind assistance of another woman almost
as poor as herself; who, though she had no light burden of her own, cheerfully
lent an helping hand to a fellow traveller who was still more heavily laden.
This friend had indeed little or nothing to give, but the very voice of
kindness is soothing to the weary. And I remarked in many other cases, that it
was not so much the degree of the help afforded, as the manner of helping that
lightened the burdens. Some had a coarse, rough, clumsy way of assisting a
neighbor, which, though in fact it might be of real use, yet seemed, by galling
the travelers, to add to the load it was intended to lighten; while I observed
in others that so cheap a kindness as a mild word, or even an affectionate
look, made a poor burdened wretch move on cheerily. The bare feeling that some
human being cared for him, seemed to lighten the load. But to return to this
kind neighbor. She had a little old book in her hand, the covers of which were
worn out by much use. When she saw the blind woman ready to faint, she would
read her a few words out of this book, such as the following -- blessed are the
poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. -- Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works out for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

THE CLERGYMAN.
A pious Minister, sinking under the weight of a distressed parish, whose
worldly wants he was totally unable to bear, was suddenly relieved by a good
widow, who came up and took all the sick and hungry on her own shoulders. The
burden of the parish thus divided became tolerable. The Minister, being no
longer bowed down by the temporal distresses of his people, applied himself
cheerfully to his own part of the weight. And it was pleasant to see how those
two persons, neither of them very strong, or rich, or healthy, by thus kindly
uniting together, were enabled to bear the weight of a whole parish; though
singly, either of them must have sunk under the attempt. And I remember one
great grief I felt during my whole journey was, that I did not see more of this
union and concurring kindness, by which all the burdens might have been so
easily divided. It troubled me to observe, that of all the laws of the Valley,
there was not one more frequently broken than the law of kindness.

THE NEGROES.
I now spied a swarm of poor black men, women, and children, a multitude which
no man could number; these groaned and toiled, and sweated, and bled under far
heavier loads than I had yet seen. But for a while no man helped them; at
length a few white travelers were touched with the sorrowful sighing of those
millions, and very heartily did they pat their hands to the burdens; but their
number was not quite equal to the work they had undertaken. I perceived,
however, that they never lost sight of those poor heavy-laden wretches, and as
the number of these generous helpers increased, I felt a comfortable hope, that
before all the blacks got out of the Valley, the whites would fairly divide the
burden, and the loads would be effectually lightened.

Among the travelers, I had occasion to remark, that those who most kicked and
struggled under their burdens, only made them so much the heavier; for their
shoulders became extremely galled by those vain struggles. The load, if borne
patiently, would in the end have turned even to the advantage of the bearers,
(for so the Lord of the Valley had kindly decreed) but as to these grumblers,
they had all the smart and none of the benefit. But the thing which made all
these burdens seem so very heavy was, that in every one without exception,
there was a certain inner packet, which most of the travelers took pains to
conceal, and carefully wrap up; and while they were forward enough to complain
of the other part of their burdens, few said a word about this; though in
truth it was the pressing weight of this secret packet which served to render
the general burden so intolerable. In spite of all their caution, I contrived
to get a peep at it; I found in ^ach that this packet had the same ^bel: the
word SIN was written on all as a general title, and in ink so black that they
could not wash it out. I observed that most of them took no small pains to hide
the writing; but I was surprised to ^^e that they did not try to g^t rid of the
load but the label. If any kind friend who assisted these people in bearing
their burdens, did but so much as hint at the secret packet, or advise them
to get rid of it, they took fire at once, and commonly denied they had any such
article in their portmanteau; and it was those whose secret packet swelled to
the most en^rmous size, who most stoutly denied they had any.

I saw with pleasure, however, that some who had long labored heartily to get
rid of this inward pacqu^t at length found it much diminished, and the more
this packet shrunk in size, the lighter was the other part of their burdens
also.

Then, methought, all at once, I heard a voice as it had been the voice of an
angel, crying out and saying, "Ye unhappy Pilgrims, why are ye troubled about
the burden which ye are doomed to bear through this Valley of Tears? Know ye
not that as soon as ye shall have escaped out of this Valley, the whole burden
shall drop off, provided ye neglect not to remove that inward weight of SIN
which principally oppresses you? Study then the whole will of the Lord of this
Valley. Learn from him how this heavy part of your burdens may now be
lessened, and how at last it shall be removed forever. Be comforted. Faith and
hope may cheer you even in this Valley. The passage, though it seems long to
weary travelers, is comparatively short; for beyond it there is a land of
everlasting rest, where ye shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, where
ye shall be led by living fountains of waters, and all tears shall be wiped
away from your eyes."

THE Strait Gate and the Broad Way, BEING THE SECOND PART OF THE VALLEY OF
TEARS.
NOW I had a second vision of what was passing in the Valley of Tears.
Methought I saw again the same kind of travelers whom I had seen in the former
part, and they were wandering at large through the same vast wilderness. At
first setting out on his journey, each traveller had a lamp so fixed in his
bosom, that it seemed to make a part of himself, but as this natural light did
not prove to be sufficient to direct them in the right way, the king of the
country, in pity to their wanderings and their blindness, out of his gracious
condescension, promised to g^^e these poor wayfaring people an additional
supply of light from his own Royal Treasury. But as he did not cause to lavish
his favors where there seemed no disposition to receive them, he would not
bestow any of his oil on such as did not think it worth asking for. Ask and ye
shall have, was the rule he laid down for them. Many were prevented from asking
through pride, for they thought they had light enough already, preferring the
feeble glimmerings of their own lamp to all the light from the king's treasury.
Yet it was observed of those who rejected it, as thinking they had enough, that
hardly any acted up to what even their own light showed them. Others were
deterred from asking, because they were told that it not only pointed out the
dangers and difficulties of the road, but by a certain reflecting power, it
turned inward on themselves, and revealed to them ugly sights in their own
hearts, to which they rather chose to be blind; for those travelers chose
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. Now it was
remarkable that these two properties were inseparable, and that the lamp would
be of little outward use, except to those who used it as an internal reflector.
A threat and a promise also never failed to accompany the offer of this light
from the king, a promise that to those who improved what they had, more should
be given, and a threat that from those who did not use it wisely, should be
taken away even what they had.

I observed that when the road was very dangerous, when terrors and
difficulties and death beset the faithful traveller, then on their fervent
importunity, the king voluntarily gave large and bountiful supplies of light,
such as in common seasons never could have been expected; always proportioning
the quantity given to the necessity of the case, as their day was, such was
their light and strength.

Though many chose to depend entirely on their own lamp, yet it was observed
that this light was apt to go out if left to itself. It was easily blown out by
those violent gusts which were perpetually howling through the wilderness, and
indeed it was the natural tendency of that unwholesome atmosphere to extinguish
it, just as you have seen a candle go out when exposed to the vapors and foul
air of a damp room. It was a melancholy sight to see multitudes of travelers
heedlessly pacing on, boasting that they had light enough, and despising the
offer of more. But what astonished me most of all was, to see many, and some of
them too accounted men of first rate wit, actually busy in blowing out their
own light, because while any spark of it remained, it only served to torment
them, and point out things which they did not wish to see. And having once
blown out their own light, they were not easy till they had blown out that of
their neighbor's also; so that a good part of the wilderness seemed to exhibit
a sort of universal blindman's buff, each endeavoring to catch his neighbor,
while his own voluntary blindness exposed him to be caught himself, so that
each was actually falling into the snare he was laying for another, till at
length, as selfishness is the natural consequence of blindness, "catch he that
catch can," became the general cry throughout the wilderness.

Now I saw in my vision that there were some others who were busy in strewing
the most gaudy flowers over the numerous bogs, precipices, and pit-falls with
which the wilderness abounded, and thus making danger and death look so gay,
that poor thoughtless creatures seemed to delight in their own destruction.
Those pit-falls did not appear deep or dangerous, because over them were raised
gay edifices with alluring names, in which were singing men and singing women,
and dancing, and feasting, and gaming, and drinking, and jollity, and madness.
But though the scenery was gay, the footing was unsound. The floors were full
of holes through which the unthinking merry-makers were continually sinking.
Some tumbled through in the middle of a song, many at the end of a feast, and
though there was many a cup of intoxication wreathed with flowers, yet there
was always poison at the bottom. But what most surprised me was, that though no
day passed over their heads in which some of those merry-makers did not drop
through, yet their loss made little impression on those who were left. Nay,
instead of being awakened to more circumspection and self-denial by the
continual dropping off of those about them, several of them seemed to borrow
from thence an argument of a direct contrary tendency, and the very shortness
of the time was only urged as a reason to use it more sedulously for the
indulgence in sensual delights. Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die. Let
us crown ourselves with rose-buds before they are withered. With these and a
thousand other such little mottos, the gay garlands of the wilderness were
decorated. Some admired poets were set to work to put the most corrupt
sentiments into the most harmonious tunes; these were sung without scruple,
chiefly indeed by the looser sons of riot, but not seldom also by the more
orderly daughters of sobriety, who were not ashamed to sing to the sound of
instruments, sentiments so corrupt and immoral, that they would have blushed to
speak or read them; but the music seemed to sanctify the corruption, especially
such as was connected with love or drinking.

Now I observed that all the travelers who had so much as a spark of light
left, seemed every now and then, as they moved onwards, to cast an eye, though
with very different degrees of attention, toward the happy land, which they
were told lay at the end of their journey; but as they could not see very far
forward, and as they knew there was a dark and shadowy valley which must needs
be crossed before they could attain to the happy land, they tried to turn their
attention from it as much as they could. The truth is, they were not
sufficiently apt to consult a map which the king had given them, and which
pointed cut the road to the happy land so clearly, that the wayfaring men,
though simple, could not err. This map also defined very correctly the
boundaries of the happy land from the land of misery, both of which lay on the
other side of the dark and shadowy valley; but so many beacons and light-houses
were erected, so many clear and explicit directions furnished for avoiding the
one country and attaining the other, that it was not the king's fault, if even
one single traveller got wrong. But I am inclined to think that in spite of the
map, and the king's word, and his offers of assistance to get them thither,
that the travelers in general did not heartily and truly believe after all,
that there was any such country as the happy land; or at least, the paltry and
transient pleasures of the wilderness so besotted them, the thoughts of the
dark and shadowy valley so frightened them, that they thought they should be
more comfortable by banishing all thought and forecast.

Now I also saw in my dream, that there were two roads through the wilderness,
one of which every traveller must needs take. The first was narrow and
difficult, and rough, but it was infallibly safe. It did not admit the
traveller to stray either to the right hand or the left, yet it was far from
being destitute of real comforts or sober pleasures. The other was a broad and
tempting way, abounding with luxurious fruits and gaudy flowers to tempt the
eye, and please the appetite. To forget this dark valley, through which every
traveller was well assured he must one day pass, seemed indeed the object of
general desire. To this grand end, all that human ingenuity could invent was
industriously set to work. The travelers read, and they wrote, and they
painted, and they sung, and they danced, and they drank as they went along, not
so much because they all cared for these things, or had any real joy in th^^,
as because this restless activity served to divert their attention from ever
being fixed on the dark and shadowy valley.

The king, who knew the thoughtless temper of the travelers, and how apt they
were to forget their journey's end, had thought of a thousand little kind
attentions to warn them of their dangers. And as we sometimes see in our
gardens written on a board in great letters, BEWARE OF SPRING GUNS -- MAN TRAPS
ARE SET HERE; so had this king caused to be written and stuck up before the
eyes of the travelers, several like notices and cautions, such as broad is the
way that leads to destruction -- Take heed lest ye also perish -- Woe to them
that rise up early to drink wine -- The pleasures of sin are but for a season,
etc. Such were the notices directed to the broad-way travelers, but they were
so busily engaged in plucking the flowers, sometimes before they were blown,
and in devouring the fruits, often before they were ripe, and in loading
themselves with yellow-clay, under the weight of which millions perished, that
they had no time so much as to look at the king's directions. Many went wrong
because they preferred a merry journey to a safe one, and were terrified by
certain notices, chiefly intended for the narrow-way travelers, such as, ye
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; but had these foolish
people allowed themselves time or patience to read to the end, which they
seldom would do, they would have seen these comfortable words added, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy, also, your joy no man takes from you, and
they that sow in tears shall reap in joy.

Now I also saw in my dream, that many travelers who had a strong dread of
ending at the land of misery, walked up to the Strait Gate, hoping that though
the entrance was narrow, yet if they could once get in, the road would widen;
but what was their grief when on looking more closely, they saw written on the
inside, narrow is the way; this made them take fright, they compared the
inscriptions with which the whole way was lined, such as, be ye not conformed
to this world -- deny yourselves -- take up your cross, with all the tempting
pleasures of the wilderness. Some indeed recollected the sine descriptions they
had read of the happy land, the golden city, and the rivers of pleasures, and
they sighed: but then, those joys were distant, and from the faintness of their
light, they soon got to think that what was remote might be uncertain, and
while the present good increased in bulk by its nearness, the distant good
receded, diminished, disappeared! Their faith failed, they would trust no
farther than they could see; they drew back and got into the broad-way, taking
a common but sad refuge in the number and gaiety of their companions. When
these saint-hearted people, who yet had set out well, turned back, their light
was quite put out, and then they became worse than those who had made no
attempt to get in. For it is impossible, that is, i^ is next to impossible, for
those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and the
good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they fall away, to
renew them again to repentance.

A few honest humble travelers not naturally stronger than the rest, but
strengthened by their trust in the king's word, came up by the light of their
lamps, and meekly entered in at the Strait Gate; as they advanced farther they
f^l^ loss heavy, and though the way did not in reality grow wider, yet they
grew reconciled to the narrowness of it, especially when they saw the walls
here and there studded with certain jewels called promises, such as he that
endures to the end shall be saved. And my grace is sufficient for you. Some
when they were almost ready to faint, were encouraged by seeing that many
niches in the narrow-way were filled with statues and pictures of Saints and
Martyrs, who had borne their testimony at the stake, that the narrow-way was
the safe way; and these travelers, instead of sinking at the sight of the
painted wheel and gibbet, the sword and the furnace, were animated by these
words written under them, those that wear white robes came out of great
tribulation, and be ye followers of those, who, through faith and patience,
inherit the promises.

In the mean time there came a great multitude of travelers, all from
Laodicea; this was the largest party I had yet seen; these were neither hot nor
cold, they would not give up future hope, they could not endure present pain;
so they contrived to deceive themselves by fancying that they resolved to keep
the happy land in view, yet that there needs must be many different ways which
led to it, no doubt all equally sure, without being all equally rough; so they
set on foot little contrivances to attain the end without using the means, and
softened down the spirit of the king's directions to fit them to their own
practice. Sometimes they would split a direction in two, and only use that half
which suited them. For instance, when they met with the following rule, Trust
in the Lord and be doing good, they would take the first half, and make
themselves easy with a general sort of trust, that through the mercy of the
king all would go will with them, though they themselves did nothing; and on
the other hand, many made sure that a few good works of their own would do
their business, and carry them safely to the happy land, though they did not
trust in the Lord, nor place any faith in his word. Thus, some perished by a
lazy faith, and others by a working pride. A large party of Pharisees now
appeared, who had so neglected their lamp that they did not see their way at
all, though they fancied themselves to be full of light; they kept up
appearances so well, as to delude others, and most effectually to delude
themselves with a notion that they might be found in the right way at last. In
this dreadful delusion they went on to the end, and till they were finally
plunged in the dark valley, never discovered the horrors which awaited them on
the dismal shore. It was remakable that while these Pharisees were often
boasting how bright their light burnt, in order to get the praise of men, the
humble travelers, whose steady light showed their good works to others,
refused all commendation, and the brighter their light shined before men, so
much the more they insisted that they ought to glorify not themselves, but
their Father which is in Heaven.

I now set myself to observe what was the particular let, molestation, and
hindrance, which obstructed particular travelers in their endeavors to enter
in at the Strait Gate. I remarked a huge portly man who seemed desirous of
getting in, but he carried about him such a vast provision of bags full of
gold, and had on so many rich garments which stuffed him out so wide, that
though he pushed and squeezed, like one who had really a mind to get in, yet he
could not possibly do so. Then I heard a voice crying, woe to him that loadeth
himself with thick clay. The poor man felt something was wrong, and even went
so far as to change some of his more cumbersome vanities into others which
seemed loss bulky, but still he and his pack were much too wide for the gate.
He would not however give up the matter so easily, but began to throw away a
little of the coarser part of his baggage, but still I remarked that he threw
away none of the vanities which lay near his heart. He tried again, but it
would not do; still his read these words, how hardly shall those who have
riche^ enter into the kingdom of God. The poor man sighed to find it was
impossible to enjoy his fill of both worlds, and went away sorrowing. If he
ever afterward cast a thought toward the happy land, it was only to regret
that the road which led to it was too narrow to admit any but the meagre
children of want, who were not so incumbered by wealth as to be too big for the
passage. Had he read on he would have seen that with God all things are
possible.

Another advanced with much confidence of success, for having little worldly
riches or hono^^, the gate did not seem so strait to him. He got to the
threshold triumphantly, and seemed to look back with disdain on all that he was
quitting. He soon found, however, that he was so bloated with pride, and
stuffed out with self-sufficiency, that he could not get in. Nay, he was in a
worse way than the rich man just named; for he was willing to throw away some
of his outward luggage, whereas this man refused to part with a grain of that
vanity and self-applause which made him too big for the way. The sense of his
own worth so swelled him out, that he stuck fast in the gateway, and could
neither get in nor out. Finding now that he must cut off all those big thoughts
of himself if he wished to be reduced to such a size as to pass the gate, he
gave up all thoughts of it. He scorned that humility and self-denial which
might have shrunk him down to the proper dimensions; the more he insisted on
his own qualifications for entrance, the more impossible it became, for the
bigger he grew. Finding that he must become quite another manner of man before
he could hope to get in, he gave up the desire; and I now saw that though when
he set his face toward the happy land he could not yet an inch forward, yet
the instant he made a motion ^^turn back into the world, his speed became rapid
enough, and he soon got back into the broaa-way.

Many, who for a time were brought from their usual bulk by some affliction,
seemed to get in with case. -- They now thought all their difficulties over,
for having been surfeited with the world, during their late disappointment,
they turned their backs upon it willingly enough. A fit of sickness perhaps,
which is very apt to reduce, had for a time brought their bodies into
subjection, so that they were able just to get in at the gateway; but as soon
as health and spirits returned, the way grew narrower and narrower to ^^em;
they could not get on, but turned short, and got back into the world. I saw
many attempt to enter who were stopped short by a large burden of worldly cares;
others by a load of idolatrous attachments; but I obser^ed that nothing proved
a more complete bar than that vast bundle of prejudices with which multitudes
were loaded. Others were fatally obstructed by loads of bad habits which they
would not lay down, though they knew it prevented their entrance. Some few,
however, of most descriptions, who had kept their light alive, by craving
constant supplies from the king's treasury, got through at last by a strength
which they felt not to be their own. One poor man, who carried the largest
bundle of bad habits I had seen, could not get on a step; he never ceased,
however, to implore for light enough to see where his misery lay; he threw down
one of his bundles, then another, but all to little purpose; still he could not
stir. At last striving as if in an agony, (which is the true way of entering)
he threw down the heaviest article in his pack; this was selfishness; the poor
fellow felt relieved at once, his light burnt brightly, and the rest of his
paok was as nothing.

Then I heard a great noise as of carpenters at work. I looked what this might
be, and saw many sturdy travelers, who finding they were too bulky to get
through, took it into their heads not to reduce themselves, but to widen the
gate; they hacked on this side, and hewed on that; but all their hacking, and
hewing, and hammering, was to no purpose, they got only their labor for their
pains; it was possible they might have reduced themselves, but they could not
widen the way.

What grieved me most was to observe that many who had got on successfully a
good way, now stopped to rest, and to admire their own progress. While they
were thus valuing themselves on their seize, their light diminished.
While these were boasting how far they had left others behind, who had set out
much earlier, some slower travelers, whose beginning had not been so
promising, but who had walked carefully, now outstripped them. These last
walked, not as though they had already attained; but this one thing they did,
forgetting the things which were behind, they pushed forward toward the mark
for the prize of their high calling. These though naturally weak, yet, by
laying aside every weight, finished the race that was set before them. Those
who had kept their light burning, who were not wise in their own conceit, who
laid their help on one that is mighty, who had chosen to suffer affliction
rather than enjoy the pleasures of si^, came at length to the happy land. They
had indeed the dark and shadowy valley to cross; but even there they found a
rod and a staff to comfort them. Their light, instead of being put out by the
damps of the valley of the shadow or death, often burnt with added brightness.
Some indeed suffered the terrors of a short eclipse; but even then their light,
like that of a dark lanthorn, was not put out; it was only hid for a while, and
even these often finished their course with joy. But be that as it might, the
instant they reached the happy land, all tears were wiped from their eyes, and
the King himself came forth and welcomed them into his presence, and put a
crown upon their heads, with these words, Well done, good and faithful servant,
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

THE COTTAGE COOK; OR, MRS. JONES's CHEAP DISHES;
Showing the Way to do much Good with a little Money.
MRS. JONES was a great merchant's lady. She was liberal to the poor, but as
she was too much taken up with the world, she did not spare so much of her time
and thoughts about doing good as she ought, so that her money was often ill
bestowed. In the late troubles, Mr. Jones, who had lived in a grand manner,
failed, and he took his misfortunes so much to heart that he fell sick and
died. Mrs. Jones retired on a very narrow income to t^^ small village of
Weston, where she seldom went out except to church. Though a pious woman she
was too apt to indulge her sorrow; and though she did not neglect to read and
pray, yet she gave up a great part of her time to melancholy thoughts, and grew
quite inactive. She well knew how sinful it would be for her to seek a cure for
her grief in worldly pleasures, which is a way many people take under
afflictions, but she was not aware how wrong it was to weep away that time
which might have been better spent in drying the tears of others.

It was happy for her that Mr. Simpson, the vicar of Weston, was a pious man.
One Sunday he happened to preach upon the good Samaritan. It was a charity
sermon, and there was a collection at the door. He called on Mrs. Jones after
church, and found her in tears. She told him she had been much moved by his
discourse, and she wept because she had so little to give to the plate; for
though she felt very keenly for the poor in these dear times, yet she could not
assist them. "Indeed fir," added she, "I never so much regretted the loss of my
fortune, as this afternoon, when you bade us go and do likewise." "You do not,"
replied Mr. Simpson, "enter into the spirit of our Savior's parable, if you
think you cannot go and do likewise without being rich. In the case of the
Samaritan you may observe, that charity was afforded more by kindness, and
care, and medicine, than by money. You, Madam, were as much concerned in my
sermon, as Sir John with his great estate; and, to speak plainly, I have been
sometimes surpised that you should not put yourself in the way of being more
useful."

"Sir," said Mrs. Jones, "I am grown shy of the poor since I have nothing to
give them." "Nothing Madam," replied the clergyman, "do you call your time,
your talents, your kind offices nothing? I will venture to say that you might
do more good than the richest man in the parish could do by merely giving his
money. Instead of sitting here, brooding over your misfortunes, which are past
remedy, bestir yourself to find out ways of doing much good with little money;
or even without any money at all. You have lately studied economy for
yourself. Instruct your poor neighbors in it. They want it almost as much as
they want money. You have influence with the few rich persons in the parish.
Exert that influence. Betty, my housekeeper, shall assist you in any thing in
which she can be useful. Try this for one year, and if you then tell me that
you should have better shown your love to God and man, and been a happier woman
had you continued gloomy and inactive, I shall be much surprised."

The sermon and this discourse made so deep an impression on Mrs. Jones, that
she formed a new plan of life, and set about it at once, as every body does who
is in earnest. Her chief arm was the happiness of her poor neighbors in the
next world; but she was also very desirous to promote their present comfort.
The plans she pursued with a view to the latter object shall be explained in
this little book. Mrs. Jones was much respect^d by all the rich persons in
Weston who had known her in her prosperity. Sir John was thoughtless, lavish,
and indolent. The 'Squire was over-frugal, but active, sober, and not
ill-natured. Sir John loved pleasure, the 'Squire loved money. Sir John was one
of those popular sort of people who get much praise and yet do little good; who
subscribe with equal readiness to a cricket match or a charity school; who take
it for granted that the poor are to be indulged with bell-ringing and bonfires,
and to be made drunk at Christmas; this Sir John called being kind to them; but
he thought it was folly to teach them, and madness to think of reforming them.
-- He was, however, always ready to give his guinea; but I question whether he
would have given up his hunting and his gaining to have cured every grievance
in the land. On the other hand, the 'Squire would assist Mrs. Jones in any of
her plans if it cost him nothing; so she showed her good sense by never asking
Sir John for advice, or the 'Squire for subscriptions, and by this prudence
gained the full support of both.

Mrs. Jones resolved to spend two or three days in a week in getting acquainted
with the state of the parish, and she took care never to walk out without a few
little good books in her pocket to give away. She found that among the numerous
wants she met with, no small share was owing to bad management or to
indisposition. She was struck with the small size of the loaves. Wheat was now
not very dear, and she was sure a good deal of blame rested with the baker. She
sent for a shilling loaf to the next great town where the mayor often sent to
the bakers' stops to see that the bread was prop^r weight. She weighed her town
loaf against her coun^ry loaf, and found the latter two pounds lighter than it
ought to be. This was not the sort of grievance to carry to Sir John; but
luckily the 'Squire was also a magistrate, and it was quite in his way. He told
her he could remedy the evil if some one would lodge the information against
the baker.

She dropped in on the blacksmith. He was at dinner. She enquired if his bread
was good. "Aye, good enough mistress, for you see it is as white as your cap, if
we had but more of it. Here Is a sixpenny loaf, you might take it for a penny
roll!" He then heartily cursed Crib the the baker and said he ought to be
hanged. Mrs. Jones now told him what she had done, how she had detected the
fraud, and assured him the evil should be redressed on the morrow, provided he
would appear and inform. "I inform!" said he with a shocking oath, "hang an
informer! I scorn the office." "You are nice in the wrong place, friend,"
replied Mrs. Jones, "for you do not scorn to abuse the baker, nor to be in a
passion, nor to swear, though you scorn to redress a public injury, and to
increase your children's bread. Let me tell you, there is nothing in which you
ignorant people mistake more than in your notions about informers. Informing is
the lawful way of obtaining redress, and though it is a mischievous and a
hateful thing to go to a justice about every trifling matter, yet laying an
information on important occasions, without malice or bitterness of any kind,
is what no honest man ought to be ashamed of. -- The shame is to commit the
offense, not to inform against it. I, for my part, should p^rhaps do right if I
not only informed against Crib for making light bread, but against you for
swearing at him." "Well but madam," said the smith, a little softened, "don't
you think it a sin and a shame to turn informer?" "So far from it when a man's
motives are good," said Mrs. Jones, "that in such clear cases as the present, I
think it a duty and a virtue. If it is right that there should be laws, it must
be right that they should be put in execution; but how can this be, if people
will not inform the magistrates when they see the laws broken? An informer by
trade is commonly a knave; a rash, malicious, or pastionate informer is a
firebrand, but honest and prudent informers are almost as useful members of
society as the judges of the land. If you continue in your present mind on this
subject, do not you think that you will be answerable for the crimes you might
have prevented by informing, and be a sort of accomplice of the villains who
commit them?"

"Well madam," said the smith, "I now see plainly enough, that there is no
shame in turning informer when my cause is good." "And your motive right,
always mind that," said Mrs. Jones. Next day the smith attended, Crib was fined
in the usual penalty, his light bread was taken from him, and given to the
poor. The justices resolved henceforward to inspect the bakers in their
district; and all of them, except Crib, and such as Crib, were glad of it, for
honesty never dreads a trial. Thus had Mrs. Jones the comfort of seeing how
useful people may be without expense; for if she could have given the poor 50
l. she would not have done them so great or so lasting a benefit, and the true
light in which she had put the business of informing, was of no small use.

There were two shops in the parish, but Mrs. Sparks at the Cross had not half
so much custom as Wills at the Sugar Loaf, though she sold her goods a penny in
a shilling cheaper, and all agreed that they were much better. Mrs. Jones asked
Mrs. Sparks the reason. -- "Madam," said the shopkeeper, "Mr. Wills will give
longer trust. Besides this, his wife keeps shop on a Sunday morning while I am
at Church." Mrs. Jones reminded Mr. Simpson to read the King's proclamation
against vice and immorality next Sunday at Church, and prevailed on the 'Squire
to fine any one who should keep open shop on a Sunday. She also put the people
in mind that a shopkeeper, who would sell on a Sunday, would be more likely to
cheat them all the week, than one who went to Church.

She also labored hard to convince them how much they would lessen their
distress if they would contrive to deal with Mrs. Sparks for ready money,
rather than with Wills on long credit; those who listened to her, found their
circumstances far more comfortable at the year's end, while the rest, tempted,
like some of their betters, by the pleasure of putting off the evil day of
payment, like them at last found themselves plunged in debt and distress. She
took care to make a good use of such instances in her conversations with the
poor, and by perseverance, she at length brought them so much to her way of
thinking, that Wills found it to be his interest to alter his plan, and sell
his goods on as good terms and as short credit as Mrs. Sparks sold hers. --
This completed Mrs. Jones's success, and she had the satisfaction of having
put a stop to three or four great evils in the parish of Weston, without
spending a shilling in doing it.

Be^ty Smart and Jenny Rose were thought to be the two best managers in the
parish. They both told Mrs. Jones that the poor would get the coarse pieces of
meat cheaper, if the gentlefolks did not buy them for soups and gravy. Mrs.
Jones thought there was reason in this. So away she went to Sir John, the
'Squire, the Surgeon, the Attorney, and the Steward, the only persons in the
parish who could afford to buy costly things. She told them if they would all
be so good as to buy only prime pieces, which they could very well afford, the
coarse and cheap joints would come more within the reach of the poor. Most of
the gentry readily consented. Sir John cared not what his meat cost him, but
told Mrs. Jones in his gay way, that he would eat anything, or give any thing,
so that she would not teize him with long stories about the poor. The 'Squire
said he should prefer vegetable soups because they were cheaper, and the Doctor
because they were wholesomer. The Steward chose to imitate the 'Squire; and the
Attorney found it would be quite ungenteel to stand out. So gravy soups became
very unfashionable in the parish of Weston; and I am sure if rich people did
but think a little on this subject, they would be as unfashionable in many
other places.

When wheat grew cheaper, Mrs. Jones was earnest with the poor women to bake
large brown loaves at home, instead of buying small white ones at the shop.
Mrs. Betty had told her that baking at home would be one step toward restoring
the good old management. Only Betty Smart and Jenny Rose baked at home in the
whole parish, and who lived so well as they did? Yet the general objection
seemed reasonable. They could not bake without yeast, which often could not be
had, as no one brewed but the great folks and the public houses. Mrs. Jones
found, however, that Be^ty and Jenny contrived to brew as well as to bake. She
sent for these women, knowing that from them she could get truth and reason.
"How comes it," said she to them, "that you two are the only poor women in the
parish who can afford to brew a small cask of beer? Your husbands have not
better wages than other men." "True Madam," said Betty, "but they never set
foot in a public house. I will tell you the truth. When I first married, our
John went to the Checquers every night, and I had my tea and fresh butter twice
a day at home. -- This slop, which consumed a deal of sugar, began to rake my
stomach sadly, as I had neither meat nor milk; at last (I am ashamed to own it)
I began to take a drop of gin to quiet the pain, till in time I looked for my
gin as regularly as for my tea. At last the gin, the alehouse, and the tea,
began to make us both sick and poor. I had like to have died with my first
child. -- Parson Simpson then talked so finely to us that we resolved, by the
grace of God, to turn over a new leaf, and I promised John if he would give up
the Checquers I would break the gin-bottle, and never drink tea in the
afternoon, except on Sundays when he was at home with me. We have kept our
word, and both our eating and drinking, our health and our consciences are the
better for it. Though meat is sadly dear, we can buy two pounds of fresh meat
for less than one pound of fresh butter, and it gives five times the
nourishment. -- And dear as malt is, I contrive to keep a drop of drink in the
house for John, and John will make me drink half a pint with him every evening,
and a pint a day when I am a nurse."

As one good deed as well as one bad one brings on another, this conversation
set Mrs. Jones on enquiring why so many alehouses were allowed. She did not
choose to talk to Sir John on this subject, who would only have said, "let them
enjoy themselves poor fellows; if they get drunk now and then they work hard."
But those who have this false goodnature, forget, that while the man is
enjoying himself, as it is called, his wife and children are ragged and
starving. True christian goodnature never indulges one at the cost of many,
but is kind to all. The 'Squire, who was a friend to order, took up the matter.
He consulted Mr. Simpson. "The Lion," said he, "is necessary. It stands by the
road side: travelers must have a resting place. As to the Checquers and the
Bell they do no good but much harm." Mr. Simpson had before made many attempts
to get the Checquers put down; but unluckily, it was Sir John's own house, and
kept by his late butler. Not that Sir John valued the rent, but he had a false
kindness which made him support the cause of an old servant, though he knew he
kept a disorderly house. -- The 'Squire, however, now took away the license
from the Bell. And a fray happening soon after at the Checquers (which was near
the Church) in time of divine service, Sir John was obliged to suffer the house
to be put down as a nuisance. You would not believe how many poor families were
able to brew a little cask when the temptations of those alehouses were taken
out of their way. Mrs. Jones, in her evening walks, had the pleasure to see
many an honest man drinking his wholesome cup of beer by his own fire side, his
rosy children playing about his knees, his clean, cheerful wife singing her
youngest baby to sleep, rocking the cradle with her foot, while with her hands
she was making a dumpling for her kind husband's supper. Some few, I am sorry
to say, though I don't choose to name names, still preferred getting drunk once
a week at the Lion, and drinking water at other times.

The good women being now supplied with yeast from each other's brewings, would
have baked, but two difficulties still remained. Many of them had no ovens, for
since the new bad management had crept in, many cottages have been built
without this convenience. Fuel was also scarce at Weston. Mrs. Jones advised
the building a large parish oven. To this oven, at a certain h^^^, three times
a week, the elder children carried the loaves which their mothers had made at
home, and paid a halfpenny, or a penny, according to their size, for the
baking.

Mrs. Jones found that no poor woman in Weston could buy a little milk, as the
farmers' wives did not care to rob their dairies. -- This was a great distress,
especially when the children were sick. So Mrs. Jones advised Mrs. Sparks at
the Cross, to keep a couple of cows, and sell out the milk at halfpenny
worths. She did so, and found, that though this plan gave her some additional
trouble, she got full as much by it as if she had made cheese and butter. She
also sold rice at a cheap rate, so that with the help of the milk and the
public oven, a fine rice pudding was to be had for a trifle.

The girls' school in the parish was fallen into neglect, for though many would
be subscribers, yet no one would look after it. I wish this was the case at
Weston only. It was not in Mr. Simpson's way to see if girls were taught to
work. This is ladies' business. Mrs. Jones consulted her counselor, Mrs.
Betty, and they went every Friday to the school, where they invited mothers as
well as daughters to come, and learn to cut out to the best advantage. Mrs.
Jones had not been bred to these things, but by means of Mrs. Cooper's
excellent cutting out book, she soon became mistress of the whole art. She not
only had the girls taught to make and mend, but to wash andiron too. She also
allowed the mother or eldest daughter of every family to come once a week and
learn how to dress one cheap dish. One Friday, which was cooking day, who
should pass by but the 'Squire, with his gun and his dogs. -- He looked into
the school for the first time. "Well, madam," said he, "what good are you doing
here? -- What are you girls learning and earning? Where are your manufactures?
Where is your spinning and your carding?" "Sir," said she, "this is a small
parish, and you know ours is not a manufacturing country; so that when these
girls are women, they will not be much employed in spinning. However, we teach
them a little of it, and more of knitting, that they may be able to get up a
small piece of household linen once a year, and provide the family with
stockings, by employing the odds and ends of their time in these ways. But
there is a manufacture which I am carrying on, and I know of none within my own
reach which is so valuable." "What can that be," sa^d the Squire. "To MAKE GOOD
WIVES FOR WORKING MEN," said she, "Is not mine an excellent staple commodity? I
am teaching these girls the art of industry and good management. It is little
encouragement to an honest man to work hard all the week, if his wages are
wasted by a slattern at home," "What have you got on the fire madam?" said the
Squire, "for your pot really smells as savoury, as if Sir John's French Cook
had filled it." "Sir," replied Mrs. Jones, "I have lately got acquainted with
Mrs. White, who has given us an account of her cheap dishes, and wise cookery,
in one of the cheap Repository little books. Mrs. Betty and I have made all her
dishes, and very good they are, and we have got several others of our own.
Every Friday we come here and dress one. These good women see how it is done,
and learn to dress it at their own houses. I take home part for my own dinner,
and what is left I give to each in turn. I hope I have opened their eyes on a
sad mistake they had got into, that we think any thing is good enough for the
poor."

"Pray, Mrs. Betty," said the Squire, "oblige me with a basin of your soup."
The Squire found it so good after his walk, that he was almost sorry he had
promised to buy no more legs of beef, and declared again, that not one sheep's
head should ever go to his kennel again. He begged his cook might have the
receipt, and Mrs. Jones wrote it out for her. She has also been so obliging as
to favor me with a copy of all her receipts. And as I hate all monopoly, and
see no reason why such cheap, nourishing, and savoury dishes should be confined
to the parish of Weston, I print them that all other parishes may have the same
advantage. Not only the poor, but all persons with small incomes may be glad of
them. "Well, madam," said Mr. Simpson, who came in soon after, "which is best,
to sit down and cry over our misfortunes, or to bestir ourselves to do our duty
in the world?" "Sir," replied Mrs. Jones, "I thank you for the useful lesson
you have given me. You have taught me that our time and talents are to be
employed with zeal in God's service, if we wish for his favor here or
hereafter, and that one great employment of them, which he requires, is the
promotion of the present, and much more, the future happiness of all around us.
You have taught me that much good may be done with little money, and that the
heart, the head, and the hands are of some use, as well as the purse."

May all who read this account of Mrs. Jones, go and do likewise!

RECEIPT I.
Two pounds of beef, four onions, ten turnips, half a pound of rice, a large
handful of parsley, thyme, and savoury; some pepper and salt: eight quarts of
water. Cut the beef in slices, and after it has boiled some time, cut it still
smaller. The whole should boil gently about two hours, on a slow fire. If fuel
be scarce, it may be stewed all night in an oven, and warmed up next day. You
may add oatmeal and potatoes.

RECEIPT II.
Take half a pound of beef, mutton, or pork, cut it into small pieces; half a
point of peace, four sliced turnips, six potatoes cut very small, two onions;
put to them seven pints of water. Let the whole boil gently over a very slow
fire two hours and a half. Then thicken it with a quarter of a pound of
oatmeal. After the thickening is put in, boil it a quarter of an hour, stirring
it all the time; then season it with salt and pepper.

RECEIPT III.
Take two pounds of salt beef, or pork, cut it into very small bits, and put it
into a pot with six quarts of water, letting it boil on a slow fire for three
quarters of an hour; then put a few carrots, parsnips, or turnips, all cut
small; or a few potatoes sliced; a cabbage, and a couple of cresses. Thicken
the whole with a pint of oatmeal. All these to be well seasoned ^ith salt and
pepper.

ANOTHER.
Put three pickled herrings into a stone jar, fill it with sliced potatoes and
a little water, and bake it till it is done.

The following soups Mrs. Sparks sold every Saturday in small quantities, a
pint of the soup with a bit of the meat warmed upon Sunday made a dinner for a
grown person.

An ox cheek, two pecks of potatoes, a quarter of a peck of onions, one ounce
of pepper, half a pound of salt, stirred altogether in ninety pints of water
till reduced to sixty, any garden stuff may be thrown in.

FRIENDLY HINTS.
The difference between eating bread new and stale, is one loaf in five.

If you turn your meat into broth it will go much farther than if you roast or
bake it.

If you have a garden, make the most of it. A bit of leek or an onion makes all
dishes savoury at small expense.

If the money spent on fresh butter were spent on meat, poor families would be
much better fed than they are.

If the money spent on tea were spent on home-brewed beer, the wife would be
better fed, the husband better pleased, and both would be healthier.

Keep a little Scotch barley, rice, dry pease, and oatmeal in the house. They
are all cheap and don't spoil. Keep also pepper and ginger.

Pay your debts, serve God, love your neighbor.

THE SUNDAY SCHOOL.
I Promised in the Cottage Cook to give some account of the manner in which
Mrs. Jones set up her school. She did not much fear being able to raise the
money, but money is of little use, unless some persons of sense and piety can
be found to direct these institutions. Not that I would discourage those who
set them up even in the most ordinary manner, or from mere views of worldly
policy. It is something gained to rescue children from idling away their
sabbath in the fields or the streets. It is no small thing to keep them from
those tricks to which a day of leisure tempts the idle and the ignorant. It is
something for them to be taught to read; it is much to be taught to read the
Bible, and much indeed to be c^rried regularly to church. But all this is not
enough. To bring these institutions to answer their highest end can only be
effected by God's blessing on the following means, the choice of able teachers,
and a diligent attention in some pious gentry to visit and inspect the schools.

ON RECOMMENDATIONS.
Mrs. Jones had one talent that eminently qualified her to do good, namely,
judgment; this even in the gay part of her life had kept her from many
mistakes, but though she had sometimes been deceived herself, she was very
careful not to deceive others, in recommending people to fill any office either
through selfishness or false kindness. She used to say, "there is always some
one appropriate quality which every person must possess, in order to fit them
for any particular employment. Even in this quality," said she to Mr. Simpson,
the clergyman, "I do not expect perfection; but if they are destitute of this,
whatever good qualities they may possess besides, though they may do for some
other employment, they will not do for this. If I want a pair of shoes, I go to
a shoemaker; I do not go to a man of another trade however ingenious he may be,
to ask him if he cannot contrive to make me a pa^r of shoes. When I lived in
London, I learnt to be much on my guard as to recommendations. I found people
often wanted to impose on me some one who was a burden to themselves. Once I
remember when I undertook to get a matron for an hospital, half my acquaintance
had some one to offer me. Mrs. Gibson sent me an old cook whom she herself had
discharged for wasting her own provisions, yet she had the conscience to
recommend this woman to take care of the provisions of a large community. Mrs.
Gray sent me a discarded housekeeper whose constitution had been ruined by
sitting up with Mrs. Grey's gouty husband, but who she yet thought might do
well enough to undergo the fatigue of taking care of an hundred poor sick
people. A third friend sent me a woman who had no merit but that of being very
poor, and it would be charity to provide for her. The truth is, the lady was
obliged to allow her a small pension till she could get her off her own hands
by turning her on those of others."

"It is very true madam," said Mr. Simpson, "the right way is always to prefer
the good of the many to the good of one; if indeed it can be called doing good
to any one to place them in a station in which they must feel unhappy, by not
knowing how to discharge the duties of it. I will tell you how I manage. If the
persons recommended are objects of charity, I privately subscribe to their
wants; I pity and help them, but I never promote them to a station for which
they are unfit, and thus hurt a whole community to help a distressed
individual."

Thus Mrs. Jones resolved, that the first step toward setting up her school
should be to provide a suitable mistress. The vestry were so earnest in
recommending one woman that she thought it worth looking into. On enquiry, she
found it was a scheme to take a large family off the parish; they never
considered that a very ignorant woman, with a family of young children, was not
fit for a school, all they considered was that the profits of the school might
enable her to live without parish pay. Mrs. Jones refused another, though she
could read well and was decent in her conduct, because she used to send her
children to the shop on Sundays. And she objected to a third, a very sensible
woman, because she was suspected of making an outward profession of religion a
cloak for immoral conduct. -- Mrs. Jones knew she must not be too nice neither,
she knew she must put up wi^h many faults at last. -- "I know," said she to Mr.
Simpson, "the imperfection of every thing that is human. As the mistress will
have much to bear with from the children, so I expect to have something to bear
with in the mistress, and she and I must submit to our respective trials, by
thinking how much God has to bear with in us all. But there are three things
which a mistress must not be without, good-sense, activity, and piety. Without
the first she will mislead others, without the second she will neglect them,
and without the third, though she may civilize, yet she will never christianize
them."

Mr. Simpson said, "he really knew but of one person in the parish who was
fully likely to answer her purpose: this," continued he "is no other than my
housekeeper, Mrs. Betty Crew. It will indeed be a great loss to me to part
from her; and to her it will be a far more fatiguing life than she at present
leads. But ought I to put my own personal comfort, or ought Betty to put her
own ease and quiet in competition with the good of above an hundred children?
This will appear still more important if we consider the good done, not as
fruit but seed; if we take into the account how many yet unborn may become
christians, in consequence of our making these children christians. For how can
we calculate the number which may be hereafter trained for heaven, by those
very children we are going to teach, when they themselves shall become parents,
and you and I are dead and forgotten? To be sure, by parting from Betty, my
pease soup will not be quite so well flavored, nor my linen so neatly got up;
but the day is fast approaching when all this will signify but little; but it
will not signify a little whether one hundred immortal souls were the better
from my making this petty sacrifice. Betty Crew is a real christian, has
excellent sense, and had a good education from my mother. She has also had a
little sort of training; for when the poor children come to the parsonage for
the broth on a Saturday evening, Betty is used to appoint them all to come at
the same time, and after she has filled their pitchers, she ranges them round
her in the garden, and examines them in their catechism. She is just and fair
in dealing out the broth and beef, not making my favor to the parents depend
on the skill of their children. But her own old caps, and ribbons, and cast off
clothes, are bestowed as little rewards on the best scholars. So that taking
the time she spends in working for them, and the things she gives them, there
is many a lady who does not exceed Betty in acts of charity; this I mention to
confirm your notion, that it is not necessary to be rich in order to do good; a
religious upper servant has great opportunities of this sort."

My readers, I trust, need not be informed, that this is that very Mrs. Betty
Crew, who assisted Mrs. Jones in teaching poor women to cut out linen and cook
cheap dishes, as related in the Cottage Cook. Mrs. Jones in the following week
got together as many of the mothers as she could, and spoke to them as follows:

Mrs. Jones's Exhortation.
My good women, on Sunday next I propose to open a school for the instruction
of your children. -- Those among you who know what it is to be able to read
your Bible will, I doubt not, rejoice that the same blessing is hold out to
your children. You who are not able yourselves to read what your Savior has
done and suffered for you, ought to be doubly anxious that your children should
reap a blessing which you have lost. -- Would not that mother be thought an
unnatural monster who should stand by and snatch out of her child's mouth the
bread which a kind friend had just put into it? But such a mother would be
merciful compared with her who should rob her children of the opportunity of
learning to read the word of God when it is held out to them. Remember, that if
you slight the present offer, or if after having sent your children a few times
you should afterward keep them at home under vain pretenses, you will have to
answer for it at the day of judgment. Let not your poor children then have
cause to say, "my fond mother was my worst enemy. I might have been bred up in
the fear of the Lord, and she opposed it for the sake of a little paltry
pleasure, for an idle holiday, I am now brought to the gates of hell." My dear
women, which of you could bear to see your darling child condemned to
everlasting destruction? which of you could bear to hear him accuse you as the
cause of it? Is there any mother here present who will venture to say, 'I will
doom the child I bore to sin and hell, rather than put them or myself to a
little present pain by curtailing their evil inclinations, I will let them
spend the Sabbath in ignorance and idleness instead of sending them to school!'
Let that mother who values her child's pleasure more than his soul now walk
away, and I will set down the names of all those who wish to bring their young
ones up in the way that leads to eternal life, instead of indulging them in the
pleasures of sin which are but for a moment.

When Mrs. Jones had done speaking, most of the women thanked her for her good
advice, and hoped that God would give them grace to follow it; promising to
send their children constantly. Others, who were not so well disposed, were yet
afraid to refuse, after the sin of so doing had been so plainly set before
them. The worst of the women had kept away from this meeting, resolving to set
their faces against the school. Most of them who were present, as soon as they
got home set about providing their children with what little decent apparel
they could raise. Many a willing mother lent her tall daughter her hat, best
cap, and white handkerchief, and many a grateful father spared his linen
waistcoat and better most hat to induce his grown up son to attend: for it was
a rule with which Mrs. Jones began, that she would not receive the younger
children out of any family who did not send their elder ones. Too many made
excuses that their sho^s were old, or their hat worn out. But Mrs. Jon^s told
them not to bring any excuses to her which they could not bring to the day of
judgment; and among those excuses she would hardly admit any except accidents,
sickness, or attendance on sick parents, or young children.

SUBSCRIPTIONS.
Mrs. Jones was very desirous of getting the help and countenance of the
farmers and trades-people, whose duty she thought it was to support a plan
calculated to improve the virtue and happiness of the parish. Most of them
subscribed, and promised to see that their workmen sent their children. She met
with little opposition till she called on farmer Hoskins. She told him as he
was the richest farmer in the parish, she came to him for a handsome
subscription. "Subscription!" said he, "it is nothing but subscriptions I
think; a man had need be made of money." "Farmer," said Mrs. Jones, "God has
blessed you with abundant prosperity, and he expects you should be liberal in
proportion to your great ability." "I do not know what you mean by blessing,"
said he; "I have been up early and late, lived hard while I had little, and now
when I thought I had got forward in the world, what with tithes and
subscriptions it all goes I think." "Mr. Hoskins," said Mrs. Jones, "this is
but an ungrateful return for all your blessings." "You are again at your
blessings," said the Farmer, "but let every one work as hard as I have done and
I dare say he will do as well. It is to my own industry I owe what I have. My
crops have been good because I minded my ploughing and sowing." "Oh, farmer!"
cried Mrs. Jones, "you forget whose suns and showers make your crops to grow;
but I do not come here to preach but to beg." "Well, madam, what is it now?
Flann^l or French? or weavers, or a new church, or large bread, or cheap rice?
or what other new whim-wham for getting the money out of one's pocket?" "I am
going to establish a Sunday school, farmer, and I come to you as one of the
principal inhabitants, hoping your example will spur on the rest to give." "Why
then," said the farmer, "as one of the principal inhabitan^s, I will give
nothing, hoping it will spur on the rest to refuse. Of all the foolish
inventions, and new fangled devices to ruin the country, that of teaching the
poor to read is the very worst." "And I, farmer, think that to teach good
principles to the lower classes is the most likely way to save the country. Now
in order to this we must teach them to read," "Not with my consent nor my
money," said the farmer, "for I know it always does more harm than good." "So
it may," said Mrs. Jones, "if you only teach them to read and then turn them
adrift to find out books for themselves. There is a proneness in the heart to
evil which it is our duty to counteract, and which I see you are promoting.
Only look round your own kitchen, I am ashamed to see it hung round with loose
songs and ballads. I grant indeed, it would be better for your men and maids,
and even your daughters, not to be able to read at all than to read such stuff
as this. But if when they ask for bread you will give them a stone, nay worse,
a serpent, yours is the blame." Then taking up a penny book which had a very
loose title, she went on, "I do not wonder if you, who read such books as
these, think it safer that people should not read at all." The farmer grinned,
and said "it is hard if a man of my substance may not divert myself; when a bit
of fun costs only a penny, and a man can spare that penny, there is no harm
done. When it is very hot, or very wet, and I come in to rest and have drank my
mug of cider, I like to take up a bit of a jest book or a comical story to make
me laugh." "Oh, Mr. Hoskins," replied Mrs. Jones, "when you come in to rest
from a burning sun or shower, do you never think of him whose sun it is that is
ripening your corn? or whose shower is filling the ear or causing the grass to
grow? I could tell you of some books which would strengthen such thoughts,
whereas such as you read only serve to put them out of your head." Mrs. Jones
having taken pains to let Mr. Hoskins know, that all the genteel and wealthy
people had subscribed, he at last said, "Why, as to the matter of that I do not
value a crown; only I think it might be better bestowed, and I am afraid my own
workmen will fly in my face if once they are made scholars, and that they will
think themselves too good to work." -- "Now "Now you talk soberly and give your
reasons," said Mrs. Jones, "weak as they are, they deserve an answer. Do you
think that either man, woman, or child ever did his duty the worse, only
because he knew it the better?" "No, perhaps not." "Now the whole extent of
learning which we intend to give the poor, is only to enable them to read the
Bible, a book in which every duty is explained, every doctrine brought into
practice, and the brightest truths made level to the meanest understanding. The
knowledge of that book and its practical influence on the heart is the best
security you can have both for the industry and obedience of your servants. Now
can you think any man will be the worse servant for being a good christian?"
"Perhaps not." "Are not the duties of children, of servants, and the poor
expressly set forth in the Bible?" -- "Yes." "Do you think any duties are
likely to be so well performed from any human motives, such as fear or
prudence, as from these religious motives which are backed with the sanctions
of rewards and punishments, of heaven or hell? Even upon your own principles of
worldly policy, do you think a poor man is not less likely to steal a sheep or
a horse, who was taught when a boy, that it was a sin to rob a hen roost or an
orchard? Will your property be secured so effectually by the stocks on the
green, as by teaching the boys in the school, that for all these things God
will bring them into judgment? Is a poor fellow who can read his Bible so
likely to sleep or to drink away his few hours of leisure as one who cannot
read? He may, and he often does make a bad use of his reading, but I doubt he
would have been as bad without it. And the hours spent in learning to read will
always have been among the most harmless ones of his life."

"Well madam," said the farmer, "if you do not think that religion will spoil
my young servants, I do not care if you do put me down for half a guinea. What
has farmer Dobson given?" "Half a guinea," said Mrs. Jones. "Well," cried the
farmer, "it shall never be said I did not give more than he, who is only a
renter. Dobson give half a guinea? Why he wears his coat as threadbare as a
laborer." "Perhaps," replied Mrs. Jones, "that is one reason why he gives so
much." "Well, put me down a guinea," cried the farmer. "As scarce as guineas
are just now, I Will never be put upon the same footing with Dobson neither."
"Yes, and you must exert yourself besides in insisting that your workmen send
their children, and often look into the school yourself to see if they are
there, and reward or discourage them accordingly," added Mrs. Jones, as she
took her leave. The farmer insisted in waiting on her to the door. When they
got into the yard, they spied Mr. Simpson, who was standing near a little group
of females, consisting of the farmer's two young daughters, and a couple of
rosy dairy maids, and old blind fiddler, and a woman who led him. The woman had
laid a basket on the ground, out of which she was dealing some songs to the
girls, who were kneeling round it, and eagerly picking out such whose titles
suited their tastes. On seeing the clergyman come up, the fiddler's companion
(for I am sorry to say she was not his wife) pushed some of the songs to the
bottom of the basket, turned round to the company, and in a whining tone, asked
"if they would please to buy a godly book." Mr. Simpson saw through the hypocrisy
at once, and instead of making any answer, took out of one of the girl's hands,
a song which the woman had not been able to snatch away. He was shocked and
grieved to see that these young girls were about to read, to sing, and to learn
by heart such ribaldry, as he was ashamed even to cast his eyes on. He turned
about to the girl and gravely, but mildly said, "young woman, what do you think
should be done to a person who should be found carrying a box of poison round
the country, and leaving a little at every house?". The girls all agreed that
such a person ought to be hanged; "that the should," said the farmer, "if I was
upon the jury." The fiddler and his woman were of the same opinion, declaring
they would not do such a wicked thing for the world, for if they were poor they
were honest. Mr. Simpson, turning to the other girl, said, "which is of most
value, the soul or the body?" "The soul sir;" said the girl. "Why so?" said he,
"because sir, I have heard you say in the pulpit, the soul is to last for
ever." Then cried Mr. Simpson, in a stern voice, turning to the fiddler's
woman, "are not you ashamed to sell poison for that part which is to last for
ever? poison for the soul?" "Poison!" said the terrified girl, throwing down
the book, and shuddering as people do who are afraid they have touched
something infectious. "Poison!" echoed the farmer's daughters, recollecting
with horror the ratsbane which Lion, the old house dog had got at the day
before, and after eating which, they had seen him drop down dead in
convulsions. "Yes," said Mr. Simpson to the woman, "I do again repeat, the
souls of these innocent girls will be poisoned, and may be eternally ruined by
this vile trash which you carry about."

"I now see," said Mrs. Jones to the farmer, "the reason why you think learning
to read does more harm than good. It is indeed far better that they should
never know how to tell a letter, unless you keep such trash as this out of
their way, and provide them with what is good or what is harmless. Still this
is not the fault of reading, but the abuse of it. Wine is still a good cordial,
though it is too often abused to the purpose of drunkenness.

The farmer said that neither of his maids could read their horn book, though
he owned he often heard them singing that song which the parson had thought so
bad, but for his part it made him as merry as a nightingale.

"Yes," said Mrs. Jones, "as a proof that it is not merely being able to read
which does the mischief. I have often heard as I have been crossing a
hay-field, young girls singing such indecent ribaldry as has driven me out of
the field, though I well knew they could not read a line of what they were
singing, but had caught it from others. So you see you may as well say the
memory is a wicked talent because some people misapply it, as to say that
reading is dangerous, because some folks abuse it."

While they were talking, the fiddler and his woman were trying to steal away,
but Mr. Simpson stopped them and said, "woman, I shall have some farther talk
with you. I am a magistrate as well as a minister, and if I know it, I will no
more allow a wicked book to be sold in my parish than a dose of poison." The
girls threw away all their songs, thanked Mr. Simpson, begged Mrs. Jones would
take them into her school after the had done milking in the evenings, that they
might learn to read only what was proper. They promised they would never more
deal with any but sober, honest hawkers, such as sell good little books,
christmas carrols, and harmless songs, and desired the siddler's woman never to
call there again.

This little incident afterward confirmed Mrs. Jones in a plan she had before
some thoughts of putting in practice. This was, after her school had been
established a few months, to invite all the well-disposed grown-up youth of the
parish to meet her at the school an hour or two on a Sunday evening, after the
necessary business of the dairy and of serving the cattle was over. Both Mrs.
Jones and her agent had the talent of making this time pass so agreeably by
their manner of explaining scripture, and of impressing the heart by serious
and affectionate discourse, that in a short time the evening school was nearly
filled with a second company after the younger ones were dismissed. In time,
not only the servants, but the sons and daughters of the most substantial
people in the parish attended. At length, many of the parents, pleased with the
improvement so visible in the young people, got a habit of dropping in, that
they might learn how to instruct their own families. And it was observed that
as the school filled, not only the fives-court and public house were thinned,
but even Sunday gossiping and tea visiting declined. Even Farmer Hoskins, who
was at first angry with his maids for learning of those merry songs as he
called them, was so pleased by the manner in which the psalms were sung at the
school, that he promised Mrs. Jones to make her a present of half a sheep
toward her first May Day feast. Of this feast some account shall be given
hereafter, and the reader may expect some further account of the Sunday School
next month in the History of Hester Wilmot.

THE HISTORY OF HESTER WILMOT; OR, THE SECOND PART OF THE SUNDAY SCHOOL.
HESTER WILMOT was born in the parish of Weston, of parents who maintained
themselves by their labor, they were both of them ungodly, it is no wonder
therefore they were unhappy. They lived badly together, and how could they do
otherwise, for their tempers were very different, and they had no religion to
smooth down this difference, or to teach them that they ought to bear with each
other's faults. Rebecca Wilmot was a proof that people may have some right
qualities, and yet be but bad characters. She was clean, notable, and
industrious. Now I know some folks fancy that the poor who have these
qualities, need have no other; but this is a sad mistake, as I am sure every
page in the Bible would show; and it is a pity people do not consult it
oftener. Rebecca was of a violent ungovernable temper; and that very neatness
which is in itself so pleasing, in her became a sin, for her affection to her
husband and children was quite lost in an over anxious desire to have her house
reckoned the nicest in the parish. Rebecca was also a proof that a poor woman
may be as vain as a rich one, for it was not so much the comfort of neatness,
as the praise of neatness which she coveted. A spot on her hearth, or a bit of
rust on a brass candlestick would throw her into a violent passion. Now it is
very right to keep the hearth clean and the candlestick bright, but it is very
wrong so to set one's affections on a hearth or a candlestick as to make
oneself unhappy if any trifling accident happens to them; and if Rebecca had
been as careful to keep her heart without spot or her life without blemish, as
she was to keep her fire-irons free from either, she would have been held up in
this history, not as a warning, but a pattern, and in that case her nicety
would have come in for a part of the praise. It was no fault in Rebecca but a
merit, that her oak table was so bright you could almost see to put your cap on
init; but it was no merit but a fault that when John, her husband, laid down
his cup of beer upon it so as to leave a mark, she would fly out into so
terrible a passion that all the children were forced to run to corners; now
poor John having no corner to run to, ran to the al^-house, till that which was
at first a refuge, too soon became a pleasure.

Rebecca never wished her children to learn to read because she said it would
only serve to make them lazy, and she herself had done very well without it.
She would keep poor Hester from church to stone the space under the chairs in
fine patterns and whim-whams. I don't pretend to say there was any harm in this
little decoration, it looks pretty enough, and it is better to let the children
do that than do nothing. But still these are not things to set one's heart
upon, and besides, Rebecca only did it as a trap for praise; for she was sulky,
and disappointed if any ladies happened to call in and did not seem delighted
with the flowers which she used to draw with a burnt stick on the white wash of
the chimney corners. Besides all this finery was often done on a Sunday, and
there is a great deal of harm in doing right things at a wrong time, or in
wasting much time on things which are of no real use, or in doing any thing at
all out of vanity. Now I beg that no lazy slattern of a wife will go and take
any comfort in her dirt from what is here said against Rebecca's nicety; for I
believe that for one who makes her husband unhappy through neatness, twenty do
so by dirt and laziness. -- All excesses are wrong, but the excess of a good
quality is not so common as the excess of a bad one.

John Wilmot was not an ill-natured man, but he had no fixed principle. Instead
of setting himself to cure his wife's faults by mild reproof and a good
example, he was driven by them into still greater faults himself. It is a
common case with people who have no religion, when any cross accident befalls
them, instead of trying to make the best of a bad matter, instead of
considering their trouble as a trial sent from God to purify them, or instead
of considering the faults of others as a punishment for their own sins, what do
they do but either sink down at once into despair, or else run for comfort into
evil courses. Drinking is the common remedy for sorrow, if that can be called a
remedy, the end of which is to destroy soul and body. -- John now began to
spend all his leisure hours at the Bell. He used to be fond of his children,
but when he found he could not come home in quiet and play with the little
ones, while his wife dressed him a bit of hot supper, he grew in time not to
come home at all. He who has once taken to drink can seldom be said to be
guilty of one sin only; John's heart became hardened. His affection for his
family was lost in self-indulgence. Patience and submission on the part of his
wife might have won much upon a man of John's temper, but instead of trying to
reclaim him, his wife seemed rather to delight in putting him as much in the
wrong as she could, that she might be justified in her constant abuse of him. I
doubt whether she would have been as much pleased with his reformation as she
was with always talking of his faults, though I know it was the opinion of the
neighbors, that if she had taken as much pains to reform her husband by
reforming her own temper, as she did to abuse him and expose him, her endeavors
might have been blessed with success. Good people, who are trying to subdue
their own faults, can hardly believe that the ungodly have a sort of savage
satisfaction in trying, by the indulgence of their own evil tempers, to lessen
the happiness of those with whom they have to do. -- Need we look any farther
for a proof of our own corrupt nature, when we see mankind delight in sins
which have neither the temptation of profit or pleasure, such as plaguing,
vexing, or abusing each other.

Hester was the eldest of their five children, she was a sharp, sensible girl,
but at fourteen years old she could not tell a letter, nor had she ever been
taught to bow her knee to him who made her, for John's or rather Rebecca's
house, had seldom the name of God pronounced in it, except to be blasphemed.

It was just about this time, if I mistake not, that Mrs. Jones set up her
Sunday school, of which Mrs. Betty Crew was appointed mistress, as was related
last month. Mrs. Jones finding that none of the Wilmots were sent to school,
took a walk to Rebecca's house, and civilly told her she called to let her know
that a school was opened to which she desired her to send her children on the
Sunday following, especially her eldest daughter Hester. "Well," said Rebecca,
"and what will you give her if I do?" "Give her!" replied Mrs. Jones, "that is
rather a rude question, and asked in a rude manner: however, as a soft answer
turns away wrath, I assure you that I will give her the best of learning; I
will teach her to fear God and keep his commandments." "I would rather you
would teach her to fear me, and to keep my house clean," said this wicked
woman. "She shall not come, however, unless you will pay her for it." "Pay her for
it," said the lady, "will it not be reward enough that she will be taught to
read the word of God without any expense to you? For though many gifts both of
books and clothing will be given the children, yet you are not to consider
these gifts so much in the light of payment as an expression of good will in
your benefactors." "I say," interrupted Rebecca, "that Hester shall not go to
school. Religion is of no use that I know of, but to make people hate their own
flesh and blood; and I see no good in learning but to make folks proud, and
lazy, and dirty. I cannot tell a letter myself, and, though I say it that
should not say it, there is not a notabler woman in the parish." "Pray," said
Mrs. Jones mildly, "do you think that young people will disobey their parents
the more for being taught to fear God?" "I don't think any thing about it,"
said Rebecca, "I shall not let her come, and there is the long and short of the
matter. Hester has other fish to fry; but you may have some of these little
ones if you will?" "No," said Mrs. Jones, "I will not; I have not set up a
nursery but a school. I am not at all this expense to take crying babes out of
the mother's way, but to instruct reasonable b^ings. And it ought to be a rule
in all schools not to take the troublesome young children unless the mother
will try to spare the elder ones, who are capable of learning." "But," said
Rebecca, "I have a young child which Hester must nurse while I dress dinner.
And the must iron the rags, and scour the irons, and dig the potatoes, and
fetch the water to boil them." "As to nursing the child, that is indeed a
necessary duty, and Hester ought to stay at home part of the day to enable you
to go to church; and families should relieve each other in this way, but as to
all the rest they are no reasons at all, for the irons need not be scoured so
often, and the rags should be ironed and the potatoes dug, and the water
fetched on the Saturday, and I can tell you that neither your minister here,
nor your judge hereafter, will accept of any such excuses."

All this while Hester staid behind, pale and trembling, lest her unkind mother
should carry her point -- She looked up at Mrs. Jones with so much love and
gratitude as to win her affection, and this good lady went on trying to soften
this harsh mother. At last Rebecca condescended to say, "well, I don't know but
I may let her come now and then when I can spare her, provided I find you make
it worth her while." All this time she had never asked Mrs. Jones to sit down,
nor had once bid her young children be quiet, though they were crying and
squalling the whole time. Rebecca fancied this ^^^deness was the only way she
had of showing she thought herself as good as her guest, but Mrs. Jones never
lost her temper. The moment she went out of the house, Rebecca called our loud
enough for her to hear, and ordered Hester to get the stone and a bit of sand
to scrub out the prints of that dirty woman's shoes. Hester, in high spirits,
cheerfully obeyed, and rubbed out the stains so neatly, that her mother could
not help lamenting that so handy a girl was going to be spoiled by being taught
godliness, and learning, and such nonsense.

Mrs. Jones, who knew the world, told her agent, Mrs. Crew, that her grand
difficulty would arise not so much from the children as the parents. "These,"
said she, "are apt to fall into that sad mistake, that because their children
are poor and have little of this world's goods, the mothers must make it up to
them in false indulgence. The children of the gentry are much more reproved and
corrected for their faults, and bred up in far stricter discipline. He was a
King who said, chasten thy son, and let not thy rod spare for his crying. --
But the more vicious the children are, you must remember the more they stand in
need of your instruction. When they are bad, comfort yourself with thinking how
much worse they would have been but for you; and what a burden they would
become to society if these evil tempers were to receive no check." The great
thing which enabled Mrs. Crew to teach well, was, the deep insight she had got
into the corruption of human nature. And I doubt if any one can make a
thoroughly good teacher of religion and morals who wants this master-key to the
heart. Others, indeed, may teach knowledge, decency, and good manners. -- Mrs.
Crew who knew that out of the heart proceed lying, theft, and all that train of
evils which begin to break out even in young children, applied her labors to
correct this root of evil. But though a diligent, she was an humble teacher,
well knowing that unless the grace of God blessed her labors, she should but
labor in vain.

Hester Wilmot never failed to attend the school, whenever her perverse mother
would give her leave, and her delight in learning was so great, that she would
work early and late to gain a little time for her book. As she had a quick
capacity, she learned soon to spell and read, and Mrs. Crew observing her
diligence, used to lend her a book to carry home, that she might pick up a
little at odd times. It would be well if teachers would make this distinction.
To give or lend books to those who take no delight in them is an useless
expense; while it is kind and right to assist well disposed young people with
every help of this sort. Those who love books seldom hurt them, while the
slothful who hate learning, will wear out a book more in a week than the
diligent will do in a year. Hester's way was to read over one question in her
catechism, or one verse in her hymn book, by fire-light before she went to bed;
this she thought over in the night, and when she was dressing herself in the
morning she was glad to find she always knew a little more than she had done
the morning before. It is not to be believed how much those people will be
found to have gained at the end of a year, who are accustomed to work up all
the little odd ends and remnants of time; who are convinced that minutes are no
more to be wasted than pence. Nay, he who finds he was wasted a shilling may by
diligence hope to fetch it up again; but no repentance or industry can ever
bring back one wasted hour. My good young reader, if ever you are tempted to
waste an hour, go and ask a dying man what he would give for that hour which
you are throwing away, and according as he answers, so do you act.

As her mother hated the sight of a book, Hester was forced to learn out of
sight: it was no disobedience to do this, as long as she wasted no part of that
time which it was her duty to spend in useful labor. She would have thought it
a sin to have left her work for her book; but she did not think it wrong to
steal time from her sleep, and to be learning an hour before the rest of the
family were awake. Hester would not neglect the washing-tub, or the
spinning-wheel, even to get on with her catechism; but she thought it fair to
think over her questions, while she was washing and spinning. In a few months
she was able to read fluently in St. John's gospel, which is the easiest. But
Mrs. Crew did not think it enough that her children could read a chapter, she
would make them understand it also. It is in a good degree owing to the want of
religious knowledge in teachers that there is so little religion in the world.
Unless the bible is laid open to the understanding, children may read from
Genesis to the Revelation, without any other improvement than barely learning
how to pronounce the words. Mrs. Crew found that there was but one way to
compel their attention: this was by obliging them to return back again to her
the sense of what she had read to them, and this they might do in their own
words, if they could not remember the words of scripture. Those who had weak
capacities would, to be sure, do this but very imperfectly; but even the
weakest if they were willing would retain something. She so managed that saying
the catechism was not merely an act of the memory, but of the understanding;
for she had observed formerly, that those who had learned the catechism in the
common formal way, when they were children, had never understood it when they
became men and women, and it remained in the memory without having made any
impression on the mind. Thus this fine summary of the christian religion is
considered as little more than a form of words, the being able to repeat which,
is a qualification for being confirmed by the bishop, instead of being
considered as really containing those grounds of christian faith and practice,
by which they are to be confirmed christians.

Mrs. Crew used to say to Mrs. Jones, "those who teach the poor must indeed
give line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, as
they can receive it. So that teaching must be a great grievance to those who do
not really make it a labor of love. I see so much levity, obstinacy, and
ignorance, that it keeps my own forbearance in continual exercise, so that I
crust I am getting good myself while I am doing good to others. No one, madam,
can know till they try, that after they have asked a poor untaught child the
same question nineteen times, they must not lose their temper, but go on and
ask it the twentieth. Now and then, when I am tempted to be impatient, I
correct myself, by thinking over that active proof which our blessed Savior
requires of our love to him when he says, feed my lambs.

Hester Wilmot had never been bred to go to church, for her father and mother
had never thought for going themselves, unless at a christening in their own
family, or at a funeral of their neighbors, both of which they considered
merely as opportunities for good eating and drinking, and not as offices of
religion.

As poor Hester had no comfort at home, it was the less wonder she delighted in
her school, her bible and church, for so great is God's goodness, that he is
pleased to make religion a peculiar comfort to those who have no other comfort.
The God whose name she had seldom heard but when it was taken in vain, was now
revealed to her as a God of infinite power, justice, and holiness. What she
read in her bible, and what she felt in her own heart, convinced her she was a
sinner; and her catechism said the same. She was much distressed one day on
thinking over this promise which she had just made (in answer to the question
which fell to her lot) To renoun^^ the devil and all his works, the pomps and
vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of ^e flesh. I say she
was distressed on finding that these were not m^^ely certain words which she
was bound to repeat; but certain conditions which she was bound to perform. She
was sadly puzzled to know how this was to be done, till she met with these
words in her bible. My grace is sufficient for thee. But still she was at a
loss to know how this grace was to be obtained. Happily Mr. Simpson preached on
the next Sunday from this text, Ask and ye shall have, etc. In this sermon was
explained to her the nature, the duty, and the efficacy of prayer. After this
she opened her heart to Mrs. Crew, who taught her the great doctrines of
Scripture in a serious, but plain way. Hester's own heart led her to assent to
that humbling doctrine of the catechism, that we are by nature born in sin; and
truly glad was she to be relieved by hearing or that spiritual grace by which
we have a new birth unto righteousness. Thus her mind was no sooner humbled by
one part, than it gained comfort from another. On the other hand, while she was
rejoicing in a lively hope of God's mercy through Christ, her mistress put her
in mind that that was the only true repentance, by which we forsake sin. Thus
the catechism explained by a pious teacher was found to contain all the
articles of the christian faith.

Mrs. Jones greatly disapproved the practice of turning away the scholars,
because they were grown up -- "Young people," said she, "want to be warned at
sixteen more than they did at six, and they are commonly turned adrift at the
very age when they want most instruction; when dangers and temptations most
beset them. They are exposed to more evil by the leisure of a Sunday evening
than by the business of the whole week: but then religion must be made
pleasant, and instruction must be carried in a kind, and agreeable, and
familiar way. If they once dislike the teacher they will soon get to dislike
that is taught, so that a master or mistress is in some measure answerable for
the future piety of young persons, inasmuch as that piety depends on their
manner of making religion pleasant as well as profitable." To attend Mrs.
Jones's evening instructions was soon thought not a task but a holiday. In a
few months it was reckoned a disadvantage to the character of any young person
in the parish to know they did not attend the evening school. At first, indeed,
many of them came only with a view to learn to sing psalms; but, by the
blessing of God, they grew fond of instruction, and some of them became truly
pious -- Mrs. Jones spoke to them one Sunday evening as follows: "My dear young
women, I rejoice at your improvement; but I rejoice with trembling. I have
known young people set out well, who afterward fell off. The heart is
deceitful. Many like religious knowledge, who do not like the strictness of a
religious life. I must therefore watch whether those who are diligent at church
and school are diligent in their daily walk. -- Whether those who say they
believe in God, really obey him. Whether they who profess to love Christ keep
his commandments. Those who hear themselves commended for early piety, may
learn to rest satisfied with the praise of man. People may get a knack at
religious phrases without being religious; they may even get to frequent places
of worship as an amusement, in order to meet their friends, and may learn to
delight in a sort spiritual goss^p, while religion has no power in their
hearts. But I hope better things of you, though I thus speak."

What became of Hester Wilmot, with some account of Mrs. Jones's May Day feast
for her school, my readers shall be told next month.

THE HISTORY OF HESTER WILMOT; OR, THE NEW GOWN.
PART II. Being a Continuation by the Sunday School.
HESTER Wilmot, I am sorry to observe, had been by natures peevish and lazy,
she would now and then slight her work, and when her mother was very
unreasonable she was too apt to return her a saucy answer, but when she became
acquainted with her own heart, and with the Scriptures, these evil tempers were
in a good measure subdued, for she now learnt to imitate, not her violent
mother, but him who was meek and lowly. When she was scolded for doing ill, she
prayed for grace do better; and the only answer she made to her mother's
charge, "that religion only served to make people lazy," was to strive to do
twice as much work, in order to prove that it really made them diligent. -- The
only thing in which she ventured to disobey her mother was, that when she
ordered her to do weekdays' work on a Sunday, Hester cried, and said, "she did
not dare disobey God," but to show that she did not wish to save her own labor,
she would do a double portion of work on the Saturday night, and rise two hours
earlier on the Monday morning.

Once when she had worked very hard, her mother told her she would treat her
with a holiday the following Sabbath, and take her a fine walk to eat cakes and
drink ale ^t Weston fair, which, though it was professed to be kept on the
Monday, yet, to the disgrace of the village, always began on the Sunday
evening. Rebecca, who would on no account have wasted the Monday, which was a
working day, in idleness and pleasure, thought she had a very good right to
enjoy herself at the fair on the Sunday evening, as well as to take her
children. -- Hester earnestly begged to be left at home, and her moth^^ in a
rage, went without her. A w^t walk and more a^^ ^^an she was used to drink gave
Rebecca a dangerous ^ever; during this illness, Hester, w^o would not follow
her to a scene of dissolute mirth, attended her night and day, and denied
herself necessaries that her sick mother might have comforts. And though she
secretly prayed to God that this sickness might change her mother's heart, yet
she never once reproached her, or put her in mind, that it was caught by
indulging in a sinful pleasure. Another Sunday night her father told Hester, he
thought she had been at school long enough for him to have a little good of her
learning, so he desired she would stay at home and read to him. Hester
cheerfully ran and fetched her Testament, but John fell a laughing, called her
a fool, and said, "it would be time enough to read the Testament to him when he
was going to die, but at present he must have something merry." So saying, he
gave her a song-book which he had picked up at the B^ll. Hester having cast her
eyes over it, refused to read it, saying, "she did not dare offend God by
reading what would hurt her own soul." John called her a canting hypocrite, and
said, he would put the Testament in the sire, for that there was not a more
merry girl than the was before she became religious. -- Her mother, for once,
took her part, not because she thought by her daughter in the right, but
because she was glad of any pretense to show her husband was in the wrong;
though she herself would have abused Hester for the same thing if John had
taken her part. John, with a shocking oath, abused them both, and went off in a
violent passion. Hester, instead of saying one undutiful word against her
father, took up a psalter in order to teach her little sisters, but Rebecca was
so provoked at her for not joining her in her abuse of her husband, that she
changed her humor, said John was in the right, and Hester a perverse hypocrite,
who only made religion a pretense for being undutiful to her parents. -- Hester
bore all in silence, and committed her cause to 02 him who judges righteously.
It would have been a great comfort to her if she had dared to go and open her
heart to Mrs. Crew, and to have joined in the religious exercises of the
evening at school. But her mother refused to let her, saying, it would only
harden her heart in mischief. Hester said not a word, but after having put the
little ones to bed, and heard them say their prayers out of sight, she went and
sat down in her own little lost, and said to herself, "it would be pleasant to
me to have taught my little sisters to read, I thought it was my duty, for
David has said, Come yo^ children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear
of the Lord. It would have been still more pleasant to have passed the evening
at school, because I am still ignorant, and fitter to learn than to teach; but
I cannot do either without flying in the face of my mother; God fees fit
tonight to change my pleasant duties into a painful trial. I give up my will,
and I submit to the will of my father; but when he orders me to commit a known
sin then I dare not do it, because, in so doing, I must disobly my Father which
is in heaven." Now it so fell out that this dispute happened on the very Sunday
next before Mrs. Jones's yearly feast. On Mayday all the school attended her to
church, each in a stuff gow of their own earning, and a cap and white apron of
her giving. After church there was an examination made into the learning and
behavior of the schools; those who were most perfect in their chapters, and
brought the best character for industry, humility, and sobriety, received a
bible, or some other good book.

Now Hester had been a whole year hoarding up her little savings in order to be
ready with a new gown on the May Day feast. She had never got less than two
shillings a week by her spinning, besides working for the family, and earning a
trifle by odd jobs. This money she faithfully carried to her mother every
Saturday night, keeping back, by consent, only two pence a week toward the
gown. The sum was complete, the pattern had long been settled, and Hester had
only on the Monday morning to go to the shop, pay her money, and bring home her
gown to be made. Her mother happened to go out that morning early to iron-in a
gentleman's family, where she usually stayed a day or two, and Hester was busy
putting the house in order before she went to the shop.

On that very Monday there was to be a meeting at the Bell of all the idle
fellows in the parish. John Wilmot of course was to be there. Indeed he had
accepted a challenge of the blacksmith to a batch at all-fours. -- The
blacksmith was flush of money, John thought himself the best player; and that
he might make sure of winning, he resolved to keep himself sober, which he knew
was more than the other would do. John was so used to go upon tick for ale,
that he got to the door of the Bell before he recollected that he could not
keep his word with the gambler without money, and he had not a penny in his
pocket, so he sullenly turned homewards. He dared not apply to his wife, as he
knew he should be more likely to get a scratched sace than a sixpence from her;
but he knew that Hester had received two shillings for her last week's spinning
on Saturday, and perhaps she might not yet have given it to her mother. Of the
hoarded sum he knew nothing. He asked her if she could lend him half a crown
and he would pay her next day. Hester pleased to see him in good humor after
what had passed the night before, ran up and fetched down her little box, and,
in the joy of her heart that he now desired something she could comply with
without wounding her conscience, cheerfully poured out her whole little stock
upon the table. John was in raptures at the sight of three half-crowns and a
sixpence, eagerly seized it, box and all, together with a sew hoarded
halfpence at the bottom, though he had only asked to borrow half a crown. None
but one whose heart was hardened by a long course of drunkenness could have
taken away the whole, and for such a purpose. He told her she should certainly
have it again next morning, and indeed intended to pay it, not doubting but he
should double the sum. But John over-rated his own skill or luck, for he lost
every farthing to the blacksmith, and sneaked home before midnight, and quietly
walked up to-bed. He was quite sober, which Hester thought a good sign. Next
morning she asked him in a very humble way for the money, which she said she
would not have done, but that if the gown was not bought directly, it would not
be ready in time for the feast. John's conscience had troubled him a little for
what he had done, for when he was not drunk he was not ill-natured, and he
stammered out a broken excuse, but owned he had lost the money, and had not a
farthing left. The moment Hester saw him mild and kind, her heart was sostened,
and she begged him not to vex; adding that she would be contented never to have
a new gown as long as she lived, if she could have the comfort of always seeing
him come home as sober as he was last night. For Hester did not know that he
had refrained from getting drunk, only that he might gamble with a better
chance of success, and that when a gamester keeps himself sober, it is not that
he may practice a virtue, but that he may commit a worse crime. "I am indeed
sorry for what I have done," said he, "you cannot go to the feast, and what
will Madam Jones say?" "Yes, but I can," said Hester, "for God looks not at the
gown, but at the heart, and I am sure he sees mine full of gratitude at hearing
you talk so kindly; and if I thought my dear father would change his present
evil courses, I should be the happiest girl at the feast tomorrow." John
walked away mournfully, and said to himself, "surely there must be something in
religion since it can thus change the heart. Hester was a pert girl, and now
she is as mild as a lamb. She was an indolent girl, and now she is up with the
lark. She was a vain girl, and would do any thing for a new ribbon; and now she
is contented to go in rags to a feast at which every one else will have a new
gown. She deprived herself of the gown to give me the money, and yet this very
girl, so dutiful in some things, would submit to be turned out of doors, rather
than read a loose book at my command, or break the Sabbath. I do not understand
this, there must be some mystery in it." All this he said as he was going to
work. In the evening he did not go to the Bell, whether it was owing to his new
thoughts or to his not having a penny in his pocket, I will not take upon me
positively to say, but I believe it was a little of one, and a little of the
other.

As the pattern of the intended gown had long been settled in the family, and
as Hester had the money by her, it was looked on as good as bought, so that she
was trusted to get it brought home and made in her mother's absence. Indeed, so
little did Rebecca care about the school, that she would not have cared any
thing about the gown, if her vanity had not made her wish that her daughter
should be the best dressed of any girl at the feast. Being from home as was said
before, she knew nothing of the disappointment. On Mayday morning, Hester,
instead of keeping from the feast because she had not a new gown, or meanly
inventing any excuse, dressed herself out as neatly as she could in her poor
old things, and went to join the school in order to go to church. Whether
Hester had formerly indulged a little pride of heart, and talked of this gown
rather too much, I am not quite sure, certain it is, there was a great hue and
cry made at seeing Hester Wilmot, the neatest girl, the most industrious girl
in the school, come to the May Day feast in an old stuff gown, when every other
girl was so creditably dress. Indeed, I am sorry to say, there were two or
three much too smart for their station, and who had dizened themselves out in
very improper finery, which Mrs. Jones made them take eff before her. "I mean
this feast," said she, "as a reward of industry and piety, and not as a trial
of skill who can be finest, and outvie the rest in show. If I do not take care
my feast will become an encouragement, not to virtue, but to vanity. I am so
great a friend to decency of apparel, that I even like to see you deny your
appetites that you may be able to come decently dresser to the house of God. To
encourage you to do this, I like to set apart this one day of innocent pleasure
against which you may be preparing all the year, by laying aside something
every week toward buying a gown out of your little savings. But let me tell
you, that meekness and an humble spirit is of more value in the sight of God
and good men than the gayest cotton gown, or the brightest pink ribbon in the
parish."

Mrs. Jones, for all this, was as much surprised as the rest at Hester's mean
garb: but such is the power of a good character that she gave her credit for a
right intention, especially as she knew the unhappy state of her family. For it
was Mrs. Jones's way (and it is not a bad way) always to wait, and enquire into
the truth, before she condemned any body of good character, though appearances
were against them. "As we cannot judge of people's motives," said she, "we may,
from ignorance, condemn their best actions, and approve of their worst." It
will be always time enough to judge unfavorably, and let us give others credit
as long as we can and then we in our turn may expect a favorable judgment from
others." Hester was no more proud of what she had done for her father, than she
was humbled by the meanness of her garb, and though Betty Styles, one of the
girls, whose finery had been taken away, sneered at her, Hester never offered
to clear herself by exposing her father, though she thought it right secretly
to inform Mrs. Jones of what had past. When the examination of the girls began,
Betty Styles was asked some questions on the fourth and fifth commandments,
which she answered very well. Hester was asked nearly the same questions, and
though she answered them no better than Betty had done, they were all surprised
to see Mrs. Jones rise up and give a handsome bible to Hester, while she gave
nothing to Betty. This girl cried out rather pertly, "Madam, it is very hard
that I have no book, I was as perfect as Hester." "I have often told you," said
Mrs. Jones, "that religion is not a thing of the tongue b^^ of the heart. That
girl gives me the best proof that she has learned the fourth commandment to
good purpose, who persists in keeping holy the sabbath day, though commanded to
break it by a parent whom she loves. And that girl best proves that she keeps
the fifth, who gives up her own comfort and clothing, and credit, to honor and
obey her father and mother, even though they are not such as she could wish.
Betty Styles, though she could answer the questions so readily, went a nutting
last Sunday when she should have been at school, and refused to nurse her sick
mother when she could not help herself."

Farmer Hoskins, who stood by, whispered to Mrs. Jones, "Well, Madam, now you
have convinced even one of the benefit of religious instruction, now I sce
there is a meaning to it. I thought it was in at one ear and out at the other,
and that a song was as well as a psalm; but now I have found that the proof of
the pudding is in the eating. I sce your scholars must do what they bear, and
obey what they learn. Why at this rate, they will all be the better servants
for being really godly, and so I will add a pudding to next year's feast."

The pleasure Hester felt in receiving a new bible, made her forget that she
had on an old gown. She walked to church in a thankful frame; but how great was
her joy, when she saw, among a number of working men, her own father going into
church. As she past by him she cast on him a look of so much joy and affection,
that it brought tears into his eyes, especially when he compared her mean dress
with that of the other girls, and thought who had been the cause of it. --
John, who had not been at church for some years, was deeply struck with the
service. The confession with which it opens went to his heart. He felt, for the
first time, that he was a miserable sinner, and that there was no health in
him. He now felt compunction for sin in general, though it was only his ill
beh^vi^^r to his daughter which had brought him to church. The sermon was such
as served to strengthen the impression which the prayers had made, and when it
was over, instead of joining the ringers (for the belfry was the only part of
the church John liked, because it usually led to the alehouse) he quietly
walked back to his work. It was indeed the best day's work he ever made. He
could not get out of his head the whole day the first words he had heard at
church. When the wicked man turns away from his wickedness, and does that
which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. At night, instead of
going to the Bell, he went home, intending to ask Hester to forgive him; but as
soon as he got to the door, he heard Rebecca rating his daughter for having
brought such a disgrace on the family as to be seen in that old rag of a gown,
and insisted on knowing what she had done with the money. Hester tried to keep
the secret, but her mother declared she would turn her out of doors if she did
not tell the truth. Hester was at last forced to confess she had given it to
her father. Unfortunately for poor John, it was at this very moment he opened
the door. The mother now divided her fury between her guilty husband and her
innocent child, till from words she fell to blows. John defended his daughter,
and received some of the strokes intended for the poor girl. This turbulent
scene partly put John's good resolutions to flight, though the patience of
Hester did him almost as much good as the sermon he had heard. At length the
poor girl escaped up stairs, not a litte bruised, and a scene of much violence
passed between John and Rebecca. She declared she would not sit down to supper
with such a brute, and set off to a neighbor's house, that she might have the
pleasure of abuting him the longer. John, whose mind was much disturbed, went
up stairs without his supper. As he was passing by Hester's little room he
heard her voice, and as he concluded she was venting bitter complaints against
her unnatural parents, he stopped to listen, resolving to go in and comfort
her. He stopped at the door, for by the light of the moon he saw her kneeling
by her bedside, and praying so earnestly that she did not hear him. As he made
sure she could be praying for nothing but his death, what was his surprise to
hear these words, "O Lord, have mercy upon my dear father and mother, teach me
to love them, to pray for them, and do them good, make me more dutiful, and
more patient, that, adorning the doctrine of God, my Savior, I may recommend
his holy religion, and my dear parents may be brought to love and fear thee."

Poor John, who would never have been hard hearted if he had not been a
drunkard, could not stand this, he fell down on his knees, embraced his child,
and begged her to teach him how to pray. He prayed himself as well as he could,
and though he did not know what words to use, yet his heart was melted; he
owned he was a sinner, and begged Hester to fetch the prayer book, and read
over the confession with which he had been so much struck at church. This was
the pleasantest order she had ever obeyed. Seeing him deeply affected with a
sense of sin, she pointed out to him the Savior of sinners; and in this manner
she past some hours with her father, which were the happiest of her life; such
a night was worth a hundred cotton, or even silk gowns. In the course of the
week Hester read over the confession, and some other prayers to her father so
often that he got them by heart, and repeated them while he was at work. And at
length he took courage to kneel down and pray before he went to-bed From that
time he bore his wife's ill-humor much better than he had ever done, and, as he
knew her to be neat and notable, and saving, he began to think, that if her
temper was not quite so bad, his home might st^l become as pleasant a place to
him as ever the Bell had been; but unless she became more tractable h^e did not
know what to do with his long evenings after the little ones were in bed, for
he began once more to delight in playing with them. Hester proposed that she
should teach him to read an hour every night, and he consented. Rebecca began
to storm from the mere trick she had got of storming; but finding that he now
brought home all his earnings, and that she got both his money and his company
(for she had once loved him) she began to reconcile herself to this new way of
life. In a few months John could read a psalm; in learning to read it he also
got it by heart, and this proved a little store for private devotion, and while
he was mowing be could call to mind a text to cheer his labor. Henow went
constantly to church, and often dropped in at the school on a Sunday evening to
hear their prayers. He expressed so much pleasure at this, that one day Hester
ventured to ask him if they should set up family prayer at home. John said he
should like it mightily, but as he could not yet read quite well enough, he
desired Hester to try to get a proper book, and begin next Sunday night. Hester
had bought of a pious hawker for three halfpence the book of prayers, printed
for the cheap Repository, by Mr. Marshall, Queer-street, Cheap Side.

When Hester read the exhortation at the beginning of this little book, her
mother who sat in the corner; and pretended to be asleep, was so much struck
that she could not find a word to say against it. For a few nights indeed, she
continued to sit still, or pretended to rock the young child while her husband
and daughter were kneeling at their prayers. She expected John would have
scolded her for this, and so perverse was her temper, that she was disappointed
at his finding no fault with her. Seeing at last that he was very patient, and
that though he prayed fervently himself, he suffered her to do as she liked,
she loft the spirit of opposition for want of something to provoke it. As her
pride began to be subdued, some little disposition to piety was awakened in her
heart. By degrees she slid down on her knees, though at first it was behind the
cradle or the clock, or in some corner where she thought they would not see
her. Hester rejoiced even in this outward change in her mother, and prayed that
God would at last be pleased to touch her heart as he had done that of her
father.

As John now spent no idle money, he had saved up a^trifle by working
over-hours, this he kindly offered to Hester to make up for the loss of her
gown. Instead of accepting it, Hester told him, that as she herself was young
and healthy, she should soon be able to clothe herself out of her own savings,
and begged him to make her mother a present of this gown, which he did. It had
been a maxim of Rebecca, that it was better not to go to church at all tha^ go
in an old gown. She had, however, so far conquered this evil notion, that she
had lately gone pretty often. This kindness of the gown touched her not a
little, and the first Sunday she put it on, Mr. Simpson happened to preach from
this text, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. This sermon
so affected Rebecca that she never once thought she had her new gown on, till
she came to take it off when she went to-bed, and that very night, instead of
skulking behind, she knelt down by her husband.

There was one thing sunk deep in Rebecca's mind, she had observed that since
her husband had grown religious he had been so careful not to give her any
offense, that he was become scrupulously clean; took off his dirty shoes before
he sat down, and was very cautious not to spill a drop of beer on her shining
table. Now it was rather remarkable, that as John grew more neat, Rebecca grew
more indifferent to neatness. But both these changes arose from the same cause,
the growth of religion in their hearts. John grew cleanly from the fear of
giving pain to his wife, while Rebecca grew indifferent from having discovered
the sin and vanity of an over anxious care about trist^s.

Hester continues to grow in grace and in knowledge. Last christmas day she was
appointed an under teacher in the school, and many people think that some years
hence, if any thing should happen to Mrs. Crew, Hester may be promoted to be
head mistress.

ON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD's SUPPER.
HOW comes it that so many persons who go regularly to public worship,
nevertheless do not attend at the Sacrament? Are they right or wrong in turning
their backs on this solemn ordinance? It is a question well worth considering,
and it is the intention of this tract to clear up, in some measure, this
important subject.

I believe the principal reason which many people have to give for not
receiving the Sacrament is, that they are afraid of it. "I think it an awful
thing," say they, "to receive the Sacrament. I am fearful lest I should eat and
drink my own damnation." To such persons we reply, have you ever enquired into
the real meaning and nature of what you so much dread? Read the present tract.
Learn to under stand what the acrament of the Lord's Supper is, and when you
know, then decide whether you will receive it or not. Let me here remark also,
that the phrase of eating and drinking our own damnation is a phrase extremely
misunderstood. It is borrowed from the Apostle Paul, but when the Apostle used
it he applied it to certain Corinthians who got drunk at the Sacrament; and it
is material also to observe, that by the word "damnation" the Apostle meant
"condemnation," and you will find, if you will read the passage that he alluded
chiefly to certain judgments in this world which the Corinthians brought upon
them, so that even in their case he did not mean to declare, that there would
be no room for repentance in this world, and no salvation in the next. It must
be owned in like manner, or rather it ought to be solemnly insisted on, that
every one who now communicates unworthily, increases his guilt rather than
promotes his salvation; but still be does not sin past all possibility of
forgiveness; and let it be remembered, that a man may sin not only by
communicating unworthily, but also by refusing to communicate.

On the manner in which Christ appointed the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
The best means of knowing what is the true nature of the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, is to enquire into all that passed when our Savior appointed
it. -- We read, with little difference of terms, in several of the Evangelists,
that our Savior, on the same night on which he was betrayed, being at supper
with his disciple^, took bread and gave thanks, and brake it and gave unto
them, saying, this is my body which is given for you. This do in remembrance of
me. Likewise also, the cup after supper, saying, this cup is the New Testament
in my blood which is shed for you. The Apostle Paul further observes, For as
often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till
be come. From this short and simple account, which is nearly all that Scripture
says on the subject, we are to collect what was our Savior's intention in
appointing this Sacrament.

Now I think we are to understand, that he thereby meant to command all
christians to meet together, from time to time, and to partake of bread and
wine, in order to keep up among them the remembrance of this his last supper
with his disciples, and of the sufferings and death of Christ, which
immediately followed. Take eat, said he, after having broken the bread, this is
my body. That is, this broken bread is to remind you of my body broken for your
sake. And speaking of the cup, he said, Drink ye all of this, for this is my
blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
That is, this cup is to remind you of my blood being shed for the pardon (or
remission) of sins. Do this in remembrance of me. These last mentioned words
may be understood both as an entreaty and as a command. Christ, your Savior,
entreats you thus to remember him. Christ, also, who is your Judge and Lord,
commands you to do it. The command is as plain as any other command of
Scripture, and he who disobeys one command of Christ, may, with much the same
reason, disobey every other. It is, in short, as if our blessed Savior had
said, "I am now about to die for your sins, and to rise again for your
justification, and I make it my last and dying request that you, and all my
disciples will accustom yourselves to meet together, and to partake of bread
and wine, as we have now done, in token of your bearing in mind, my painful and
bloody death, and in token also of your believing that I, who am now about to
be crucified, shall hereafter come again, according to my promise, in power and
great glory." For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show
the Lord's death till he come.

What it is to receive the Sacrament unworthily.
First then, I think it is plain that to receive it ignorantly, is to receive
it unworthily. This may very properly be called not discerning the Lord's body.
Gross ignorance or error concerning the nature of the Sacrament, evidently
shows a man to be unfit at present to receive it, and gross ignorance of the
doctrines of christianity is in like manner a disqualification. This ignorance,
however, is that which should immediately be cured. Every person who is come to
years of discretion should be afraid of remaining a stranger to the Lord's
table. He should lose no time in enquiring into the nature of it, and when he
understands it, he is no more to be excused for absenting himself from it, than
he is for absenting himself from the common public worship.

But next I would observe, that to receive the Sacrament in any respect,
lightly and carelessly, is to receive it unworthily. Some receive the Sacrament
as a thing of course as soon as ever they arrive at a certain age; and at this
same age perhaps they go and plunge themselves into all the vanities and
follies of the world, if not into its vices also. Some receive it because they
have a grave character to support; some because they are expected to receive
it, and are ashamed to refuse to do so, having, for instance, a brother or a
sister who receives it from whom they do not care to differ; some from mere
zeal for their own church, of which they show themselves steady members by
receiving the Sacrament according to the forms which it has appointed: some
from a confused mixture of several of the abovementioned motives; and some for
the mere purpose of qualifying themselves for a place under government. Thus,
while many seriously disposed persons need to be encouraged to come to the
Lord's table much more than is their custom, it is to be feared also, that
there are not a few of our communicants who in one way or other receive the
Sacrament very unworthily.

Again, to receive the Lord's Supper superstitiously is to receive it in some
measure unworthily. Now a man receive it superstitiously who thinks there is
some charm or unaccountable virtue in it, and who is not content with believing
the Sacrament to be a means of grace, in the same manner as prayer or the
reading of the Scriptures, or attendance on public worship. The papists go so
far as to adore the elements of bread and wine, which they also fancy that the
priest is able, by consecration, to turn into the real and literal body and
blood of Christ; and there are some Protestants who have not entirely escaped
from the same error; for they fancy that there is some dark and mystical
meaning in the Sacrament, which, however, they cannot explain; and they are not
aware that it is that plain and simple thing which we have described it to be.
I am sorry to add that some superstitious protestants imitate the papists in
another respect. They think they have done a very meritorious deed when they
have received the Sacrament; they have gone through what they call their
religious duty, and in consideration of this they fancy that they have now
obtained a right to employ themselves in any manner they think sit, and away
therefore they go from the Lord's table into the world with minds full of
ambition or pride, or covetousness, and the very Sacrament which they have
attended serves to confirm them in the neglect of daily and habitual
repentance, and to give a dangerous and false peace to their consciences, There
are persons of this description who prepare themselves possibly with much
solemnity for the day of receiving the Sacrament, and who even attend the
service with a face of great sanctity and seriousness. It must, nevertheless,
be laid down as a maxim, that whenever any one's life is quite at variance with
every thing he professes at the Lord's table, that person must be considered as
a mere hypocrite and self-deceiver, and as one of the worst and most unworthy
sort of communicants.

On the self-examination that is proper before we determine to receive the
Sacrament.
St. Paul, after reproving the Corinthians for their profanation of the Lord's
Supper, observes, but let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread and drink of that cup. In the catechism of the church of England we are
instructed, what it is that may now be particularly required of communicants;
namely, "that they should examine themselves whether they repent them truly of
their former sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life; whether they have a
lively faith in God's mere, through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his
death, and whether they are in charity with all men!" Let every one then
examine himself on these sever I heads, and more especially when he is for the
first time about to communicate. Here, however, while we warn the careless not
to be too slight in their self-examination, let us also caution the serious not
to be too severe. It is not required that a man should have become free from
sin, nor that he should even have reached to some great heights in religion,
before he ventures to the Sacrament; for the Sacrament itself supposes us
sinful creatures, and is intended to cheer us with the hope of pardon, through
that death of Christ, which it sets before us Reader! if your heart is full of
pride, or covetousness, or impenitence, and unbelief, or if you are carried
away by the love of the world, and are cold and indifferent about religion, or
if you are habitually given to any deceit or fraud, or to any secret
wickedness, approach not to the holy table; but if the sins I have spoken of
are the very things which you hate, and if the mercie^ of God in Christ, are
the sincere desire of your soul, then doubt non that the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper is intended for such persons as you, however weak your faith, and
however small your present seize.

On the dispositions which we should feel at the time of communicating.
The Lord's Supper was ordained "for a continual remembrance of the sacrifice
and death of Christ, and of the benefits which we receive thereby." The
benefits which we receive from the death of Christ, are therefore one of the
chief subjects on which we should reflect when we are approaching the table of
the Lord We should consider that we are now about to commemorate the death of
that Savior who died for us, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God: who was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities,
and the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are
healed. All we like sheep had gone astray; but the Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all. Let it never be forgotten when we go to the table of the
Lord that we should go thither in the very character of sinners. In this
respect there is no difference, for all have sinned, and come short of the
glory of God, being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is
in Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, that he might be just, and the justifier of him who believes in Jesus.
Christ is that Lamb of God, a Lamb without blemish and without spot, which has
been offered up as a bleeding sacrifice, and which takes away the sins of the
world. Take, eat, this is my body, which is given for you, and this is my blood
which is shed for you for the remission of sins. Unto him, therefore, we are to
look, and through the exercise of this faith in Christ, and not through our own
works or deservings, we are to hope for pardon. There is, therefore now no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but
after the spirit. Therefore, being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Such are some of the thoughts concerning our
Savior's death, as well as the blessed effects of it, which the Scriptures
teach us to indulge, and which are more peculiarly proper at the time of
receiving the Sacrament.

On the character and conduct which becomes us after having received the
Sacrament.
Presuming the reader to be a member of the church of England, we will here
more particularly remind him of a few passages in the Sacramental service
provided by our Church. In that service we are supposed to say, "We do not
presume to come to this thy table, O merciful Lord! trusting in our own
righteousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies." Now have we been sincere
in uttering these words? Let us beware then how we afterward talk of the
innocence of our lives and the goodness of our hearts, and how we boast of our
character and our honor as worldly people do; let us take care that we never
put any part of our confidence in that righteousness which we have professed in
those words to renounce. Humility, meekness, patience toward others, loving
kindness and charity, a disposition to forgive injuries and to take reproofs
without anger, contentment with our lot, and submission under the afflicting
hand of Providence, all these are tempers which cannot fail to arise out of an
habitual sense of our unworthiness, and they are the tempers therefore which
become a communicant; nor is there any doubt that every sincere communicant
will find these tempers increase in him through his frequent attendance at the
Lord's table.

Again, we are supposed by another part of the service most humbly to declare,
"We do most earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for these our misdoings.
The remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burdens of them is
intolerable." But how false and hypocritical should we suspect ourselves to
have been in these words, if we seldom afterward feel any sorrow for our sins,
if we neglect the duty of habitual repentance, and if we pretend that Christ
with save us, or that the mere Sacrament will save us, without our feeling in
our hearts any great hatred of iniquity. Let us therefore never think after we
have pronounced those words, that sin can be counted too great an evil, that
temptations to sin can be too much avoided, that repentance can ever be too
deep or serious, or that things in this respect can, as the world imagine, be
ever carried too far.

Once more -- we are supposed at the end of the service each of us to declare,
"and here we offer and present unto thee ourselves, and souls and bodies, to be
a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto thee." Do we then indeed and in
truth thus devote ourselves to God? To have said these words, and to have
repeated them again and again at the Sacrament, is to have done little. By
these words it is meant, not only that a solemn service should be performed,
and that a momentary feeling should be expressed, but it is intended also to
imply that we purpose actually to employ all our powers and faculties, whether
of body or of soul, our time, our wealth, our abilities, and our influence in
the cause of our Maker and our Redeemer; for we are not our own, but are bought
with a price; a life really laid out in the service of God is therefore to be
expected in a communicant. To redeem each precious moment of our time by
employing it in whatever is our most proper and most urgent work, to shake off
our natural indolence and sloth, and to go from the Lord's table into scenes of
diligence and usefulness: thus to join together the love of God and of man, and
to be active as well as to be devout, is to be consistent in our character as
christians.

If then we have attended at the table of the Lord, let us not forget to do
good, and to distribute; for these also are sacrifices with which God is well
pleased. Let us not only pour out our hearts in prayer, but let us also employ
our active powers in the Lord's service. Let us be steadfast, immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord. Let us keep under our body, and bring it
into subjection. Let us command our passions, and restrain our tongues. Let us
also be punctual in our engagements, upright, exemplary Let us be zealously
affected in every good cause; and while we visit the fatherless and widows in
their affliction, let us take equal care that we keep our selves unspotted from
the world.

THE HISTORY OF MR. FANTOM, THE NEW FASHIONED PHILOSOPHER, AND HIS MAN WILLIAM.
MR. FANTOM was a retail trader in the city of London. As he had no turn to any
expensive vices, he was reckoned a sober, decent man, but he was covetous and
proud, selfish and conceited. As soon as he got forward in the world, his
vanity began to display itself, but not in the ordinary method of making a
figure, and living away; but still he was tormented with a longing desire to
draw public notice, and to distinguish himself. He felt a general sense of
discontent at what he was, with a general ambition to be something which he was
not; but this desire had not yet turned itself to any particular object. It was
not by his money he could hope to be distinguished, for half his acquaintance
had more, and a man must be rich indeed, to be noted for his riches in London.
Mr. Fantom's mind was a prey to vain imaginations. He despised all those little
acts of kindness and charity which every man is called to perform every day,
and while he was contriv^^^ grand schemes which lay quite out of his reach, he
neglected the ordinary duties of life which lay directly before him.

About this time he got hold of a famous little book written by the new
philosopher, whose pestilent doctrines found a ready entrance into Mr. Fantom's
mind; a mind at once shallow and inquisitive, speculative and vain, ambitious
and dissatisfied. As almost every book was new to him, he fell into the common
error of those who begin to read late in life, that of thinking that what he
did not know himself was equally new to others; and he was apt to fancy that he
and the author he was reading were the only two people in the world who knew
any thing. This book led to the grand discovery; he had now found what his
heart panted after, a way to distinguish himself. To start out a full grown
philosopher at once, to be wise without education, to dispute without learning,
and to make proselytes without argument, was a short cut to fame; which well
suited his vanity and his ignorance. He rejoiced that he had been so clever as
to examine for himself, pitied his friends who took things upon trust, and was
resolved to assert the freedom of his own mind. To a man fond of bold novelties
and daring paradoxes, solid argument would be flat, and truth would be dull,
merely because it is not new. Mr. Fantom believed, not in proportion to the
strength of the evidence, but to the impudence of the assertion. The trampling
on holy ground with dirty shoes, the smearing the sanctuary with filth and
mire, the calling prophets and apostles by the most scurrilous names, was new,
and dashing, and dazzling. Mr. Fantom now being set free from the chains of
slavery and superstition, was resolved to show his zeal in the usual way, by
trying to free others, but it would have hurt his vanity had he known that he
was the convert of a man who had written only for the vulgar, who had invented
nothing, no, not even one idea of original wickedness; but who had stooped to
rake up out of the kennel of infidelity, all the loathsome dregs and offal
dirt, which politer unbelievers had thrown away as too gross and offensive for
their better bred readers.

Mr. Fantom, who considered that a philosopher must set up with a little sort
of stock in trade, now picked up all the common place notions against
christianity, which have been answered a hundred times over: these he kept by
him ready cut and dried, and brought ou^ in all companies with a zeal which
would have done honor to a better cause, but which the friends to a better
cause are not so apt to discover. He soon got all the cant of the new school.
He talked of narrowness, and ignorance, and bigotry, and prejudice, and priest
cast, on the one hand; and on the other of public good, the love of mankind,
and liberality, and candor, and toleration, and above all, benevolence.
Benevolence, he said, made up the whole of religion, and all the other parts of
it were nothing but cant, and jargon, and hypocrisy. Finding, however, that he
made little impression on his old club at the Cat and Bagpipes, he grew tired
of their company, yet there was one member whose society he could not resolve
to give up, though they seldom agreed, as indeed no two men in the same class and
habits of life could less resemble each other. -- Mr. Trueman was an honest,
plain, simple hearted tradesman of the good old cut, who feared God and
followed his business, he went to church twice on Sundays, and minded his shop
all the week, spent frugally, gave liberally, and saved moderately.

Mr. Fantom resolved to retire for a while into the country, and devote his
time to his new plans, schemes, theories, and projects for the public good. A
life of talking, and reading, and writing, and disputing, and teaching, and
proselyting now struck him as the only life, so he soon set out for the country
with his family, to which was now added his new footman, William Wilson, whom
he had taken with a good character out of a sober family. He was no sooner
settled than he wrote to invite Mr. Trueman to come and pay him a visit, for he
would have burst if he could not have got some one to whom he might display his
new knowledge. He knew that if on the one hand, Trueman was no scholar, yet on
the other he was no fool, and though he despised his prejudices, yet he thought
he might be made a good decoy duck, for if he could once bring Trueman over,
the whole club at the Cat and Bagpipes might be brought to follow his example,
and thus he might see himself at the head of a society of his own proselytes,
the supreme object of a philosopher's ambition. Trueman came accordingly. He
soon found that however he might be shocked at the impious doctrines his friend
maintained, yet that an important lesson might be learnt even from the worst
enemies of truth; namely, an ever-wakeful attention to their grand object. If
they set out with talking of trade or politics; of private news or public
affairs, still Mr. Fantom was ever on the watch to hitch in his darling
doctrines; whatever he began with, he was sure to end with a pert squib at the
Bible, a vapid jest on the clergy, the miseries of superstition, and the
blessings of philosophy. "Oh!" said Trueman to himself, "when shall I see
christians half so much in earnest? Why is it that almost all zeal is on the
wrong side?"

"Well, Mr. Fantom," said Trueman next day at breakfeast, "I am afraid you are
leading but an idle sort of life here." "Sir," said Fantom, "I now begin to
live to some purpose; I have indeed lost too much time, and wasted my talents
on a little retail trade, in which one is of no note; one cannot distinguish
one's self." "So much the better," said Trueman, "I had rather not distinguish
myself, unless it was by leading a better life than my neighbors. There is
nothing I should dread more than being talked about. I dare say now heaven is
in a good measure filled with people whose names were never heard out of their
own street or village. So I beg leave not to distinguish myself." "Yes, but one
may if it is only by signing one's name to an essay or a paragraph in a
newspaper," said Fantom. "Heaven keep John Trueman's name out of a newspaper,"
interrupted he in a fright, "for it must either be found in the Old Bailey or
the Bankrupt List, unless indeed, I were to remove shop, or sell off my old
stock." "But in your present confined situation you can be of no use," said
Fantom. "That I deny," interrupted the other. "I have filled all the parish
offices with some credit. I never took a bribe at an election, no, not so much
as a treat; I take care of my apprentices, and don't set them a bad example by
running to plays and Sadler's Wells in the week, or jaunting about in a gig all
day on Sundays; for I look upon it that the country jaunt of the master on
Sundays exposes his servants to more danger than their whole week's temptations
in trade put together."

Fantom. I once had the same vulgar prejudices about the church and the
sabbath, and all that antiquated stuff. But even on your own narrow principles,
how can a thinking being spend his Sunday better (if he must lose one day in
seven by having any Sunday at all) than by going into the country to admire the
works of nature.


Trueman. I suppose you mean the works of God; for I never read in the bible
that nature made any thing. I should rather think that she herself was made by
him who made all things; by him, who, when he said, thou shall not murder, said
also, thou shall keep holy the sabbath day. But now do you really think that
all that multitude of coaches, chariots, chaises, vis-a-vis, booby-hutches,
sulkies, sociables, phaetons, gigs, curricles, cabrioles, chairs, stages,
pleasure-carts and horses, which crowd our roads; all those country houses
within reach, to which the London friends pour in to the gorgeous Sunday feast,
which the servants are kept from church to dress; all those public houses under
the signs of which you read these alluring words, AN ORDINARY ON SUNDAYS; I
say, do you believe that all those houses and carriages are crammed with
philosophers who go on Sundays into the country to admire the works of nature
as you call it? Indeed, from the reeling gait of some of them when they go back
at night, one might take them for a certain sect called the tippling
philosophers. Then in answer to your charge, that a little tradesman can do no
good, I must tell you that I belong to the society for relieving prisoners for
small debts, and to the sick man's friend, and to. --


Fantom. Oh, enough -- all these are petty occupations.


Trueman. Then they are better suited to petty men of petty fortune. I had
rather have an ounce of real good done with my own hands, and seen with my own
eyes, than speculate about doing a ton in a wild way, which I know can never be
brought about.


Fantom. I despise a narrow field. Oh, for the reign of universal benevolence!
I want to make all mankind good and happy.


Trueman. Dear me! sure that must be a wholesale sort of a job; had not you
better try your hand at a town or a parish first?


Fantom. Sir, I have a plan in my head for relieving the miseries of the whole
world. Every thing is bad as it now stands. I would alter all the laws, and do
away all the religions, and put an end to all the wars in the world. I would
every where redress the injustice of fortune, or what the vulgar call
providence. I would put an end to all punishments, I would not leave a single
prisoner on the face of the globe. This is what I call doing things on a grand
scale. "A scale with a vengeance," said Trueman. "As to releasing the
prisoners, however, I don't so much like that, as it would be pleasing a few
rogues at the expense of all honest men; but as to the rest of your plan, if
all christian countries would be so good as to turn christians, it might be
helped on a good deal. There would be still misery enough left indeed, because
God intended this world should be earth and not heaven. But still, banishing
irreligion from the world would be like striking off all the pounds from an
over charged bill; and all the troubles which would be left, would be reduced
to mere shillings, pence, and farthings, as one may say."


Fantom. Your project would rivet the chains which mine is designed to break.


Trueman. Sir, I have no projects. Projects are in general the offspring of
restlessness, vanity, and idleness. I am too busy for projects, too contented
for theories, and I hope, have too much humility for a philosopher. The utmost
extent of my ambition at present is, to redress the wrongs of a parish
'prentice who has been cruelly used by his master; indeed, I have another
little scheme, which is to prosecute a fellow in our street who has let a poor
wretch in a workhouse, of which he had the care, perish through neglect, and
you must assist me.


Fantom. The parish must do that, as to me I own that the wrongs of the Poles
and South Americans so fill my mind, as to leave me no time to attend the petty
sorrows of workhouses and parish 'prentices. It is provinces, empires,
continents, that the benevolence of the philosopher embraces; every one can do
a little paltry good to his next neighbor.


Trueman. Every one can, but I don't see every one does. If they would, indeed,
your business would be ready done to your hands, and your grand ocean of
benevolence would be filled with the drops which private charity would throw
into it. I am glad, however, you are such a friend to the prisoners, because I
am just now getting a little subscription from our club, to set free your poor
old friend, Tom Saunders, a very honest brother tradesman, who first got into
debt and then into gaol, through no fault of his own, but merely through the
pressure of the times. We have each of us allowed a trifle every week toward
maintaining Tom's young family since he has been in prison, but we think we
shall do much more service to Saunders, and indeed in the end lighten our own
expense, by paying down at once a little sum to restore to him the comforts of
life and put him in a way of maintaining his family again. We have made up the
money all except five guineas, I am already promised four, and you have nothing
to do but to give me the fifth. And so for a single guinea, without any of the
trouble, the meetings, and the looking into his affairs, which we have had, you
will at once have the pleasure (and it is no small one) of helping to save a
worthy family from starving, of redeeming an old friend from gaol, and of
putting a little of your boasted benevolence into action. Realize! master
Fantom, there is nothing like realizing. "Why hearkee, Mr. Trueman," said
Fantom stammering, and looking very black, "don't think I value a guinea; no
Sir, I despise money, it is trash, it is dirt, and beneath the regard of a wise
man. It Is one of the unfeeling inventions of artificial society. Sir I could
talk to you for half a day on the abuse of riches, and on my own contempt of
money.


Trueman. O pray don't give yourself the trouble, it will be an easier way by
half of proving both, just to put your hand in your pocket and give me the
guinea without saying a word about it; and then to you who value time so much
and money so little, it will cut the matter short. But come now (for I see you
will give nothing) I should be mighty glad to know what is the sort of good you
do yourselves, since you always object to what is done by others. "Sir," said
Mr. Fantom, "the object of a true philosopher is to diffuse light and
knowledge. I wish to see the whole world enlightened."


Trueman. Amen! if you mean with the light of the gospel. But if you mean that
one religion is as good as another, and that no religion is the best of all; in
short, if you want to make the whole world philosophers, why they had better
stay as they are. But as to the true light, I wish it to reach the very lowest,
and I therefore bless God for charity schools, as instruments of diffusing it.

Fantom, who had no reason to expect that his friend was going to call upon him
for a subscription on this account, ventured to praise them, saying, "I am no
enemy to these institutions. I would indeed change the object of instruction,
but I would have the whole world instructed."

Here Mrs. Fantom, who with her daughter had quietly sat by at their work,
ventured to put in a word, a liberty she seldom took with her husband, who in
his zeal to make the whole world free and happy, was too prudent to include his
wife. "Then my dear," said she, "I wonder you don't let your own servants be
taught a little. The maids can scarcely tell a letter, or say the Lord's
prayer; and you know you will not allow them time to learn. William too has never
been at church since we came out of town. He was at first very orderly and
obedient, but now he is seldom sober of an evening, and in the morning when he
should be rubbing the tables in the parlor, he is generally lolling upon them
and reading your little manual of the new philosophy." "Mrs. Fantom," said her
husband angrily, "you know that my labors for the public good, leave me little
time to think of my own family. I must have a great field, I like to do good to
hundreds at once."

"I am very glad of that papa," said Miss Polly, "for then I hope you will not
refuse to subscribe to all those pretty children at the Sunday school as you
did yesterday, when the gentleman came a begging, because that is the very
thing you were wishing for; there are two or three hundred to be done good to
at once."


Trueman. Well Mr. Fantom, you are a wonderful man to keep up such a stock of
benevolence at so small an expense. To love mankind so dearly and yet avoid all
opportunities of doing them good; to have such a noble zeal for the millions,
and to feel so little compassion for the units; surely none but a philosopher
could indulge so much philanthropy and so much frugality at the same time.


Fantom. I despise the man whose benevolence is swallowed up in the narrow
concerns of his own family, or parish, or country.


Trueman. Well, now I have a notion that it is as well to do one's own duty as
that of another man, and to do good at home as well as abroad, and I had as
lieve help Tom Saunders to freedom as a Pole or a South American, though I
should be very glad to help them too, but one must begin to love somewhere, and
to do good somewhere; and I think it is as natural to love one's own family and
to do good in one's own neighborhood as to any body else. And if every man in
every family, parish, and county, did the same, why! all the schemes would
meet, and the end of one parish where I was doing good, would be the beginning
of another, where somebody else was doing good; so my schemes would jut into my
neighbors, and all would fit with a sort of dove-tail exactness.

Here they were told dinner was on table. "Don't think," said Mr. Fantom, "that
you have the best of the argument, because you happen to have the last word. We
will finish our talk some other time." So saying they went in to dinner.

When t^^^ sat down, Mr. Fantom was not a little out of humor, to see his table
in some disorder. William was also rather more negligent than usual. If the
company called for bread, he gave them beer, and he took away the clean plates,
and gave them dirty ones. Mr. Fantom soon discovered that his servant was very
drunk; he flew into a violent passion, and ordered him out of the room,
charging that he should not appear in his presence in that condition. William
obeyed; but having slept an hour or two, and got about half sober, he again
made his appearance. His master gave him a severe reprimand, and called him an
idle, drunken, vicious fellow. "Sir," said William, very pertly, "if I do get
drunk now and then, I only do it for the good of my country, and in obedience
to your wishes." Mr. Fantom, thoroughly provoked, now began to scold him in
words not fit to be repeated, and asked him what he meant. "Why, Sir," said
William, "you are a philosopher you know, and I have often overheard you say to
your company, that private vices are public benefits, and so I thought that
getting drunk was as pleasant a way of doing good to the public as any,
especially when I could oblige my master at the same time."

"Get out of my house," said Mr. Fantom, in a great rage. "I do not desire to
stay a moment longer, so pay me my wages." "Not I, indeed," replied the master,
"nor will I give you a character, so never let me see your face again." William
took his master at his word, and not only got out of the house, but out of the
country too as fast as possible. When they found he was really gone, they made
a hue-and-cry, in order to detain him till they had examined if he had left
every thing in the house as he had found it. But William had got out of reach,
knowing he could not stand such a scrutiny. On examination, Mr. Fantom found
that all his port was gone, and Mrs. Fantom missed three of her best new
spoons. William was pursued, but without success, and Mr. Fantom was so much
discomposed, that he could not for the rest of the day talk of any thing but
his wine and his spoons, nor harangue on any project but that of recovering
both by bringing William to justice.

Some days past away, in which Mr. Fantom having had time to cool, began to be
ashamed that he had been betrayed into such ungoverned passion. He made the
best excuse he could, said no man was perfect, and though he owned he had been
too violent, yet he still hoped William would be brought to the punishment he
deserved. "In the mean time," said Mr. Trueman, "seeing how ill philosophy has
agreed with your man, suppose you were to set about teaching your maids a
little religion?" Mr. Fantom coolly replied, "that the impertinent retort of a
drunken footman could not spoil a system." "Your system, however, and your own
behavior," said Trueman, "have made that footman a scoundrel; and you are
answerable for his offenses." -- "Not I, truly," said Fantom, "he has seen me
do no harm; he has neither seen me cheat, gamble, nor get drunk: and I defy you
to say I corrupt my servants. I am a moral man, Sir." "Mr. Fantom," said
Trueman, "if you were to get drunk every day, and game every night, you would
indeed endanger your own soul, and give a dreadful example to your family; but
great as those sins are, and God forbid that I should attempt to lessen them,
still they are not worse, nay, they are not so bad as the pestilent doctrines
with which you infect your house and your neighborhood. A bad action is like a
single murder, but a wicked principle is throwing lighted gun powder into a
town, it is poisoning a river; there are no bounds, no certainty, no end to its
mischief. The ill effects of the worst action may cease in time, and the
consequences of your example may end with your life; but souls may be bro't to
perdition by a wicked principle, after the author of it has been dead for ages.


Fantom. You talk like an ignoramus, who has never read the new philosophy. All
this nonsense of future punishment is now done away. It is our benevolence
which makes us reject your creed; we can no more believe in a Deity who permits
so much evil in the present world, than one who threatens eternal punishment in
the next.


Trueman. What, shall mortal be more merciful than God? Do you pretend to be
more compassionate than that gracious Father, who sent his Son into the world
to die for sinners?


Fantom. You take all your notions of the Deity from the vulgar views your
bible gives you of him. -- "To be sure I do," said Trueman, "can you tell me
any way of getting a better notion of him? I don't want any of your farthing
candle philosophy in the broad sunshine of the gospel, Mr. Fantom. My bible
tells me that God is love, not merely loving, but love. Now do you think a
being whose very essence is love, would permit any misery among his children
here, if it was not to be some way or other, or somewhere or other, for their
good? You forget too that in a world where there is sin there must be misery.
-- Then, too, I suppose, God permits misery partly to exercise the sufferers,
and partly to try the prosperous; for by trouble God corrects some and tries
others. -- Suppose now, Tom Saunders had not been put in prison, you and I --
no, I beg pardon, you saved your guinea: well then, our club and I could not
have shown our kindness by getting him out, nor would poor Saunders himself
have had an opportunity of exercising his own patience under want and
imprisonment. So you see one reason why God permits misery is, that good men
may have an opportunity of lessening it." -- Mr. Fantom replied, "There is no
object which I have more at heart; I have as I told you a plan in my head of
such universal benevolence as to include the happiness of all mankind." "Mr.
Fantom," said Trueman, "I feel that I have a general good will toward all my
brethren of mankind; and if I had as much money in my purse as I have love in
my heart, I trust I should prove it; all I say is, that in a station of life
where I cannot do much, I am more called upon to procure the happiness of a poor
neighbor who has no one else to look to, than to form wild plans for the good
of mankind too extensive to be accomplished, and too chimerical to be put in
practice. I cannot free whole countries, nor reform the evils of society at
large, but I can free an aggrieved wretch in a workhouse, and I can reform
myself and my own family."


Some weeks after a letter was brought to Mr. Fantom from his late servant
William, who had been turned away for drunkenness, as related in the former
part of this history, and who had also robbed his master of some wine and some
spoons. Mr. Fantom glancing his eye over the letter said, "it is dated from
Chelmsford jail; that rascal is got into prison. I am glad of it with all my
heart, it is the fittest place for such scoundrels. I hope he will be sent to
Botany Bay, if not hanged." "O ho! my good friend," said Trueman, "then I find
that in abolishing all prisons you would just let one stand for the
accommodation of those who should happen to rob you." Mr. Fantom drily
observed, that he was not fond of jokes, and proceeded to read the letter. It
expressed an earnest wish that his late master would condescend to pay him one
visit in his dark and doleful abode, as he wished to say a few words to him
before the dreadful sentence of the law, which had already been pronounced,
should be executed."

"Let us go and see the poor fellow," said Trueman, "it is but a morning's
ride. If he is really so near his end, it would be cruel to refuse him." "Not I
truly," said Fantom, "he deserves nothing at my hands but the halter he is
likely to meet with. Such port as is not to be had for money, and the spoons
part of my new dozen." "As to the wine," said Trueman, "I am afraid you must
give that up, but the only way to get any tidings of the spoons is to go and
hear what he has to say; I have no doubt but he will make such a confession as
may be very useful to others, which, you know, is one grand advantage of
punishments; and besides, we may afford him some little comfort." "As to
comfort he deserves none from me," said Fantom, "and as to his confessions they
can be of no use to me, but as they give me a chance of getting my spoons, so I
don't much care if I do take a ride with you."

When they came to the prison Mr. Trueman's tender heart sunk within him. He
deplored the corrupt nature of man, which makes such rigorous confinement
needful, not merely for the punishment of the offender, but for the safety of
society. Fantom, from mere trick and habit, was just preparing a speech on
general benevolence, and the cruelty of imprisonment, till the recollection of
his old port and his new spoons cooled his ardor, and he went on without saying
a word. When they reached the cell where the unhappy William was confined, they
stopped at the door. -- The poor wretch had thrown himself on the ground as
well as his chains would give him leave. He groaned piteously, and was so
swallowed up which a sense of his own miseries, that he neither heard the door
open, nor (...) the gentlemen. He was attempting to pray, but (...) an agony
which made his words hardly intelligible. Thus much they could make out -- "God
be merciful to me a sinner -- the chief of sinners!" then suddenly attempting
to start up, but prevented by his irons, he roared out, "O God! thou can not
be merciful to me for I have denied thee; I have ridiculed my Savior who died
for me; I have derided his word, I have resisted his spirit. I have laughed at
that heaven which is shut against me, I have denied those torments which await
me. Tomorrow! tomorrow! O for a longer space for repentance, O for a short
reprieve from hell." Mr. Trueman wept so loud that it drew the attention of the
criminal, who now lifted up his eyes, and cast on his late master a look so
dreadful, that Fantom wished for a moment that he had given up all hope of the
spoons rather than have exposed himself to such a scene. At length the poor
wretch, said, in a voice that would have melted a heart of stone, "O Sir, are
you there? I did wish to see you before my dreadful sentence is put in
execution. O Sir! tomorrow, tomorrow! But I have a confession to make to
you." This revived Mr. Fantom, who again ventured to glance a hope at the
spoons. "Sir," said William, "I could not die without making my confession."
"Aye, and restitution too I hope," replied Fantom. "Where are my spoons?" --
"Sir, they are gone with the rest of my wretched booty. But O Sir! these spoons
make so petty an article in my black account that I hardly think of them.
Murder, Sir, murder is the crime for which I am justly doomed to die. O Sir!
Who can dwell with everlasting burnings?" As this was a question which even a
philosopher could not answer, Mr. Fantom was going to steal off, especially as
he now gave up all hope of the spoons: but William called him back. "Stay, Sir,
stay, I conjure you, as you will answer it at the bar of God. You are the cause
of my being about to suffer a shameful death. Yes, Sir, you made me a drunkard,
a thief, and a murderer." "How dare you, William," cried Mr. Fantom, with great
emotion, "accuse me with being the cause of such horrid crimes?" "Sir,"
answered the criminal, "from you I learnt the principles which lead to those
crimes. By the grace of God I should never have fallen into sins deserving of
the gallows if I had not often overheard you say there was no hereafter, no
judgment, no future reckoning, O Sir! there is a hell, dreadful, inconceivable,
eternal!" Here through the excess of anguish, the poor fellow fainted away. Mr.
Fantom, who did not at all relish this scene, said to his friend, "well Sir, we
will go if you please, for you see there is nothing to be done."

"Sir," replied Mr. Trueman, mournfully, "you may go if you please, but I shall
stay, for I see there is a great deal to be done. "What," rejoined the other,
"do you think it possible his life can be saved?" "No, indeed," said Trueman,
"but I hope it is possible his soul may be saved." I don't understand these
things," said Fantom, making toward the door. "Nor I neither", said Trueman,
"but as a fellow sinner I am bound to do what I can for this poor fellow. Do
you go home Mr. Fantom, and finish your treatise on universal benevolence, and
the blessed effects of philosophy; and hark ye, be sure you let the
frontispiece of your book represent William on the gibbet; that will be what
our parson calls a practical illustration. You know I hate theories; this is
realiving; this is philosophy made easy to the meanest capacity."

Mr. Fantom sneaked off to finish his work at home, and Mr. Trueman staid to
finish his in the prison. He passed the night with the wretched convict, he
prayed with him and for him, and read to him the penitential psalms, and some
portions of the gospel. But he was too humble and too prudent a man to venture
out of his depth by arguments and consolations which he was not warranted to
use. This he left for the minister. -- But he pressed on William the great duty
of making the only amends now in his power to those whom he had led astray.
They then drew up the following paper which Mr. Trueman got printed, and gave
away at the place of execution.

The last words, confession, and dying speech of WILLIAM WILSON, who was
executed at Chelmsford for murder.
I was bred up in the fear of God, and lived with credit in many sober
families, in which I was a faithful servant. But being tempted by a little
higher wages, I left a good place to go and live with Mr. Fantom, who, however,
made good none of his fine promises, but proved a hard master. In his service I
was not allowed time to go to church. This troubled me at first, till I
overheard my master say, that going to church was a superstitious prejudice,
and only meant for the vulgar. Upon this I resolved to go no more; for I
thought there could not be two religions, one for the master, and one for the
servant. Finding my master never prayed, I too left off praying, this gave
Satan great power over me, so that I from that time fell into almost every sin.
I was very uneasy at first, and my conscience gave me no rest; but I was soon
reconciled by overhearing my master and another gentleman say, that death was
only a long sleep, and hell and judgment were but an invention of priests to
keep the poor in order. I mention this as a warning to all masters and
mistresses to take care what they converse about while servants are waiting at
table. They cannot tell how many souls they have sent to perdition by such
loose talk. The crime for which I die is the natural consequence of the
principles I learnt of my master. A rich man, indeed, who throws off religion,
may escape the gallows, because want does not drive him to commit the crimes
which lead to it; but what shall restrain a needy man, who has been taught that
there is no dreadful reckoning? Oh, my dear fellow servants! take warning by my
sad fate, never be tempted away from a sober service for the sake of a little
more wages. Never venture your immortal souls in houses where God is not
feared. And now hear me, O my God, though I have blasphemed thee; Forgive me, O
my Savior! though I have denied thee. O Lord most holy, O God most mighty,
deliver me from the bitter pains of eternal death! and receive my soul for his
sake who died for sinners.

WILLIAM WILSON.

Mr. Trueman would never leave this poor penitent till he was launched into
eternity, but attended him with the minister in the Cart. This pious minister
never cared to tell what he thought of William's state. -- When I ventured to
mention my hope, that though his penitence was late yet it was sincere, and
spoke of the dying thief on the cross as a ground of encouragement, the
minister, with a very serious look, made me this answer, "Sir, that instance is
too often brought forward on occasions to which it does not apply: I do not
choose to say any thing to your application of it in the present case, but I
will answer you in the words of a good man speaking of the penitent thief."
There is one such instance given that nobody might despair, and there is but
one, that nobody might presume.

Poor William was turned off just a quarter before eleven, and may the Lord
have had mercy on his soul!

THE HUBBUB; OR, THE HISTORY OF FARMER RUSSEL, The hard-hearted Overseer.
THE oldest man living at Compton-Ashby, cannot call to mind such another
hubbub as that which happened there some months ago, on the common, just before
the poor-house door. A number of men, women, and children, had formed a ring
round one farmer Russel, a sullen, down-looking fellow, whom no one loved and
every one feared; for his love of money had led him to be hard-hearted, and his
power over the poor had made him insolent. Never was there such a hissing and
hooting, and hallooing heard. Many of these people had been grievously
oppressed by the farmer, and now they had him in their power, they seemed
resolved to show him little mercy.

Betty Jobbins beat the drying pan with the key of the door, Sally Gore pounded
the pestle and mortar, Nelly Shepston rung the warming-pan, Dick Devonshire
blew the Ram's-horn, whilst Nick Stafford and others gingled the sheeps' bells.
It so happened that one Mr. Britton rode up at the instant to enquire what was
the matter, of two poor women who were sitting in the porch of the poor-house.
One of them, Amy Talbot, seemed to be about sixty years of age, but time had
not cured Amy of gossiping, or taught her to mend her clothes. As she had no
turn for industry in her youth, she soon eat and drank up the little property
left her by her parents, which might now have afforded her a comfortable
maintenance; but no, Amy's tongue was always abusive and always busy, whilst
her fingers were seldom employed. Wherever there was a gossiping in the parish,
thither ran Amy with her rags flying about her, like a scarecrow in a cherry
tree. Her skin which was quite tawny, was never washed; her hair had worked
itself through the holes of her mob, half the border of which was lost, and the
flaps of it were always flying behind her; the pigs had one day eaten a hole
through her hat as it lay on the ground, and a piece of it now hung over her eye
like a black patch, her petticoats were all tatters, and her gown reached but
little below her knees; it had been torn away bit by bit, till it was ravelled
out to the above dimensions; her stockings had no feet, and her feet were
slipped into a miserable pair of shoes, which she had not taken the trouble to
draw up at heel, even when they were new; in one hand she clenched her rags
together, whilst with the other, she held a short pipe in her mouth resting her
elbow on her knee, as she sat cross-legged.

The other poor woman whose name was Apsley, was of a very different cast from
Amy; she was the picture of cleanliness and good housewifery; she was mending
her apron, which though very coarse, was as white as the driven snow; this good
woman never sat at the door to take the air, but she was doing something; "it
is a duty," she would say, "to turn our time to the best account we can," and
when her other employment was over she would read a chapter in her bible. Mr.
Britton asked her what occasioned the uproar, and at the same time slipped half
a crown into her hand, giving afterward a few halfpence to Amy, which he
thought was more than such a dirty woman deserved.

"Why Sir, cried Amy, pocketing her pence, "I Will tell you all how and about it;
don't you see that sulky ^^l-looking fellow of a farmer, so hooted at by the
people? he is a fine rare crusty old blade, and has hectored over the parish at
a fine rate; he is always at law with the parson about tithes, and with his
neighbors upon the slightest provocation; besides Sir, he is overseer of the
poor, and a poor time we have had on it, but thanks be praised, it is come home
to the wretch at last." Then she fell to hooting and hissing, till she foamed
at the mouth again; which having wiped off with the corner of her gown, she
said, "now Sir, I Will tell you: that fellow's stomach has been well filled with
every thing of the best, whilst he has starved we poor almost to death, but
it is likely to come home to him at last, and he may chance to swing for it, and
then we shall all be revenged of him," and again she fell to clapping her hands.

"Prithee Amy," replied dame Apsley very camly, "don't give way to such evil
tempers; we have been hardly used by the farmer to be sure, but if we are
christians, we must learn to forget and forgive." "If ever I forgive the
villain," cried Amy, knocking the dust out of her pipe, "may I never get
another quartern of tobacco; revenge is sweet, Sir, revenge is sweet."

"To an unchristian temper I grant it is," said Mr. Britton, "but revenge is
the worst passion that can enter the human breast, it is the very spirit of
Satan."

"It is a very fine remark truly, Sir," said dame Apsley, "for to my thinking,
a man who is always nursing up an evil passion in his bosom, is as if he
cherished a serpent there, which must sting him to death at last; yet, Sir, I
must be bold to say, much as I want money, I would not accept of sh^mer
Russel's fortune, if I must take up the heavy burden of his crimes into the
bargain." "Ah! dame, dame," interrupted Amy, "preach as you please, I am glad
at heart it is come home to the villain at last, things cannot go on worse with
us."

"Nor perhaps much better," answered dame Apsley, "for, after all, it is a very
unthankful office to have much to do with poor people, especially if they have
not the fear of God before their eyes; because then they are abusive, and
ungrateful to those who are guardians over them; for the matter of that, Amy,
have we not several old people in this poor house, who have been drunken, idle,
blaspheming people all their lives; and though we live so near to the church,
not one of them has seen the inside of it for many years past, unless when
there has been Christmas gifts' money to be given away; but I think if I were
the parson, Amy, every Lord's day I would drive the whole posse into church
before me, if they were able to set one foo before another." "My good woman,"
said Mr. Britton, "I am mightily pleased to see how usefully you employ your
time, for you have continued your work ever since we have been chatting
together." "Time, Sir, is ^he gift of God, and I must account to him for it;
besides, Sir, often when I am busily employed at my needle, I can ponder on
some text of scripture; and I can say with king David, As for me, when I am
poor and in heaviness, thy help, O God, shall lift me up. Now, Sir, although I
am very poor, that is no reason why I should not be very clean; if my clothing
be coarse, that is no excuse for its being ragged, and if I am lame in my feet,
that is no cause for my fingers being idle; besides, Sir, a stitch in time
saves nine, and I frequently get a shilling by mending stays, or quilting of
servants' petticoats, when my health will permit."

"Ah! well," interrupted Amy, "I never had the heart to work unless I were
better paid for it. But I say, dame, I will say, that I am glad at heart farmer
Russel is in hold at last; live and let live, is my notion of the thing; but
no, he went on from day to day, cribbing and scraping something out of every
body; and no sooner did he get a little uppish in the world, than he took no
more account of poor we, than if we had been so many hedge-hogs, for all he was
born and bred amongst us; but for the matter of that, he has not been much kinder
to his own family, for you must know, Sir, his bitter temper caused his only
son to run away from him, nor has any tale or tidings ever been heard of him."
Here again Amy began hissing and hooting the farmer, insomuch that Mr. Britton
began to think he should never get at the end of the story.

"Now, Sir," cried Amy at last, whilst she filled her pipe, "now I have got
breath again, I Will tell you all how and about it. You must know last hard
winter. Sir, when bread was so dear, and coals were so scarce, farmer Russel
would not let the parish be at the expense of mending the thatch on our house,
so that when the snow melted it ran in streams down on dame's bed, by which she
lost the use of her limbs, and she has hobbled with crutches ever since: yet
she, foolish woman, seldom complains: but off she goes to her Bible for
comfort, as another body would to a glass of gin, or a pot of beer, when ^^ings
go amiss."

"The troubles of life," said dame Apsley, "are but as shadows which pass away;
but the christian's rest will be eternal: and certain I am, Sir, my weak nature
would often have given way to sinful murmurings, but for the gracious promise
of better things in the life to come. O! Sir," continued she, "I have found it
much more for my soul's good, to bless Heaven for what I have, than to murmur
for what I have not; though, to be sure, I have seen better days," wiping her
eyes with the corner of her apron.

"Indeed has she, Sir," cried Amy, "for dame's husband was a man well to pass
in the world; he rented a small farm, and was accounted one of the most
industrious men in the country; and as to dame herself, up early and down late
was her maxim: when all of a sudden comes that same knavish scoundrel there,
farmer Russel, and takes farmer Apsley's estate over his head, ^^o was soon
after obliged to take up with day-laboring to maintain his family. by-and-by
sickness came on, want followed next, farmer Russel seized farmer Apsley's
goods for a little debt, and at the end of a long fit of sickness, he and his
whole family were brought here to the poor-house, where the man soon after died
of a broken heart; and yet, Sir, dame is for forgiving the farmer all this."

"That I do," replied she, "since my blessed Savior not only forgave his
enemies, but prayed to his Heavenly Father to forgive them also; and I should
read my Bible to little profit, Amy, if I learnt nothing from so bright an
example; but, good Sir," said she, turning to Mr. Britton, "your patience must
be quite tired, not to be yet made acquainted with all the hubbub yonder: but
most folks are so fond of telling their own stories, that they do not think of
other people. There is, Sir, a poor soldier found dead this morning, in the
next parish, and it is thought that farmer Russel has had some concern in the
matter, so the people are now going to carry him before a justice to be
examined."

"And I hope he will be hanged, I hope he will be hanged," cried Amy, clapping
her hands; -- "and I hope he will live to repent," cried dame Apsley, wiping
her eyes. Mr. Britton's curiosity was now raised, and he attended the mob to
the justice's.

Justice Carter was an upright gentleman, just such a man as a justice of the
peace ought to be. Before he administered an oath to an ignorant person, "Think
a moment, my friend," he would say, "before you kiss this book, whether you can
stand to the tru^^^ (...) what you are going to swear, when you are called to
be judged for it, before the God of Heaven and earth." No temptation could ever
prevail on his worship unjustly to favor any man: the laws, he said, must take
their course; if they were found severe, he did not make them: it was his duty
to administer them.

"And, please your worship," cried one Jones, who seemed to be the ringleader
of the mob, "we all hope that you will now take revenge for us on the farmer,
for all the spiteful tricks he has played us."

"I should make but an ill use of power, Jones," replied the justice, "If I
were to do any thing from heat or passion; if the law acquits farmer Russel, I
shall readily dismiss him."

"Well, to be sure," cried the people all in a breath, "your worship must be a
very fine christian, to forget and forgive at this rat^ for, to our certain
knowledge, the farmer has been a plague to you yourself these ten years,
sneering at you many times, and saying that neither you nor the l^^ could take
hold of him." "Now, do not you see," replied the justice, "that all that has
nothing to do with the present matter?"

Then turning over a great book, as big as a church bible, the witness was
called, who deposed upon oath, that the last evening, just between light and
dark, he saw farmer Russel dragging a soldier-like looking man over Compton
bridge, clear out of his own parish into the next, that he there laid him down
by the side of a ditch; that at first he, the witness, believed the man to be
dead; but that, in a short time, he found the poor fellow had only sainted
through weakness; that the witness had lent the poor soldier all the assistance
in his power; but that he was obliged soon after to follow his cattle."

Here the witness's evidence closed. "And could you," said the justice to
farmer Russel, "drag a poor traveller out of your parish in this barbarous
manner? In order to save your own parish a trifling expense, you did not
scruple to risk the life of this poor traveller. -- You thought, indeed, that
the darkness concealed you; but remember, though it seemed dark, yet the broad
eye of the Almighty was upon you."

The farmer then in a surly tone replied, "that the man had no business in his
parish, and that as for himself, no one could say he was unkind to the poor,
for he paid three times as much to the poor-rates as any man in the parish,
(the lord of the manor only excepted.)" -- "And reason good," cried ragged Amy,
who had followed the mob; "because you are the greatest renter in it; for by
dishonest practices you have got all the small farms into your own hands; but,
farmer, no one has heard you ever gave a penny out of your own pocket to the
poor, when the laws did not compel you, so no thanks for your charity. And
please your worship, every one here knows, that whenever a kind gentleman and
lady sent a few shillings to be divided amongst us, if the farmer heard of it
he would stop our pay till it was gone."

Both the justice and Mr. Britton quite sh^delered a^ this act of cruelty, and
every one present hoped his worship would not sail to take ample revenge on the
farmer.

"My friends," said the justice again, "if my breast harbored revenge against
any man, I should be unfit for a magistrate; did you never see the picture of
justice painted in my great hall? she is there represented as holding a pair of
scales with the balance quite even."

The justice wishing to know some more circumstances about the man's death, the
whole posse now moved off to the place where the corpse lay, attended by Mr.
Britton; by the way they accused the farmer of every crime; some of which he
had not, and others which he had committed. "Ah!" said one, "who sold eider for
the very best, when it was proved it had been half filled up with water?"
"Who," said another, "sold his hay-ricks, all warranted good, and when they
were cu^ open they were found crammed with musty stuff, fit only for littering
cattle?" "And who," cried a third, "carried the best samples of wheat to the
market, and afterward sobbed the buyer off with the very worst?" "And who,"
bawled out a fourth, "turned his own child out of doors, and mayhap murdered
him, for no tidings have been heard of him since?"

Much after this manner they went on, and soon after the coroner pronounced a
verdict of natural death, no marks of violence being found upon the body. --
The farmer now brightened up at once, and sticking his hands in his waistcoat
pockets, cast a malignant grin of triumph on all around him: "Now touch me if
you dare," cried he, "but if my name be Russel, I Will have my revenge of every
man and woman's child of you; and I Will spend a thousand pounds at law, but I Will
be a match for some of you. I Will lay an action against you, J^^^ Hoskins, for
defamation; you have accused me with the murder of my own child, now prove your
words if you can." Poor Hoskins turned as pale as death, well knowing the
farmer's unforgiving temper.

Here some one searching the pockets of the deceased, was surprised to find in
them a letter, not sealed, directed to farmer Russel, of Compton Ashby. The
letter was offered to the farmer, but he refused to take it, having always
thought it unlucky to touch any thing belonging to the dead. The people then
requested Mr. Britton to read it aloud, which he at length consented to do.

LETTER.
HONORED FATHER,
This comes to you, from your ever dutiful, but unfortunate son, JAMES RUSSEL.


Here the shouts of the people were so clamorous, that Mr. Britton could not go
on reading; every one pressed round the body, and after examining the face for
a moment, they one and all cried out in a breath, "It Is Jemmy Russel, it is Jemmy
Russel, as sure as eggs are eggs; we cannot be mistaken, by the cut across his
right eye." "O, you hard-hearted wretch!" said Hosk^ns, shaking his clenched
fist at the farmer, (who gave a deep groan, and turned as white as a sheet)
"will you have the law of me now, because I said you killed your son, you cruel
monster?" Mr. Britton here interfered, and said, let me advise you, good folks,
to hear the letter read through, and stop your tongues a moment."

My dear father, I have faithfully served his majesty. King George, in his
wars, for many years; but falling at length into the same disorder of which my
poor mother died, the consumption, my commanding officer, who has behaved like
a father to me, has kindly granted me a furrow, to try what my native air ^^ll
^o for me, giving me at the same time a golden guinea out of his own pocket to
bear my expenses on the road, he having always taken a great fancy to me,
seeing as (...) I ever made it my delight to obey him. So I began my march
homeward, although with great fear and trembling, pondering in my mind the last
words I ever heard you speak, which were, "that you wished I might drop down
dead if I ever dared to darken your doors again;" and calling down heavy curses
on yourself if ever you forgave me. And now, as my offense, dear father, was
but a slight one, and much have I repented of it, and much shall we all have to
be forgiven when we shall appear before God in judgment, so I humbly trust you
will receive me kindly, when you see how sick, and how very weak I am. I have
fallen down once or twice on the road, and having spent all my money, have been
for two days living by charity. I therefore write these few lines from the Swan
at Bridgewater, where I have stopped, in order that they may, in case I should
not be able to reach home alive, be sent to you after my death. Oh, my dear
father! my hourglass is almost run, and death will now be welcome to me, for my
life has been little el^e than pain and sorrow. O! father, nothing becomes a
christian-man like sorrow for sin, even when he is sound in health, and his
worldly concerns shourshing round him. Pray, dear father, think of these
things. Although this life. is nearly over with me, yet I have a comfortable
hope: and trust that the joys of the next will soon open upon me.

Farewell, for ever, my dear and honored father: should we meet no more in this
world, I humbly pray. we may meet in the next. I beg pardon for all my faults,
and with my dying breath, subscribe myself your ever dutiful son.

JAMES RUSSEL.


Many tears were shed whilst Mr. Britton read the letter. "My good friends,"
said he, when he had finished it, "let me now give you a word of advice: --
Whenever a sick and poor traveller (and especially when a brave British soldier
or sailor, who has shed, his blood in fighting for you in foreign parts, and is
perhaps escaped from an enemy's prison) knocks at your door to ask for charity,
do not refuse him a cup of beer, or a plentiful slice of bread and cheese; to
you who abound it is little, to him it may be much; and henceforward let us all
learn to look upon every man in distress as a child or a brother; and let us do
by him as we would wish to be done by, if we were in his condition. As for you,
farmer Russel," continued he "no reproof from me is wanting, for the event that
has happened is of itself the most bitter of all reproofs."

"O my son! my son!" at length cried the farmer, (wringing his hands, and
tearing his hair with grief) "my own curses have brought on my own destruction!
Wretch! wretch! that I am!" (here attempting to rise, he sunk down by the body
of his son, and then fell into such strong convulsion fits, that six of the
stoutest men present could not hold him: his limbs were distorted, his face
turned black, his eyes looked as if they were bursting out of his head; so
dreadful indeed was his situation, that those who but a moment before hated and
reviled him, were now ready to pity him. "What and affecting sight," said Mr.
Britton "have we now before us! God grant that it may prove a lesson to us all.
It was but a few moments ago that this miserable man, who now lies struggling
in the toils of death before you, was proudly rejoicing that he had escaped the
lash of the law."

The farmer's wagon now arrived to carry him home, and it was a most moving
sight, to see it followed by the corpse of his son. A doctor was sent for, who
the moment he saw the farmer, said he feared he could do nothing for him. Mr.
Britton watched by him all night, and when the fits went off for a few minutes,
he was heard thus to mutter to himself.

"Of what use to me is all the riches in the world, now the afflicting hand of
heaven is upon me? My punishment is great, great also has been my crime. I
suffered my own child to perish for want, whilst I was in plenty, and now my
own hand has helped to kill him; how hard also have I been to the poor; the
Lord has smitten me for it! The curses I have often uttered against them are
now come upon myself. I must die (...) The jaws of bell seem opening to devour
me!"

After this the farmer uttered nothing to be understood, though be languished
near three weeks in a state of misery which excited the pity of all who saw him.

TAWNY RACHEL, OR, THE FORTUNE TELLER; With some account of dreams, omens, and
conjurers.
TAWNY Rachel was the w^^^ of poaching Giles. There seemed to be a conspiracy
in Giles's whole family to maintain themselves by tricks and pilfering. Regular
labor and honest industry did not suit their idle habits. They had a sort of
genius at finding out every unlawful means to support a vagabond life. Rachel
traveled the country with a basket on her arm. She pretended to get her bread
by felling laces, cabbage nets, ballads, and history books, and to buy old rags
and rabbit skins. Many honest people trade in these things, and I am sure I
don't mean to say a word against honest people, let them trade in what they
will. But Rachel only made this traffic a pretense for getting admittance into
farmers' kitchens, in order to tell fortunes. She was continually practicing on
the credulity of silly girls; and took adva^tage of their ignorance to cheat
and deceive them. Many an innocent servant has she caused to be suspected of a
robbery, while she herself, perhaps, was in league with the thief. Many a
harmless maid has she brought to ruin by first contriving plots and events, and
then pretending to fortell them. She had not, to be sure, the power of
foretelling things, because she had no power of seeing into futurity; but she
had the art sometimes to bring them about according as she had foretold them.
So she got that credit for her wisdom which really belonged to her wickedness.

Rachel was also a famous interpreter of dreams, and could distinguish exactly
between the fate of any two persons who happened to have a mole on the right or
the left cheek. She had a cunning way of getting herself off when any of her
prophecies failed. When she explained a dream according to the natural
appearance of things, and it did not come to pass; then she would get out of
that scrape by saying, that "this sort of dreams went by contraries." Now of
two very opposite things the chance always is that one of them may turn out to
be tru^, so in either case she kept up the cheat.

Rachel in one of her rambles stopped at the house of Farmer Jenkins. She
contrived to call when she knew the master of the house was from home, which
indeed was her usual way. She knocked at the door; the maids being out
hay-making, Mrs. Jenkins went to open it herself. Rachel asked her if she would
please to let her light her pipe? This was a common pretense, when she could
find no ^^^er way of getting into a house. While she was filling her pipe, she
looked at Mrs. Jenkins and said, she could tell her some good fortune. The
farmer's wife, who was a very inoffensive, but a weak and superstitious woman,
was curious to know what she meant. Rachel then looked about very carefully,
and shutting the door with a mysterious air, asked her if she was sure nobody
would hear them. This appearance of mystery was at once delightful and
terrifying to Mrs. Jenkins, who bid the cunning woman speak out. "Then," said
Rachel, in a solemn whisper, "there is to my certain knowledge a pot of money
hid under one of the stones in your cellar." "Indeed," said Mrs. Jenkins, "it
is impossible, for now I think of it, I dreamt last night I was in prison for
debt." "Did you indeed?" said Rachel, "that is quite surprising. Did you dream
before twelve o'clock or after?" "O it was this morning, just before I awoke.
"Then I am sure it is true, for morning dreams always go by contraries," cried
Rachel. -- "How lucky it is you dreamt it so late." Mrs. Jenkins could hardly
contain her joy, and asked "how the money was to be come at." "There is but one
way," said Rachel, "I must go into the cellar. I know by my art under which
stone it lies, but I must not tell." They then both went down into the cellar,
but Rachel refused to point at the stone unless Mrs. Jenkins would put five
pieces of gold into a basin and do as she directed. The simple woman instead of
turning her out of doors for a cheat, did as she was bid. She put the guineas
into a basin which she gave into Rachel's hand. -- Rachel strewed some white
powder over the gold, muttered some barbarous words, and pretended to perform
the black art. She then told Mrs. Jenkins to put the basin quietly down within
the cellar; telling her that it she offered to look into it, or even to speak a
word, the charm would be broken. She also directed her to lock the cellar door,
and on no pretense to open it in less than forty-eight hours. "If," added she,
"you closely follow these directions, then, by the power of my art, you will
find the basin conveyed to the very stone under which the money lies hid, and a
fine treasure it will be." Mrs. Jenkins who believed every word the woman said,
did exactly as she was told, and Rachel took her leave with a handsome reward.

When farmer Jenkins came home he desired his wife to draw him a cup of eider;
this she put off doing so long that he began to be displeased. At last she
begged he would drink a little beer instead. He insisted on knowing the reason,
and when at last he grew angry, she told him all that had past; and owned that
as the pot of gold happened to be in the cider cellar, she did not dare open
the door, as she was sure it would break the charm. "And it would be a pity you
know," said she, "to lose a good fortune for the sake of a draught of cider."
-- The farmer, who was not so easily imposed upon, suspected a trict. He
demanded the key, and went and opened the cellar door. He found the basin, and
in it five round pieces of tin covered with powder. Mrs. Jenkins burst out a
crying; but the farmer thought of nothing but of getting a warrant to apprehend
the cunning woman. Indeed she well proved her claim to that name, when she
insisted that the cellar door might be kept locked till she had time to get out
of the reach of all pursuit.

Poor Sally Evans! I am sure she rued the day that ever she listened to a
fortune teller! S^lly was as harmless a girl as ever churned a pound of butter;
but Sally was ignorant and superstitious. She delighted in dream-books, and had
consulted all the cunning women in the country to tell her whether the two
moles on her cheek denoted that she was to have two husbands, or only two
children. If she picked up an old horse-shoe going to church she was sure that
would be a lucky week. She never made a black-pudding without borrowing one of
the Parson's old wigs to hang in the chimney, firmly believing there were no
other means to preserve them from bursting. She would never go to bed on
Midsummer eve without sticking up in her room the well known plant called
Midsummerman, as the bending of the leaves to the right or to the left, would
not fail to tell her whether Jacob, of whom we shall speak presently, was true
or false. She would rather go five miles about than pass near a church yard at
night. Every seventh year she would not eat beans because they grew downward in
the pod, instead of upward; and she would rather have gone with her gown open
than have taken a pin of an old woman, for fear of being bewitched. Poor Sally
had so many unlucky days in her calendar, that a large portion of her time
became of little use, because on these days she did not dare set about any new
work. And she would have refused the best offer if made to her on a Friday,
which she thought so unlucky a day that she often said what a pity it was there
were any Friday in the week! Sally had twenty pounds left her by her
grandmother. She had long been courted by Jacob, a sober lad, with whom she
lived fellow servants at a creditable farmer's. Honest Jacob, like his namesake
of old, thought it little to wait seven years to get this damsel to wife,
because of the love he bore her, for Sally had promised to marry him when he
could match her twenty pounds with another.

Now there was one Robert, a rambling, idle young gardener, who, instead of
sitting down steadily in one place, used to roam about the country, and do odd
jobs, where he could get them. No one understood any thing about him, except
that he was a down-looking fellow, who got his bread nobody knew how, and never
had a penny in his pocket. Robert, who was now in the neighborhood, happened to
hear of Sally Evans and her twenty pounds. He conceived a longing desire for
the latter. So he went to his old friend Rachel, told her all he had heard of
Sally, and promised if she could bring about a marriage between them, she
should go shares in the money.

Rachel undertook the business. She set off to the farm-house and fell to
singing one of her most enticing songs just under the dairy window. Sally was
so struck with the pretty tune, which was unhappily used to set off some very
loose words, that she jumped up, dropped the skimming dish into the cream and
ran out to buy the song. While she stooped down to rummage the basket for these
songs which had the most tragical pictures, for Sally had a tender heart and
delighted in whatever was mournful, Rachel looked steadfastly in her face, and
told her she knew by her art that she was born to good fortune, but advised her
not to throw herself away. "These two moles on your check," added she, "show
you are in some danger." "Do they denote husbands or children?" cried Sally,
starting up and letting fall the song of the children in the wood; "husbands,"
muttered Rachel, "Alas! poor Jacob!" said Sally mournfully, "then he will die
first, wo^'t he?" "Mum for that," quoth the fortune teller, "I will say no
more." Sally was impatient, but the more cu^osity she discovered, the more
mystery Rachel affected. -- At last she said, "if you will cross my hand with a
piece of silver I will tell you your fortune. By the power of my art I can do
this three ways; by cards, by the lines of your hand, or by turning a cup of
tea grounds: which will you have?" "O, all! all!" cried Sally, looking up with
reverence to this sunburned oracle of wisdom, who knew no less than three
different ways of diving into the secrets of futurity. Alas! persons of better
sense than Sally have been so taken in; the more is the pity! The poor girl
said she would run up stairs to her little box where she kept her money tied up
in a bit of an old glove, and would bring down a bright queen Ann's sixpence
very crooked. "I am sure," added she, "it is a lucky one, for it cured me of a
very bad ague last spring, by only laying it nine nights under my pillow
without speaking a word. But then you must know what gave the virtue to this
sixpence was, that it had belonged to three young men of the name of John; I
am sure I had work enough to get it. But true it is, it certainly cured me. It
must be the sixpence you know, for I am sure I did nothing else for my ague,
except indeed taking some bitter stuff every three hours, which the doctor
called bark. Indeed I lo^t my ague soon after I took it, but I am sure it was
owing to the crooked sixpence, and not to the bark. And so, good woman, you
may come in if you will for there is not a soul in the house but me." This was
the very thing which Rachel wanted to know.

W^^le Sally was above stairs untying her glove, Rachel ^sipped into the
parlor, took a small sil^er cup from the beaufet, and clapped it into her
pocket. Sally ran down lamenting she had lost her sixpence, which she verily
believed was owing to her having put it into a left glove instead of a right
one. Rachel comforted her by saying, that if she gave her two plain ones
instead, the charm would work just as well. Simple Sally thought herself happy
to be let off so easily, never calculating that a smooth shilling was worth two
crooked six-pences. But this skill was a part of the black art in which Rachel
excelled. She took the money and began to examine the lines of Sally's left
hand. She bit her withered lip, shook her head, and bade her poor dupe beware
of a young man, who had black hair. -- "No ind^ed," cried Sally, all in a
fright, "you mean black eyes, for our Jacob has got brown hair, it is his eyes
that are black." "That is the very thing I was going to say," muttered Rachel,
"I meant eyes though I said hair, for I know his hair is as brown as a chestnut,
and his eyes are as black as a sloe." "So they are, sure enough," cried Sally,
"how in the world could you know that?" forgetting that she herself had just
told her so. And it is thus that these hags pick out of the credulous all which
they afterward pretend to reveal to them. "O, I know a pretty deal more than
that," said Rachel, but you must be aware of this man. "Why so," cried Sally
with great quickness. "Because," answered Rachel, "you are fated to marry a man
worth a hundred of him, who has blue eyes, light hair, and a stoop in the
shoulders." "No, indeed, but I cannot," said Sally, "I have promised Jacob, and
Jacob I will marry." "You cannot child," returned Rachel, in a solemn tone; "it
is out of your power; you are fated to marry the gray eyes and light hair."
"Nay, indeed," said. Sally, sighing deeply, "if I am fated, I must; I know
there is no resisting one's fate." This is a common cant with poor deluded
girls, who are not aware that they themselves make their fate by their folly,
and then complain there is no resisting it. "What can I do?" said Sally. "I
will tell you that too," said Rachel. "You must take a walk next Sunday
afternoon to the churchyard, and the first man you meet in a blue coat, with a
large posy of pinks and southernwood in his bosom, sitting on the churchyard
wall, about seven o'clock, he will be the man." "Provided," said Sally, much
disturbed, "that he has gray eyes, and stoops." "O, to be sure," said Rachel,
"otherwise it is not the right man." "But if I should mistake," said Sally,
"for two men may happen to have a coat and eyes of the same color?" "To prevent
that," replied Rachel, "if it is the right man the two first letters of his
name will be R. P. This man has got money beyond sea." "O I do not value his
money," said Sally, with tears in her eyes, "for I love Jacob better than house
or land; but if I am fated to marry another, I cannot help it. You know there is
no struggling against my fate."

Poor Sally thought of nothing, and dreamt of nothing all the week but the blue
coat and the gray eyes. -- She made a hundred blunders at her work. She put her
rennet into the butter-pan, instead of the cheese tub. -- She gave the curd to
the hog^ and put the whey into the vats. She put her little knife out of her
pocket for fear it should cut love, and would not stay in the kitchen, if there
was not an even number of people, lest it should break the charm. She grew cold
and mysterious in her behavior to faithful Jacob, whom she truly loved. But the
more she thought of the fortune tellers, the more she was convinced that brown
hair and black eyes were not what she was fated to marry, and therefore though
she trembled to think it, Jacob could not be the man.

On Sunday she was too uneasy to go to church; for poor Sally had never been
taught that her being uneasy was only a fresh reason why she ought to go
thither. She spent the whole afternoon in her little garret, dressing in all
her best. First she put on her red ribbon, which she had bought at last Lammas
fair; then she recollected that red was an unlucky color, and changed it for a
blue ribbon, tied in a true lover's knot; but suddenly calling to mind that
poor Jacob had bought this knot for her of a pedlar at the door, and that she
had promised to wear it for his sake, her heart smote her, and she laid it by,
sighing to think she was not fated to marry the man who had given it to her.
When she had looked at herself twenty times in the glass, for one vain action
always brings on another, she set off, trembling and quaking every step she
went. She walked eagerly toward the churchyard, not daring to look to the
right or left, for fear she should spy Jacob, who would have offered to walk
with her. As soon as she came within fight of the wall, she spied a man sitting
upon it. Her heart beat violently. She looked again; but alas! the stranger not
only had on a black coat, but neither hair nor eyes answered the description.
She happened to cast her eyes on the church-clock, and found she was two hours
before her time. This was some comfort. She walked away and got rid of the two
hours as well as she could, paying great attention as she went not to walk over
any straws which lay across. While the clock was striking seven she returned to
the churchyard, and, O! the wonderful power of fortune tellers! there she saw
him! there sat the very man! his hair as light as flux, his eyes as blue as
buttermilk, and his shoulders as round as a tub. Every tittle agreed to the
very nosegay in his waistcoat button-hole. At first indeed she thought it had
been sweethrier, and glad to catch at a straw, whispered to herself, it is not
he, and I shall marry Jacob still; but on looking again she saw it was
southernwood plain enough, and that all was over. The man accosted her with
some very nonsentical, but too acceptable compliments. Sally was naturally a
modest girl, and but for Rachel's wicked arts, would not have talked with a
strange man; but how could she resist her fate you know? After a little
discourse, she asked him, with a trembling heart, what might be his name?
"Robert Price, at your service," was the answer. "Robert Price! that is R. P.
as sure as I am alive, and the fortune tellers was a witch! It is all out! it is
all out! O the wonderful art of fortune tellers!"

The little sleep she had that night was disturbed with dreams of graves, and
ghosts, and funerals; but as they were morning dreams, she knew those always
went by contra^ies, and that a funeral denoted a wedding. -- Still a sigh would
now and then heave, to think that in that wedding Jacob could have no part.
Such of my readers as know the power which superstition has over the weak and
credulous mind, scarcely need be told, that poor Sally's unhappiness was soon
completed. -- She forgot all her vows to Jacob; she at once forsook an honest
man whom she loved, and consented to marry one of whom she knew nothing, from a
ridiculous notion that she was compelled to do so by a decree which she had it
not in her power to resist. She married this Robert Price, the strange
gardener, whom she soon found to be very worthless, and very much in debt. --
He had no such thing as "money beyond sea," as the fortune tellers had told her;
but he had another wife there. He got immediate possessien of Sally's 20 l.
Rachel put in for her share, but he refused to give her a farthing, and bid her
get away or he would have her taken up on the vagrant act. He soon ran away
from Sally, leaving her to bewail her own weakness; for it was that indeed, and
not any irresistible fate which had been the cause of her ruin. To complete her
misery, she herself was suspected of having stolen the silver cup which Rachel
had pocketed. Her master, however, would not prosecute her, as she was falling
into a deep decline, and she died in a few months of a broken heart.

Rachel, whenever she got near home, used to drop her trade of fortune tellers,
and only dealt in the wares of her basket. Mr. Wilson, the clergyman, found her
one day dealing out some very wicked ballads to some children. He went up with
a view to give her a reprimand; but had no sooner begun his exhortation than up
came a constable, followed by several people. -- "Th^^^ she is, that is she,
that is the old witch who tricked my wife out of the five guineas," said one of
them. "Do your office constable, seize that old hag. She may tell fortunes and
find pots of gold in Taunton gaol, for there she will have nothing else to do."
This was that very farmer Jenkins, whose wife had been cheated by Rachel of the
five guineas. He had taken pains to trace her to her own parish: he did not so
much value the loss of the money, but he thought it was a duty he owed the
public to clear the country of such vermin. Mr. Wilson immediately committed
her. She took her trial at the next assizes, when she was sentenced to a year's
imprisonment. In the mean time the pawnbroker, to whom she had sold the cup,
which she had stolen from poor Sally's master, impeached, and as the robbery
was sully proved upon Rachel, she was sentenced for this crime to Botany Bay;
and a happy day it was for the county of Somerset, when such a nuisance was
sent out of it. She was transported much about the same time that her husband
Giles lost his life in stealing the net from the garden wall.

I have thought it my duty to print this little history as a kind warning to
all you young men and maidens not to have any thing to say to cheats,
impostors, cunning women, fortune tellers, conjurers, and interpreters of
dreams. Listen to me, your true friend, when I assure you that God never
reveals to weak and wicked women those secret designs of his providence, which
no human wisdom is able to foresee. To consult these false oracles is not only
foolish, but sinful. It is foolish, because they are themselves as ignorant as
those whom they pretend to teach, and it is sinful, because it is prying into
that futurity which God, as kindly as wifely, hides from men. God indeed orders
all things; but when you have a mind to do a foolish thing, do not fancy you
are fated to do it. This is tempting providence, and not trusting him. It is
indeed charging God with folly. Prudence is his gift, and you obey him better
when you make use of prudence under the direction of prayer, than when you
madly run into ruin, and think you are only submitting to your fate. Never
fancy that you are compelled to undo yourself. Never believe that God conceals
his will from a sober christian who obeys his laws, and reveals it to a
vagabond gipsey, who runs up and down, breaking the laws, both of God and man.
King Saul never consulted the witch till he had left off serving God. The bible
will direct us what to do better than any conjurer, and no days are unlucky but
those which we make so by our own vanity, folly, and sin.

THE EXPLANATION OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
PART I.
WE all of us are taught to say the ten commandments, but there are few of us I
am afraid who rightly understand them, and fewer still who walk by them and try
to practice them. I may add that there are none who do not break, more or less,
one or other of the ten, and that therefore there is no man living who could
bear to be judged by them.

We read in the 20th chapter of Exodus (from whence the commandments are taken)
that God spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage. God was here
speaking to the Jews, who were of old his favorite people. The ten commandments
were first given to them, and through them to us. We must not wonder,
therefore, if we find a few expressions which mited the Jews better than they
will suit us. -- Let us now proceed to the explanation.

FIRST COMMANDMENT. Thou shall have no other Gods but me.
This means that we must have, or choose to ourselves, the one true and only God
of the Scriptures. Now in order to know who this God of the Scriptures is, it
is plain that we must read the Scriptures, and especially the New Testament. He
was the God who appeared to Moses, at Mount Sinai, and gave him all these
commandments. He was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets
and holy men that lived on the earth. He afterward was still more plainly made
known as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ whom he sent into the
world to die for our sins, and he now sends his holy spirit into the hearts of
those who call upon him. It would take too much time to enter here fully into
the character of God; let us therefore only repeat shortly a few of the many
things which the Scriptures have said concerning him. He is the high and lofty
one who inhabiteth eternity. From everlasting to everlasting he is God. He is
the Almighty. His wisdom is infinite: the light and the darkness are both alike
to him. He searches the hearts of all the children of men. By him actions are
weighed -- yea, he judges the secrets of men's hearts. Our God shall bring
every work into judgment, whether it be good or whether it be evil, for he has
appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man
whom he has ordained; and then the wicked shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. He is at the fame time a God
of compassion and of tender mercy. What can more strongly prove it than his
sending Christ to die for us, and to offer salvation to us. God is love. Not
that we loved him, says the Apostle, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to
be a propitiation for our sins. He described himself to Moses as being the
Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and of great
goodness, keeping mercy for thousands; yet at the same time he will by no means
excuse or clear the unrepenting and the guilty. Moreover let us remark that he
is the God of nature and providence; he made the world and he now governs it.
Not a sparrow falls to the ground without his notice. He orders the events of
nations and of individuals. He does all things both in heaven above and in
earth below, according to the council of his own will, being righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works.

Now, therefore, let us seriously apply this subject to ourselves, and first as
to our knowledge of God. -- Is it then in the God of the Scriptures that we
believe, or in some false kind of Supreme Being whose character is more suited
to our inclinations, and more indulgent to our sins? Do we believe in a God who
will inflict punishment on the disobedient, as well as show mercy to them that
love him and keep his commandments -- who on the one hand is ready to pardon,
and wills all men to be saved, and who on the other will surely condemn the
unbelieving, as well as plentifully reward every wicked doer? Oh! how do men
often mistake the whole character of God; some in one way some in another,
according to their various tempers, passions, interests, prejudices, and
conceits.

But having learned to know God aright, do we in the next place also reverence
him, and fear him, and trust him, and love him and serve him? Do we carry about
with us at all times, a holy reverence and regard to God? And as to our fear of
God, I would ask, is it greater in us than our fear of man? When men require or
expect us to do a thing which God has commanded us not to do, whom do we obey,
God or man? that is the question. In vain do we flatter ourselves that we keep
the first commandment if the fear of man is greater in us than that of God. Do
we trust him also? Do we trust him, for instance, both in our prosperity and in
our adversity, and whatever befalls us do we say that it is the Lord who has
done it, looking forward at the fame time to his help in all the future
circumstances of our lives; or are we trusting in ourselves and in an arm of
flesh?

And here, above all, let us examine whether we love God: Do we love him as our
Savior, in speaking of this commandment, expressly says that we ought to do. I
mean, do we love him with all our heart, and soul, and strength: Do we love him
more than we love our wealth, our pleasure, our interests, our earthly friends,
or any worldly things whatever? Whom have I in heaven but thee, said the pious
psalmist, and there is none upon earth that I desire in comparison of thee. Do
our hearts cleave to God as our best and most desirable portion? Is his favor
all in all with us, and do we therefore seek it carnestly by prayer, and by all
the means through which the Scriptures teach us that it is to be obtained? And
to crown all, do we obey him and diligently serve him? If ye love me, said
Christ, keep my commandments When we say that we love a person, and yet refuse
to do the things he desires us, it is loving him in word only, not in deed, or
in truth. Nor is it one commandment only that we must obey. If a man keeps
the commandments of God, and yet offends in one point, he is guilty of all;
for the same God that says, thou shall not commit adultery, said also thou
shall not steal. Nothing more plainly proves men to be hollow and insincere in
their whole religion than their professing to serve God indeed in some things,
but refusing to do it in others. Such men do not truly serve God at all.

Such is the first commandment. It says, thou shall have none other Gods but
me: that is, thou shall set up no God in opposition to me, neither thy lusts
nor thy passions, neither the world nor the flesh, nor yet any of the false
Gods whom men's own imaginations have formed to themselves, nor whom the
heathen fall down and worship.

SECOND COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not make to thyself any graven image, nor the
likeness of any thing that is in the heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or
in the waters under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship
them; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me: and show mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.
This commandment was directed more particularly to the Jews. God had separated
them from the surrounding nations, who were idolatrous, and had made a covenant
with them, that they should not make to themselves Gods, such as their
neighbors worshipped, but that he should be their God, and they should be his
people. He says in this commandment, that he is a jealous God, that is, jealous
of his honor. It is said in another place, my glory will I not give to another,
neither my praise to graven images. He will have no rivals in any respect. The
declaration, that he would visit the sins of the fathers upon the children even
to the third and fourth generation, is to be understood as a part of that
national covenant which God made with the Jews. If the fathers worshipped and
served him, then the children also would continue to have him in like manner,
for their God: but if the fathers went astray, and did as the heathen, then
also the children for generation after generation were to be involved in the
consequences. Somewhat in like manner indeed it often happens now, that
children suffer through the crimes of their parents, which should be an
argument with all parents both to avoid sinning themselves, and to take care
lest they draw their children into sin and misery also.

Let us then abhor this sin of idolatry. It was one into which the Jews were
continually falling; and let it be our prayer, as well as our endeavor, that
all the nations of the earth, who are now sunk in idolatry, may be recovered
out of it; for it is a sin highly offensive to God.

Let us ourselves keep at the greatest distance from this sin, and for this
purpose it seems prudent not even to adorn our churches with images, lest any
of the people who see them there, forgetting that God is a spirit, should pay
undue honor to the representation.

THIRD COMMANDMENT. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain,
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless who takes his name in vain.
To take the name of God in vain is, in the strongest and worst sense of the
words, to call on God to witness a thing that is false, or in other words, to
take a false oath. In many cases men are required by law to make oath of the
truth of what they say. Now what solemnity and fear of God should there be in
our minds on such occasions! The judge and the jury indeed may possibly not
find us out, but the Lord our God will not hold us guiltless if we thus
dreadfully take his name in vain.

We may here remark by the way, that it is this fear of God therefore, which is
the chief security of the lives and properties of people in society. Now I
think it cannot be too strongly insisted on, that it is a very solemn thing to
call on God to witness any thing we are at but to utter, and that therefore,
all restlessness and in consideration in taking eaths, even though the oaths
should not be false, are very sinful. There are some who take custom-house
oaths in a very slovenly manner, and who say, "O it is only a custom-house
oath." -- Others take oaths of office just as lightly, and I believe there are
some who now and then take oaths of a grave and solemn nature in their pastimes
and in mere sport. But let all such weigh well those awful words, the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

The next practice we shall speak of is that of common swearing, a sin which
has not the excuse which most other sins have, of some present pleasure or
profit having tempted the person to it. That awful name which angels reverence
and adore, and which all good men cannot hear without a peculiar emotion, is
t^^fied with, and in that sense, taken in vain by a great part of our
fellow creatures almost every hour of every day. -- Some add cursing to this
profane mention of the name of God, and often of the most horrid kind, and,
perhaps, when they curse and swear, do not know that they me doing it, which
they think is an excuse, but which ought other to be considered as a proof to
what an awful pass the habit has gone. Others, equally without knowing i^, use
the name of God to express their surprise, or to make their conversation, as
they think, more entertaining. Ah! how dreadful will it be for such persons to
have all these words brought against them, as so many unexpected sins, on the
day of judgment.

But it is necessary to be still more plain and particular on this head, for
the very persons who are most guilty of this sin oftentimes cannot, or will not
understand that what is said is addressed personally to them. To prove the
justice of what we are about to add, I would here first call to my render's
recollection what our Savior himself has observed on the subject of this
commandment. Ye have heard, said he, how it has been said by them of old time,
thou shall not for swear thyself, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths;
but I say unto you, swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is God's
throne, nor by the earth, for it is his footstool. To say by heavens, or good
heavens (the very expression which some people use now) is thus expressly
forbid by our Savior. But not only this one phrase which happened to be the
one in common use in Christ's time, but all others of a like kind are of course
by the same precept forbidden. It is painful to mention the various ways of
being profane, which irreligious men from time to time have invented; but for
the sake of being understood, it seems necessary here in some degree to do so.
I would observe therefore, that such phrases as the following: "Bless me,"
meaning Lord bless me, "Mercy on me," meaning Lord have mercy on me, "By Jove,"
meaning by the heathen God Jove or Jupiter, "Upon my soul," "Faith," and a
variety of others appear all to be forbidden. Let your communication, says
Christ, be yea, yea, nay, nay, that is, let your assertions be plain and
simple, and not profane or violent. Let them consist as much as possible in a
simple yes and no; for whatsoever is more than this comes of evil. Sin begins
whenever we depart from this simplicity and purity of speech, and it seems even
to be declared, that all those profane expressions which our Savior alludes
to, come from the wicked one.

We will close this subject with two remarks -- the first is, beware of all
violence and passion. Men swear often through passion. To cure men's passion is
therefore to take away one cause of their swearing; nay, remember also that
even all violent affirmations, all appeals to God or to religion which are
needless, are offenses against our Savior's rule. It is a rule which calls us
all to peculiar simplicity and self-command, in our conversation. Be calm,
therefore; be not loud and boisterous, but mild and gentle in your speech, and
in order to keep your tongue, learn also to keep your heart. -- Learn,
therefore, in short, those doctrines of the gospel which go to the correction
of the heart.

My last observation is, be serious. The world is full of people, who in one
way or other are taking God's name in v^in, and who do it, as was observed
before, without thinking of it; and the reason of it is, they are not serious.
They have no awe of the divine majesty, or of the divine presence. They have
not felt the power of religion in their hearts. They have no reverence for God
and divine things, and hence it is that they speak so lightly of them. In vain
do we multiply directions, not to use this or the other word, because it is
profane; a profane mind will be ever coining new words instead of the old ones
which are forbidden, and will betray a person into profaneness a hundred times
a day without his being once a ware of it.

FOURTH COMMANDMENT. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day. Sin days
shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to do. -- But the seventh day is
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, thy maidservant, nor thy
cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord
made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh
day, wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hall^wed it.
In the New Testament we find our Savior observing that the Sabbath was made
for man, and not man for the Sabbath, that is, the Sabbath was made to be a
benefit to man, and not a burden to him. We who are christians should
peculiarly rejoice in it as a benefit. What a blessing is it, in particular to
the poor of this country, that there is one day in seven on which they may rest
from their work, and pass the day with their families in worshipping and
praising God, and in considering over all his m^rcies, as well as in exac^ining
into the manner in which they have been perso^^ning their own weekly duties.
The very brutes, in p^rt, share in the benefit, for this commandment mercifully
provides a day of rest for the ox and the ass also.

It is proper here to remark, that some alteration has taken place in respect
to the Sabbath, since this commandment was given. The day has been changed, for
we keep now not the seventh day of the week, which is Saturday, but the first,
which is Sunday, because our Lord rose from the dead on the Sunday, and the
name of the Lord's day has for that reason been given to it. We therefore unite
two purposes together, for we both rest every seventh day as the Jews did, in
imitation of God, who made the world in six days, and then rested or ceased
from his work on the seventh, and we also commemorate the glorious resurrection
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who, as on this day was raised from the
dead, after having died for our sins and obtained eternal redemption for us.

Besides the difference in the day it is natural that there should now arise
some circumstances of difference in the manner of keeping Sunday. The Jews, who
often indeed misinterpreted their own law, thought it wrong to pluck so much as
an ear of corn, or to heal a person of his disease on the Sabbath day, and in
many other points they were extremely strict. But we have been taught by our
Savior, that this commandment ought not to be construed so severely by us, and
it is now generally agreed among the most serious christians, that both works
of mercy, and also works of necessity are perfectly lawful on the Sabbath Day.

But let us next endeavor to explain distinctly in what manner it seems to us
that a christian Sabbath ought, under our present circumstances, to be kept.

And first, it should be considered by us as a day of rest from our common
labor. The very laws of the land require this, by forbidding shops to be
opened, and common employments to be followed on the Lord's day, and all
magistrates are obliged by their oath, to see the laws of their country
executed in this respect. Every individual therefore is bound to abstain from
the open violation of the Sabbath provided he reverences the laws or the public
religion of his country, even supposing that he is not a christian himself.

But christians are called upon to keep the Sabbath holy in a much higher
sense. The word holy means separate or setapart from others, in order to a
religious use. We should therefore consider the Sabbath as a different day from
other days, and should carry that feeling habitually about with us through all
the hours of it. Even if necessity should oblige us to do some things which
make a part of our common work, yet even then we should endeavor to bear in our
minds all the while that it is the Sabbath. I urge this learing in mind that it
is the Sabbath, because I know that if this sentiment is in the heart needless
work will be generally avoided, but that without this a man will not easly be
kept from breaking ^^e Sabbath in one way or other.

Remember then that all common work, which can as well be shifted to the
Saturday or the Monday, becomes sinful if done on the Sunday. Cleanliness must
no doubt be attended to on the Sunday, but this is to be done by the
preparation of Saturday. Our food must be got ready; but this may be managed
with very little trouble even in the largest families, if there is but a
disposition to spare all kinds of labor on the Sabbath Day. There are many
houses, I grant, which must not be less quite empty during civine service; but
it is in genoral enough if one person is lest at home, who may take turns with
others, so that the fan^e individual need not always be hindered from attending
public worship. There should be an universal agreement among masters and
servants, and among servants also with one another, each not only to observe
the S^bbath himself, but to promote the observation of it among those around
him.

But now, to speak of what is still more material. -- It It is of little use to
abstain from bodily work, if the frame of mind is quite inconsistent with a due
attention to the Sabbath. This would be a formal and Jewish Sabbath indeed. To
comply with the form, but to neglect the spirit, is no true keeping of the
christian Sabbath. It should even be remembered that if Jewish forms are in
some respects left off, it becomes us to be the more careful to attend to the
substance; for we are now placed under a dispensation, in which all is expected
to be spirit and life.

The Sabbath, as was observed before, was made for man. It was made for his
good, and more especially for his spiritual good. Whatever therefore tends to
our spiritual benefit is fit employment for the Sabbath. Public worship has
been appointed on this principle, in all christian countries. But it is
necessary that we should not only be seen attending in our places, but that our
minds also should be engaged in the service. In prayer we should feel our need
of the mercies we implore; in the confession of sin, we should be affected with
a sense of our unworthiness, and in offering up our thanksgivings to God, we
should pour out our whole hearts before him. And when we hear the Scriptures
read, and the gospel of Jesus Christ preached to us, we should listen with an
attentive ear, and receive the truth into an honest and good heart. When we are
returning from the service, we should not discourse as many are apt to do,
about light and trifling things; but we should call up the subject which we may
have been hearing of at church. We should betake ourselves also at home to the
instruction of our children, to the reading of the Scriptures, to family
prayers, and to conversation that may have something useful in it, or if we
take our walk abroad, it should be in order to indulge in meditation on divine
things, and in order also to call perhaps on our more pious friends and
kindred, whose conversation is likely to turn on topics suitable to the day, or
to visit the sick, to comfort one that is afflicted, to do an act of kindness
and charity, or to pursue some plan of usefulness proper for the Sabbath, and
in which we may be then regularly employed.

Such are the occup^tions which become a christian on the Sunday, and uniting,
as they naturally do, with the exercise of the social affections, they may well
employ the whole of this sacred season; for that is a poor motley inconsistent
Sabbath indeed of which one little part only is spent at church, in building
ourselves up in our most holy faith, while the rest is given up to such
employments as tend to pull down what we have been building up, and to promote
forgetfulness of all that we have been hearing. It is the prayer before we go
to worship, and the reflection after; it is the weekly self-examination which
we at this time practice; it is the secret desires of the heart after the favor
of God; it is the humble and holy contemplation of the life, death, and
resurrection, and ascension of our Savior; it is, in short, the heavenly mind
exercising itself on spiritual objects, and shutting out those things that are
worldly, which constitutes the true keeping of the Sabbath. It is thus that we
acquire a hope full of immortality. "All sorrows mitigated, all cares
suspended, all fears repressed, every angry emotion softened, every envious,
revengeful, or malignant passion expelled:" we become on this day partakers, in
some measure, of the heavenly happiness, and learn to look forward to that
never ending Sabbath, to that season of eternal rest which remains for the
people of God.

And now what a privilege is the Sabbath! It is often so spoken of in the Old
Testament. I gave you my Sabbaths, says God to the Israelites, and then he
proceeds to found a claim upon that nation for peculiar gratitude and
obedience. Let us be grateful to God that he has by his good providence,
preserved to us this blessed day, while, in many countries in Europe it has
been grievously profaned, and in some entirely overthrown. Let us rejoice that
in Great Britain the law of the land still in some measure maintains it, though
many of the people are learning to confound it more and more with the other
days of the week, and are thus impiously casting off all concern for this
commandment.

EXPLANATION OF THE NATURE OF BAPTISM.
Designed espe^^ally for all those Parents who are about to bring a Child to be
baptized.
THE Sacrament of Baptism, like that of the Lord's Supper, was appointed by
Jesus Christ himself and no doubt for the wis^st purposes. It is a mean^
whereby we may acquire no small insight into the nature of the whole christian
religion. Unhappily, however, there is a remarkable degree of carelessness and
ignorance about this subject pr^varling among us, insomuch, that it some pa^ns
are not taken to represent this important matter aright to our countrymen in
general, and to all parents in particular, we seem in danger of losing all the
benefit which was intended to be conveved to us by this institution of Christ.
It is true the form of Baptism is still continued among us. Parents appear,
almost with o^^e consent, to bring their children to be baptized; but for what
purpose do they bring them? Is it because they really wish to pledge their
children, and to pledge themselves afresh, to fight under the banners of
Christ? Oh, no; for there are many who hardly once think of Christ in the
matter. I appeal to the common observation of my readers, whether the day of
baptizing a child is not by many parents made to be little else than a day of
extraordinary feasting, a day of vanity and ostentation, a day at least of
n^^re worldly joy, on which, when the clergyman ha^ done his office, not a word
is to be heard of that kingdom of heaven whereof the child is now said to be a
partaker, nor of those holy ends for the sake of which baptism was appointed by
Jesus Christ.

Godfathers and godmothers also have learnt, as well as parents, to be very
inconsiderate about this sacred ordinance. They promise, indeed, in the face of
God and of the church, to renounce, in the child's name, this wicked world,
with all the sinful lusts of the flesh, and they also are understood expressly
to undertake that the child shall be taught not only the Creed, the Lord's
Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, but also, all other things which a christian
ought to know and believe for his soul's health; and yet the most of them have
no sooner made this vow than they think they have done with it; they reflect
not whether the parent be a person who is likely to pay that attention to the
child's soul for which they have been engaging, nor do they ever afterward
bestow a single thought on its religious education themselves.

Some there are, indeed, who do not act quite so absurdly about baptism, nor
think quite so lightly of it as many others, and yet are far from turning it to
a truly religious use; they are aware, in part, of the profanation of it which
is so common, but they have not the courage to differ from the general custom.
They dare not refuse, for instance, to stand godfather or godmother whenever
some one expects or requests it of them. To do so is a bad custom, they allow,
but since it is a custom they must comply with it. Ah, how little do they
reflect, that in that very vow which in the child's name they are about to
take, there is contained a promise to renounce the world; in which promise the
renunciation of its sinful customs is no doubt included; and I therefore ask
such persons, whether the custom of undertaking, lightly, the duty of
godfathers and godmothers, is not one of those sinful customs which the very
ceremony of baptism pledges them to renounce.

In short, then it must be acknowledged, that baptism is on all sides neglected
and profaned, and that it is become now little, else than a convenient
ceremony, by which people bestow a name upon their children.

But is this all that was intended by it? It surely needs no argument to prove,
that it was never meant by the founder of it to serve merely as a national
ceremony, by which we were to register ages, or to give names to our children.
It cannot be that a Sacrament ordained by him who died for us, enjoined upon
his disciples nearly in his last words, and emphatically urged upon us in those
remarkable expressions, he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. I
say, it cannot be that a Sacrament thus solemnly appointed can deserve to be
lightly treated. Depend upon it, it cannot be made light of without affronting
him who was the founder of it. It cannot be made light of without making light
of Christ; without making light of him who is the hope of fallen man, and the
only Savior of our souls.

Let us then proceed reverently to enquire what is the true meaning and nature
of it.

And here I would first remark, that long before baptism was appointed there
prevailed among the Jews the ceremony of circumcision, which had nearly the
same use and design. Abraham was the first person on whom circumcision was
enjoined. Abraham was called by the divine goodness from a state of ignorance
and idolatry, he was blessed also with many great and glorious promises; he was
made the father of the faithful, and was himself adopted into the family of
God; in token whereof circumcision was required of him as a sign, the same
thing being required also of his children the Jews, who became the peculiar
people of God; not that the mere sign or ceremony could bring any one into
God's favor, for the apostles tell the Jews, that if they did not also keep the
law, verily their circumcision was made uncircumcision. And again it is said,
for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcision,
but a new creature. The being a new creature was therefore the great point: and
circumcision seems to have been intended to represent to men in those early
ages, that new and holy state into which they must be brought in order to their
being introduced into the favor of God, uncircumcision representing on the
other hand that sinful condition in which we are born, and in which we all
naturally are, according to that expression of the apostle, and you who were
dead in your sins, and in the uncircumcision of your flesh yet now has he
reconciled.

Having thus made it appear what circumcision meant of old, let us next show
from the same word of God what baptism signifies now.

When Nicodemus came to Jesus by night in order to enquire (as it seems) into
the nature of that new religion of which he had heard, Jesus says to him,
verily, verily, I say unto you, except a man be born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God. Nicodemus not understanding what was spoken, our Savior
declares again, except a man be born of water and of the spirit he cannot see
the kingdom of God. What is it to be born of water and the spirit? The answer I
think will be found easy, especially if we take advantage of the information
given us in other parts of Scripture. Water, we there find, is the sign ordered
to be used in baptism on account of its cleansing whatever is dirty or defiled;
the holy spirit however is the thing signified by the water; for as it is the
business of water to cleanse the defilement of the body, so it is the office of
the Holy Spirit to cleanse the corruption of the heart of man. The meaning,
therefore, of our Savior's speech to Nicodemus seems to be as follows, "Except
a man be renewed, or born again, and not by the outward baptism of water only,
but also by the effectual inward baptism or purification of the Holy Spirit --
except a man be thus born, both of water and of the spirit, he cannot see (that
is, he cannot rightly understand, nor is he qualified to enter into) the
kingdom of God. Blessed, says our Savior, are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. It is our hearts then, and not our bodies only, that must be
baptized and purified. We are naturally corrupt, indisposed to serve God, and
to obey his will and commandments. We are all, says Scripture, gone out of the
way. Behold, says David, I was born in sin and shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me. And you, says the apostle, has he quickened who
were dead in trespasses and sins wherein in times past ye walked according to
the course of this world -- and were by nature the children of wrath even as
others. -- We are therefore exhorted not to be conformed to this present world,
but to be transformed in the renewing of our minds. And the Scripture
accordingly speaks of true christians as being cleansed by the washing of
regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, and of their being washed and
cleansed, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God. The necessity then of his death unto sin and new birth unto righteousness
is plain and evident; for how can an unholy creature obtain the favor of a holy
God, and become fitted for a holy heaven, without undergoing this change so
just, so rational is that saying of our Savior, ye must be born again.

There are many other passages of Scripture which equally show that to be a
christian is to undergo a great change in the natural disposition of our minds,
and also that baptism is intended to set forth to us this change. As many of
you, says St. Paul, as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ; that
is, ye have put on the same dispositions that were in your Savior, such as his
humility, meekness, love to God and man, devotion, heavenly-mindedness; and
again, for we are buried by baptism into his death, that, like as Christ was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life. When Paul himself first became a christian, Ananias said to
him, arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. Ananias does not merely
say, arise and be baptized. No, these words are introductory to the words that
follow. And so is it in our case. Wash away thy sins, is an addition which we
also must make to our form of baptism. Nay, I will venture to remark, that
baptism without this is not only useless, but it is even worse than useless. It
does but aggravate our guilt; just as in the case of any other promise, he who
promises, but does not perform, not only makes his promise void, but is even in
a worse case than if he had never made any promise at all.

The blessings of the gospel, it is true are, on that part of God, conveyed
over to us in baptism, but they are conveyed over to us only on the
supposition, that we also on our side repent earnestly of our sins, have faith
in Christ, become regenerate, or born again, and walk in newness of life. If
all these things are left undone, and are forgotten by us, our baptism is then
like an agreement as yet unfulfilled. It is like a contract or bargain, which
has been made, but which one of the parties has afterward rendered void,
through his having neglected to fulfill something that he promised in the very
body of the deed. The other party is therefore let loose of course. For let not
the reader suppose that there is any charm in baptism, and that on the saying
over of certain words by a regular priest, the gates of heaven fly open to him,
his heart being now renewed and made regenerate of course. Let not any one, I
say, presume to stake his salvation on the truth of so absurd a supposition as
this. A person is admitted, I grant, at the time of baptism into the church of
Christ, but it is only into the visible church; for an outward form can only
admit into the outward church; and it is also in the way of charity supposed
(according to the form now in use in the church of England) that the baptized
person both does and will fulfill his part, so as to avail himself of the
christian privileges held out to him.

Let us then beware of this as well as every other error, and as the Jews were
continually warned by Christ and his apostles not to trust in the form of
circumcision, but to remember the thing signified, so let us take warning not
to trust in the form of baptism, but to remember what baptism signifies; for he
is not a Jew, says the apostle, who is one outwardly; and in like manner, he is
not a christian who is one outwardly, neither is circumcision (nor baptism
neither) that which is outward in the flesh, but it is that of the heart and of
the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of man but of God.

It is proper that something should here be added, concerning the particular
expressions which our Savior used when he appointed the ordinance of baptism.
When he had now finished his work, when he had died for our sins on the cross,
and had also risen again, and was about to ascend into heaven, go ye, said he
to his disciples, into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature!
Go ye and baptize them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

In the same sacred names of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost (or
Spirit) all christians are now baptized. Let us therefore close the present
subject, by endeavoring to explain, in an easy and familiar manner, what it is
that a true christian, who is baptized, may be supposed to mean by each of
these three striking expressions.

To be baptized into these three sacred names may be considered then as saying,
in the first place, "I believe in God, the Father Almighty, who made and who
now governs the world, and orders all things by his continual providence." It
is to say, "I believe in that God of whom the Scriptures speak, and not in
those false gods which vain men have imagined to themselves, whether they be
gods of wood and stone, or gods whom their own reason has set up in opposition
to the one true and only God of the Scriptures." It is to say secondly -- "I
believe also in Jesus Christ, who is the Son of God, and who for us men and our
salvation came down from heaven, who was crucified, dead, and buried, and who
on the third day rose again from the dead and ascended into heaven. I renounce,
therefore, the vain hope of being my own Savior; I own my guilt and
unworthiness. I trust in the merits of my Savior's death, and in his power to
save that immortal soul which I have committed to him." It is to say thirdly --
"I believe also in the Holy Ghost. I believe in the miracles which he wrought
in the days of the apostles, whereby he testified of Jesus Christ. I believe in
him also as my sanctifier. I depend on his help for that change in my corrupt
nature of which I feel the need, and while I am striving earnestly against my
sins, I implore the grace of this Holy Spirit, without which I know that I can
do nothing." It is to say also, that "I believe in him as my comforter. I draw
my best consolations not from the world, nor from the ordinary satisfactions of
this life, still less from the indulgence of my pride or of my passions; but my
highest comfort springs from those holy doctrines of the gospel which the
Divine Spirit has, I trust, impressed on my heart; and from that humble
persuasion which he has given me, that, for the sake of Jesus Christ, God even
now admits me into his favor, and will hereafter receive me into his glory.

Such is the true meaning of our being baptized into the name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. It is to renounce the Devil and all his works, the
pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh,
so as no longer to follow nor be led by them. It is to choose instead of these,
and as it were in defiance of them, and in direct opposition to them, that
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit which have been spoken of. It is to profess to
live all our days in this faith, persevering in it through all the changes and
chances of this mortal life, in spite of all the revolutions which may happen
in the faith of our own country, or in that of surrounding nations. It is to
determine to hold fast this faith, into whatsoever new place we go, and among
whatsoever company we may chance to dwell, amidst the scoff of infidels, amidst
the gainsaying of heretics, amidst all the discouragements or persecutions that
may rise up against it in the world, amidst the evil example of degenerate and
corrupt christians, and amidst the united enmity and opposition of all wicked
men. And lastly, to take on ourselves the christian name in baptism is to
profess that in this faith having lived, in this faith we trust we shall not be
afraid to die, since we are well persuaded that we shall not be ashamed of
having confessed this faith on the great judgment day.

Having spoken hitherto of baptism in general, I now mean to make the following

Address to those Parents who are about to bring a Child to be Baptized.
A general question might indeed be asked -- "But why should infants be
baptized at all? Why should they be made to promise that which, on account of
their tender age, they cannot perform." To this objection the church of England
gives the following answer: -- "Because the children promise, by means of their
sureties, which promise, when they come to age, they themselves are bound to
perform." Now, I cannot help here remarking, that although the godfathers and
godmothers may be the persons in this place alluded to, yet parents also must
of necessity be considered as sureties, and even as principal sureties for the
religious education of their children; for, not to mention the duty that arises
from the very relationship between parent and child, is it not the parents who
bring the child to be baptized? Does it not depend on the parents' will whether
the child shall be baptized or not? The baptism of the child being then the
parents' act, the parents certainly must be considered as approving of the
baptismal vow, and as approving it both with respect to their children and
themselves also.

You then that are parents, and that are about to bring a child to be baptized,
ask yourselves such questions as the following. First, am I serious in what I
am doing? Baptism you have just seen is a solemn thing. -- It is not that light
matter which some people make of it. Indeed, the manner in which parents are
used to bring their children to be baptized, may serve as a test or proof by
which we may try the reality of their whole religion. They who treat christian
baptism lightly, we may depend upon it, are altogether light and giddy people;
nor is this all; to be light and giddy in a case of this sort, is to be profane
and wicked also.

There is something indeed particularly aggravated in the guilt of those
parents who come in a trifling spirit to attend their child's baptism. When the
mother has just escaped from the pains and perils of childbirth; when the
father has had the life of his beloved wife preserved to him, and when they
both are made the happy parents of a living infant, then is the time for coming
and offering up to God, who is the deliverer, and in the name of Christ, who is
their Savior, their delicate and tender offspring. Is this then the time for
light and giddy mirth? or for luxury, and vanity, and ostentation? or for
giving way to the evil customs of an unthinking world? and above all, is this a
time for profaning one of the most sacred ordinances of Christ? No; it is the
time rather for the parents to think of their sins, and to examine into all the
errors of their own past life. And as the right education of their newborn
infant will now become the object of their thought, it ought certainly to occur
to them, and to impress itself very strongly on their mind, that an immortal
being is now committed to their care, a being whose soul is likely to be saved
or lost, according as it receives from them a good or a bad education,
influence, and example. -- To have brought an immortal being into the world is,
to every considerate mind, in itself no light matter; and for the parents to be
the means not of saving, but of damning the child to which they have given
birth, is a thought too horrible to be borne. Many, therefore, who neglect
their own souls cannot endure the idea of neglecting the souls of their
children, and they are for doing something at least toward what they call, the
right education of their offspring; but let all parents remember that if they
are light and profane, instead of being serious and devout in presenting their
child to God in baptism, the child is then introduced into life by an act which
amounts to a solemn mockery of God. And alas, is there not then too much reason
to fear lest (to borrow some words of the church of England service) "the child
should lead the remainder of his life, but too truly, according to this
beginning."

But now to be more particular. First, then, before the time of baptism comes,
be sure that you offer up to God in secret the most fervent prayers on the
behalf of your infant. What is baptism? It is a Sacrament appointed by Christ,
in order to remind us that the natural hearts both of parents and children need
to be baptized or cleansed by God's Holy Spirit; and how is this gift of the
Holy Spirit to be obtained? By prayer; for God has said, he will give his Holy
Spirit to them that ask it. As then by prayer you are to seek this gift for
yourself, so are you to seek it for your children also. -- Pray then, I say,
that God will give to your child that thing which by nature he cannot have;
that he will endow him not only with kind and amiable tempers, but also with
the still greater gift of his heavenly grace. -- Pray that he may not only be
respectable, so as to do credit to his family, in the eyes of men, but that he
may have the fear of God also in his heart. Pray that he may be established in
the faith of Christ, and that he may be one of those who shall one day fight
manfully under Christ's banners against Sin, the World and the Devil, and who
shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified in the midst of a
proud, a careless, and a wicked world.

Let me remark next, in respect to godfathers and godmothers, that it will be
your endeavor if you are at all impressed with the important nature of baptism,
to choose them from among the most religious persons of your acquaintance, and
not merely from among those who may be most likely to help foward your child in
his worldly interest; for, in a case of this sort, you must cast aside the
principle of worldly policy, and you may also have to act against the rules of
civility, and common custom. It is probable, indeed, if you have hitherto been
a thoughtless, irreligious person, that your religious friends, if you have
any, will be very shy of standing godfathers or godmothers to your children. In
order then to take away their objections, explain to them how seriously you now
intend to bring up your offspring. Assure them that you account baptism a very
solemn thing, that you wish them to undertake for the religious education of
your child on serious principles, and also that you shall be glad to take
advice from them from time to time on this subject.

In the next place, on the day of baptism, be careful to avoid all extravagant
feasting and show, as well as levity. Do not prepare a vast expensive dinner,
but a decent and moderate meal, and beware of inviting a crowd of irreligious
people to be your guests. Do not dress out the little infant in expensive
finery, but remember that you are about to dedicate him to one, who, when he
gave a feast to his followers, was pleased to offer them nothing but a few
fishes and barley-bread, who had not himself a house where to lay his head, and
who, when he was nearly of the age of your child, was laid even in a manger.

And when the day of baptism is over, begin immediately to prepare for the good
education of your child, by taking all those steps which now become you. If
there is any thing in your character and conduct which will reflect blame on
you in the eyes of your offspring, and thus lessen their reverence for you,
endeavor to correct all such things now. Are there any wrong habits which you
are living in, be sure to change them now. Have you any friends, whose
principles are such as to make them dangerous companions for your child, part
them from all such friends now, and begin immediately to form such connections,
and to establish such religious customs in your family, as may be of serious
use to your children.

Above all, lastly, take this occasion of examining whether you have ever yet
fulfilled your own vow in baptism; for if you have not, it is in vain to expect
that you will do your duty religiously by your children. Examine, then, whether
the great end of baptism has been fulfilled in you; whether you have ever
repented of your sins, have turned to God, have learnt to deny the sinful
inclinations of your heart, have refused to follow the evil customs of the
world, and have become holy, as your profession of christianity requires you to
be. Examine, in short, whether you have got a christian name only, or a
christian nature also. If you cannot answer these questions satisfactorily, do
not run away from the subject altogether, but rather take the opportunity which
the affecting circumstance of a child's birth affords you of considering over
all your own ways and let the season of your child's being born into a new
world be the season of your own death unto sin, and new birth unto
righteousness.

THE Servant Man turned Soldier; OR, THE FAIR WEATHER CHRISTIAN A PARABLE.
WILLIAM was a lively young servant who lived in a great but very irregular
family. His place was, on the whole, agreeable to him, and suited to his gay
thoughtless temper. He found a plentiful table and a good cellar. There was
indeed a good deal of work to be done, though it was performed with much
disorder and confusion. The family in the main were not unkind to him, though
they often contradicted and crossed him, especially when things went ill with
themselves. This, William never much liked, for he was always fond of having
his own way. There was a merry, or rather a noisy and riotous servant's hall;
for disorder and quarrels are indeed the usual effects of plenty and
unrestrained indulgence. The men were smart but idle, the maids were showy, but
licentious, and all did pretty much as they liked for a time, but the time was
commonly short. The wages were reckoned high, but they were seldom paid, and it
was even said by sober people, that the master was insolvent, and never
fulfilled any of his flattering engagements, or his most positive promises; but
still, notwithstanding his real poverty, things went on with just the same
thoughtlessness and splendour, and neither master or servants looked beyond the
jollity of the present hour.

In this unruly family there was little church-going, and still less praying at
home. They pretended, indeed, in a general way, to believe in the bible, but it
was only an outward profession, few of them read it at all, and even of those
who did read it still fewer were governed by it. There was indeed a bible lying
on the table in the great hall, which was kept for the purpose of administering
an oath, but was seldom used on any other occasion, and some of the heads of
the family were of opinion that this was its only real use, as it might serve
to keep the lower parts of it in order.

William, who was fond of novelty and pleasure, was apt to be negligent of the
duties of the house. He used to stay out on his errands, and one of his
favorite amusements was going to the parade to see the soldiers exercise. He
saw with envy how smartly they were dressed, listened with rapture to the
music, and fancied that a soldier had nothing to do but to walk to and fro in a
certain regular order, to go through a little easy exercise, in short, to live
without fighting, fatigue, or danger.

"Oh!" said he, whenever he was affronted at home, "what a fine thing it must
be to be a soldier! to be so well dressed, to have nothing to do but to move to
the pleasant sound of fife and drum, and to have so many people to come to look
at one, and admire one. O it must be a fine thing to be a soldier!"

Yet when the vexation of the moment was over, he sound so much ease and
diversion in his master's house, so suited to his low taste and sensual
appetites, that he thought no more of the matter. He forgot the glories of a
soldier, and eagerly returned to all the mean gratifications of the kitchen.
His evil habits were but little attended to by those with whom he lived; his
faults, among which were lying and swearing, were not often corrected by the
family, who had little objection to those sins which only offended God, and did
not much affect their own interest or property. And except that William was
obliged to work rather more than he liked, he found little, while he was young
and healthy, that was very disagreeable in this service. So he went on, still
thinking, however, when things went a little cross, "what a fine thing it was
to be a soldier!" and at last one day as he was waiting at dinner, he had the
misfortune to let fall a china dish, and broke it all to pieces. It was a
curious dish, much valued by the family, as they pretended; this family were
indeed apt to set a false fantastic value on things, and not to estimate them
by their real worth. The heads of the family, who had generally been rather
patient and good-humored with William, as I said before, for these vices,
which, though offensive to God, did not touch their own pocket, now flew out
into a violent passion with him, called him a thousand hard names, and even
threatened to horsewhip him for his shameful negligence.

William, in a great fright, for he was a sad coward at bottom, ran directly
out of the house, to avoid the theatened punishment, and happening just at that
very time to pass by the parade where the soldiers chanced to be then
exercising, his resolution was taken in a moment. He instantly determined to be
no more a slave, as he called it; he would return no more to be subject to the
humors of a tyrannical family; no, he was resolved to be free, or, at least,
if he must serve, he would serve no master but the King.

William, who had now and then happened to hear, from the accidental talk of
the soldiers, that those who served the great family he had lived with, were
slaves to their tyranny and vices, had also heard, in the same casual manner,
that the service of the King was perfect freedom. Now he had taken it into his
head to hope that this might be a freedom to do evil, or at least to do
nothing, so he thought it was the only place in the world to suit him.

A sine likely young fellow as William was, had no great difficulty to get
enlisted. The few forms were soon settled, he received the bounty-money as
eagerly as it was offered, took the oaths of allegiance, and was joined to the
regiment, and heartily welcomed by his new comrades. He was the happiest fellow
alive. All was smooth and calm. The day happened to be very fine, and therefore
William always reckoned upon a fine day. The scene was gay and lively, the
music cheerful, he found the exercise very easy, and he thought there was
little more expected from him.

He soon began to flourish away in his talk; and when he met with any one of
his old fellow servants, he fell a prating about marches, and counter-marches,
and blockades, and battles, and sieges, and blood, and death, and triumphs, and
victories, all at random; for these were words and phrases he had picked up
without at all understanding what he said. He had no knowledge, and therefore
he had no modesty; he had no experience, and therefore he had no fears.

All seemed to go on swimmingly, for he had as yet no trial. He began to think
with triumph what a mean life he had escaped from in the old quarrelsome
family, and what a happy honorable life he should have in the army. O, there
was no life like the life of a soldier.

In a short time, however, war broke out, his regiment was one of the first
which was called out to actual and hard service. As William was the most raw of
all the recruits, he was the first to murmur at the difficulties and hardships,
the cold and hunger, the fatigue and danger, of being a soldier. O what
watchings, and perils, and trials, and hardships, and difficulties, he now
thought attended a military life! "Surely," said he, "I could never have
suspected all this misery, when I used to see the men on the parade in our
town."

He now found, when it was too late, that all the field-days he used to attend,
all the evolutions and exercises which he had observed the soldiers to go
through in the calm times of peace and safety, were only meant to fit, train,
and qualify them, for the actual service which they were now sent out to
perform by the command of the King.

The truth is, William often complained when there was no real hardship to
complain of; for the common troubles of life fell out pretty much alike to the
great family which William had lest, and to the soldiers in the King's army.
But the spirit of obedience, discipline, and self-denial of the latter, seemed
hardships to one of William's loose turn of mind. When he began to murmur, some
good old soldier clapped him on the back, saying, "cheer up lad, it is a
kingdom you are to strive for; if we faint not, henceforth there is laid up for
us a great reward, we have the King's word for it man." -- William observed
that to (...) who truly believed this, their labors were as nothing, but he
himself did not at the bottom believe it; and it was observed of all the
soldiers who failed, the true cause was that they did not really believe the
King's promise. He was surprised to see the then soldiers, who used to bluster,
and boast, and deride the assaults of the enemy, now began to fall away; while
such as had faithfully obeyed the King's orders, and believed in his word, were
sustained in the hour of trial. Those who had trusted in their own strength,
all fainted in the slightest attack, while those who had put on the armor of
the King's providing, the sword, and the shield, and the helmet, and the
breastplate, and whose feet were shod according to order, now endured hardships
as good soldiers, and were enabled to fight the good fight.

An engagement was expected immediately. The men were ordered to prepare for
battle. While the rest of the corpse were so preparing, William's whole thoughts
were bent on contriving how he might desert. But, alas! he was watched on all
sides, he could not possibly devise any means to escape. The danger increased
every moment -- the battle came on. William, who had been so sure and confident
before he entered, flinched in the moment of trial; while his more quiet and
less boastful comrades, prepared boldly to do their duty. William looked about
on all sides, and saw that there was no eye upon him, for he did not know that
the King's eye was every where at once. He at last thought he spied a chance of
escaping, not from the enemy, but from his own army. While he was endeavoring
to escape, a ball from the opposite camp took off his leg. As he sell, the
first words which broke from him were, "while I was in duty I was preserved, in
the very act of deserting I am wounded." He lay expecting every moment to be
trampled to death, but as soon as the confusion was a little over, he was taken
off the field by some of his own party, laid in a plac^ (...) safety, and left
to himself, after his wound was dre^^^^

The skirmish, for it proved nothing more, was soon over. The greater part of
the regiment escaped in safety, while the few who fell, rejoiced that they fell
in their duty. William in the mean time suffered cruelly ^oth in mind and body.
To the pains of a wounded ^ldier, he added the disgrace of a coward, and the
infa^y of a deserter. "O," cried he, "why was I such a fool as to leave the
great family I lived in, where there was meat and drink enough and to spare,
only on account of a little quarrel? I might have made up that with them as we
had done our former quarrels. Why did I leave a life of ease and pleasure,
where I had only a little rub now and then, for a life of daily discipline, and
constant danger? Why did I turn soldier? O, what a miserable animal is a
soldier!"

As he was sitting in this weak and disabled condition, uttering the above
complaints, he observed a venerable old officer, with thin gray locks on his
head, and on his face deep wrinkles engraved by time, and many an honest scar
inflicted by war* William had heard this old officer highly commended for his
extraordinary courage and conduct in battle, and in peace he used to see him
cool and collected, devoutly employed in reading and praying, in the interval
of more active duties. He could not help comparing this officer with himself.
"I," said he, "flinched and drew-back, and would even have deserted in the
moment of peril; and now, in return, I have no consolation in the hour of
repose and safety. I would not fight then, I cannot pray now. O, why would I
ever think of being a soldier?" He then began afresh to weep and lament, and he
groaned so loud that he drew the notice of the officer, who came up to him,
kindly sat down by him, took him by the hand, and enquired with as much
affection as if he had been his brother, what was the matter with him, and what
particular distress, more than the common fortune of war, it was which drew
from him such bitter groans? "I know something of surgery," added he, "let me
examine your wound, and assist you with such little comforts as I can."

William at once saw the difference between the soldiers in the King's army,
and the people in the great family; the latter commonly withdrew their kindness
in sickness and trouble, when most wanted, which was just the very time when
the others came forward to assist. He told the officer his little history, the
manner of his living in the great family, the trifling cause of his quarrelling
with it, the slight ground of his entering into the King's service. "Sir," said
he, "I quarrelled with the family, and I thought I was at once fit for the
army: I did not know the qualifications it required. -- I had not reckoned on
discipline, and hardships, and self-denial. I liked well enough to sing a loyal
song, or drink the King's health, but I find I do not relish working and
fighting for him, though I rashly premised even to lay down my life for his
service if called upon, when I took the bounty money and the oath of
allegiance. -- In short, Sir, I find that I long for the ease and sloth, the
merriment and the feasting, of my old service; I find I cannot be a soldier,
and, to speak truth, I was in the very act of deserting, when I was stopped
short by the cannon ball. So that I feel the guilt of deserting, and the misery
of having lost my leg into the bargain."

The officer thus replied, "your state is that of every worldly irreligious
man. The great family you served is a just picture of the WORLD. The wages the
world promises to those who are willing to do its work, are high, but the
payment is attended with much disappointment; nay, the world, like your great
family, is in itself insolvent, and in its very nature incapable of making good
the promises, and of paying the high rewards which it holds out to tempt its
credulous followers. The ungodly world, like your family, cares little for
church, and still less for prayers; and considers the bible rather as an
instrument to make an oath binding, in order to keep the vulgar in obedience,
than as containing in itself a perfect rule of faith and practice, and as a
title-deed to heaven. The generality of men love the world as you did your
service, while it smiles upon them, and gives them easy work, and plenty of
meat and drink; but as soon as it begins to cross and contradict them, they get
out of humor with it, just as you did with your service. They then think its
drudgery hard, its rewards low. They find out that it is high in its
expectations from them, and slack in its payments to them. And they begin to
fancy (because they do not hear religious people murmur as they do) that there
must be some happiness in r^^gion. The world, which takes no account of their
deeper sins, at length brings them into discredit for some act of imprudence,
just as your family overlooked your lying and swearing, but threatened to drub
you for breaking a china dish; such is the judgment of the world, it
particularly bears with those who only break the laws of God, but severely
punishes the smallest negligence by which property is injured. The world sooner
pardons the breaking ten commandments of God, than even a china dish of its own.

"After some cross or opposition, worldly men, as I said before, begin to think
how much content and cheerfulness they remember to have seen in religious
people. -- They therefore begin to fancy that religion must be an easy and
delightful as well as a good thing. They have heard that her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; and they persuade themselves that by
this is meant worldly pleasantness and sensual peace. They resolve at length to
try it, to turn their back upon the world, to engage in the service of God and
turn christians; just as you resolved to leave your old service, to enter into
the service of the King and turn soldier. But as you quitted your place in a
passion, so they leave the world in a huff. They do not count the cost. They do
not calculate upon the darling sins, the habitual pleasures, the ease and
vanities, which they undertake by their new engagements to renounce, any more
than you counted what indulgencies you were going to give up, when you quitted
the luxuries and idleness of your place to enlist in the soldier's warfare. --
They have, as I said, seen christians cheerful, and they mistook the ground of
their cheerfulness; they fancied it arose, not because through grace they had
conquered difficulties, but because they had no difficulties in their passage.
They fancied that religion found the road smooth, whereas it only helps to bear
with a rough road without complaint. They do not know that these christians are
of good cheer, not because the world is free from tribulation, but because
Christ, their captain, has overcome the world. But the irreligious man, who has
only seen the outside of a christian in his worldly intercourse, knows little
of his secret conflicts, his trials, his self-denials, his warfare with the
world without, and with his own corrupt desires within.

The irreligious man quarrels with the world, on some such occasion as you did
with your place. He now puts on the outward forms and ceremonies of religion,
and assumes the badges of chistianity, just as you were struck with the shows
of a field day; just as you were pleased with the music and the marching, and
put on the cockade and the red coat. All seems smooth for a little while. He
goes through the outward exercises of a christian, a degree of credit attends
his new profession, but he never suspects there is either difficulty or
discipline attending it; he fancies religion is a thing for talking about, and
not a thing of the heart and the life. He never suspects that all the
psalm-singing he joins in, and the sermons he hears, and the other means he is
using, are only as the exercises and the evolutions of the soldiers, to fit and
prepare him for actual service; and that these means are no more religion
itself, than the exercises and evolutions of your parade were real warfare.

At length some trial arises. This nominal christian is called to differ from
the world in some great point; something happens which may strike at his
comfort, or his credit, or security. This cools his zeal for religion, just as
the view of an engagement cooled your courage as a soldier. He finds he was
only angry with the world, he was not tired of it. He was out of humor with the
world, not because he had seen through its vanity and emptiness, but because
the world was out of humor with him. He finds that it is an easy thing to be a
fair weather christian, bold where there is nothing to be done, and confident
where there is nothing to be feared Difficulties unmask him to others;
temptations unmask him to himself; he discovers that though he is a high
professor, he is no christian; just as you found out that your red coat and
your cockade, your shoulder knot, and your musket, did not prevent you from
being a coward.

Your misery in the military life, like that of the nominal christian, arose
from your love of ease, your cowardice, and your self-ignorance. You rushed
into a new way of life, without trying after one qualification for it. A total
change of heart and temper were necessary for your new calling. With new views
and new principles, the soldier's life would have been not only easy but
delightful to you. But while with a new profession you retained your old
nature, it is no wonder all discipline seemed intolerable to you.

The true christian, like the brave soldier, is supported under dangers by a
strong faith that the fruits of that victory for which he fights will be safety
and peace. -- But, alas! the pleasures of this world are present and visible;
the kingdom and the crown for which he strives are remote. He is therefore apt
to think them uncertain. He is therefore apt to fail, because nothing short of
a lively says can outweigh the present temptation, an^ teach him to prefer the
joys of conquest to the pleasures of sloth.

Whether William went back to his old service, or was received again into the
army may be known hereafter.

THE GENERAL RESURRECTION.
PART I. Being a description taken from Scripture, of some of the events which
will come to pass at the end of the world.
EVER since sin entered into the world and death by sin, this earth has been a
vast grave-yard, or burying place for her children. In every age, and in every
country, that sentence has been executing, Dust thou art, and unto dust thou
shall return. Mankind at first consisted only of one pair, but how
inconceivably numerous are now the sons of Adam! One single nation commonly
contains many millions of men, and these millions form only one generation. How
many, then, must be the millions that have appeared on the earth in the long
run of near six thousand years! -- Let imagination call lup this vast army;
infants that have just lived to see the light, multitudes of the young and
middle aged, and all the old and grey-headed also -- persons of all countries
and of successive generations -- let them all pass in review before us, and now
vast and astonishing is the multitude! If the posterity of one man, Abraham, by
one of his sons was, according to the language of divine promise, as the stars
of heaven and as the sand by the seashore, innumerable, who can compute the
multitudes that have sprung from all the different patriarchs? Who can number
the long line of children that have proceeded from Adam, and all the families
of the earth that have sprung from the loins of Noah! But what is now become of
this vast and inconceivable host? Alas! they are again turned into earth, (...)
original element; they are all sunk into the grave, except^ng only the present
generation; and we also are ^^^ng down one after another, into that place
appointed for all living. There has hardly, perhaps, been one moment of time,
during the space of many thousand years, in which one person or other has not
been dropping into the grave: and in some seasons, through the sword of war,
the devouring pestilence, or rather visitations of God, thousands have been
mowed down at once, and have formed one undistinguished heap of dead. The
greater part of mankind beyond comparison, are now sleeping under ground. There
lies beauty, mouldering into dust, a prey to the vilest worms; there lies the
mean and humble beggar; and there lies the head that once wore a crown. There
lie the mighty giants, the Sampsons, and the Caesar's of the world. There lie
the wise and the learned, as weak and helpless as the fool. There lie some with
whom we ourselves have conversed, and who were once our dear friends and our
companions; and there lie our fathers and mothers; and there perhaps also lies
a tender wife or husband, a child, a sister, or a brother.

And shall they lie there always? Shall this body, that curious wormanship of
God, so fearfully and wonderfully made, continue always in these ruins, and
shall it never be restored? This we know, that it is not a thing impossible
with God to raise the dead. He that could first form our bodies out of nothing
is just as able to form them anew, and to repair the wastes of time and death.
But what has he declared to be his intention in this case? for on this the
matter turns; and it is a point which is fully revealed in the Scriptures. The
hour is coming, says that sacred book, when all that are in the grave shall
hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall come forth; they that have done
well, to the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, to the
resurrection of damnation. Behold, says St. Paul, I show you a mystery; we
shall not all sleep, (that is, mankind will not all be sleeping in death, when
the day of resurrection comes, for there will be one generation remaining then
alive upon earth;) but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye, at the last trump, for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall
be raised, incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive
and remain, shall be caught up together with them to meet the Lord in the air.

Let us now realize the majesty and terror of this tremendous day. When the
multitudes of the dead are sleeping in the silent grave; when many perhaps of
the living are thoughtless of this great event; when some men are running
eagerly, as they are now, after riches and honors, and some after sensual
pleasures; while they are eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage;
while some are asleep in the dead of night; while some are planning future
mischief; and some are in the very act of sin; while the course of nature seems
to go on as usual, so that unbelieving scoffers take occasion from thence to
ask where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. When, perhaps,
a few only are serving God, and are looking for their Savior's appearance --
^hile the multitude in short no more expect the approaching judgment than the
people or Sodom did the destruction which befell them on that fine clear morning
when Lot fled away; or than the people of the old world expected the d^luge on
the day when Noah entered the ask -- th^^ suddenly shall the he^v^ns open over
the astonished world, and the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible; for in an instant the sound shall reach all the mansions of the
dead, and in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, the dead shall be raised and
the living shall be changed. This call will be as effectual in raising each of
the sons of men as ever that call of Christ was, Lazarus, come forth. O, what a
surprise will it be to the thoughtless world! Should this alarm burst over our
heads this moment, with what terror would it strike many a one who read this
description of it? How dreadful, then, will be the surprise and consternation
when this event shall actually come to pass! Now, indeed, there are many who
stop their ears: -- Now, though the voice of mercy calls, though reason pleads,
and conscience warns, yet multitudes will not hear; but then there shall be no
one among the millions of mankind that shall be able to disobey the summons,
for the living shall start, and be changed, and the dead rise at the sound.

But for what purpose shall they rise? It is in order that they may come to
judgment. For we m^^^ all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and m^st
give an account of the things done in the body, whether they be good or whether
they be evil. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the
righteous into life eternal. And I saw, says the apostle, the dead, small and
great stand before God; and the books were opened, and the dead were judged out
of those things which were written in the books according to their works; and
the sea gave up the dead that were in it, and death and hell (that is the place
of departed spirits) delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were
judged every man according to their works, and whosoever was not found written
in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire. And I saw, continues the
same apostle, a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first
earth were passed away. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, behold
the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and there shall
be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, for the former things are passed
away. And he that sat on the throne said, behold, I make all things new. In
like manner we are told in another place, that the heavens and the earth are
but kept in store until the day of destruction and perdition of ungodly men;
and that when this great and terrible day of the Lord shall come, then the very
elements shall melt with servent heat -- the earth also, and all the works
thereof shall be burnt up -- the heavens shall depart as a scroll -- they all
shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall be changed; and there
shall then he new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Well
might the apostle say, Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness.

There are many things spoken of in Scripture that shall follow the grand scene
of the resurrection, which remain to be described; but we shall speak in this
place only of one further point, and that is of the person who is to be our
judge. It will be Jesus Christ, for the Father, says the Scripture, judges no
man, for God has committed all judgment to the Son, because he is the Son of
Man. This same Jesus, said the angels, just after his resurrection, which is
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him
go into heaven. Once he was despised and rejected of men; he was led as a lamb
to the slaughter, and as a sheep before his shearers is dumb, so he opened not
his mouth; he was mocked, and buffeted, and spit upon; he was himself arraigned
before the bar of Pontius Pilate, and he was hung upon the Cross as if he was
the vilest malefactor, the whole multitude having joined in the cry, crucify
him, crucify him. But now, behold he comes in the clouds, and every eye shall
see him, and they also which pierced him, and all nations of the earth shall
wall because of him. For the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ; now also he is come to be
glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe. Some men
think that to forget or to disobey Christ is no great matter; they are good, as
they call it, in their own way, and therefore they are satisfied. But such men
should be reminded, that it is not a^ the bar of their own reason, nor even at
the bar merely of their own consciences, that they are to be tried, but that
they are to be tried at the bar of Jesus Christ. The word that I have spoken to
you, said our Savior to the Pharisees, it shall judge you at the last day. Let
us further enquire, then, what Christ has spoken to us, and what the Scripture
in general has said respecting the manner of our trial on the day of judgment,
for this is the way in which alone we can truly know whether we shall be
acquitted or condemned.

An Hymn on the second coming of Christ.
LO! he comes with clouds descending,
He that was for sinners slain;
While the host of Saints attending
Swell the triumph of his train!
Every eye shall now behold him;
Every creature bend the knee;
They that mocked him too and sold him,
Pierced and nailed him to the tree.
See, the Angels all adore him!
Hark, the trump proclaims the day!
All the nations stand before him,
Heaven and earth are fied away!
Come, thou Savior long expected,
Sit on thine eternal throne!
Thou that wast by man rejected,
Claim the kingdom for thine own.
PRAYERS TO BE USED BY A CHILD OR YOUNG PERSON -- BY A GROWN PERSON -- BY THE
MASTER OR MISTRESS OF A SUNDAY SCHOOL -- AND BY THE MASTER OR MISTRESS OF A
FAMILY.
Address to individuals on the subject of the following Prayers.
THERE are many persons, it is to be feared, who do not accustom themselves to
pray at all, than which there cannot be a greater proof of irreligion. Some of
these may plead perhaps that they have never been taught to pray, or at least
that they have no suitable prayer provided for them. To such persons an
opportunity is now given of beginning what they cannot but allow to be a good
custom, for who can deny that is a good custom, or rather indeed, that it is a
bound^n daty to call day by day on the God who made them.

There are other persons who oblige themselves daily to say over the Lord's
prayer only, and perhaps also the belief. This is often done in a very formal
and superstitious manner. The Lord's prayer is undoubtedly a most excellent
pattern for our daily prayers, but it does not appear to have been given by
Christ as the only form of prayer that was to be used; and it is worthy of
remark that when he uttered it, he took occasion to warn his disciples against
the vain repetitions used in prayer by the Pharisees. It is to be feared that
even the Lord's prayer has become a vain repetition in these days, not through
any fault in the prayer itself, but through the unthinking, and perhaps, over
frequent way in which some people use it. Possibly a new form may supply some
new thoughts, and may serve to awaken the sort of people I am speaking of to a
sense of the true meaning and use both of the Lord's prayer and of prayer in
general.

ADDRESS TO PARENTS.
It is hoped that there can be little occasion to inform parents that they
ought to teach their children to pray. A short prayer, fit for persons of
twelve or fourteen years of age, is here supplied. The same prayer may serve
both for morning and evening, and the memory, therefore, will be little
burdened by learning it by heart. -- Before children entirely leave their
father's house, it is desirable that, instead of the child's prayer, they
should learn by heart the morning and evening prayer for a grown person, which
follows.

TO HEADS OF FAMILIES.
If all masters and mistresses of families would ask each of their servants
what is their custom in respect to daily prayer, and would supply them, if
there seems occasion, with the morning and evening prayer for a grown person,
which they will find in this tract, it is plain, I think, that much be^^ fit
might arise, through the blessings of God, both to masters and servants, for a
servant's duty to his master is one of the things which these prayers will
teach.

ADDRESS TO MASTERS AND MISTRESSES OF SCHOOLS.
You are desired to take notice that the prayer for a Sunday school is intended
to be used only on a Sunday. The prayer for an individual may, by merely
changing the word I into we, and the word me into us, be made to suit a daily
school, and indeed it may be made to suit some families also.

ON FAMILY PRAYER.
The advantages of family prayer are many, and they are very plain. The master
of a family (or the mistress in his absence) by devoutly reading a morning and
evening prayer to his family, instructs both his children and servants in their
duty, accustoms them to prayer, makes an open profession of his own religion,
brings himself under an obligation to observe a consistent, that is, a
religious conduct during the day; and above all let it be remarked, he draws
down the blessing of God on himself and his household. Four prayers are here
offered to masters and mistresses of families, and they who have not yet been
used to family prayer, have now therefore, an opportunity of beginning this
good custom, and in doing it may God grant them his blessing!

General Directions, appli^^^le chiefly to the case of private Prayer.
First, before you proceed to your private prayers, endeavor to compose your
thoughts, and then ex^^^^^e yourself for a few moments. Ask yourself in the
morning, for instance, what are likely to be the duties and trials of the day
that is before you, and in the evening reflect what have been the sins of the
day past. By doing so, you will be enabled to apply the words of your prayer
more particularly to your own case, and possibly also you may thus be led to
add a few words of your own to what you have got by heart, and by degrees you
may thus be inclined to enlarge your daily petition more and more in your own
words, and thus you may learn to pray in spirit and in truth.

Secondly, when about to pray, endeavor to lift up your heart to God for the
help of his Holy Spirit; for the Scripture t^lls us, that it (...) the H^^^
Spirit that ^^^^^th our infir^^rities, Many p^op^e comp^ain or great coldness
and indifference while engaged in prayer, and there are few who are not
conscious of this in a greater or less degree. Let all them begin, by imploring
God's Holy Spirit to assist them in praying as they ought. There cannot be a
better introduction to every kind of prayer, than a few secret words first
uttered to this effect from the heart.

Thirdly, beware of wandering thoughts when engaged in prayer. To this end let
every struggle be made, and let it be seriously impressed upon you, that God is
now present in an especial manner, and that all absence of mind which is
allowed and indulged is a great affront to his majesty.

Fourthly, but besides being attentive, take care that you are also sincere in
your prayer. Ask yourself often whether you mean what you say while you are
praying and whether you sincerely and earnestly wish the thing that you ask.
Accustom yourself not to attend to the mere sound of your words, but to the
sense; and if you do not well understand any part of the prayers here offered
you, endeavor to get what is difficult explained before you repeat it. Some
persons have been known to say prayers day by day, almost every word of which
they have contradicted by their whole conversation and conduct. What a terrible
hypocrisy is this! A man's prayers may either be the greatest blessing to him
or the most grievous sin, according to the manner in which he performs them.

Fifthly, endeavor not only to be sincere in your prayers at the moment when
you offer them, but endeavor also, that the same spirit which animates your
prayers, may animate your whole life. To this end, examine your life often by
means of your prayers. Try whether all your maxims in life, your common speech,
and your several tempers, as well as your open conduct agree with the prayers
which you use. The sincerity which God requires of you is not a momentary
sincerity, it is not a short lived and changeable feeling which is forgotten
when you go into the world. The remembrance of what you have been praying for
in the morning should follow you into the field or the shop, and should
influence your conduct all the day long.

Lastly, consider whether God answers your prayers. If you pray aright, depend
upon it your prayers will be heard and answered; your tempers will be subdued,
your temptations weakened, and your whole mind will be rendered pious if you
really pray that it may be so; and if this be not the case, you may reasonably
suspect that your prayers have not been such as they ought. If you pray aright,
depend upon it, you will improve in every respect; you will gain more humility,
more tenderness of conscience, more fear of God, more pleasure in his worship,
and more happiness in his service, and also more confidence in Christ, and
probably more hope of salvation in proportion to the earnestness and sincerity
of your prayers to God to this effect, for these are all the gifts of that holy
spirit which God has promised to them that ask it.

A Prayer to be used by a Child or Young Person, both in the Morning and
Evening.
O Lord God Almighty, I beseech thee to have mercy upon me and to bless me.
Defend me this day (or this night) by thy mighty power, bestow upon me all
things which thou know to be needful for me, and help me by thy holy spirit,
to do whatsoever thou have commanded. Incline me thankfully to receive
instruction; what I know give me grace to practice, and make me wise unto
salvation. Grant that I may be obedient to my parents and teachers, faithful
and diligent in the duties of my calling, and humble, and kind, and merciful.
Preserve me from stubbornness and self-will, and from evil thoughts, and from
angry passions, and also from lying and profaneness, and from all vain
boasting; turn my heart from the love of sin, and make me to avoid wicked
company.

And pardon all the offenses which either in thought, word, or deed, I have
committed against thee. O God, forgive all that is past, and receive me now
into thy favor, for the sake of thy Son, Jesus Christ, my most merciful Lord
and Savior.

May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion
of the holy spirit, be with me now and evermore. Amen.

Morning Prayer for a Grown Person.
O Lord God Almighty, I thank thee for having preserved me through the past
night, and for granting me health and strength for my duties on this day. --
Blessed be the Lord for all his mercies, for giving me food to eat and raiment
to put on, and for delivering me from many evils which my sins have justly
deserved.

I thank thee especially, O Lord, for the gift of Jesus Christ, thy Son. I
confess before thee my exceeding guilt, and I pray thee, for Christ's sake, to
pardon my offenses, and to receive my soul when I die.

I beseech thee also, for his sake to grant unto me the help of thy holy spirit
that I may be enabled to follow my Savior's example, and to do whatsoever he
has commanded. May I be patient, and humble, and kind, and merciful,
endeavoring to do good unto all men, and forgiving those who trespass against
me, even as I hope to be forgiven. Grant me grace to labor on this day
diligently in my calling, and to be true and just in all my dealings, doing
unto others as I would they should do unto me; and help me, O Lord, to restrain
my tongue, and to subdue my evil tempers, and to live in temperance, soberness,
and chastity. Save me from those sins which in times past have most easily
beset me; strengthen me, O Lord, for all my duties, carry me through all my
difficulties and troubles, and help me, day by day, to grow in grace, and in
the knowledge of my Lord and Savior.

This prayer I humbly offer up in the name of Jesus Christ.

May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the (...) of
the holy spirit be with me now and evermore. Amen.

An Evening Prayer for a Grown Person.
O Lord God Almighty, I bless thee for all the mercies of the past day, and I
pray thee now take me under thy care, and to deliver me from all the perils and
dangers of this night. Preserve me O Lord, both in body and soul from every
evil, and keep me from all wicked thoughts when I am about to close my eyes in
sleep.

And pardon, I beseech thee, all my sins, for the sake of Jesus Christ. I
consess, O Lord, that I have this day left undone many things which I ought to
have done, and done many things which I ought not to have done. Pardon all my
pride Any of these words may be charged as may suit the case of the person
praying, that whatsoever sins have been committed in the day may be mentioned.
and vanity, my idleness and self-indulgence, my impatience and fretfulness,
and discontent. Pardon, O Lord, all the rash and angry words which I have this
day spoken, and all the sinful thoughts which have risen up in my mind, and
which I have not been careful to resist. And especially I pray thee to pardon
my forgetfulness of thee my God, and my want of gratitude and love to Jesus
Christ. For these, and all my other sins, which from time to time I have
committed, I here implore thy pardon and forgiveness, in the name of my most
merciful Savior.

And since I know that my life is so short and uncertain, help me, day by day,
to think of my latter end. -- O Lord, grant me grace so to live that I may not
be afraid to die, and do thou receive my soul at last into thine eternal
Kingdom.

I also beseech thee to give thy blessing to all my dear relations and friends.
Bless the poor, the sick, and the afflicted, and all the tempted and
distressed. Bless the land in which I live, and especially all the faithful
followers of Jesus Christ. Give repentance to those who live in (...). Bless
also mine enemies.

And now, O Lord, help me to lie down at peace with thee, and in perfect
charity with all men.

These prayers I humbly offer up in the name of Jesus Christ my Savior.

May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with me now and evermore. Amen.

Morning Prayer for a Sunday School.
O Lord God Almighty, who have safely brought us to the beginning of this day,
we thank thee for thy merciful preservation of us through the past night. -- We
also thank thee for all thy goodness to us, for our health and strength, and
food and raiment, and friends and benefactors. More especially we bless thy
name for giving us the Holy Scriptures, in order that we may be instructed in
the will of God, and in the way of everlasting life.

Dispose, O Lord, all who are here present, to attend reverently to the truths
they hear, and suffer them not to give way to indolence, or carelessness of
mind, or to hardness of heart and unbelief. Teach them also to apply the
Scriptures to their own use. When they read of thy judgments may they stand in
awe of thy great power and majesty, and when they read of thy promises, and
especially of thy mercies in Christ, may their hearts be filled with gratitude
to their Redeemer, and may they take delight in singing thy praises.

And we pray thee, O Lord, to grant unto them the continual help of thy Holy
Spirit, that they may day by day be preserved from sin, and may become fruitful
in every good work. May they be faithful to the Lord their God, and upright in
their conduct toward all men. May they be true and honest in all their
dealings, doing unto others as they would that others should do unto them. May
they be obedient to their parents and teachers; and may they be temperate,
sober, and diligent; may no untruth proceed out or their lips, and may they
learn both to command their tempers and restrain their tongues, and may they be
kind and merciful to each other, forgiving one another, even as they hope that
God, for Christ's sake, will forgive them.

And pardon, O Lord, all their sins in time past, which either in thought,
word, or deed they have committed against thee. Receive, O Lord, all these
children into thy favor, and into the arms of thy mercy; grant unto them true
repentance, and an unfeigned faith in Jesus Christ their Lord.

We also beseech thee to prepare them for all those events in life which thy
Providence may see fit at any time to bring upon them. Thou know the various
temptations and troubles to which before long they may be exposed, and the
situations to which they may be called. We therefore pray thee now to arm them
for every future trial, and to train them up for the performance of all those
duties which thou shall hereafter require of them. May they be grounded in the
knowledge of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, and may they now begin to sight
under the banners of their Savior against the world, the flesh, and the devil;
and as they advance in life may they grow in grace, each of them striving to
recommend that gospel which they have been taught, and shining as lights in the
world.

And finally we pray that having thus done thy will, and enjoyed thy favor, all
the days of their lives, they may at length be received into those everlasting
habitations which thou have prepared for them that love thee.

We offer up these our prayers in the name of Jesus Christ, through whom alone
we hope for the pardon of our sins, and in whose words we further call upon
thee.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come; thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven; give us this day our daily bread; and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; and
lead us not into temptation, for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

May the Grace, etc.

Evening Prayer for a Sunday School.
O Lord God, our heavenly Father, we beseech thee to pour down thy blessing on
these children, and to grant that the words which they have this day heard with
their outward ears, m^^, through thy grace, be so grafted inwardly in all their
hearts, that they may bring forth in them the fruits of good living, to the
praise and glory of thy name.

Forgive, O Lord, all the imperfection which thou have seen in their worship
and services on this day. -- Forgive also the various sins of their past lives;
may they repent of them with unfeigned sorrow and contrition of heart, and may
they lie down this night trusting in Jesus Christ their Lord.

We commit them to thy watchful care, and to thy mercies in Jesus Christ.
Defend them, we pray thee, from all the dangers of darkness; do thou keep them,
O Lord, by night and by day; let thy blessing attend them to the end of their
lives, and when they shall lay down their bodies in the grave, do thou receive
their souls into thine eternal kingdom.

We pray thee, O Lord, to give thy blessing to all their friends and relations;
grant unto their parents grace to lead a christian life, and to set a good
example to their families, that so they, and the children whom thou have given
them may meet together in heaven. We commend to thee also the bountiful
benefactors of these children. Be merciful unto all those who have shown them
mercy, and make them heirs of everlasting life. Bless the teachers of this
school; give them grace both to know their duty and to fulfill it.

We pray for the land in which we live, for the king and all in au^hority, and
especially for all the ministers of the gospel; give success to their labors on
this day; may their preaching be made effectual to overcome the various sins of
men, and to make them obedient to the will of God.

Bless, we pray thee, in an especial manner, the true followers of Jesus
Christ; build them up in their most holy faith, unite them in the bonds o^
christian love, preserve them from the wickedness that is in the world, and
make them to be a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

We would also make intercession for the poor, the sick and the afflicted, for
the widow and the fatherless, and for all those who have none to help them; O
Lord, bless unto them their earthly troubles, and turn them to their soul's
good, and do thou protect and defend them, and appear for them when all human
help fails.

We pray also for the whole rising generation; may they be trained up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord. Put into the hearts of all parents and
teachers, a concern for the souls of those over whom thou have set them, and
give thy grace to the children of this land that they may hear instruction with
a teachable spirit, and may be made wise unto salvation.

And finally we pray thee to have mercy on those who are now living in
ignorance and sin, and who are without God in the world. Turn them, O Lord,
from their evil ways, give them true repentance, and send abroad the gospel of
Jesus Christ into this and all lands.

These prayers we offer up in the name of our only Lord and Savior, in whose
words also we further address thee, saying our Father, etc.

May the Grace, etc.

Morning Prayer for a Family
O Lord God Almighty, assist us now to draw near unto thee with deep reverence
and humility of mind. Deliver us from all wandering thoughts, and enable us to
worship thee in such a manner as thou may hear our prayers and pour down thy
blessing upon us.

O Lord God of Heaven, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, giver of every good and
perfect gift, we thank thee for all thine unmerited mercies bestowed upon this
family, and we pray thee by thy grace to preserve every one of us from sinning
against thee.

Defend us through this day by thy mighty power, save us from the temptations
of the world, the flesh, and the devil, put into our hea^ts good desires, and
help us to fulfill all thy precepts and commandments. And since thou have sent
thy Son Jesus Christ into the world to die for our sins, and to become the
Savior of our souls, O Lord, give us grace, day by day, to thank thee for this
unspeakable gift, and help us to remember that we are not our own, but are
bought with a price, and make us willing therefore both to do and suffer all
things to which thou may be pleased to call us; teach us to be this day
patient and humble, and thankful, and contented with our lot, often lifting up
our thoughts to heaven, having our chief desires fixed on a better world.

And make us holy in all manner of conversation as becomes the disciples of
Jesus Christ; make this household, we pray thee, to be a household that fears
God; may we be delivered from the corruption that is in the world, and may we
also dwell together in unity. May we put away from us all bitterness and wrath,
and anger, and evil speaking, and all malice, and may we be kind one toward
another, forgiving one another, even as we hope that God, for Christ's sake,
heath forgiven us. And help us to know our several duties in life that we may
fulfill them. May we be upright and diligent, may we waste no time, and neglect
no opportunity of doing good that is afforded us. May we be ready to every good
work.

And teach us to be ever watchful and circumspect, and fearful of running into
temptation, but if at any time, we are overtaken with a fault, give us grace to
confess it and repent of it, and to ask forgiveness both from God and man.

O Lord, pardon the many sins which in times past we have committed against
thee. Forgive our forgetfulness of thee our God, and our many trespasses
against our neighbors. Grant unto us all true repentance, and help us day by
day to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior.

Our Father, etc.

May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with us all evermore. Amen.

Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Lord our heavenly Father, we beseech thee to hear the prayers which we are
about to offer up unto thee; deliver us from all wandering thoughts, and help
us to remember that we are now in the presence of that God unto whom all heart
are open, and from whom no secrets are hid.

O God we pray thee to forgive the sins of the past day. We acknowledge that we
have this day left undone many things which we ought to have done, and done
many things which we ought not to have done. We have trespassed against thee in
thought, word, and deed, and though we have been encouraged by thy gospel to
repent of our iniquities, and to serve God in newness of life, yet we have many
times returned to those sins which we profess to have repented of, and we have
fallen under thy just wrath and displeasure.

But we pray thee, O thou God of all grace and goodness, for the sake of thy
Son Jesus Christ, to pardon all that is past, and to take us into thy favor
this night, not weighing our merits, but forgiving our offenses, and causing us
to place our humble trust in thy mercy. Deliver us, we pray thee, from the
troubles of a guilty conscience, now that we are about to lie down to rest.
Save us, O Lord, from the dread of death, and from the terrors of the wrath to
come. Grant unto us, if it please thee, a quiet night, and make us all to be at
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

At the same time we beseech thee, not to suffer that we should deceive
ourselves by any false hope, but give us grace, day by day, to examine
ourselves with care and diligence, that we may discover all that is amiss in
us. O Lord deliver us from continuing in any known sin. Save us from every
secret iniquity; may we each of us resolve before we go to rest this night, to
forsake, by thy grace assisting us, every former transgression, and may we now
devote ourselves entirely to thy service.

We further beseech thee to bless all our relations, friends, and connections;
take both them and us under thy protection this night. And have mercy on all
those who are in pain, sickness, or any other adversity, do thou lighten their
troubles and support them by thy heavenly grace.

And accept our thanks for all thy goodness vouchsafed unto us this day.
Praised be the Lord for all his mercies, for the health and strength, and food
and raiment, and comforts of every kind which we have enjoyed. But above all we
desire to bless thy name for the gift of Jesus Christ, thy Son, for the
instructions of thy sacred word, and for the hope of everlasting life. -- O
Lord, grant unto us grace to receive these, and all thy blessings with a
thankful heart, and let us show forth thy praise, not with our lips only, but
with our lives. Accept, we beseech thee, our imperfect supplications and
prayers, for the sake of Jesus Christ, our only Lord and Savior.

Our Father, etc.

May the Grace, etc.

Prayer for a Family on Sunday Morning.
O Lord God Almighty, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we bless thy name for
all thy mercies vouchsafed unto us the children of men.

We thank thee, O Lord, for all the blessings of this life, but especially we
praise thee for giving us thy holy word, for sending to us the ministers of thy
gospel, and for appointing the Sabbath to be a season of rest for our bodies,
and to be a day on which we may also attend to the salvation of our immortal
souls.

O Lord, grant we beseech thee, that we may rightly use the religious
opportunities which we enjoy. -- Preserve us from thoughtlessness and
inattention during thy public worship. In prayer may we feel our need of the
mercies we implore. In the confession of sin, may we be affected with the sense
of our unworthiness, and in offering up thanksgivings to God, may we pour out
our whole hearts before thee. We pray also, that when we shall hear thy word
read, and the gospel of Jesus Christ preached to us, we may listen with an
attentive ear, and receive thy truth into an honest and good heart.

And we beseech thee to preserve in us a right frame of mind throughout the day
that is now before us. -- May we remember that this is the day on which our
Savior rose from the dead, having by his death obtained eternal redemption for
us. May we therefore think of our ascended Lord, and may we put away from us
all folly and vanity, as well as vice and wickedness, and all eager desires
after the things of this life, and all anger and passion, and envy, and malice,
and whatsoever else is either unsuitable to this sacred day, or is unbecoming
the followers of Jesus Christ.

O Lord, we lament that in passing through the week we are so often entangled
by the cares of this life, and overpowered by temptations which come upon us
unawares. But we pray thee now to call away our tho'ts from earthly things, and
to fix them on those unspeakable joys which are at thy right hand for evermore.
-- We pray thee on this day to strengthen our faith, to increase our hope, and
to fill our hearts with love to thee, and with fervent charity toward our
neighbor. Help us also to repent of our sins, examining carefully our conduct
during the week, and thus may we learn to amend our lives, and to run with
patience the race that is set before us.

And, together with these prayers for ourselves, we offer up our supplications
in behalf of all christian congregations. Give thy grace to all the ministers
of thy gospel, and enable them every where this day to preach thy word with
faithfulness to the souls of men. Make thy gospel effectual, to pull down the
pride of the high minded, to alarm the careless, and convince the wavering, to
encourage them that are as yet weak in faith, and to give peace and consolation
to every troubled heart.

And, O Lord, we beseech thee, to send thy gospel to the nations which now sit
in darkness. Put an end to all false religion, and idolatry, and ignorance, and
error; and give thy blessing to those who, in distant lands, are making known
the light of thy truth.

We offer up these our prayers, in the name of Jesus Christ, our only Lord and
Savior.

Our Father, etc.

May the Grace, etc.

Prayer for a Family on Sunday Evening.
O Lord God Almighty, Father of Mercies we beseech thee, for Christ's sake, to
hear the prayers which we are now about to offer up unto thee.

We pray thee, O Lord, to give thy blessing to the instruction which we have
this day heard, and to grant that it may be so grafted inwardly in all our
hearts, as to bring forth in us the fruits of good living, to the praise and
glory of thy name. Pardon also whatsoever thou have seen amiss in our worship
and services on this day.

And accept, O Lord, our humble confession of all those great and manifold
sins, which, from time to time both in thought, word, and deed, we have
committed against thee: for we have left undone those things which we ought to
have done, and we have done those things which we ought not to have done, and
there is no health in us. We have sinned, O Lord, by our pride and vanity, by
our indulgence of many sinful passions, by our fretfulness, impatience, and
discontent, by our emulation, our ambition, and our covetousness. We have
sinned also by our sloth and negligence, by our forgetfulness of many duties of
our calling, by our too great love of this present world, and by our
carelessness in following many of those evil customs which we have found in it.
More especially we have sinned by our inattention to thy written word, to thy
preached gospel and to all the means of thy grace.

For these, and all our numberless offenses, we here implore thy pardon and
forgiveness, in the name of Jesus Christ; at the same time we thank thee for so
mercifully providing the Savior for us, who came down from heaven and died for
our sins, and who now sits at thy right hand making intercession for us.

We also beseech thee, for Christ's sake, to grant unto us the help of thy holy
spirit, that we may now forsake every evil way, and may amend our lives
according to thy holy word. O Lord, preserve us through the ensuing week from
sinning against thee. Save us from the world, the flesh, and the devil. Carry
us through all our temptations and dangers. Fit us for whatsoever duties are
before us, and when we have fulfilled thy will on earth, receive us to thine
eternal kingdom, through Jesus Christ.

And the same things which we have been imploring for ourselves, we humbly ask
in behalf of our dear friends and relations. Grant unto them pardon of their
sins, an humble faith in Jesus Christ their Lord, and grace to walk in the way
of thy commandments. Be merciful to the land in which we live. Bless our king
and all in authority. Give thine especial grace to the ministers of thy gospel,
that they may both preach thy true and lively word, and may also be examples to
their flock of all virtue and goodness. Let thy blessing also descend on all
the faithful followers of Jesus Christ. Save them from the temptations which
are in the world: strengthen their faith and hope, and unite them in the bonds
of christian charity with each other; and have pity on all those who neglect
thy gospel, and profane thy Sabbaths, and live as if there was no God in the
world. Convince them of their sins before it is too late, and incline them to
seek for mercy, through that Savior whose grace they now despise. And O Lord,
deliver every one of us from all hardness of heart and contempt of thy word and
commandments. Make us to lie down this night thankful for the opportunities of
instruction which we have enjoyed, and for all the blessings of the gospel. And
may the peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep our hearts and
minds in the knowledge and fear of God, and of his Son Christ Jesus.

Our Father, etc.

May the Grace, etc.

FINIS.

