A GENUINE HISTORY OF THE LIVES and ACTIONS OF THE MOST NOTORIOUS Irish
Highwaymen, Tories and Rapparees, from Redmond O'Hanlon, the famous
Gentleman-Robber, to Cahier na Gappul, the great Horse-Catcher, who was
executed at Maryborough, in August, 1735.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, THE GOLD-FINDER: Or, the History of Manus Mac Oneil, who
under the Appearance of a stupid, ignorant Country Fellow, (on the Bog of
Allen, by the help of his Man Andrew) played the most notorious Cheats, and
remarkable Tricks on the People of Ireland, that ever was known.

ALSO, The Remarkable Life of Gilder Roy, a Murderer, Ravisher, Incendiary and
Highwayman, With several others, not in any former Edition:

The Edition, with Additions. By J. COSGRAVE.

WILMINGTON: Printed and Sold by BONSAL and NILES. 1799.

THE PREFACE.
SO great a prevalence has custom, that to see an English book without a
Preface, is as strange a sight as a bull without horns, the weapons of his
defense. If this little History of the Irish Robbers has any occasion of a
Preface, it can only be to obviate one objection that may be made by cavillers
against it, viz. Rogues merit no commendation; and therefore men ought to be
cautious of introducing their actions in History, lest it should be an
encouragement to others to follow their example: But I can assure the Reader,
that my intention is quite different: I have wrote with no other design than to
discourage young men from falling into such company as may lead them into a
shameful way of living, which often brings them to an ill end, and leaves a
reproach upon their family, who may be innocent. We may observe the great
Redmond O'Hanlon, though he lived a merry life, yet it was but short, and
attended with such dangers and fear, that he could have but little
satisfaction, and at length he became such an odium, that one of his own
relations, for the lucre of a reward, dispatched him out of the world as he lay
asleep. How safely, then can an outlawed rogue leave his life in the power of
another, when induced not only by the promise of a reward, but for the sake of
pardon to give information? And if a man has occasion to distrust his own
comrades, with how much dissatisfaction must he live? It is true, he may riot
for a while, but let him take care, lest (according to the Psalmist) he be cut
off in his wickedness, and die in his sins.

I hope the following History may also be of service to honest men of all
professions, who may happen to have dealings, though at unawares, with such
kind of cattle as are here treated of. -- By making ourselves acquainted with
their artifices and ways of management, we may be better able to know how to
discover their wiles, and break their measures. When a man is forewarned, if he
does not sore-arm himself, I believe all men will think him blameworthy. I am
sure this is my opinion, who am a well wisher to all men.

J. C.

A GENUINE HISTORY OF THE LIVES AND ACTIONS of the most notorious Irish ROGUES
and RAPPAREES.
THOUGH it is very probable that Ireland has produced a great many barbarians
and murderers from the beginning, yet as the ancient histories of that nation
are so very fabulous, that little or no credit can be given to them, we shall
begin with the lives of such, the veracity whereof cannot be called in
question; and, as among the Irish robbers of modern date none appears to be
more remarkable and notorious than Redmond O'Hanlon, the reader is d^sired to
let him lead the van.

The surprising History of Redmond O'Hanlon, protector of the rights and
properties of the benefactors, and captain general of the Irish robbers; almost
notorious, though a gentlemanlike robber.
REDMOND O'H -- N was the son of a reputable Irish gentleman, who had a
considerable estate, and lived at the ^oot ^f Sleygunnin mountains, in the
county of Armagh, among a vast number of relations, several whereof were of the
same name. After his parents had given him the best education the time and
place afforded, they obtained for him a small post in the army, where he served
a few years with pretty good credit, though very young, 'till the reduction of
the Irish forces in this kingdom, among which our Redmond was one.

The nation being reduced by the English foreces, several Irish families, who
had a hand in the wars of Ireland were dispossessed, and their lands forfeited;
by which means a very great alteraetion was made in this family, and several of
thn O'H -- ns were obliged to travel, in hopes of retrieving their fortunes.
But poor Redmond, in this unhappy condition, once happened to be at the killing
of a gentleman in a quarrel, and flying for safety, staid abroad for a long
time, still refusing to come to trial 'till he was outlawed, which put him to
his shifts. But our hero having received some instructions in the art of war,
and being naturally of an undaunted courage, was easily led into the secret of
invading other men's properties, both on the highway, and by breaking open of
houses, till he had acquired as much money as might have put him in a way to
live above the frowns of fortune, with good management, all his life.

But seeming to relish this new course of life more than the former, he
proceeded in his robberies, 'till from an infancy in the art, he became one of
the most notorious and expert of that profession that had ever been bred in the
kingdom of Ireland. He had made himself acquainted with all the bye passages in
the country, and he knew all the lurking places on the mountains of Newry and
Sle^gun in, so that whoever pretended to pursue him, made but fruitless
attempts, and commonly returned with loss and shame, like dogs that lost their
ears, both before and after the rewards were offered by the government for
apprehending him.

He was strong and active, and as occasion required, could perform his feats
either on foot or on horseback: but though he was so notorious a plunderer, he
was naturally of a very generous disposition, frequently giving share of what
he got from the rich to relieve the poor in their necessities. His remarkable
actions and surprising attempts, spread his character through all the country;
and being joined by a great number of his former acquaintance (adventerous lads
who became his associates spontaneously) 'till his company was augmented to
fifty effective men, mostly his own relations, he then began to take upon a
captain's command, and appointed a brigade to act in every province, who were
always to return (barring accidents) four times a year to their general place
of rendezvous and give an account of their success, and as soon as the booty
was regularly divided, each brigade was ordered to exchange posts, and to march
out on duty again. This was their constant practice for some years, by which
policy they kept themselves concealed much longer than they otherwise could
have done. However, there was no robbery committed any where at all in the
kingdom but was attributed to Captain O'H -- n, though it is probable he might
be an hundred miles distant at the same time: nay, so well was his character
established, and so notorious his actions, that it became a common proverb,
when any man had a mind to brand another with infamy and scandal, for him to
say, "You are as great a rogue as Redmond O'H -- n."

As Redmond was once traveling along the ^^ad between Newry and Armagh, like a
kite in the air in quest of prey, with only two or three attendants, who were
at some distance behind him, he overtook a pedlar, crying out and bemoaning his
misfortune, in a very moving and hi^^ous manner. Redmond taking compassion of
the pedlar, came up and asked what had befallen ^im? To whom the pedlar
replied, "Teat damned rogue of a Redmond O'H -- n has robbed me of above five
pounds in money, which was all I had; and that would not satisfy him either,
but he has taken my box away too; and because I strove to hold it, he knocked
me down, and abused me like a dog." Redmond incensed at such language, had
hardly patience to hear him tell out his story before he interrupted him, and
called him a rascal and a lying son of a whore. -- 'How could I rob you you,
(said he) that never saw you before? You dog, show me which way he went, and
I Will convince you that it was none of Redmond O'H -- n that robbed you. By the
time the fellow had described the robber, and showed the road he took,
Redmond's company came up, and they all went in pursuit of the new rogue, whom
they overtook, with the pedlar's box under his arm, and brought him back to the
place where he committed the robbery. He knew himself guilty of the fact, and
returned the pedlar both his money and box, without waiting to be examined,
being no way acquainted with Redmond or any of his party. Upon this Captain O'H
-- n said, he would teach him to rob in his name, and without his license or
permission, and bound ^he pedlar under an obligation to prosecute the fellow at
the ensuing assizes, and then wrote a mittimus, and sent the criminal under a
proper guard to the jail of Armagh. The pedlar was as good as his word,
prosecuted him to the very utmost, upon which the fellow being found guilty,
was accordingly executed. He was not altogether so destitute of friends but
that he had council to plead for him, who insisted very much upon the error in
commitment, and prevailed so far as to have the mittimus The mitimus, we are
informed, ran thus:

Com. Arm. By Redmond O'H -- n, in loco of one of his Majesty's justices of the
peace for the said county; but chief ranger of the mountains:

I herewith send you the body of --, who was this day brought before me, and
examined for robbing^ Mr. -- on the King's high road; requiring you to hold him
in safe custody, 'till the next general assi^es to be held for the said c^^ots;
and for so doing this shall be your suffici^nt warrant.

Given under my hand, this first day of March, 1695. Redmond O'H -- n.

To --, jailer of A^magh.

produced and read, thinking to get the trial postponed; but this was of no
other service than to give rise to as pleasant a fit of merriment in court as
ever happened upon such an occasion, the judges and every one else laughed till
they were ready to burst, at the conceit of Redmond's acting the justice of
peace.

Redmond had a much greater antipathy to the English than to the Scotch or
Irish; for he was always kind to his country men, and made a bargain both with
them and the North country pedlars, and all such as acknowledged his
jurisdiction all over the kingdom; alleging for excess, that as he was a
reduced gentleman, he hoped his country men would not refuse to pay him tribute
toward his maintenance, upon his de^^sing to plunder. Upon this he made
proposals, that whosoever paid him half a crown per annum, he would indem^ify
them from robbers of all kinds: but if at any time they neglected to ^^^^t him
his salary, and run in arrears, they were sure to pay for it. Such as made this
bargain with him, had their names registered in his pocketbook, and were so
little afraid of losing any of their goods by robbers, that they thought their
effects as safe in the field as in the house; for if at any time they happened
to have any thing stolen, upon application to Redmond, he would make the most
diligent search that could possibly be made through all parts of the kingdom,
till he found it and restored it to the owner; and if he falled to find it,
always allowed his benefactor two years salary to compensate the loss. But he
had so many emisaries, and such good intelligence, and all other petty rogues
were so much afraid of him and his party, that none of them dared disoblige
him; and besides, every robber was served with a copy of the registered names,
and had strict orders not to meddle with any thing that belonged to such, but
to assist the loser in searching for their goods: so that his friends seldom
suffered under his protection.

Having once got cold, upon some desperate occasion, it threw him into a
dangerous fever, of which he recovered; yet the place being damp where he lay,
he lost the use of his limbs, and continued a cripple or lame for some years:
yet during this time he was preserved among his friends, who had a great esteem
for him, and escaped from being taken, though he was proclaimed a tory and a
robber, and a reward of fifty pound was offered for taking of him, which
occasioned frequent searches after him. He likewise was punctually paid his
salary or tribute by his benefactors or allies (except a few who broke the
truce, but dearly paid for it after) though robberies were not so frequent
during his illuess as before, so that he was under a necessity of making his
pay maintain him 'till he was able to go about again.

As soon as he had recovered the use of his limbs, he took the field again, and
scoured all the roads roads in the country, sometimes alone, and sometimes with
company, and took special care to revenge himself on all those who had
neglected to send him his yearly pension while he was out of order; but found
himself so closely hunted, that he fixed his head quarters at or about the bog
of Allen for a considerable time, where he committed such a number of notorious
robberies, that the country was obliged to keep under arms to guard their
effects. The government taking this into consideration, a fresh proclamation
was issued out, offering a reward of two hundred and fifty pound for the taking
of him; upon which several attempts were made to secure him, but to no effect:
though he was once taken in bed near Clonbullock; but had the good fortune to
be rescued by his comrades, as his captors were leading him to Naas goal.

Though he was very well acquainted all over the kingdom, yet he was loath to
venture himself any longer in this place, and among strangers, ^^tear of a
second dissaster: so be took an opportonity of conveying himself private to his
old quarters on Slevgunnin, where he remained some time, and carried on his
game with great success, before his enemies had notice where to seek him.

Soon after his return, he was in company with some of his associates beyond
Armagh, where they met with cornet Montgomery's steward, who having received
about 500 l. from his master's tenants on an estats he had in that country, was
carrying it home to his own house near Killevan, in the country of Monaghan,
where he dwelt. Redmond stood at a little distance all the time of the action,
and observed the dispute on both sides, and the defense made by the steward,
which though he maintained it with bravery for some time, yet he was overpowered
by numbers, and obliged to deliver his purse to save his life. When the boots
was divided, captain O'H -- n made a present of his part to the cornet's young
son, who was at nurse in the same place, which he sent by the steward, with
strict order to deliver it, and took his acknowledgment for the same payable on
demand. This he did out of a pure regard that he had for the cornet, on account
of some favor that he had done him formerly: and the cornet to make him a
requital for so generous an action, made a promise that he would use his best
endeavors to obtain the king's pardon for him, in hopes of his forsaking his
new trade; and was as good as his word, as by the sequel will appear.

A little after this action, a merchant in Dundalk had a draught on a merchant
in Newry for a large sum, but was so much in dread of Redmond OH -- n, that he
was afraid either to send for the money, or to go for it himself: while he was
thus consulting with his wife how to get the money safely home, his apprentice,
a lad about sixteen years of age, overheard their discourse, and as soon as he
got an opportunity, desired his master to tell him why he was so much afraid of
sending to Newry? The master having answered his request, the boy asked him
whether he would venture to trust him with so much money? The master said he
did not doubt his honesty, but on that occasion he could not tell what to think
of the matter: However, by many entreaties, the boy prevailed on the master to
let him go for the money, promising to forfeit his ears if he lost one
halspenny of it. The boy having obtained privilege to go for the money,
immediately set about prepating himself for the journey; and by his n^^^^'s
assitance, being provided with about forty shilling in ^alf pence, he divided
them into two parcels, and tied them up close in a little wallet, a^^^^ch end,
and then went to the field and brought home an old vic^ous stone horse, (much
of the same humor with Sir Teague O'Reagan's war horse, on which he rode out
to meet duke S^bomberg after the surrender of Charlemount) that when any other
came up to meet him on the road, be always strove to bite or kick him, by which
means he commonly kept the road to himself. With proper accoutrements the boy
mounted, and had the fortune to meet Redmond on the road as he was going, who,
as it was usual with him, demanded where he was going? They boy told him to
Newry, 'Pray what business have you there? says Redmond. Why, says the boy, to
receive about 100 l. for my master. And when do you think you will be back? says
Redmond. Why, says the boy, I believe about this time tomorrow. Well, my good
boy, says Redmond, you had b^^ter take care not to tell every body what year
business is, for fear you should be robbed. Oh, says the boy, I am sure such a
gentleman as you would not too me; I don't intend to tell any body else.' Upon
this Redmond made him a present of a ducat to drink his health or to hite
another horse, if the one he had under him s^^^ld tire; and so they parted good
friends for that time.

Redmond was then under some necesities for a little money; and as none of his
companions were present at the dialogue, he was resolved not to let them know
any thing of the matter, that he might have all the booty to himself: And to
make himself the more sure of the prey, he ordered his comrades to a different
post the next morning, and waited himself alone on the road leading from Newry,
'till the boy returned.

When they boy came in sight Redmond rode up and saluted him, and, after some
discourse, began to ask him the necessary question about the money. The boy
seeming to have no mistrust of his design confessed that he had received it,
upon which the other di^^^red him to let him see it. The boy seemingly under a
su^prize, ^^^^^e several excuses, but they all availed him nothing for, after a
short parley, the other began to demand with some authority, and would have
taken hold of him had he not been something afraid of receiving a kick from the
mad horse. Among other excuses, the boy alleged that his master would think
that he had made away with the money himself and deem him a rogue, for which
reason he could not part with it; but at length, Redmond threatening to shoot
him if he refused any longer, the boy took his wallet, and cast it over a
slough by the road side, and told Redmond that if he must have it, he should
follow it. Upon this Redmond alighted from his horse, and having tied him to a
tree, with some difficulty he got over the slough and through the hedge, to the
place where the wallet lay. While he was upon this expedition the boy exchanged
horses much for the better, and rode home with speed, having the money he had
received at Newry safely quilted up in his waistcoat and though Redmond called
after him to stay, with all the cagerness in the world, yet he took no further
notice of him, but left him to make the best hand he could of an old garren and
a bag of halfpence.

Shortly after this Redmond was presented with the king's protection for three
year, on trial of his good behavior, by cornet Mon^gomery, who had taken some
pains to obtain it, and remained for the space of above two years inossensive
in the country, and kept company with some of the best gentlemen in the
kingdom, who not only took pleasure in hearing him relate his exploits, l^^t
caressed and made much of him; However, though he knew very well, if he had
continued his good behavior for the term granted aforesaid, he might have
obtained a general pardon, yet this honest way of living did not relish well
with him; he had an itch to be at the old game, and accordingly began it before
the admitted time was expired, growing ten times more wicked and notortous than
ever he had been before.

In imitation of Oliver Cromwell, lord protector of the commonwealth, he took
upon him either the title of protector of the rights and properties of his
benefactors contributors, chief ranger of the mountains, surveyor general of
the highroads of Ireland, or lord-examiner of all passengers, committing such
villainies, and barbarities on sturdy travelers, as he called them as, were
never heard of before; often driving away whole herds of cattle from such in
contempt of his protection and authority, had given offense by running in
arrear; though he never used any ill that did not oppose him. Y^^ he seldom
robbed a poor man, but on the contrary was always generous to men in necessity
or distress -- It Is said that having once overtaken a poor man who had hardly
any thing else lest but one cow, which he was driving to a fair to be sold, in
order to raise the rent for his landlord, he asked him several questions, 'till
he found certainly that he was in want, and then lent him five pounds, which he
was to pay him at an in^^a few weeks after: The poor man proving perfectly
honest, went with the money according to compact; which pleased Redmond so
well, that he bestowed it on him and five pounds more for ever.

He was likewise very generous to a soldier, if he met him alone, and
understood the art of dissimulation, on disguising himself, as well as any man;
sometimes appearing like an officer, sometimes like a country gentleman, and
sometimes like a footman, and could after the tone of his voice at pleasure; so
that the soldiers seldom knew him, though he often gave them money to drink,
unless he discovered himself. The duke of Ormond, in his time, ordered out a
small party of foot and horse, to pursue him, who being informed where he was,
but not mistrusting his disguise, went after him immediately. Redmond
perceiving how it was, dressed himself like an officer and went quietly along
the high road, often looking cack wards, 'till he saw the red coats at a good
distance behind him; then he hastened to a gentleman's house near the road, and
told him he was an officer who was sent out with a party of men in pursuit of
Redmond O'H -- n, but being a little fatigued, made bold to call and red
himself 'till his men came up; then desiring the people of the house to call
him as soon as they passed by, he stretehed himself down to rest. The soldiers
had not gone above an hundred yards past the end of the avenue, before Redmond
went out in pretense of meeting them at a sure by the road side a quarter of a
mile off; but his intent was to make his escape another way, which he had for
that time unperceived.

Not long after he appeared in Armagh in the habit of a country gentleman, and
requested of the commanding officer there to let him have a few men to guard
him about eight miles further, for fear of being met by any Redmond O'H -- n^s
party, because he had a c^^^^e of money about him. The request seemed very
^easonable, and upon his rewarding the men beforehand, the privilege was
granted. He and the men passed on very jocosely for about seven miles, 'till,
as it seems thinking himsel safe ennough, he told them he was out of danger,
and they might go back: upon this he gave every man a ^iece of money, and
desired them to make a discharge for joy of his safe passage, which they aid;
then he desired them to charge and do the like again: till at length they told
him their ammunition was spent. This was what he expected, and giving a
whistle, a parcel of his gang sprung up out of the thickets who stripped the
soldiers of their arms, money, accoutrements and clothes, in which shameful
condition they were obliged to go back to their quarters.

A relation of the surprisring escape be made at the four-mile house, between
Dundalk and Newry, may claim the reader's attention as much as any of these.
Being there overtaken by an officer and twelve men, he was made prisoner; but
seeming to have a great respect for the soldiers, and they for him, there was
no dispute made; he submitted to every thing they demanded, and seemed ready
and willing to go where they pleased. His ready compliance and civility diew
compastion from the men toward him, and as an acknowledgement of their
kindness, he treated them with North country whiskey, taking care to drink
spari^gly himself, 'till they were all overcome with that heady liquor, and not
one of them able to stand or speak. While they were in this condition he got
they, all tied neck and heels, by the assistance of some of his comrades, and
leaving them in that posture marched of with their arms, which it seems he and
his gang had occasion for.

The government being just by incensed at the manner of his proceeding and
behavior, soon after issued out a new proclamation, offering a fresh reward
for his head dead or alive.

There was a barrack also erected at a Caradevelin, where two troops of horse
and two companies of foot were ordered for the security of the country; which
though several of Redu^ond's comrades were dispersed, put him under no terror,
for he robbed as ^r^quently as ever; but kept in the night at very private
plates.

A captain of foot being informed of one of his haunts, chose out twenty of the
most active men in the barrack, who stripped themselves to their waistcoats,
and marched out in pursuit of him before break of day in the morning, with
nothing but their muskets and bayonets, and a little prevision in their
pockets. In about two hours they invested his ca^tie of defense, where he lay
alone that night, but, in the midst of their search, had the mort ficati^n to
hear him call out to them from an adjacent hill, bidding denance; for it seems,
he had warning of their approach, though it was so short that he ran out half
drossed. Upon this the militury men hold a consi^tation of war, wherein it was
resolved to divide themselves into three parties, and pursue him without delay.
The captain and ten men were to follow (...) chase in the center, and five men
on each wing, who were always to keep within a quarter of a mile of the main
body. In this manner they followed him 'till noon, without giving him time to
rest, but at length, several of them beginning to lag, the chase was only
maintained by four, who kept so nigh him as to have him in view now and then
the greatest part of the day, notwithstanding the difficulties they had to
surmount in ascending the hills. In the evening he hid himself in a knot of
furze, about half a mile from a small village, where several of his friends
lived, intending to convey himself thither in the night expecting that the
soldiers would have gone on, and have searched the village before it grew quite
dark: but here he was entirely mistaken, for his pursuers (though he had out ran
them near half a mile) upon loosing sight of him, suspected that he had hid
himself, and having fited a shot for a signal waited near they place where they
had missed him 'till the whole company came up and then made a very diligent
search, but to no purpose: upon this they held a fresh consultation, not many
yards from they place where Redmond lay, and concluded to sit down and make a
repast of what provision they had and to lie under cover 'till morning. Redmond
overhe^rd the discourse, and was resolved to steal away, if possible, but was
provented by the brightness of the moon, and the men's walking to and fro to
keep themselves warm, till a little before sunrise, when observing a smoke at
a distance, they drew near thinking to meet with some house, to refresh
themselves; but instead of finding one they ^^^nd a village, where being
furnished with fresh provisions, though at a dear rate, as they were returning to
renew the search, they observed a man at some distance, making to a cabin on
the side of a hill whom they pursued and found that they were upon the scent.
But Redmond looking behind him, though he was exceeding hungry, altered his
course, and the pursuit was renewed with great warmth, insomuch that Redmond
had not time to refresh himself all day long and was obliged to hide himself
next evening in the top of a mountain, where he remained 'till break of day,
and then, being almost famished with hunger, went to one of his friend's houses
to get something to eat.

At his coming up to the door, one of the dogs began to bark, which alarmed the
pursuers in the center, who lay not far off; whereupon they all came up in a
body and surrounded the house, just as Redmond fat down with a cake of bread,
some butter, and a can of milk before him. It was now the third day since he
had got a morsel, and being almost spent for want of food, was just going to
put the first bit in his mouth, when the captain of the little army appeared at
the door with a very kind salutation, which Redmond, though under the greatest
surprise) returned with a gentleman-like air, 'Mr. O'H -- n, (said the officer)
I am glad to have overtaken you; we have been in pursuit of you near three days
with the king's warrant, and at last are come up with you; now, sir, you are
the king's prisoner; get ready, for you must come along with us.' Redmond
replied, sir, I acknowledge that I am your prisoner and shall comply with your
orders immediately; but, gentlemen, you have been hunting me these two days
past, as I never was hunted in my life. I have not had time to put one bit in
my mouth 'till now. and I beg, sir, you will give me leave to eat my last
breakfast with my friends; as soon as I have done you shall carry me where you
please, and it will be no small honor to have the credit of taking Redmond O'H
-- n only don't disturb me 'till I am ready. The privilege was readily granted
him, resting on their arms, while the other twelve guarded the house on all
sides without, 'till Redmond had done; then he started up, taking his
blunderbuss in his hand, and presenting it to the officer, said, 'Now you take
me for your prisoner, and I don't deny it; but you must give me a little play,
that the world should not have it it to say that I was taken so silly; you bear
the title of captain, so do I; if you refuse to give me horse room and
car-room, I Will discharge my piece at you this instant, and you shall die with
me. I expect nothing but death gentlemen, but yet am resolved to have fair
play, and die honorably: I have but one life to loose, you can take no more,
and perhaps I may make three o^ four of you bear me company; for to goal I
never will go alive.' This language surprised the officer, who seemed to give
way a little, as though he had a mind to consent; upon which Redmond forced out
of the door, and ran for his life. The soldiers without were so situated, that
he had got above twenty yards before the^ could fire without any danger of
hurting one another: so that, though every ry shot was discharged after him, he
got clear off, with only some slight wounds, and made a complete es^ape for
that time, taking great advantage of the delay the made in loading their pieces
again.

After this he had the mortification, with five of his gang, to be frightened
after a queer manner. Some of the servants being abroad, happened to spy the
people at their first coming, and suspecting the design, ran to the fields to
catch a horse to alarm the country, the wh^le stud, affrighted at so sudden a
disturbance, galloped up toward the house and made a very great noise, which
the gang took for the country in arms at their heels, and ran away in confusion
before they had time to get much plunder or enter the house.

It was about this time that P --, the greatest robber in Mun^^er, out of mere
curiosity, took a journey to the country of Armagh, purely for the sake of
seeing Redmond O'H -- n, of whom he heard abundance of sine stories, but never
had been in his company. When he came near the place of Redmond's abode, he put
up at an inn, but for some private reasons made no enquiry that night; for
observing a gentleman, as he thought, telling over a good some of money, he
took care to be informed which road he interded to take, in the morning; upon
which he pursued him and overtook him at the side of a little wood: At coming
up be demanded the gentleman's money without more ado, which he ^^ld him he saw
him reckoning the night before: The other told him, he had money sure enough,
but swore, that whosoever took it should sight for it; upon which each of them
discharged a pistol, but without any damage, and then d^e^^ their swords,
without which they fought some time on horseback, with out much harm or
advantage on either side: a length, looking on one another, they forbore a
while, and agreed to alight and decide the quarrel on foot; having alighted the
victory was contended for with equal bravery and loss of blood on both sides
^^'till they were able to sight no longer then sitting down to rest, 'Pray,
says the Sampson of the North, who are you, or what is your name! Upon this the
other confessed, he was the chief Pobber of Munster who hearing a great deal of
Redmond O'H -- n's same, came purposely have an opportunity of getting
acquainted with him. Says Redmond, then you have satisfied your curiosity, for
I am the man; and I must confess you are the heartiest lad that I ever met
with, I ^ever was so worsted before. So the battle erded; they kissed and
became friends, and he made a league to tarry with Redmond a year and half in
the north; but nor relishing so much bonnocks and oatmeal as they usually got
in this place, he returned again to his own country, and surveyed only the
Munster road; afterward.

Before he departed they made a truce, and promised to give one another notice
it at any time either of them was put in prison, or in distress, that the one
at liberty might relieve or rescue the other if possible. And soon after this,
the Munster tory was apprehended, and put into Clonmel goal, for robbing and
murdering a traveller on Kilnagowna, near the place where Patrick Sarsfield
afterward had the fortune to blow up King William's artillery, and ^ail down
the cannon. According to their compact, he wrote a letter to Redm^nd, when he
received at Armagh, and having comm^^cated the contents thereof to his trust,
comrades, Patrick Mac-tigh, John Reilly, Shan Ber^ag, Phil. Gall^ge, Pat. Meel,
Arthur O'Ned, and the famous ^rian O'Kelly, they took the affair into
consideration: but however the time being very short, Redmond posted away alone
and only reached ^loume^ the evening before the Munster champion was led out to
Kilmagowna, in or^er to be executed. Being in the habit of a gentleman be found
means of communicating with P -- and let him know that he intended to set the
town on fire in several places that night that while the people were in
confusion he might have an opportunity of executing his design; but P -- let
him know the danger of such an attempt, while a strong guard of soldiers were
kept in the town, and dissuaded him from it, by telling him of a much better
opportunity that would offer on the road the next day, there being but a sile
or two of foot soldiers with the sheriff, to guard him; and to put him in a way
of forming a probable Stratagem for making a rescue. Next morning the guard set
out with the prisoner, and having con^ucted him about half way, they stopped a
while at a public house on the road, to retresh themselves. The prisoner was
left in a final room at one end of the house, under the charge of four
soldiers, while the soldiers sat in a large room at the other end, over a cup
of liquor, not mistrusting any thing; though the landlord was made privy to the
design, but abfolutoly refused to give any aid or assistance, unless Redmond
would promise to give him some slight wourd, to save his credit. To make the
story short, while they sat in this posture, Redmond appeared at the door in
the furniture of a gentleman, and having in^^ired the cause of the soldiers
being there be desired to have the privilege of seeing the prisoner; which
being readily granted to him be called for wine and other liquor in great
plenty, to treat the men and paid the whole reckoningwith a great many sine
compliments. This being over, the officer to make a return of such gratitude,
called for more wine to treat the gentleman, while the men were plied with
liquor, by Redmond's private orders, to facilitate his design.

As soon as he thought convenient, he stepped out, on pretense of making water,
and looking round about him, to see whether the coast was clear he observed
eight men riding toward him, and waiting till they came up, sound they were
some of his own comrades, to whom he had communicated the affair before he left
the North who had followed him in order to assist him. To be sure the news was
very agreeable, and his comrades could never meet him in a more well come time;
for that moment, seeing an opportunity of rele^sing his brother, they consulted
the: manner of executing their design, and had the luck to rescue him in a very
surprising manner, as follows: one of the gang held the horses at the end of
the house, while the rest followed Redmond into it who opening a door that was
in the passage, to prevent any in the lower room from looking up into the
other, stood there, and made some kind of a noise, not only to drown the voice
of those with the prisoner during the scuffle, but to hinder the others from
coming out to see what the matter was, if there arose any suspicion. In the
mean while, seven of the North country robbers entered into the little room,
and taking advantage of the small guard, while they were in liquor, dispatched
and laid aside the four men so suddenly, that the had not time to cry out; and
then having out they cords wherewith the prisoner was bound, he followed them
out, and mounted one of the horses with very little noise, and so made his
escape to the mountains along with his new company. Things were so situated,
that Redmond himself was the first who gave notice of the escape, and assisted
the sheriff and the guard in pursu^ng the rescuers for several miles, 'till
finding an opportunity in the evening, and observing that several of the
guards, being overcome with liquor, had lagged behind, he turned off short,
giving them the slip on the mountains, and followed his comrades directly to
Longford-pass, near the Bog of Allen, without stop or stay, where he had
directed them to post away before him. Here they all met, acrording to
agreement; but what became of P -- after is uncertain, though partly related in
the next.

Some time after this, when the soldiers in the barrack erected at Carradelvin
Lad marched out of their quarters, and fresh ones had supplied their room
Redmond having contrived the plot himself, took out with him eighteen men
(among whom were the aforesaid Mac-tigh, Reilly, Bernagh, Galloge, Meel,
O'Neal, Kelly, all a med) and we^^ in the night, as privately as possible t^^h
ba^r^ck, in order to be revenged of the soldiers for the severe hunting ^e got
some time before that, when he made his very surprising escape. It seems the
soldiers had no suspicion of captain O'H -- n's adventure, for they were all
asleep; other wise it appears to be very improbable that the Rapparees could
open the door, and ^^eal away eighteen horses unknown to the guard. However, so
it was, the eighteen O'Hanl^nians ma^e off with eighteen ho^ses, making no
delay 'till they came to Balliboy, about 8 m^^es distant from the barrack,
where there stood an old castle in the valley at the foot o^ a great hill. Here
they alighted to get some provender for the horses; where I shall leave them a
while, and return to the barrack, to observe how the army ch^^ed.

How the robbery was first discovered i^ not yet known, but this is fact:
eighteen horsemen, ^ach with a foot soldier behind (...), began the p^rsuit
early in the morning, and following the tracks of of the horse, cause within
sight of them, about 9 o'clock in the morning, in the valley aforesaid. As soon
as Captain O'H -- n perceived the pu^s^ers, he marked out a ^^^le, and gave
orders to his m^^ to draw the horses up into an half ^oon, and prepare for
battle. H^^ reason for making out the circle was, that his (...) might move the
more (...) ^^^ly, and keep the ^^^e of the half moon still toward ^is enemy,
ever ^an standing close to his horse, to prevent the sold^^rs from firing;
because they ^^ew very well the ^ragcons did not pursue them with an ^^tent to
ki^l their own horses.

In this posture, they were just by the side of a large tr^nch (over which it
was impossible for a horse to pass) when the officer come within^ shot; and
though he was a man of experience, yet could not venture with any safety, to
fall on them at once, which occasioned a long debate; and at length Captain.
O'H -- n^gave the officer a f^ir challenge, either to decide the matter b^ a
field battle, or to give three ^uine as a piece for the horses; but the offer
was rejected, and several ^hatage^^s were made use of by the officer to break
the order of the Rapp^rees: which Redmond observing, and fearing that the foot
men would find a passage over the ^^ench, and get behind him while the rest
were before, he thought proper to make a more modera^e offer which was to
return the horses at a guine^ a piece, and to be allowed the liberty of
marching off unmolested with his gang. If this were refused, he swo^e^ that
every man he had should f^^e upon the ^^my making no doubt but that they should
kill eighteen at least, and that several of themselves would escape afterward.
This audacious challenge occasioned a council of war to be held wherein it was
concluded to give him the fast demand, with privilege of retining an hundred
yards before a soldier moved from his place to prevent the loss of men and
horse: so a messenger was sent with the money, which when Capt. H -- n had
received, he and his men made use of the privilege, and retired behind the
trench, which before was unperceived by the officer, who otherwise, upon an
ear^ier discovery might have made, Redmond a prisoner, though not without running
a great ri^que. This surprising adventure ended without striking a^b^l^.

This last action of Redmond's incensed the government to the highest degree,
and a fresh proclamation was issued out, offeri^g ^a reward of 400 l. or m^re
for his head dead or alive, and 40 l. a p^^ce f^^ ^^e eighteen men that were
with him. The family o^ the Coote^, at Coote-hill, were very active and
successful in taking his com^^de^, and likewise the family of the Jo^^s^ones of
the Fews: and in a few years, the most of his chief men were taken and executed
except the aforesaid Reilly, who had been so closely hunted by ^^^i^e Coote,
that fled for his life to France, where shortly after, the same Coote, being on
his travels, and having killed a man in fighting a duel, contrary to the laws
of that nation was tried and found guilty. Reilly hearing that Coote was in
danger of his life, came to him and after letting him know often he had hunted
him, told him he was then come to render good for evil; and accordingly with
some assistance, he ^esc^ed him and helped him to make his escape to I^eland
again. When Coote got home, he ^^q^ired for Reilly's family, and having found
his father only in a small potatoe-garden, one cow, and a little cabin, on the
mountain, he made him a freehold lease of a small piece of land in the county
Monag^^an, wh^^n the Reilly's family still enjoy, and is now of considerable
val^e.

B^ien Kelly wa^ the most active servant that Redmond had, and merits a place
in history (if a rogue can have merit) almost as well as his master, having
been in company with him in most of his during enterprises, as well as in
several more private, but as the particulars have not been told me, I shall
only relate one, and let the rest lie in oblivion. While Redmond resided near
Allen, Kelly with two or three green-horn rapparees, beset a house in the
country of Kildare, about ten o'clock at night, and having easily found means
to convey themselves into a pig's stye at one end of the house, where there was
a hole made in the wall, through which whey was usually conveyed into the
swine-trough, the servant-maid, who was a brave s^urdy girl, had occasion to go
into the dai^y with a candle, and observing that the hole was grown somewhat
wider than before mis^usted that all was not right. Upon this she took up a
large cleaver, and putting out the candle, conveyed herself to the side of the
hole to watch for a considerable time. When all was bushed, the hands fell to
work again to pick out the stones of the wall, and made the hole wider, and
presently came in a head and shoulders, which the girl perceived by the light
of the window, and making ready to give him a stroke, the fellow likewise
discovered her, and called to his comrades to draw him back, because the hole
was too narrow; but the girl had taken care to lighten the load, by cutting of
the head, which terrified the rest without so much, that they fled for the
same, and no body came afterward to challenge the dead, neither was it known
who he was, 'till Kelly, the great m^^derer and robber, confessed it afterward
in his last speech at Armagh. However the girl was highly applauded. But now to
return to Redmond, and finish his life;

The gallows destroyed many of his accomplices, and the large rewards that were
offered for taking himself, encouraged even private persons to endeavor to
take him. And as the family of the Johnstons at the Fews are at present very
serviceable to their country in apprehe^ding tories and rapparees, so were they
then; for the vigilant Mr. Johnston seldom let him rest after his chief
comr^des were cut off, but hunted him over ^^lls and days; but more
particularly once, having notice that he was at Narrow-water, took some men and
a^^es with him, and pursued him closely almost all the way to Carlingford where
for fear that he should get and hide, and so convey himself away by sea in the
night, his passages were all intercepted; which Redmond observing, he made up
to an alehouse by the riverside, at which time it, happened there was no boat
near hand, and no bridge within a mile and an half of the place. By some means
or other old Johnston got notice of it, thinking it was not possible for
Redmond to escape over so broad a river while the tide was in, for he had no
other way left. When old Johnston and his men came near, they observed that
Redmond ^^d stripped off his clothes, and tied them on his back, and which he
took to the river, and swam down, mostly under water, for above two hundred
yards. This prevented his receiving the shot of his pursuers 'till out of
danger; and what was as remarkable as this, when Mr. Johnston set his dog after
him to seize him, the dog snapt at the coat, and at the same time Redmond
turned about, and took hold of the dog by the throat and dragged him along with
him under water till be drowned him quite ((...) Redmond was a fi^e swimmer)
and in a little time he g^ined the bank on the other side of the river, then
dressed himself and fled directly to the Island of Magee near ^elfall, where he
lur^ed privately for a year or more, till he thought the country had forgot
him, and then came up to the county of Ar^^^gh, to engage in new adventures;
but did not reign long.

He was now under more apprehensions of danger than ever, he appeared but
seldom publicly abroad; yet though he was somewhat advanced in years, he fell
desperately in love with an inn keeper's daughter, a very beautiful young
woman, who he at last prevailed upon, by entreaties and valuable gifts, after a
long suit to yield to his lustful embraces, upon a kind of a sham marriage.
However, he was very fond of her, and spent most of his time in her company,
'till her father hearing who he was, and what reward was offered for
apprehending him, endeavored to get her to betray him; but all to no purpose,
for it only gave Redmond warning to conceal himself with more caution. But at
length one Doug^as, a minister of the Church established, in the parish where
the young woman mostly resided, knowing she was brought up a Protestant, and
that Redmond only went to hear mass (if he frequented any place of worship at
all) thought that she might be prevailed upon, on this account, to make a
discovery; but all his endeavors even appeared to be fruitless for a long
time, till Redmond took some occasion to abuse her; then Douglas began to work
on her again, and at last obtained his end. The young woman, according to her
promise to Douglass, took an apportunity to send a messenger to him, and gave
him notice where Redmond was, just as he was going into bed after a hard fit of
drinking. In a little time after a guard came up and took him asleep, and he
was hu^ried to Armagh and put into goal, with above twelve stone of irons upon
him, where he remained till the assizes, and being t^^ed was found guilty of
such a number of facts, What the old women say of his mother's dreams, of her
going to consult an astr^loger upon his birth, and of his having a T^o^ his
breast when born, is an old story and a fiction; though it is certain that his
exploits spread his fame through most countries in Europe. In England he was
called Captain O'H -- n, but in France, Count OF -- n, by all his fraternity.
that he was condemned, and his body ordered to be cut in quarters, and to be
hung in different places, as a terror to others: notwithstanding which he gave
three surprising jumps in court, to show his activity, though so heavily laden
with irons.

However, it is said that he was afterward either enlarged or made his escape
out of prison; for he died at last by the hand: of one of his own relations
(and foster brother) who for the sake of the large reward offered for Redmond's
head, caused his wife to lay a wile for him; and she having betrayed him, under
a pretense of giving him some refreshment, he being weary, stretched himself
down to rest, and was shot through the head as he lay asleep in a bam. He that
shot him had the head carried on a staff, to Armagh, and got the thanks of the
whole country, besides the reward, at the ensuing quarter sessions.

Thus ended the memorable life of that notorious highwayman and robber Redmond
O'H -- n, on whom there was a very curious song composed in Irish after his
death, though never printed. And though some soldiers lost their lives in the
rescue of P -- r, yet he was entirely against it, and intended only to over-do
them by liquor. Kelly was the chief actor in the tragedy, therefore Redmond
ought not to bear the scandal of so foul a deed.


But stories concerning him differ greatly nevertheless, had all his exploits
and actions been recorded, they would have made as remarkable a history as most
of the Irish giants.

The life of Capt. Power, a genteel Robber.
CAPTAIN Power was a younger son of a worthy gentleman, who had a good freehold
or estate Kilvallen, in the county of Cork; but having entered into a suit of
law, contrary to his elder brother's advice, was cast; upon which he ^i^hdrew
privately, and contemned all proceedings at law. 'till a writ of outlawry was
issued out against him, so that he thought himself not secure in any public
place. There had been some difference between him and his brother before that,
and being somewhat disgusted, his high spirit chose to undertake any way of
living rather than submit to the courtesy of friends. He was at length
prevailed upon to try his fortune on the highway, and had great luck; but was
never observed to abuse any travelers unless they opposed him. Some offers
were made for granting him his pardon; yet he was afraid to come in, and
continued a survey or of the roads till his death.

After his refusal of accepting the King's pardon, a proclamation was issued
out, and a reward offered for taking him; but he still pursued his usual
courses, till his character was thoroughly established. It once happened that
an ensign in Cork was informed that Captain P -- r was drinking alone at an ion
on the road leading from Kilworth, and hearing that there was a reward of forty
pounds offered for apprehending him, he went out within file or two of
musketeers, who all entered the house in the evening, before P -- r was aware.
P -- r was sitting in a room or parlour at the end of the house when the
officer came in, and enquired for him, who being told where he was, went into
the room (first having desired admittance) to take share of a bottle with him,
leaving the men together over a pot of ale in the kitchen. After some discourse
our officer challenged him, and said he was his prisoner; but P -- r was too
many for him (...) he fastened the door, and with a pistol cocked and sword
drawn in his hand, demanded the ensign's money: and after he had secured it, he
left the officer bound on the bed, and stole out of the house unpercieved by
the soldiers, who th^^^^^^ the prisoner safe, drank too hard, and then they
marched back to Cork, like so many fools. By this we learn how foolish a thing
it is to trust a prisoner's honor when his life is in danger.

Capt. P -- r made some advances after this, in Lienster, where coming one
evening to an obscure farmer's house, expecting to get a night's lodging, he
observed that the man and his wife were in deep sorrow, which occasioned him to
demand the cause of their grief. After many pauses the farmer at last told him,
that having run in arrears with the landlord, he had caused him to be served
with an ejectment, and that in a few days he would be turned out of possession,
and all the effects he had taken from him; upon this P -- r took compassion on
them, and grew more and more solicitous, 'till he found out what day the
landlord intended to take possession. Then he asked the farmer, "whether he had
any friend at all that would endeavor to help him?" The farmer said he knew of
none. Then said P -- r, "If a friend should be so kind as to lend so much money
(which he understood to be about sixty pounds) as would clear your landlord,
would you repay it again of you could." "Indeed, said the farmer, I would if I
could." Well then, says P -- r, here is the sum; I Will be your friend so far as
to lend it to you only upon our own note;" which he gave him, promising not to
let his landlord know that he had any money 'till he had made all the excuses
that were possible, say even so far as to let him begin to drive the cattle and
turn him out of possession. This passed on very well till the landlord came
with the Sheriff, in order to possess himself: and after the tenant delayed as
long as it was safe, he at last told him, that a friend of his had left so much
money with him to keep, and rather than be turned out a beggar, he would give
it to his landlord and let his friend wait 'till he could rise it.

The landlord accepted the money; but was obliged to give an acquittance in
full for all rent and arrears whatsoever, and then, after having abused his
tenant and called him a rogue and a villain several times, because he did not
pay the money long before that, thinking it was his own, he mounted his horse
and rode homewards, the Sheriff having taken another way.

P -- r in disguise waylaid the landlord on the road, and took all the cash,
with a watch, and some other things of value, from him; and meeting his tenant
two or three days afterward, told him his money was unlucky, for he had lost
it, every penny, and a good deal more with it, on the road, being taken from
him by an highway robber, whom he described as well as he could, not
remembering ever to have seen him. In less than a week, P -- r called at the
farmer's house dressed as he was at first, in order to see how he fared. The
farmer told him the whole story, and how that his landlord was robbed (which he
was little sorry for) on the road. He entertained P -- r very handsomely that
night (not mistrusting that he was the robber) and gave him a thousand thanks
for the use of his money, promising to raise it for him as soon as he could. P
-- r seeing the man's intregrity, desired him to be under no concern for it;
then tearing the note to pieces, bid the farmer adieu.

We have but an imperfect account of the rest of the actions of his life.
However, by all reports, he was very generous to the poor, and often told the
rich that he took their purses to make a distribution among such as were in
want. He was at last betrayed, for a small reward by his brother's servant
maid, who seeming to be his friend, sat drinking with him at an alchouse near
Cork, 'till the got an opportunity of pouring water into the pans of his
blunderbuss and pistols, and then sent privately for the guards, who surrounded
the house and made him aprisoner. He was taken to Cork bound, and being there
tried and found guilty, was according executed, much about the time that
Redmond O'H -- n came first in vogue. He was only dubbed a captain, by reason
of his exploits, by the rest of the society.

At the pla^e of execution, he gave a very kind caution to all young men,
desiring them to shun the company of lewd women. It was by giving himself too
much indulgence with such cattle that he was prevented from accepting his
pardon when offered, which at last brought him to that ignominious death. By
woman (said he) was I enticed to continue in sin, and by a woman was I at last
betrayed, though she pretended to be my friend. Which speech melted the
spectators into tears.

Some passages of the Life of strong John Macpherson, a notorious Robber.
I Could never learn certainly where John Macpherson was born; but his parents
were not so poor but they were able to bequeath him a p^^^ty little income at
their death. He was then about nineteen years of age when the effects came into
his hands, which he made a shift to spend in the company of lewd women and
gamesters in less than three years, in which time he was always a leading man
at hurling, patterns, and matches of football, and acquired such fame by his
wondrous activity, that no stagie person dared to oppose him at any exercise.
He was accounted in his time the strongest man in the nation; he would hold an
hundred weight at arms length in one hand, and would make little or nothing of
twisting a new horse-shoe round like a gad; yet notwithstanding all his
activity, he was soon reduced to poverty, and so, from one step after another,
brought to the gallows. Want of precaution and care in the beginning, often
lays men under difficulties they can never surmount; and men that are bred up
in luxury and idleness, seldom settle themselves rightly to business after.
Nothing is more commendable in youth than industry, it is the bulwark and
preservation of common wealths, and the support of private persons and
families. When vice ha^ settled itself in the bone, no medicine that can be
applied to the flesh can expel it. Of this kind we have an example before us.
This Macpherson, when he had sold his little income, and spent what he had, was
under the necessity of seeking for a livelihood some how. He was a stranger to
work, and it was beneath him to beg, neither could he brook to rely on the
courtesy of his friends, who (as it usually falls out in such cases) began to
look very shy upon him.

Upon this he began to think of a new way of living, and having provided
himself with some weapons and a very good staff, he betook himself to the high
road, fa^ enough from his native place not t^ be known. In his first attempts
when he came up with any one he knew had money, he first requested of them to
lend him some, and if by terror or persuasion he could prevail on them so to
do, he would be pretty moderate, and commonly took but a part; but, on
resistance, he made little or nothing of taking a man by the arm and pulling
him off his horse; he then usually would give him a pretty hearty squeeze,
which seldom failed to bring him into compliance, and to deliver without
further trouble; yet if a man s^ill continued sturdy, his custom was to throw
him over his shoulders, and run away with him to some private p^ace, and there
rifle him: what become of his horse he mattered not.

This was his common and usual way of robbing, which he continued for many
years, very seldom with company, but mostly alone. One ever^i^g he went into a
country house by himself, and (...) he had ca^r^ed all the people he met i^ his
way into another room and s^^^ened the do^^^ he begin to put his plunder in
order for carrying it off; the mean while some workmen that were employed above
came down and set the rest loose, who all sell upon him together, with clubs
and other instruments 'till he was almost overpowered; at last he got hold of
the woman of the house, whom he cast over his shoulders to sk^een himself from
the blows, (knowing very well they would not strike for sear of hurting her)
and ran away with her into a little wo^d just before the house, where he laid
her down, and ^lapped hi^ foot up on her petticoats, to prevent her from
stirring, while the rest stood at some distance holding (...) parley, and
threat^i^g, for they were afraid to do any more; but it was all to no purpose,
he parleyed them out of twenty pieces of gold before he quirted her, and then
left their coa^t.

This method of taking up the women, when he was hard set, he always after
practiced, and it still answered his ends: and these are two examples of his
common way of robbing. He was never known to murder any body; nay, he was very
cautions of striking, unless in his own defense; though in his time he
committed more robberries single hand by far than over Redinond O'H -- n did,
with whom he was acquainted, but none of his gang. However he was at last taken
by treachery, and after being tried and found guilty, was dispatched by the
common finisher of the law, about the year 1^78. As he was ca^^ying to the
gallows he played a fine tune of his own composing on the bagpipes, which
retains the name of Macpherson's tune to this day.

The History of Patrick Fleming, a Notorious robber.
THE parents of Patrick Fleming were very poor people, and when he was born
lived in At^lone, supporting themselves only by hard labor; yet as poor as
they were, they took some ^a^e to send him to school as long as they could
aff^^rd, and, being a boy of ready wit, he learned to read and write tolerable
well in a short time. At thirteen years of age he was recommended to the
countess of Kildare for a footboy; but when he came to get a full belly, he
grew so unlucky and negligent of his business that he was soon dismis^ed. Some
time after, he got into the service of the earl of Antrim, where he committed
so many unlucky tricks, that a man would be tired to rehearse the tenth part of
them; he was soon turned out of the earl's service, though not before he took an
opportunity of conveying out of the house plate and money to the value of 400
l. with which he sled into the county of Roscommon, in Connaught, and hid
himself in a cave near the river Shannon for about a fortnight, never stirring
out but in the evening for a little provision, till the hue and cry was over,
and then he went to Dublin where, for the space of six years, he committed more
robberies than ever was known before in that time; he continued in Dublin for
the space of four years, with the greatest success that could attend a rouge,
'till one Sunday morning making too free with another man's wife, the husband,
though one of his accomplices, vowed revenge and in about three weeks after F --
g, was taken and committed to jail it is thought through his associate's means;
but he found means to make his trial easier than most people expected, though
several indictments were read against him. As soon as he got clear off this
job, he fell to his old trade again, of stealing, robbing and knocking men down
in the night which he continued near two years longer, 'till at length he
became so well known that the people would point him out in the daytime going
along the streets, but were afraid to lay violent hands on him, having the name
of being such a violent rogue and barbarous murderer, and that also in a very
troublesome time: however, it was his fate to be once more seized and committed
to jail in Dublin, where the trial went so hard against him, that he swore he
would never ventue a third trial in the same place, and accordingly, as soon as
he got clear, with one or two of his trusty accomplices, having prepared proper
materials for a tent, they went down well armed and mounted, and set up on the
edge of the b^g of Allen, not carring to venture himself in strange houses at
that time, having fixed his scouts, and learned the roads of the country very
well; his new successes puf^ him up with so much impudence, that his usual
compliment was I am chief lord of the country and collector of this road; you
shall pay tribute to Patrick F -- g. In one morning, with very little
assistance, he robbed no less than 125 men, on the mount of Barrimore, and was
so little afraid of being taken, that he lay within ten miles of the place the
next night, where he gave the servant maid a couple of pieces of gold for some
obligations she had done him, withal telling her how he got them; nay, so great
was his insolence, that his frequent apology to persons of quality, when he met
them on the road, was, I am Patrick F -- g the greatest man by birth in the
kingdom, and the best bred, you must come down to support my grandeur. It was
his luck once, though alone, to have the honor of robbing both the primate and
bishop of Raphoe, as they were riding together in a coach, with six men
attending them; and because they made no resistance, he used them very
honorably, doing no further damage, after borrowing what money and bills they
had, than cutting the reins of the bridles, to prevent a pursuit. Another time
he met with the lady Baltimore, from whom he took 100 l. in money, a diamond
ring and a watch, but not contented therewith, he took her son a child of four
years old prisoner, whom she was obliged to ransom for 300 more in twenty four
hours, le^t F -- g should kill him, as he swore he would, if she refused. Not
long after this, having notice that the archbishop of Tuam was going to Dublin
with 1000 l. in money, he waylaid him, took every farthing, and abused his
servants and horses, for making resistance, after such a manner, that his grace
was obliged to wait at a paltry alehouse three days for a fresh set of horses,
and one of the servants was three months before his wounds were healed.
Nevertheless, the Bishop being well beloved in the neighborhood, and offering
rewards, the country resolved to take Patrick if poss^ole which obliged him to
shift his quarters, and fly into the province of Munster for safety. It^
Munster he committed as many robberies, and playe^ his usual pranks as fast as
ever, scouring the whole country, and sp^ring neither man woman or child, that
refused to gratify him in any request, drinking, whoring, gaming, and playing
the devil in every shape, night and day; 'till at length being apprehended for
robbing a nobleman of 250 l. he was committed to Cork goal; but he found means,
though with great difficulty, to make his escape up the chimney, which prolonged
his life a little longer.

Nevertheless, he continued his villainies after this so long in Munster, that
examinations were sworn against him for murdering five men and two woman, with
a boy of fourteen years of age, at sundry times, besides robbing them of all
they had. And it was said, that having met with Sir Donough O'Brier, he abused
him most grossly, (upon his refusing to deliver upon F -- g's orders) and cut
off his nose and one of his ears with a hanger, though he made a very gallant
resistance; but shortly after a proclamation was issued out, offering a reward
of 100 l. sterling, for the taking of him dead or alive, which obliged him to
shift his quarters to the bog of Allen again, fixing an alehouse near Manooth
for one of his places of rendezvous.

But the devil leaving F -- g in the lurch, the landlord, though one of his
intimates, for sake of the reward, went and informed the sheriff of the county
that he might be taken every night in in the week at his house, but that he had
fourteen men to guard him, well armed: hereupon the sheriff went privately and
consulted with the landlady (who had the reputation of an honest woman, though
her husband was otherwise) how to manage the taking of them; she in pursuance
or his directions, while the robbers were drinking and carousing late at night,
poured warm water into the barrels of all their carbines and pistols, which
soaked into the powder, and rendered, the charges useless. Next morning the
sheriff appeared with a strong guard, and surrounded the house, which Patrick
and his associates surprised at so sudden an attack, fled to their arms in a
kind of confusion which increased the more as they found them of no service.
Thus they were all taken prisoners, and hanged at Dublin, on Wednesday the 24th
of April, 1650. Fleming was hanged in chains not far from the city.

The History of Irish Teague, alias William Macquire, an Irish Robber.
WILLIAM MACQUIRE was born near Athenree in the county of Galway, and by report
(though without any solid foundation, for he gave him no schooling) was the
natural son of an Irish lawyer, who took care and provided for him 'till he was
sixteen years of age in the nature of a poor boy or servant; but the lawer
dying, and Macquire being by nature viciously inclined, fell into bad company,
and lost all the good impressions of his education and religion, retaining
nothing but the brogue upon his tongue, which he could never wear out, though i^
underwent a long course of English exercise. At about twenty years of age he
arrived in England, and soon got into a gang of thieves, among whom he was
known by a number of names, as Macquire, Ballie, Irish Teague, etc. but in the
first attempt which he made at house breaking, he discovered as great a
capacity for that undertaking as ever the great Charles Dempsy did at horse
stealing.

For having made a combination with three other rogues, they broke into a
gentleman's house at Frentwood in Essex, and binding all the people, took away
four diamond rings, a great quantity of plate, and about 600 l. in money; this
was the first attempt, and though he had but three to assist him, they
overpowered no less than ten men and boys, without making the least
disturbance, and tied them every one in such a manner that one could not
relieve another: by which means Teague and his gang had sufficient time to make
off.

After this Macquire, with one assistant, broke into chancellor Jeffreys's
house at Westminster, and stole the purse and mace, which he made his comrade
carry on his shoulder through the park to the house where they lodged, and then
locked them up in a closet; but some of the jewels that were in the purse
happened to fall out in the chamber, and Macquire, being gone into the country,
the landlord in his absence had occasion to go into the room, where finding the
jewels on the floor it gave him a strong suspicion of the roguery, upon which
he broke open a closet door, and found the mace, which he restored to the
chancellor, withal telling him how he got it; for which he was rewarded.
Macquire hearing what had happened, took care to shun his landlord's house for
about a quarter of a year after, 'till at length finding an opportunity, for
the sake of revenge, he broke open his house, and robbed him of money and goods
to the value of eighty pounds, and secured them for his own use. Now Teague
scorning to be a house robber any longer, thinking that it was too mean an
employment, to began to try his fortune on the highway, and stealing an horse
from councellor Thrusby in Burleigh-street on the Strand, and a pair of pistols
from Robert Williams, a goldsmith in George yard Westminster, his first attack
was upon Alexander Oldyss a diminutive son of the muses, both in wit and
stature, who was frequent in paying visits to a patron of his who lived near
Hammersmith, and being potvalliant when Macquire stopped him, he asked him,
with a haughty voice, how ^e durst s^^p any son of the muses on the highway;
it being not only an affront to him, but to App^llo and the sacred nine. Teague
hearing him use such lofty language, which he did not well understand, began to
state at him, and said. What the devil sort of a son is dat, a son of the
Muses? By my troth, if you call yourself a son of some outlandish bitch, I Will
not misdoubt you; but worcester all da^, and by shaint Patrick, I don't care a third
for you, nor Pollo, nor ever a son of a whore in the whole world; so come
deliver your moneys, or I Will be after sending you to hell with the shot in this
pistol. After Oldyss had given a great many flourishes with his sword, he was
obliged to give Teague three pence halfpenny, that being all the money he had
about him; but Teague, not satisfied therewith, took away the poet's sword, the
loss whereof threw him into a fit of sickness, that had like to have cost him
his life.

Another time meeting with lady Overquerque, as she was returning from Bath,
slenderly attended, he desired her to lend what money she had about her,
saying, Madam, af you will lend me what moneys you have about you, because I
have business wid it tomorrow, reckon it out here, and I will give it to you
again; the first place I will meet you; the lady hesitating a while, says
Teague again, though he could neither read or write) madam, If you doubt my word
I will give you my bond. To which the lady answered, here is never a s^rivener.
By my shoul, says Teague, I will maak one myself, but you must let me count the
moneys first. Teague answered, by my snoul and shalvation, madam, I am a
stranger upon the country, and I want moneys, and what is lying good for? af you
lend it to me. I will not give it to you again; and af I rob you I will keep it,
and that is all the difference I make between robbing and borrowing; and so,
madam, give me your moneys quickly, either one way or the other, or I will be
very enruly wid you. Whereupon presenting his pistols, she gave him a purse of
gold, a watch, and two diamond rings.

After this meeting with a lieutenant of the army, near Uxbridge, he bid him
stand and deliver, or he was a dead man. The officer, surprised at such usage,
told him he never knew a highwayman rob any of his coat, because they hazard
their lives in defense of there country. By my shalvation, says Teague, I don't
care a halfpenny for one man above another, and besides, you sort of gentlemen
will fight more for the sake of the women and the ladies, nor you would for
your king or your country, af you were not well paid for it. Let me see how you
will fight me for your honor now; for my troth, your tongue shant secure your
purse. The lieutenant, startled at this speech, gave him six pounds, out of
which Teague returned him ten shillings back to bear his charges.

Afterward meeting with captain Shutter on Hownslow-Health, he demanded his
money: but the captain making a stout resistance, a bloody battle ensued: at
last Teague shot him through the head, and then stripped him of fifty guineas and
a watch, with which he made off. But he was shortly after apprehended, and
hanged at Tyburn, with William Selward, his companion, and eight others, on
Friday, the first of May, 1691.

The Life of Richard Balf, a most notorious Murderer and Highwayman.
THE reputed father of Richard Balf, was a peddler, though but of small account,
who with his wife, was accustomed to travel to fairs and markets up and down
the country, on pretense of getting bread; but, as the story goes, having
learned all the artifice of canting, they got more by begging and cheating than
by fair dealing; and at length by thieving and robbing, made a shift to obtain
the favor of a hempen necklace, which eased them of their care, and was
administered to them by their son Dick, for robbing and murdering in the manner
following. Having cast their eyes upon a lone house in the country, wherein it
was reported the owner kept a considerable sum of money, they had an itching
desire to be at it; and accordingly one night having laid their scheme, (with
their son Dick, not above fifteen years of age, and one more, to assist them)
they entered the house by some stratagem, and the family being fast asleep,
they thought it the safest way to dispatch them; so beginning with the servant
maids, they cut both their throats with a knife, then going to the servant-man,
and served him the same way, also three children, who lay in a room adjoining;
lastly, proceeding to the apartment where the Master and Mistress lay, they
thought it would be convenient to make them co^fe^ where their treasure lay;
and consulting what method to take for the purpose, it was resolved to put the
man to torture; but his answers not satisfying the robbers, they dispatched
them both, and sell to plundering the house. When they had gathered all the
booty they could find in the house they marched off; but as it commonly
happens, that murder is found out by one means or other, so this was happily
discovered by the mu^derers disagreeing among themselves about the dividing the
spoil.

Dick and his parents were all taken up and put into prison, ^^ied and
convicted of murder; but so it fell out, that the judge taking compassion of
the boy's youth, and as no hangman was to be had, the son was granted his
pardon to account of executing his father and mother. It was Dick's comfort,
when they came to the gallows, to hear them say before all the good company,
that they had rather be hanged by their son than by any body else, because they
made no doubt but he would use them as kindly as he ex^ected shortly to be used
himself; which being the dying words of his parents, made him very careful of
tying the ends of the rope fast, to dispatch them the more speedy and surely.

Dick having seen the exit of his parents, was very much discouraged, for a
while, from following their practices, and proposed going to service for an
honest livelihood; but no body being willing to receive him on account of their
exaltation, and time having worn out the good impressions that were made on his
mind by their case, what was b^^d in the b^^e began to ^ppear e^ce more in the
^^^sh; so he betook himself to picking of pockets, till being often in the
chair and ducked in a h^r^e pond (which was a sort of punishment then used for
several kinds of pretty-larceny) he grew tired of that calling, and enlisted
himself into a gang of robbers, who made it their business to steal all kinds
of cattle that came in their way; it would be surprising to hear of the methods
these rogues had of conveying cattle away in the right. But, however, this
trade was attended with so much trouble, and not answering his end, that B -- f
soon grow tired of it, and became a cygaret, whose business is to cut off the
skirts of a coat, gown, etc. or any other part of a garment that hangs loose
when people are at their devotion, or in any public assembly: which not
answering well, he entered himself into a gang of G^umers, who either by
scaling walls with rope ladders, or creeping in at holes and windows in the
night, rob houses privately. It happened one night, that Dick being on an
exploit of this kind, be found a considerable booty of plate, and other
valuable things, worth at least 150 l. which he sell into a blanket held by his
comrades at the bottom of the window, to receive the plunder. He had but two
comrades, and they being brothers seeing so valuable a prize in a small bulk,
concluded to keep it to themselves, and leave Dick to take care of himself: and
accordingly, taking a way the rope ladder, they made off with the prey, and
left b -- f to come down as he could. B -- f, seeing himself outwitted, could
not tell what to do, 'till observing there was a new bedead in the room but
newly corded, he cut ^^e the cord with as little noise as possible, and
fastening one end of it in the room, he let himself down into the street. He
was no sooner on his feet, but he began to meditate revenge, and immediately
posted away to the place of rendezvous, telling his comrades they were all
discovered, and the people wh^m they had robbed were in hot pursuit of then,
just at his heels. Before the words were well out of his mouth, they ran away
helter skelt^r, and left all the booty, both money and plate, behind them; but
Dick had the wit to stay, and secure it for his own use, and would never give
any part thereof to his comrades.

When he had got so much insight and experience in this business as to make
himself a complete master, he goes next into a crew of Wool-combers, whose
business is to snach hats, cloaks, wigs, and women's handherchiefs, etc. off in
the night; but at length being taken in the fact at Galway, by a gentleman who
pursued and overtook him with a sword drawn in his hand, he was committed to
goal and b^rned in the hand for the same offense.

This business not answering his purpose, he took a resolution to commence
highway robber; but being a little at a loss for a good n^g to mount himself
on, he contrived to get one in this manner: He observed there was a neighbor
of ^is landlord's in Galway that had a very well bred gelding of a good size,
very fit for his purpose, and that there was no obstacle to hinder him from
stealing it but the stable door, which was still kept locked; to remove this
difficulty, he went to an old comrade of his whom he knew to be an expert
pick-lock, and agreed with him to open the stable door, the next night at an
hour that was fixed. A heavy shower of rain favoring B -- f's design, be
carried with him four old coarse stockings, and put a little hay in the feet of
them, drew them on the horse, and led him saddled, and bridled through the gate
way, without making any noise. As soon as he had got the horse into the street
(without staying to take off the stocking which he thought would be soon torn
off with riding, in which he guessed right) he mounted and made off, without
taking leave of any body, having taken care to provide himself with a good case
of pistols and a cutlass, beforehand; but never thought proper after to enquire
what time the owner missed his horse, or what search he made after him.

Thus accoutred, and well mounted on a good nag, he rode all night 'till he
came to the house of one of his acquaintance, near Athlo^e, where he lay
concealed with his hors^ 'till the ^ext, resolving not to make a public
appearance 'till he got a good distance from Galway.

He then moved to the north and began his new trade of 'Stand, and deliver,' as
is usual with men of his rank, and had such wonderful success in his
e^terprizes in ^^bbing passengers on the road, that above fifty travelers had
been compelled to deliver him their purses of considerable value, in six mouths
time, which made the people so timorous, that they carried no money about them,
except traveling charges: by which means Dick often m^t with disappointments,
which enraged him to that degree, that in revenge, as he called, it, he neither
spared man, woman, or child, that fell in his way.

Such disappointments made him think it necessary to change his quarter, for a
while; and accordingly, having fixed his place of rende^vous, he scoured the
other three provinces with the like success, and thought the whole nation
scarcely large enough to furnish him with occ^s^^^^; and like death, never took
any denial 'till he was satisfied.

One day, as he was hunting in quest of his game, he met the earl of D -- l,
between Ballyshannon and Sligo, in his coach, and made his servants prisoners,
and rode up to the earl, expecting large booty; but finding he had no more than
150 guineas about him, B -- f was very much dissatisfied at it, and ordered him
to draw a bill of 60 l. on a certain goldsmith in Dublin, to ransom his coach
horses from being killed. As soon as Dick received the bill, (leaving the
servants tied) he cut the harness, and made what speed he could to Dublin,
where he received value for the note without being apprehended.

He was so notorious for robbing on the mount of Barrimore, that a guard-hou^e
was b^^lt by order of the government in the mi^^tle of it, to secure passengers
from being robbed by him; which was continually supplied with a company of
soldiers, either from Londonderry, Cole^ain, or Belfas^.

This being B -- f's head quarters at that time, he was obliged to shift; so
moving toward Lorras, he finds new quarters; where one day meeting with Genesis
In -- y, though he had several attendants waiting on him, Dick resolutely rode up
to him, and commanded, him to stand and deliver; but the General refusing to
obey his orders, a sharp engagement began betwixt them. The General d^ew out a
pistol, but before he could have it ready, his horse was shot under him; the
pistol in his hand went off in the fall, without doing any harm, and B -- f
took care to secure the other: The groom was the first that came to assist his
mas^er, who seeing him in such danger went up resolutely, thinking to seize
upon Dick, and ^^ld him 'till hi^ fellow servants came to his assistance; but
the poor fellow had the misfortune to ^e shot dead on the spot in making the
attempt. The General feeing his horse and man both ^ead, and B -- f continue
his ^esolution to conquer or die, conce^^ed to let him take 80 guineas, a
di^mond ring, and a gold watch, with which he ^ode off, and left the General to
ride the groom's horse.

Not for this action alone, but for several full as bold and daring, B -- f by
this time was become so notorious that a reward of 400 l. from the government,
by proclamation was offered for the taking him: This encouraged several people
to join themselves in parties to go in quest of him: but be being timely
informed of it, employed some spies whom he kept in fee, to give him always
notice before hand of their coming out. Accordingly one morning, as he sat by
the sire in one of his houses or rendezvous, he had notice that ^i^e men were
in pursuit of him, and that they were very near, intending to search that
house. B -- f, not knowing which road was safest to take, was rosolved once to
stand and sight for his life, but withal not without having recourse to some
stratagem. Then having exchanged coats with the man of the house, who was his
confidant, he ordered him to go out at a back window, and hide himself in a
barn behind the house, just as the men came before the door. The fellow acted
his part so well, that they saw him go through the window, and likewise in at the
barn door, when he took care to hide himself effectually by going under some
straw where there was a communication made under ground between the house and
the barn: in the mean while, Dick was so well fixed in his fortification, that
he might have shot ten men without any harm.

When the pursuers saw the man, whom they took for B -- f, enter the barn, they
went directly to it, setting a guard at the door, whilst the rest examined the
outside for fear he should escape at any window or private hole: but finding no
such place they all came to the door, resolved on a thorough search. When they
had searched on a long time to no purpose, they began to move a great heap of
straw from one end of the barn to the other, big with hopes of finding what
they came for, leaving only two at the door. While they were thus employed, B
-- f comes unawares, in disguise upon the centi^els, first discharging a piece
upon them, and then drawing his sword, which terrified them so much, that they
fled to the further side of the barn for sear, while he shut the door upon
them, and ^^^^ened it so secure that it (...) ^^possible for them (...) g^t out
without help; and when he had done, set fire to the barn, mounted his horse,
and bid them get out as well as they could.

After this he began to be more and more afraid of staying in his own country;
so stying to Donaghadee, a seaport town in the north of Ireland, he took
shipping, and landed at Port-Patrick in Scotland; where meeting with an
handsome agreeable landlady, he picked up acquaintance with her, which gave
occasion to her husband to be jealous, who in revenge, understanding well
enough what he was, caused b^^ to be seized and sent over to Ireland again; He
was brought pinioned through all the country to Dublin, committed there to
Newgate, and shortly after was tried and condemned. While he was under sentence
of condemnation, he ^ffered five thousand pounds to save his life, but the
government was not to be bribed to save a ro^^e from the gallows, so he was
ordered to die, and accordingly hanged he was at Dublin, on Friday the 25th of
May. 1702, ag^d 29 years, and then hanged in chams on the mount of Bar^sinore
in the province of Ulster.

Jack Balf and his brother (of said family) were born some miles from Dunlaven,
on the mountains of Wicklow; Jack was pu^ apprentice to a stocking weaver, but
was never suspected of misbehaviour till after his brother's suspension on the
three-legged tree at Stephen's Green, soon after which he made an alteration in
his business, and turned surveyor of the roads, without license. And as he had
been bred on the mountains, he first chose Tallow road, as it lay next to his
inaccessible lurking places in that country, where he committed such a number
of robberies on passengers as to put all the nation in dread of him: But his
manner of robbing a certain most eminent council being so very singular, I
thought proper not to omit it here.

The counselor had been in Dublin all Michaelmas term, where having fleeced a
great number of geese, he was returning home to Munster, with the feathers, a
little before Christmas; of which honest Jack Balf having previous
intellegence, contrived the following project, in order to become a partner
with the lawyer, which he luckily effected, near Blessingt^n, as follows: when
Jack had notice that the lawyer, with sundry other gentlemen, had left Dublin,
attended by several servants all armed for the protecting their store, he
placed himself at a private house near the road 'till they passed by; then
plunging his horse into water, to wet him all over, he mounts and gallops after
company, and soon overtook them, with hat in hand, puff^^g and blowing, as if
he had rode at that rate a dozen miles; upon which he immediately enquires for
the counselor, alleging that he had an extraordinary case to lay before him,
and said, that he had followed him post haste from Dublin, where he missed of
him by coming in too late the night before. Having thus deceived the company,
and appearing like a gentleman, he was introduced to the lawyer, whom he
presented with a fee of six guineas, earnestly desiring him to hear the case
out of hand, for he would be satisfied with the opinion of no other; then he
pulls out a paper touching the state of his case, which as it requied privacy,
he prevailed on the counselor to ride slowly for a while, 'till it was read to
him: in the mean time the rest of the company went on and left them behind;
which as soon as Jack perceived, and, a convenient place offering, he draws out
a pistol, claps it to the lawyer's breast, and demands his money; which it
seems was very considerable. The lawyer, astonished at this sudden change of
his behavior, began to hesitate, like a young orator at the bar, to prolong
the time; but Jack wanted no trifling, 'Deliver, or death' was the word; and so
the lawyer gave him a purse of 300 pieces of gold. Upon which Jack took his
leave of them all, and fled directly to the mountains, where they thought to
pursue him; but the day being short, and Jack's roads impassible for strangers,
they went on homewards, where ha^^^ ^^rived, the counselor pursued his folios
til^ the ^^^lowing term, and then returned to Dublin, ^^ere he had the
pleasure, a few months after, of speaking a good word for honest Jack at the
bar, who by the general voice of court and country, was voted to the care of
the finisher of the law, and accordingly executed at Stephen's-Green, aforesaid
where his brother had been exalted to the same dignity but a short while before.

B -- f's' dwelling house remains to this day, on the side of the mountain near
ballimore; it contains two rooms, andis situated in a shrubbery, on the side of
a hill, environed with rocks, which makes it difficult of access, even to those
that knew it; and being thatched with heath under the cover of trees, is not to
be seen any distance, though one may see from thence the whole country on all
sides.

The History of James Butler, a notorious Highwayman, Robber, and Murderer.
JAMES BUTLER was born and bred in Kilkenny, and in his pupilage kept pretty
much to school; but his learning did him little service, though he spoke Latin
pretty fluently. When he arrived to man's estate he enlisted himself a soldier
in lord Gal way's regiment, and went with the army to Spain, where they had not
been long before he deserted to the Spaniards, as his favour^^^ party, but
meeting with some usage among them that he did not relish, he soon grew tired
of a ^^litary life, and gave the Spaniards the go-by also. Thinking himself in
danger in Spain, and not finding a convenient opportunity of returning home,
his fancy led him into Andalusia, where he for no for a mo^ntebank, and had
wonderful success in raising his reputation and performing cures, that at
length he undertook the method of easing the men of troublesome wives, who were
taken to him by wholesale: and this brought more grist to his mill than any
other part of his practice. So great was his fame at last, that he outwitted
the famous Dr. Thornhill, who offered to be his merry Andrew, upon condition
that he would teach him his Irish assurance, but whether Thornhill did it to
get rid of his ce^npetitor or not, I cant tell; however it happened that he was
discovered, and to prevent danger made the best of his way to Venice, where he
set up for a conjurer; but not managing this business so well as the former,
success failed him, and he joined with a company of banditti (a kind of
highwaymen so called in Italy.) While he was in this company, they had the good
fortune one morning to meet with a fat, lusty, medicant friar whom they robbed,
taking from him to the value of 20,000 l. which he was going to carry to Modena
for the widow of the late King James II. queen dowager of England; but the
captain of the gang dividing the booty, ordered Butler but a small part not
half his portion, which stomached him so much that he left them, and went to
Florence, and by this time had learned to speak both Spanish and Italian. While
he was at Florence, his curiosity led him to go and see a man executed, where
he singled out a young gentleman, with whom he had some confabulation; and
among the rest of his discourse, he said, 'the man was a fool for suffering
himself to be taken.' At these words, the gentleman taking him to be a man of
resolution, carried him to a tavern, and having sounded him pretty well,
offered him 500 pieces of gold to murder an uncle of his, that he might enjoy
his estate. B -- r assented to the proposal, and went immediately to one of the
banditti, with whom he agreed concerning the matter of the murder; and taking
him along with him, about eleven o'clock at night, to the old man's house, they
made a quick dispatch of his life. This being done and the reward paid them, as
soon as B -- r got a convenient opportuninity, he likewise put an end to the
young man's life, to prevent him from discovering, and for the same reason in a
little time afterward he murdered his comrade in like manner.

But having thus committed three murders, the rumor whereof spread far and
near, he grew a little afraid of his mother's calf-skin, and ^ied directly to
Paris, where, he soon introduced himself into Cartouche's gang, with whom he
often went out in quest of prey; but they not always distributing the booty
equitable, as he thought, he ventured to go out one morning alone, and in his
survey, having notice that a young gentleman of Campaign, was come to Paris on
purpose to study, he met him, and accosted him pretending to be a scholar also,
and then taking him to the college of Navarre, he led him through the walks, on
pretense of entertaining him with some new discourses, 'till they came to a
remote c^rner and then he robbed him. But beginning to grow too notori^us in
France, and not over well liked by his comrades neither, he packed up his awls,
and went into Holland; and in his travels overtaking a genteel young woman near
Rotterdam he began to make love, and grow very sweet upon her; she seemed at
f^^t coy, but after some discourse had passed, upon further application, she
grew more familiar, and agreed to pass for his wife, and lie with him that
night upon condition not to meddle with her without her consent; to which he
agreed and gave his oath to perform the obligation. However not being able to
^each the H^gue, they stopped short at an inn on the road, where, after supper
the young lady retired with her landlady to the bed chamber leaving her
pretended husband and the host in company together, who drank pretty heartily,
the one for joy of his expecting pleasures, and the other for sake of his own
interest, till B -- r grew something mellow; at length he went to bed, where
he found his mistress according to his heart's desire, with whom he spent great
part of the night in caresses and embraces, 'till at length being fatigued with
excess of love, and overwhelmed with wine, he f^ll fast asleep. As soon as his
supposed wife saw daylight, (and perceiving how seenre he lay,) she rose and
casting for her husband's portmanteau, under pretense of getting some linen,
took out of it about 300 pieces of gold; this being done to her liking, she
ordered the ostl^r to saddle her husband's horse for her, to go and pay a
friend of here is a visit, but took ca^e, to ride off, and let none of them hear
any more of her afterward. When B -- r awakened, threw his arms about
expecting to grasp his dear mistress; but finding himself disappointed, in
order to make enquiry about her, and to know the time of the day, he called the
landlord who told him, 'his lady was a very early woman, for she had rid abroad
three or four hours before: Surprised at this news, B -- r started up, and ran
for his portmanteau, which when he had searched, he immediately found how
finely he was tricked; yet he could not find in his he^^^ to asperse her, or
much to blame herself, becau^^ he lived by tricking. However thus outwitte^ as
he was, he sold his lady's horse, and having paid his reckoning, with the
remainder of the money he made the best of his way to England, where fortune
forsaking him, the lady poverty come to pay a visit and could never be
persuaded to abandon him 'till she had brought him to a very low ebb. Being
reduced to this condition, he happened one day to pick up a fresh acquaintance
with Mrs. Impudence, who accompanied him and two others to King's gate in
Gray's-Inn lane, where they attacked and stopped a coach; but finding a
vigorious resistance, were obliged to hurry, and ride off as fast as they
could: However, B -- r was pursued, taken and committed to Newgate; but being
only found guilty of an assault, for which he was fined 100 l he was kept in
confinement for 12 months; yet in that time he found means to get a woman or
two with child, who were put in prison for debt. At length procuring his
liberty, he fell into his old courses on the highway, in conjunction with one
Nodes, an upholsterer's son by Fleet-ditch; but they had not continued the
trade long before they were both taken at Holloway, and being committed to
Newgate, were afterward hanged at Tyburn in the year 1716. Nodes being in the
26th year of his age; and Butler in the 28th, who was, buried in St. Andrew's
churchyard, at the charge of lewd women, who also supported him in prison.

The History of John Mulhoni, a highwayman.
JOHN MULHONI was born in Connaught; but our author (not being willing to
expose his family, which on his mother's side was of some repute) has concealed
both his parents and the place of his birth. However he informs us, that being
desirous of an employment, his friends obtained for him the queen's letter, and
put him aboard of her majesty's ships of war, in which he served several years
in the Meditetrranean, both about Messina in Sicily, and several other ports;
having quit this vessel, he went aboard a privateer, in which he had very great
success in taking pirates, whereby he go^ a large quantity of money. Afterward
he had the good fortune to be advanced to a considerable post in another of her
majesty's ships of war, which was sent into the Balt^c, to observe some motions
in the North; but upon return of the fleet he was discharged with several
others. Being out of employment in London he soon found out ways of exonerating
his pockets of the pay he had received for his service, and returned into
Ireland to visit his friends, in a very mean condition, which gave them a
suspicion of his ill management, and caused them to take but little notice of
him. Disgusted at such treatment, he sought new company, and soon became
acquainted with one Cahoon, a gamester, and perhaps not much richer than
himself, who furnished him with materials for the highway; where, in
conjunction with James Carrick, they committed a number of robberies; one in
particular was on Mr. Dil^on of above 300 l. who had that same night broken the
bank, at the Pharoh-table, and another on Richard Nutley, Esquire in which last
Cahoon was taken and afterward executed. Upon this Mulhoni and Carrick,
carrying with them about ^0 l. went over to London, where they set up for
gentlemen, and frequented the play houses and drawing rooms, like pe^s^ns of
distinction, 'till at length Mulhoni got acquainted with a rich merchant's wise
on the Strand, who out of stark love and kindness supplied him from time to
time with money to support him in his extravagancies for about a year, 'till
she died. During the time of his familiarity with this gentlewoman, he picked
up acquaintance with Smith, Butler, and Campbell, whom he afterward assisted
in committing many robberis on Finchly Common and other places, 'till Smith and
Campbell quarrelling about dividing the prey, Campbell was killed in the fray,
which dissolved the knot.

Then Mulhoni and Carick picked up Daniel Carrol as a man fit and proper for
making a third person, being of a daring spirit, and fit to undertake any
enterprise; and with his assistance they robbed Matthew Joncour, Esquire on Epping
forest, from whom they took twenty guineas, two diamond rings and his and his
lady's watches.

Soon after this they met with the Cambridge and Huntingdon stage-coaches,
which they sound pretty well filled with persons of distinction, from whom they
took a considerable booty, and supplied themselves with money enough to support
their extravagancies 'till September following in the year 1719, about which
time, finding their stock pretty low, they took their posts on the high read
again, where meeting with the Southampton, Salisbury, and Taunton Dean coaches,
and not being able to accomplish their undertaking without blows, during the
engagement some of the company slipped aside and raised the country, who
pursued our Irish gentlemen so close, for three miles end-ways, that they were
within an ame's ace of being taken, making their escape with great difficulty.
This put Carrick into so great a panick, that he resolved to forsake so
dangerous a way of living. and advised his partners to do the like: 'till
Mulhoni upbraided him with cowardice, said. "Sink or swim, I Will go on with the
game 'till I get money enough to make a figure in my own country," which
occasioned Carrick to alter his intentions, and make a new league with his
comrades; so swearing upon the holy evangelists to be ever true to one another,
they proceeded, and took possession of the highway once more. But to be more
private than before they took a lodging at Wapping, where they had not
continued song before they pretended to have business in Scotland, and were
several times making a sham agreement with Adrian Van Stoken to carry them
thither in his vessel: But while this was in agitation, they took notice that a
Norway master lodged a bag of 100 l. in their landlord's hands, who was a
slopseller, and having observed where he laid it, they set their heads together
to contrive how to bring it off with the least danger; and pursuant to their
agreement, they secured the bag, which they conveyed privately away by night,
and took new lodgings in Tothill-street, Westminster.

But Jonathan Wild, who was likely to be a great sufferer by this action,
offered a reward of 20 l. to take them for the fact; upon which, not thinking
themselves safe here, they removed to Oxford, where Carrick happened to see Dr.
Hosken in a coffee house whom they had formerly robbed. Whether the Doctor knew
him or no^ is a query, though he asked him several questions as "What countryman
he was, how long he had been in England; and where he was going?" and the like:
but Carrick hearing him say he was going to the vice chancellor's began to
suspect that he was discovered, and made the best of his way (as soon as he got
an opportunity) to his companions, to whom he related the story; upon which
they all agreed to remove their quarters with speed to Conventry, where he held
a consultation to know, whether they had best go home to Ireland or return to
London and pursue their old courses. Carrol seemed positively bent to forsake
his old courses and go back to Ireland among his friends; but Mulhoni and
Carrick overruled him, and persuaded him to return with them to London again,
where they arrived in a little time: But the daily instances of the seizures of
highway men, and constantly hanging them, together with the small favor
Irishmen were shown by English juries. insomuch that it became a proverb, "an
Irishman's name is enough to hang him." I say all these considered together
discouraged our heroes so much, that they no longer adventured to survey the
high roads on horeback, but bethought themselves of a new method of making
attempts, which was attacking passengers on foot by night in the public
streets; and more effectually to succeed in these new enterprises, they made it
their business to pick acquaintance with the servants of persons of quality
that attended the Whitehall, St. James's, the Smyrna, offender and other
chocolate houses, in order to learn of them where their masters generally spent
the evening and to what place they retired afterward; and having received
information they commonly took care to way-lay them, and made the best hand
they could of their captures. By and such like stratagems, they seldom passed a
week whenever they were in want, without making sure of some considerable Prize.

It was customary with them when they met a chair conveniently with any one in
it, for two of them to stop the men that carried it, while the third robbed the
gentleman; but when they made an attack on a coach with but one servant behind,
one was ordered to each side, and to have an eye on the footman, whise the
third stopped the driver till the seat was performed. After this manner they
robbed a Scotch gentleman, whom they had observed to receive a sum of money in
gold, from a banker near Hungerford market; and after that a lady in a chair
within three or four doors of her own house in Park place as she was returning
from paying the countess of Walsingham a visit in St. James's palace, from whom
they took a purse of ten guineas, a gold watch, and a diamond ring: Likewise in
the same month four gentleman in a coach, from whom they took two silver
watches, and swords, and about 3 l. in money; fourthly on the third of March
following, they robbed a gentleman and three ladies in another coach, from whom
they took about 20 l. in value. The next they took into the secret, as they
called it, was an old courtier, who had been visiting a young lady in Great
Albemarlestreet, from whom they took a diamond ring and a gold watch, but no
money, the young lady having prevailed on him, to leave that with her.

The sixth adventure was at Marybone in August, 1721, where observing that a
baronet with one servant attending him had received a large purse of gold, they
dogged him on his way home to a field, near the bordered house, and took above
200 guineas from him, with some silver, a diamond ring and a watch, then giving
the silver to his man, they padded the hoof and made their ecape: However the
gentleman advertised the robbery, offering a larger reward for the watch (in
the news papers.) than it could be sold for; upon which they sent it privately
to the place appointed for receiving it, and got the reward, without being
asked any questions.

The next robbery they committed was in December following (and as they fully
proposed should be their last) when having moved their quarters nearer to
Convent-Garden, in order to be less remote from the gambling tables, in and
about the little Piazza, Bow-street, Charles-street, and Bridges-street, they
took notice of a Frenchman of quality, who lodged at a house on the paved
stones in St. Martin's lane, that had stripped most of the adventurers at
hazard; upon this they followed him, about one in the morning, until he came to
the corner of Bedfordbury, where stopping the chair, they made the men turn two
or three yards down a bye alley, and then robbed him of 230 pieces of gold, his
watch, ring, gold headed cane, and sword, which hearing the noise of men's feet
behind, they took to their way through Rosestreet, to Mulhoni's lodging in
Hart-street.

Though they were now put into a condition of living creditable, ^et we may
observe, that by playing cards, dice, etc. and keeping company with lewd women,
they were reduced, in a little time, to their primitive condition, poverty: and
sitting one day accidentally at the Rose-tavern, in Bridges-street, they began
to consult how they should retrieve their fortunes once more. The first attempt
they made afterward was but in vain, having dogged two gentlemen in their
chairs, from thence into Tavistock-street, to no purpose: but agreeing to meet
again at the Rose the night following, they staid there until it grew pretty
late, and then went out in quest of prey. As they were passing down little
Queen Street, they espied -- Young Esquire in his chair, which they caused to be
stopped in manner aforesaid, until they robbed him of 42 l. in money, a gold
watch, a crystal snuff box, and a silver bilted sword. But the watch hearing
some n^ise at a distance, came up with speed, and being informed of the matter,
pursued the robbers several ways, an Mulhoni had the misfortune to be stopped
by a watchman in the passage near the duke of New-castle's house in
Lincoln's-inn-sields as he was running away; but proving too strong for the
watchman, he broke loose anc got from him, just as another watchman was coming
up with his dog, which being set at Mulhoni, he seized him ^n the first
quartier of the field, and held him fast 'lill his master and the other came
up, who secured him in the watch-house all night: The next day being committed
to Newgate, after several examinations, he confessed the robbery, and many
others, impeaching both Carrick and Carrol, his confederates and countrymen;
but that not excusing him, he was prosecuted for the last robbery, and hanged
on the 18th of July, 1722, seeming very penitent according to the principles of
his religion, dying a Roman Catholic.

The History of Charles Dempsey, alias Cahier na Cappul, the renowned
horse-stealer.
THE father of this Cahier was a man of as great note among the rapparees, in
the reign of King James, as any that ever escaped the gallows; though after the
kingdom was restored to its former privileges by king William's forces, he left
off that practice pretty much, and lived like the rest of his countrymen. He
had several sons there whereof afterward became very notorious, viz. Daniel,
Charles and Luke. Daniel was put to school in his youth, 'till he obtained the
reputation of a good scholar; but not being fond of going abroad to finish his
studies, chose to stay at home and lead the life of his brother, rather than be
put into orders, (for he was intended for a priest.) When he arrived to mans's
estate, he was too easily drawn into be a clerk and register to his his brother
Cahier, who could neither read nor write; and at length, by following his
pattern, was brought to the gallows, and executed along with him in August
1735. Their brother Luke would have had the same fate, only that he fled the
country, though he never arrived to half the dexterity of Charles in the art of
horse hiding. They all understood the canting language pretty well, yet made no
use of it but upon proper occasions which made several of their neighbors
think there was more laid to their charge than they deserved, 'till time made
the truth manifest. But as our design here is only to give the history of
Charles Dempsey, let us omit circumlocutions and proceed.

This Charles Dempsey, alias Cahier na Cappul was born on the lands of
Glenmalier, near Ballibrittas, in the Queen's County, and in his childhood was
kept mostly at his foster-father's, where he learned to speak Irish, but little
or no English. From his infancy, it was observed that he was much addicted to
lying and defrauding his companiona, little children, out of their playthings,
and was so extraordinary fond of horses and riding, that before he arrived to
the age of five years, be could ride and stick on a wild horse better thau a
great many men; a thing seldom known. It Is an old proverb, and commonly taken
for granted, "that he that is born to be banged will never be drowned." Nor has
it been more apparently verified in the life of any person than in his, for at
the age aforesaid, being prompted by his natural inclinations to ride one three
years old colt, he persuaded a man, to put him on his back, though he had nothing
but a collar on his head; but not being any way capable of managing the young
beast, he ran headlong' with him into the Barrow, and swam it, though there was a
very high flood, and the stream rapid: He held his grip by the mane very well
till he got to the further side, but striving to land at a bad place, the bank
broke under the beast's breast, and sunk with it under water for a moment, and
poor Charles was washed off with the current, which carried them both down the
river near 50 yards, till the colt found footing, and plunged out; yet he held
a fast grip of the collar till he got on dry ground, though he was shortly after
taken up for dead, and with some difficulty recovered. After this he used
frequently to say, in Irish, he would not fear drowning if he were to sail in a
turf kish, neither was he afterward any thing afraid of the Barrow water, for
he made several dangerous adventures across to escape the hands of his pursuers.

As he grew more cautious of pilfering publicly than when he was young (not
that he thought it any sin, but in dread of the law) he managed his affairs so
cunningly as to lay the facts always on others, because he had an inveterate
hatred to the gallows and the courthouse after Sir Toby's death.

From a child he had an ill-favored aspect, and in his countenance betrayed a
deceitful heart, that is, he always carried a rogue's face, though his brother
Daniel was a handsome portly man, and of seemly behavior. His English was but
broken at best, and sometimes he pretended to none at all, as will appear by
the sequel: And as the saying is, Save a thief from the gallows and he will cut
your throut, so it was with him; for his ingratitude was so great, and he had
so tittle fidelity, that he made no scruple of accusing his nearest relations,
or even his landlord, nay persons no ways guilty or concerned, to save himself.

At the age of twelve years he began to practice the art of decoying and
catching horses, in which he acquired so much skill, that he made no difficulty
of laying hands on the wildest colt, and horses that had been handled, seemed
to fall into his clutches of their own accord. Perhaps some reader would expect
that I should give a particular account of his management in this affair, but
as our intent in publishing this history, is only to put honest people on their
guard against robbers and rogues, it can be no way necessary, neither it
expedient to teach a thief how to catch a horse, or to steal: If I can show an
honest man how to outwit a rogue, or put a trick on him, it is as much as can be
expected; and verily that was my chief design in publishing this book.

But it fame be true, it will be entirely needless to mentionany particulars:
the country people will have and family do believe it was by a kind of
witcharast, or charm, that he decoyed and entrapped horses, and taught others
to do so; and the affirm that he received this charm from a witch in the county
of Monaghan, (with whom he was very intimate) for some singular services he had
done her. However, the following relation will make it seem probable that his
father before him had the like charm; for which reason, I Am more than half
inclined to dissent from the vulgar opinion, and conclude, that this magic was
inherent in the family, and runs in the blood.

The story was related by a gentleman thus:

"In the beginning of queen Ann's reign, I went to see a friend of mine near
Abbeleix, and having arrived at the place, I walked about the fields in the
evening alone, and when I came near to the bog, I found I had occasion to ease
nature; I chose a convenient place under a hedge for that purpose, but before I
had finished the discharge of my office, there appeared through the hedge a man
before me, driving some horses very quietly into a corner, one whereof he took
hold of him by the near foreleg, and held him fast 'till he threw a shert rope
about his neck, then he vaulted on him with more agility than ever I saw a
miller do on his sacks: In this posture with a long stick in his hand, he drove
the colt (he was never handled before) across the bog, till he got out of my
sight, plunging and leaping to such a degree all the way, that one would have
thought if the old boy were on his back he had but a dull chance from coming
off without a broken neck; and by the noise they made, I conjectured they might
have gone a mile at the same rate before I left the place. I had no notion of
rapparees being out at this time, and thought it might be some one that owned
the colt that had made so free with him, till returning to my friends, I told
the story and then they all suspected, as it really was, from the manner of
catching the colt, that old Dempsy (tho he had been quiet a long time) had come
to pay them a visit." Thus the gentleman ended his story, and now to preceed to
Charles.

His foster father was a tenant under Major P -- t, who once as he was riding
out to take a review of his land, took notice of young Charles's activity in
riding horses; upon which he had him sent home, to him, in order to be an
attendant on his groom, and to learn him to speak English; where he behaved
tolerable well and modest for a month or two and then he began his waggish
tricks. "The groom and another servant happening to have some difference
between themselves, Charles was resolved to wind it up to the highest, and
bring a battle about if possible: they had often been jarring and sparing; and
as the groom lay in a room under a hay loft, through which there was a private
hole wide enough for a man to pass through, the young rogue took an
opportunity, in the groom's absence, to drop a large sur-reverence at the foot
of his bed, not forgetting to besprinkle it a little. When the groom was going
to make his bed, what should he lay his hand first upon but the t --, which all
bedaubed him, and threw him into such a fit of anger, that he vo^ved to be
revenged of his fellow servant in the morning, whom he suspected and nobody
else. He went not to bed that night, but sat up, and as soon as the master came
out the next day, made his complaint to him. His master could hardly forbear
smiling at the joke, though it was a dirty one; yet he showed a very great
resentment to the other servant who was accused, though the fellow who was
innocent, utterly denied that he knew any thing of the matter. All this gave
the groom no satisfaction, but to loggerheads he would and did go with the
other, who proving too hard for him, the groom was worsted and obliged to give
out; then the other, and all that took his part reported that the groom had S
-- t his own bed and that he laid it on another with no other view than to
excuse himself; which getting wind, he was so jeered about it, that he had no
quietness, till he quitted his service and went away.

There were several young gentlewomen in the house, who were very glad of the
groom's departure, because he was very ready in making complaints against
themselves to the old gentleman; from thence Charles took occasion to let the
young ladies into the secret, who approving of his management, employed him in
several little affairs and about messages not proper to mention here. But it
happened once in the fruit reason, that the young gentlewomen had a great
desire for some choice fruit out of the orchard, into which they were refused
admittance by the major; upon this they employed Charles to rob the orchard,
who getting up very early by break of day, the next morning and without staying
to put on his breeches, crept through a hole in the roof of the privy-house,
adjoining the orchard, and went to pillaging the trees, where he filled a large
chequer apron, with the choicest fruit, and was making ready to return. There
was a clergyman that lodged in the house, who had got a touch of the country
disease and was somewhat very much out of order, and having occasion to give
speedy vent, had repared to the coffee house for that purpose while the boy was
on his expedition. As the gentleman sat on his seat, and was stooping forward,
the boy came to the hole, where, without looking before him as he was
descending, the apron untied, and all the fruit came tumbling down about his
ears; and at the same moment Charles fell with his legs on each side of the
clergyman's ^^^k, and by the weight of the fall, threw him on his face, in this
posture they lay wedged together in a nook, for near the space of a minute,
before Charles could disengage himself; and the clergyman's surprise being
heightened more and more upon feeling nothing but naked skin about him he
fainted quite away; and lay-still on the ground; the boy thinking he had killed
the gentleman, ran away with all speed, and came back no more to his service:
But the clergyman who could not see him, and was as much terrified as the boy,
(without suspecting him in the least) went in and told the story: some pitied
him, others could hardly forbear smiling; but nobody could find out the truth,
but the boy being missing two or three days, and the young gentlewomen knowing
the apron that was left behind, called to mind the exploit they sent him about,
and so conjectured that it could be none else but young Dempsey, who had
affrighted the poor clergyman into a sit.

In days of his youth there was a miller, at the wind mill near Ballybritas, a
fellow very fit for his purpose with whom he had picked an acquaintance.
Charles had often been tampering with him to come into his measures; but the
fellow had imbibed such strange notions of a Judge, that he thought he must be
something more than mortal, to decide and give judgment on criminal causes;
Nay, he imagined the Judge knew the truth of every complaint that was brought
before him, before he heard it; for which reason, he was afraid of entering
into any affair that might bring him before one, 'till he was fully informed
what kind of a thing a Judge is. Charles to remove these scruples, prevailed on
the fellow, who was very desirous of knowing, to go along with him to Mary
borough assizes, where they heard some causes tried; which satisfied the
miller's curiosity so far, that he told Cahier, as they were returning home,
that a Judge was like one of themselves, and nothing else but a man, and that
he would be nothing afraid of entering in the lists with Charles as soon as he
pleased; accordingly the fellow was enlisted and put into employment by his
master.

By this time Charles had picked up acquaintance in most parts of the kingdom
for putting his designs into execution. He fixed five or six of his own
relations in Upper Ormond and Ossory, and as many in the counties of Leitrim,
monaghan, and Derry, besides a vast number of receivers and assistants in
almost every hole and corner in the country; so that nothing went amiss with
him. He had likewise never less than four apprentices at a time, who were
always bound for the term of seven years and paid a pretty round sum of money
for learning his art and mystery, in which he had such great skill, that boys
were sent to him all the way from the county of Kerry, to be bound. Perhaps he
was the first Irish rogue that ever thought of such a stratagem; for had he
taken a thousand pounds for teaching a boy to catch or disfigure a horse or cow
only, I question whether he could be hanged by our laws for it; and by the
sequel, we may observe that he always acted in such a manner as to be capable
of evading the force of the law, if possible, though he was as great a rogue as
has been hanged.

He had besides his Satyrs, receivers and apprentices, a number of spies and
setters, whose business only was to make observations, and give notice what
cattle (and where they) might be most safely conveyed away; and these had no
communication with the Satyrs or drivers themselves. Whenever such notice was
given to Charles, an express was immediately dispatched to some one or more of
the Satyrs, with a description of such beast or beasts, which, without any more
words, was sufficient to be understood. By such means as this the downright
thievery could never be proved on Charles, though every body knew that he was
receiver general, and that his servants were all paid by the piece, so much a
beast for officiating; but how Daniel kept his accounts is a secret.

He had private places for hiding stolen cattle of all kinds in; and at any
time when he thought proper, would order such horses as came from Leinster side
or Munster, down to his correspondents in the North, who either would send them
from Derry, Newry, on Donaghadee to Scotland, or otherwise swap them off in
fairs or sell them. Such horses, as his correspondents got in exchange, they
made no scruple of selling publicly because they could prove the getting of
them; but those that were stolen in the North were commonly sent to different
hands, and were disposed of in Upper Ormond, Ossory, or in Munster. To satisfy
the reader's curiosity, I shall rehearse one story, being part of the
confession of one of the confederates while he lay in confinement, before he
was executed in Kilkenny, which will give a more particular account of his
management than the foregoing.

He confessed to the people who came to see him, that one of Charles's setters
come to him by night where he lived, and told him there were three horses in a
park near Clonegal; one was black, with a star and one white foot, another a
bay gelding, that padded, and the third, a white pad, with his mane and tail
cut close. He said he understood the messenger's meaning very well and
accordingly conveyed the three horses down to Glenmalier in two nights after.
After that he was pitched upon as the most proper person for disposing of them,
and pursuant to his orders took them down to the country of Monagham but as the
white horse was so very remarkable they stained him all over with a flesh
colored red, in order to disguise him, which was done with Brazilet and alum
boiled in water; but that color was soon washed off. This fellow was not so
much as known in that country; so by the assistance of some of his Brother
receivers, he put off the three horse in a fair, being all sightly cattle to
good advantage, for two of them he got twenty pounds, and for the third a mare,
that was afterward sold in the county of Waterford for six pounds. Some after
the owner of the bay-horse was directed to Charles, in expectation of getting
some tidings of his breast: but Cahier would not undertake the inquiry, till he
was paid two guineas in hand; upon which he promised to search for the horse.
In about twelve days after the horse was taken out of a stone park in the
night, where the last purchaser kept him and so conveyed down to Charles, who
gave the right owner notice that they might find such a horse in the wood near
the river Barrow; upon which the owner sent his servant for him, and had him
brought home without any compliments. Some time after, the owner was riding to
the North to buy linen, and having his horse with him, he was challenged and
secured till the assizes; but the owner bringing sufficient evidence that he
bred him, and that he had been missing all the while the other had him, got the
better of the dispute, and took his horse home again. On the other hand, the
purchaser could only prove, that he bought him in a fair, but could not tell
from whom; so by that means the thief was seldom sound.

By what has been related one may perceive how cunningly his affairs were
carried on; and in the next place, I shall relate some of his own actions.

There was an elderly gentleman in the King's County who had a particular
humor of his own in several respects, and when he took a fancy to any thing
was commonly so choice of it, that he would suffer no one else to use it. He
had a dun horse of great spirit, and a good hunter; which he was so choice of,
that he would not suffer his son to ride him. The son knew the goodness of the
horse as well as the father, and had cast a covetous eye upon him, but could
not tell how to compass his desire till he had advised with Cahier, who gave
him proper directions. In consideration of a handsome fee, Charles, provided
him with the skin of a horse of the same color, and with the like marks of his
father's horse, which was then at grass. This skin was dipped in a bog-hole and
presented to the father by one of his tenants, as the skin of his gelding,
which, they said, was drowned in a bog-hole. -- The old man, who had not all
the wit in the world, nor any mistrust of the fraud believed his tenant's
report, and took it for a matter of fact. However some time after the son, who
had kept the horse concealed, rode on him home, pretended he had bought him in
a fair; as soon as his father saw him he cried out, "D --, I vow to G -- d,
only my horse was drownded, I would take my oath that is he for he is as like as
ever I saw any thing in my life," which expression passed to a sterling joke
among the gentlemen of the county for a long time afterward.

Cahier had occasion once to pay his correspondents in the county of Kilkenny a
visit and to examine how the affairs and accounts stood between them; where, as
he was on his march in the evening, he went into a poor widow's house, and
demanded a drink of milk, upon which she brought him a large drink of
butter-milk but disliking it very much, he abused her to all intents and
purposes, and bid her go for some of the new milk, which she refused, and would
not own to have any other than what she brought; then he called her a bitch and
a whore, and cursed her over and over, withal saying she should pay for that
ill usage: And indeed so she did, for before next morning her two cows being
all she had, were stolen from her, neither could she ger any tidings of them
after.

Much about this time he was in his prime, and kept a place much like an office
of intelligence, where his brother Daniel was register, who kept an account not
only of their correspondents and place of abode, but likewise how and for what
every beast was disposed of: By this means they were able to answer such people
as came in pursuit of cattle: if they were to be had at all, he generally
de^^anded a fee in hand, for putting the owner in the way of getting his beast,
which fee was always proportioned according to the beast's value, or the
difficulty that might attend the recovery of it; and if in happened that the
beast could not be procured with any safety, he was to return such a part of
his fee as was agreed to before hand, which he seldom refused. Now we must
observe, that Cahier never delivered to the owner any beast that had been
stolen; all he did, was to direct him to go where he might find such a one; and
this stratagem was to prevent home proof being given against him. Nevertheless,
he had the misfortune to be bit even in this respect, and catched in such a
trap, that it cost him a summer's work to get lose. This was in the year 1729,
when the practice was so common of killing sheep in the night time, and taking
away their skins, carcases, and fat, which they disposed of in distant places.
This practice was carried on mostly by discarded shepherds (though not without
Cahier's knowledge) who kept dogs trained sit for the purpose, with other
materials.

A gentleman in the country of Kilkenny having some cows stolen from him,
employed a trusty servant to make enquiry from Cahier, who having received his
fee, in a short time gave proper directions, as he thought, where to find them.
The gentleman managed so crattily, that he took up one of the men in whose
custody the cattle were sound, and this person having accused Cahier, Cahier
was taken and put into Naas goal, where on purpose to save his own ^e^k, he
turned evidence for the king, and impeached six or seven people in that
country. Cahier told the Judges that he could do the country a vast deal of
service, that he could inform against rogues in every county in the province,
and was willing to do it, to bring them to justice. The judges were pr^^ty well
informed of his capacity of doing so; but not in^ggining that he was a
foresworn rogue, they took him through the circuit to Philipstown, Maryborough,
Carlow, Kilkenny, Wexford, and Wicklow, expecting to benefit the country, by
ridding it of rogues upon this evidence; but Charles took care not to inform
against any one who was staunch to his interest, impeaching none but such as he
thought might betray him, if taken up, or such as he owed a grudge to, though
they were innocent, and no way concerned with him. It Is true, he was
discharged, and slipped his own neck out of the halter by this means, but the
country was little the better; for though he caused four or five to be hanged,
it is thought that some of them were not guilty.

Charles has not been long out of confinement before he took a small concern
under a gentleman near Lea, on which he opened his office again; and as he had
accused none of his staunch comrades, they had no fault to his charge, but
joined him very readily, and carried on their trade as before in conjunction.

However, one of his boys had given him occasion to be angry on a certain time,
for which he banged and abused him; the boy being stomached at this usage,
threatened to make some discovery to his master's prejudice, which to prevent,
Charles decoyed him into a wood (knowing that he could neither read not write)
and with assistance, bound him fast, and cut out his tongue; however through
mistake, not so close, out when he was cured, he made a shift to speak, though
very imperf^^tly.

At another time, one of his accomplices bro't to him by night, a very simple
follow (in appearance) from upper Ormond, who came only to get intelligence of
two horses that hadl been stolen from him, and had laid down a gui^ea for
information money. Charles was then near the windmill, at a very bye-place;
yet though the fellow was brought to him by night, and through the most crooked
paths, he beg^n to suspect that the man had something more in his head than
lice, and was resolved to put him into the high roads as privately as he came,
lest he should come as a spy against him another time. After he had reprimanded
his accomplices for intruding such a fellow on him without previous notice, the
two horses were sent for, and ready to be delivered against daybreak; then
Cahier after he had plied the man with liquor all night, sent for a large sack,
and having bound the fellow hand and foot, and gagged him to prevent him f^^^m
making a noise, he was tumbled into it, and then the vacancy was well stuffed
with hay (only a hole was made for him to breathe through) to ^^^ake it seem like
a sack of corn.

When matters were thus prep^^ed, Charles mounted on one of the horses, and had
the sack thrown up before him, which he carried through as private paths as he
could for about two miles, 'till he got into the high road, and it began to
grow pretty light; then pitching upon a proper spot of ground where there was
good gr^ss, he took the sack off the horse, the gag out of the f^llow's mouth,
tethered both horses, and made off himself. The fellow had no other way left to
relieve himself, than by calling out to passengers, which he did very
powerfully, but found no relief till about nine o'clock. When he was released,
he catched his horses, and made the best of his way home, for fear of meeting
with a second disaster.

Charles was shortly after indicted for several facts, and committed to Mary
borough jail, with his comrade Jack; but the Landlord, who perhaps was afraid
of losing some arrears, if he lost his tenant, made such interest, and obtained
so fair a character of him, that he was acquitted for that time, and his
brother also, though it was very well known that they were pri^y to the
stealing of almost every horse that had been stolen in that county.

But some little time after, the said landlord to make sure of his rent, seized
on Cahier's effects, and turned him off his land. This put him to his wit's end
to meditate revenge, which he thought he could bring about no better way than
by accusing him, and bringing him in as a party concerned along with him.

His former landlord had converted a large vault, that lay under an old castle,
into a stable, which was large enough to hold several horses; in this stable,
and in a wood near to it (which some people say Charles did only through
design) Cahier, when he had occasion, had leave to put some of his horses, and
this was foundation enough for him to ground an accusation upon: Nay, he made
preparations for giving in examinations, and the whole country believed that
the said gentleman was one of the managers in the confederacy.

Mr. G --, the said gentleman, who was upon setting up for a justice, being
irritated against Charles, had examinations given against him, and after a very
difficult pursuit, Cahier was taken and committed to Naas goal, in November,
1734^, where he remained till the March assizes following, from whence he was
transmitted to Mary borough, in order to be tried. While he was pursued, he
swam several times across the Barrow, though the flood was great, and his said
landlord's men followed him with as much resolution, till they took him, in a
haggard, where he had concealed himself.

Things being now brought to this situation, he swore several examinations in
Irish, while he was in confinement, against the gentleman and others, to put
off his own trial, and told his stories so plausible, that several gentleman in
the country took his part, and the gentleman was tried; and were it not for
some of the leading men in the country, it is to be feared he might have
suffered. It was with some difficulty that his trial was put off till August
affixes, though Cahier was the only evidence against him. But some others whom
Charles accused, were tied up by the neck, particularly one Hickey, who owned
that he had often transgressed, but denied the facts whereof he was then
accused, at the gallows.

We must now pass on to Cahier's trial, at Maryborough, in August, 1735. He was
first brought to the bar, and then ordered to hold up his hand, which he did
pretty quietly, time after time, 'till above thirty indictments were read
against him: Then the judge said, 'guilty or not guilty?' but Cahier seemed not
to understand one word of English, till one behind him bid him in Irish to
answer: then he turned about, and asked the other in the same language, what he
should say? Why says he, neel me dheer (i. e. not guilty.) The judge then told
him, he would make him sind good English shortly; and proceeded on, asking him
how he would be tried? but still no English from Charles, who only asked one
that stood by in Irish, what the judge said? But the judge was resolved not to
be tristed with; so after much ado, he was taught to say, "By cod and my guntry.

At length the first evidence was produced, and then a second and a third, etc.
but still nothing but Irish from Dempsy, till a fellow from the North came up,
who swore very home against him about a cow: Then all at once, he cried in a
passion, "That Is murder, my lord, he does not know m^ at all; he is a lying
rogue, for I had that cow wid my shelf ever; she was born'd upon my own ground,
my brother here knows it" Ah! (says the judge) you and your brother. --

His trial lasted above twelve hours; for though there were so many evidences
against him, and even the man that had lost his tongue, yet not above two,
without other circumstances, would have hanged him. He spoke broken English all
along after, and pleaded very artfully, particula^ly against the said
gentleman, who was one of the chief evidences against him. He always
contradicted him, and still would say to the judge, "That the evidence was the
greatest rogue of the two." But all did not save him; he received sentence of
death, and was executed in August, 1735.

As he passed from the gaol to the gallows, he minded nothing but discoursing
with the people, who came to inquire of him about cattle that had been stolen
from them. To some he gave satisfactory answers, and directed them where to
seek; to others, he made none. On the ladder he continued the like discourse,
till he was turned off, and even then, he was so loath to die, that he caught
hold of it as it turned, and held fast, till the sheriff obliged him to quit
his grip, by pounding his knuckles with the but end of his whip. Thus he went
out of the world, without clearing any one that he had accused, and died
according to the belief of every body, an hardened villain.

His brother Daniel, who was found guilty of the like facts, and executed along
with him, behaved in a quite different manner; he continued reading, on his way
to the place of execution, very devoutly, in a Manuel, and repeated a great
number of prayers before the ladder was turned.

This same Charles, in imitation of Redmond O'Hanl^n, used to indemnify people
from having their cattle stolen, for a yearly reward.

John, or Jack Dempsey, was also hanged some time before; but was not an own
brother of Charles, though generally taken to be so.

THE GOLD FINDER: Or, the notorious CHEATS of Manus. Mac O'Neil, AND His Man
ANDREW.
AMONG the many remarkable tricks related in the history of the Irish Rogues,
there is none deserves more the attention of the reader, than the following,
being managed by an ignorant country fellow, who, by the natural simplicity of
his look, and an artful affectation of folly, passed upon the world as a
stupid, innocent bumpkin, incapable of forming the least design or intrigte,
which gave him the advantage of carrying on his cheat^ successfully for a long
time, without being in the least suspected. What province or country he was
born in, I could never learn, though you may take it for granted, he was a
downright Irishman; for he wore the brogue upon his tongue, as fashionable as
any rogue in the nation.

At the age of sixteen years, or thereabouts, he was bound apprentice to a
Mason, at Clone-bullock, in the King's county; but his master dying before he
had time to learn the trade, Manus was put under some difficulties; however, he
made a shift to pick up acquaintance with an expert tinker, who had skill in
running down metal; and upon occasion, was not backward in coining a piece of
silver and gold, to answer his necessities.

This same tinker had been tried for his life, for facts of this kind, both in
Naas and Armagh, and found means to get off in both places. The Indictment upon
which he was tried in Armagh, was for making and uttering a bad pistole; where
seeming on his trial, to know nothing of the matter, he said that not above
three pistoles had passed through his hands in his life, and that he could know
every one again; at the same time he begged leave to see the piece he was
charged with for uttering, and if he had passed it, he would not deny it; upon
this, it was given into his hand to be examined. While he was viewing the
piece, he pretended to bite it, but took an opportunity of drawing another out
of his mouth instead of it, which he said was the same piece he had passed, and
would prove it to be right good gold; accordingly it was tried, and found good,
by which stratagem he got clear.

Manus having got a little insight into the business, grew sick of Masonry and
immediately fell upon new schemes. By some means or other, he procured as much
gold as made a small ingot, which he used as a decoy. With this he moved
toward Allen, where meeting with a simple honest English countryman, sit
enough to serve his turn, he took him into a private place, and gave him the
following relation: --

"I was 'prentice, says he, wi^^ a Mason, and at Easter when my Master went
abroad, he left meself and ^noder 'prentice to maak a paar of pear, for a gaat
at New-abbe), in the county of Kildere, just hard by the old buildings: both of
us had a mind to maak as good a work while my master would be from us, and
better, nor af he would sten wid us himself; and I went wid myshelf, and tin wid a
crow in my hand, to get some good stones out of the old walls, that would be
fitting for us, though it was Easter Monday, and the people all at mass. I saw
one plaas about so big as a door, stopped up wid the sort of stones I wanted,
and so I fell to work, striving to get 'em out, and taak em along wid me to my
comrade; but before I got de half of 'em out, I found there was steps up before
me, going down like stairs, and I went in to see what sort of a plaas there was
there, and where should the steps be after bringing myself to, but into a dark
toom; I believe it is a want you call it, and what should I find there, but a
parshil of shets, and I thought they were coffins full of bones: but when I
struck my crow against one of 'em, I found it is iron they were made of; and
upon that I went out and stopped the whole up again, for fear any body would
find it, and go in before night. When it was dark, myshelf and my comrade along
wid me, wint it there wid a candle and dark lantern; and what should we find in
the chests whin we broke 'em open wid de crow, but bars like dis (pulling out
his ingot) piled up a top of one anoder, a yaad high, and fait I believe it
gold, dar a neigh, look at it. -- There was anoder chest full of candlesticks
of the saam sort of dis, and more of them full of crosses, chalices, and rings,
and fine shining stones; my comrade has one of 'em, and a gentleman says it has
a carbuncle. Do you know what sort dat is? But what would you have of it? We
took em all out of dat, and buried em in anoder plaas, till we got time to look
'em all over, for fear of the lord of the manor; if he hears of it, he will come
and take it from us. You must not tell any body, only if you have any friend
who would give us a little moneys, he should have a great bargain, for my shelf
does not know the wort of such sort, and may be too af I Will take them to the
goldsmith in Dublin, he will shallenge us wid 'em, and fair may be we'd get
nothing for 'em, but go to gaal after. Af you have any friend that is a^ honest
man, we would rather let him have a bargin for your sake, than give it to a
stranger; there is a crown among it too, which they say was belong to the King
of Scotland.

The Farmer hearing the fellow talk so simply, verily imagined that he was a
mere ignoramus, and thought all that he told him was as true as the hearth
mouey; however he kept his council as far as proper, and desired Manus to have
his treasure in readiness, and not to show it to any body, for fear of losing
it, till he got an opportunity of acquainting some of his friends, who, he was
sure, had a good deal of money lying by, and would purchase the whole. Manus's
sole intention was to make himself seem as foolish as possible, thereby to make
his bait the more taking, yet he did not confine himself to hold the secret
from all others; for he told the aforesaid story to as many as he thought he
could make proper fools of, to further his designs, and behaved as much like a
fool as possible, that no suspicion of deceit might hereby arise: for which
reason I shall give him the title of the Irish fool, let others call him what
they please. By this artisice, the story was whispered about very privately
from hand to hand, among such people as were supposed to have money, who were
mostly intent upon engrossing the treasure every one to himself, that for sear
of being prevented they even would not give their wives an item of it.

At length, people that had money, came privately from all parts to seek Manus,
in hopes of making their fortunes, but in fact it was only to lose them. The
first that he made a perfect master of the secret, was an innkeeper of the
county of Kilkenny, who had brought a pretty handful of money with him, and a
portmanteau, in order to purchase a large quantity of gold; but Manus, as great
a fool as he pretended to be, was resolved not to be caught in any trap, and
absolutely refused to sell any of his ware under that denomination, for sear of
bringing himself into trouble, and gave such reasons for so doing, that the
purchaser seemed to have no mistrust of a bite. Says he, "I don't sell you my
ingots of gold, that would be the way to be found out by the lord of the manor,
who has the first pretension to every sort of that kind that is found in his
ground any way; and to be sure he would have the gold above any thing else. I tell
you what I Will do wid you, give me such moneys as will buy tin good cows to
maintain myshelf, and I Will give you so much of the sort I found in the Old
Abbey as ever you can carry way wid you in the leather bag behind you; but you
must give me your oat first that you will not open it till you get home, nor tell
any body how much gold you have, nor how you got it, and dis is some of the
sort I found (laying his ingot on a brick, and pointing to it with his finger.)
Now, how much moneys will you give me, and I Will sill your bag?" The bargain was
agreed to, and the purchaser sworn to secrecy; then Manus led him in the night
to a convenient field for his purpose, pretending a great deal of fear, lest
any one should see or hear them; and having blindfolded him, he took the
portmanteau a little further, where he filled it with bricks, stones, and hay,
and when he had locked it, he returned with the load. The inkeeper was
overjoyed at his bargain, and having paid Manus about forty pound, earnest
money, he put the load up behind him, and rode home post haste, promising to
pay the remainder on delivery of the key, which the goldfinder was to give him
in two days after at his own house, where he was to meet him and take an
account of his ware. But the inkeeper waited two days, three times told before
Manus appeared with the key, and might have waited till doom's day only his
impatience prompted him to be fingering the gold; upon which he tipped open the
portmanteau, and finding how ^^^nfoundedly he was outwitted, he sell sick of a
Plenetick fever, which had like to have cost him his life. However he was so
much ashamed of his bargain, that he could not tell how to divulge the secret
for some months after.

The rumor of finding such immense treasure was spread about with such
artifice, that hundreds were apprized of it yet every man that had money and
heard it imagined himself first in the baby-house, and strove eagerly to make
his market, before others knew any thing of the affair. I heard of a very
responsible merchant's son in the county of --, that had just received a
considerable fortune with his wife, who upon having notice thereof, made
preparations for disposing of all his effects, in order to purchase the whole
treasure, (crown, jewels and all) and to carry them to France, about the time
the late French King was married, expecting to make a million of money by the
bargain, and to be able at his return to purchase the whole country before him;
but the gay man his father being a man of better experience in the world,
suspected some deceit, and (though with difficulty) dissuaded his son from
engaging in so hazardous a project.

Manus had such good fortune by his schemes, that in a little time he was able
to make a new ingot of real gold, which weighed about twelve ounces, in the
shape of a small bar, and this he carried about for a decoy: Besides he was
supplied by one of his accomplices from Dublin-with brass bars of the same size
and form, gilded or covered over so that any person not well skilled in metals
might easily be deceived, and not know one from the other. He had likewise the
luck to pick up an acquaintance with one Andrew Farrel, an ill inclined young
fellow, whose usual employment was to carry meat from the butchers in Dublin to
gentlemen in the country. He presently found that this fellow would be very fit
for his purpose, inasmuch as that he was intimate with several people of good
credit in Dublin, and so he let them into the secret. This Farrell told his
story concerning the treasure with such a seeming probality, that numbers
entertained him, and treated him with a^undance of courtsev, in order to get
him to introduce them to Manus; however he always enjoined them to secrecy,
still pretending the greatest friendship imaginable to those he told it to, by
which means he drew great numbers in search of the gold. It Is really a wonder,
that among so many as came from all parts in quest of this treasure, that some
of them did not blab out one to another, what their business was; but the
mystery lay here, those that were in pursuit, kept council of necessity, and
such as were bit, were under these obligations, or so much ashamed of their
bargains, that they could not tell how to discover or expose their weakness.

Their most usual way of imposing on customers, was this; after the buyers had
been properly informed of the treasure, and manner of finding it and so wrought
up into a firm belief of the certainty thereof, without showing any token of
mistrust; then Manus began to expose the gold bar which he called brass, as a
sample of his treasure, always prompting his chapmen to try it, let them call
it what they pleased. When they had fully satisfied themselves concerning the
value of the metal, a bargain was commonly concluded upon; in the mean while
Manus always took care, by one means other, to exchange the gold bar for
another of brass of which sort be could furnish his customers with as many as
they thought proper; then as it was customary with him, he demanded either the
money or sufficient earnest, which being laid down on the side of the table,
and the ingits, as he called them on the other, "Now, says he, here is my ware,
it is brass I call it, and will fold it to you for brass, and nothing else, but
yourself knows the sort best. I hope you will have good luck wid it; as you
don't like it, leave it ^id myself; here is your moneys, take your c^^^^^. I Will
be bound to get more; but as you keep my ingits, you must buy it for brass, and
call it b^^ss; and you shall give me your oat you will never say you bought
gold, nor tell what you give for my ingits, for fear of the lord of the manor
would come and ^aak it all wid himshelf." He frequently appeared to be in
liquor, and by these kind of speeches, which seemed to proceed from perfect
ignorance, his customers only became ten times more earnest than before, making
no scruple to give an oath of secrecy, which being done, they seldom made any
delay till they got home with the treasure. But as particular instances may be
more satisfactory, I shall relate two or three, to render him in more plain
colors.

In the beginning of his prospetity, in company with the said Farrel, he took a
jaunt down to Dublin, with the ingot of real gold in his pocket and several
gits of brass, as like it as could possibly be made. In the habit of a mean
country farmer, he went to an eminent banker in Castle-street, and finding him
alone, he drew out his ingot, and began to make his condition and case known in
the most moving and pathetic manner. Says he. "God bless your worship. Sir,
every body knows you have the best skill in the sort of dis of any man in
Dublin, (showing his ingot in paper) because you deal so much in moneys: I
believe it is the fort they make the guineas of. Well, says the banker, what
would you have me do with it? Why God bless your worship sir, my landlord is
hard upon me for the rent, and he says he will drive my cattle away from me, as I
don't pay him ne^^ Monday. My father and my father's father, and his father
before him had this piece in the family, and there is no luck nor grace would
ever stay in the same plaas wid me, if I Would sell its but for all dat (dropping
some tears) I must borrow some moneys upon it or my family will be undone: God
bless you, sir, you know the worth of dis sort; strive to relieve me, and I Will
pray for you ever" Upon this the banker took pity on him, yet not willing to
pend entirely on his own judgment, he sent the ingot out to his goldsmith to
be tried who sent him word back that it was good gold. The banker then would
have been very willing to have purchased it at so moderate a price, but the
other refused to sell; end cot only so, but was for borrowing more upon it, and
at a longer time than the banker approved of; so Manus took the ingot, lhpped
it up in the same paper, and went out, on pretense of seeking redress from some
body else upon the same security; but he had not gone many sleps from the door
before he took an opportunity of putting a git of brass in the place of the
ingot, and returned with it so lapped up to the banker again. Says he, (giving
a sigh, with a sorrowful countenance, wringing his hands and dropping a few
tears) "I must sell dis or borrow some moneys upon it, to slop my cattles, I
believe you will give me so much as any body for it, and as I don't release it
against Christmas day I will not asb it any more." The banker then told him out
what he offered before and a guinea over, thinking him a simple ignorant
fellow, and then laid his bargain up in a drawer without examining it, thinking
that it was worth about fifteen pounds more at least. Some time after Christmas
the banker had some company at dinner with him, to whom he related after what
manner he had bought a great bargain of gold from a sill countryman. They were
all desirous of seeing it, and when one of the gentlemen viewed it, he said it
was not gold, upon which the banker held him a bottle of wine to the contrary,
and had it tried over again: but to his mortification was obliged to yield the
wager lost, which put him entirely out of humor, though it proved very good
diversion for the rest of the company, to see a banker outwitted by a fool, who
never intended to pay him another visit.

When he and his man Andrew had pretty well seduced and defrauded a great
number of the Dublinians out of there money, for ingots of brass instead of
gold, they grew enraged against him and began to dog Andrew to his lodgings,
and to the country, thinking to take him before a justice; but he observing it,
gave them the slip, and posted away to his master, who had retired to the wood
of Allen, where he usually spent the most of his time. As soon as Manus
understood that people endeavored to take him, says he dar a nagh agus dat a
neagh, we will go to Connaught: And their effects being easily carried, and
affairs settled, after drinking a belly full of brandy, their common liquor,
they began their journey, not in the direct-road, but through the Queen's County,
where Manus was obliged to make a longer stay than he expected occasioned by a
misfortune that befell him. It happened that while he passed through this last
county, a man of some figure purchased some of his ingots of brass for which he
paid Manus a pretty round sum of money; in a few days after the gentleman
exposed his bargain to a goldsmith in Dublin, with a design of converting part
of it into plate for his family, and to make money of the rest; but to his
sorrow, being thoroughly made sensible of the fraud, he posted home, and upon
search, had the good fortune of seizing Manus, whom he got committed to
Maryborough goal, where he remained under confinement 'till the next assizes.
At length his trial came on, and a vigorous prosecution was made against him,
and to be sure the jury could have thought no better of him than he deserved,
only that when he was asked what he had to say for himself, he asked his
prosecutor several crooked questions, 'till he obliged him to acknowledge, that
Manus told him, at the time they made the bargain that his ware was brass, and
no other. 'What would you have din? And is it not brass? Sure that is no sheat
for a man to sell his guts by the right name. I will leave it to my lord judge,
and the gentlemin of the the jury.' In short he filled the court with surprime
and laughter, to see how artfully he could evade the force of the law, tho in
appearance he seemed like a fool: However the jury sat upon it, yet they could
not bring him in guilty of what he was accused; upon which he was acquitted.

Now he thought every hour a day 'till he got into some remote place, and so
hasted away with his man Andrew to Connaught, where having no acquaintance,
they remained under some difficulties before they got into a way of getting a
livelihood, and so were under a necessity of making the former spoil of the
Dublinians maintain them (of which they had still a good plenty left, drinking
wine and brandy very profusely) till at last Andrew got acquainted with one
Dominick D -- t, a rich farmer's son, and a sharp insinuating youth, who was
very intimate with several gentlemen in that country. It was beneath a man of
Emanuel's fortune to seek customers himself, wherefore Andrew was to manage
that point, who thinking this young man would make a sit bate for his hook,
told him the whole story concerning the finding of the treasure, as before
related, that for fear of the lord of the manor who heard of it, they fled,
into that country to conceal it, and to be more private. They were over a cup
of liquor at this time, and Farrel pretending to be drunk, called the other
aside and spoke very privately, desiring him to let no body know but his
nearest friends, who on his account only should get good bargains.

Young D -- t was overjoyed at the news, and returned in to talk to Manus,
without delay or, suspicion. Manus knowing his inclinations pulled out his
ingot of gold. and swore the young man to secrecy, who was charmed with the
beauty of the metal; and being very desirous that his friends should make their
fortunes, he brought his uncle to Manus, who told him his usual story, (like an
ignorant fellow, as he pretended to be) with great artifice and having charged
him pretty high with liquor, he got all the man's money, and sent him home with
gits in lieu of it; but in some days having discovered the fraud, he complained
to Dominick's father, and poor Dominick was turned out of doors for his pains:
this was what Manus wanted in his heart, and as soon as he heard thereof, he
returned to Cloncumber, a scrubby island in the bog of Allen surrounded with
rivers and quagmire: At a small distance from the island stands a wood, from
which to the island there is a passage, but then a great part of it is commonly
covered with water, and very difficult to find; and on the middle of the island
there is a fort, whereon if a man stands, he may view the country round for
some miles, and see every body that comes near it. Here he fixed his lodgings,
so that when any that he knew not came on the wood side, he commonly would take
to the bog; but if on the bog side, to the wood; and here he carried on his
game for a long time, never coming out but to make his bargains, and then only
in sure company, to such houses as he well knew.

Andrew had given an item to Dominick where they intended to go, who being
turned out as aforesaid, followed them in expectation of getting his money
returned; but Manus showed him so many legerdemain tricks that he soon found it
was but in vain to expect any such thing, and so knowing he had no business
home without it, he became a dissolute young fellow, and joined his forces
along with this new company.

It Is true he returned to Connaught, but then it was only as a decoy, and to
make a prey of others. He brought a collector with him from Eyrecourt, to
Cloncumber, whom Mac O'Neil first swear to keep secrecy, and then sold him some
of his bars at a very good race, only with this liberty, upon his oath that if
any one asked what he had bought, to say it was brass; and says, 'dar a nagh, a
dan a negh, I believe it is, for I don't know gold.' But when the collector
found out the cheat, he was exasperated and watching an opportunity, had Manus
taken up, sent to jail, and trie^. Mac O'Neil told the judge on his trial, that
when he was seiling him the brass, he made him^f we^^ he would tell every one
he spoke to about it, that it was brass. 'And what else should I call it, said
he, for it was brass like dish (producing one of the gits) which set the court
into a f^^ of laughter and Manus appearing so very ignorant in metal, and so
innocent in the matter. was acquitted.

Alter this he removed to the woods near clonbullock, where he followed his
trade as brisk as ever, sometimes sending away led horses with portmantenus,
and sometimes cars with chests ^oaden with gits, or else bricks nicely lapped
up in paper; but he always took care to keep the leys himself. promising to
meet them at such a place as appointed, and they not to meddle with the
treasure before he met them.

But when the time expired, his chapman commonly began to suspect some fraud,
and of consequence would break open the locks, to examine what he had got. One
fellow that had made money of all his effects to purchase his treasure, upon
opening his portmanteau, sound nothing but bricks carefully lapped up in paper.
Which exasperated him to such a degree, that he went back armed in pursuit of
Mac O'Neil; but Manus had removed to the island, as he always did when he
expec^ed a pursuit, where he might rest secure enough ^ill he thought proper to
appear again; his absc^^ding in this manner, made the fellow search in vain, so
that he was obliged to return home with loss and shame.

Not long after this, a pretty farmer in the county of Limerick hearing that
such a heap of treasure was to be disposed of, privately came up with his wife
and all the money he could raise in order to make his for^^ne for ever. He
found Manus near Rathangan, and when he had made a very good bargain. as ^^e
thought and got a ^^^ge quantity of the treasu^^ into possession, the Gold
finder showed as much more to tempt him the man having laid out all the money
he brought with him was in no condition to buy more then; however, he had an
itching to be at it, and began to treat about the price, which being agreed
upon, they entered into articles, and the man was to return home with what
treasure he had bought, leaving his wife in pledge with the Gold-finder, 'till
be brought the rest of the money back to Manus. When he got ho^e, he put up the
treasure, without showing it to any body, and sold two draft mares he had for
about thirty pounds, with which money he went back to Rathangan, in about
sixteen days; but when he came to the alehouse where he left them, he could
find nobody that he knew but his wife, who informed him the Gold-finders were
gone to some island above three days before, and intended to see him no more;
upon some other words that she, dropped he not only began to smell the cheat, but
was so much blinded with a pair of horns that sprung out of his forehead that
moment, and hung in his eyes, that he spent a month in groping the way home
again.

Among other wise men of Gotham who expected to make their fortune by dealing
with Manus, there was one C -- h -- n near Wexford, a great projector, who
having received private intelligence of his vast treasure, rode several miles
to make further enquiry and assure himself of the matter; concerning which upon
his return, he was so well satisfied, that he immediately disposed of as much
ef^^cts to be could conveniently spa^e, and then g^thering tog^^^er what money
he had in the house, and owing to him, he made ready for an expedition to the
island of Allen. It was about Michelmas, (as Manus says) that this gentleman
set out from his house on a stout gelding, equipt like a man of honor, with a
silver ^ilted sword, a new suit of clothes, a fine hat and wig, and sixty
pounds in his pocket, with which he posted directly to Munstereven, attended
only by a servant. When he came to his inn, he made all the private enquiry
possible for the island of Allen, and sent his servant there the next morning
to find out the Gold-finder, who returned the following eyening, with
directions for his master to come on foot alone, or with his guide, to a little
cabin on the side of an island on the bog, and bring his money along with him,
for which he might expect ten times the value in gold and jewels, provided he
kept the affair a secret; and the better to conduct him, Manus sent one of his
men, as a guide to show him the way, and tender the usual oath of keeping
council; which being done, and their hearts regaled with a good break fast and
a cup of strong liquor, they set out, and arrived at the said cabin about
noon: where they found nobody but an old woman, upon which, the guide ordered
her to bring a bottle of wine to the gentleman; the wine was accordingly
produced, and our projector being fatigued with walking and thirst, drank
pretty freely, (not suspecting there was any intoxicating stuff, or the juice
of the bogdale in it) and then sat him down to rest, 'till the guide went for
Manus. C --, notwithstanding had his thoughts so much upon the treasure, that
sleep did not suddenly invade his eyes, as otherwise it would have done; and
when he had waited about an hour, seemed very uneasy that neither Manus came,
nor any news from him; upon which the woman went out and called to a boy, and
sent him seemingly in a great hurry for her master, and in a little time a
messenger returned, with directions to open another bottle, and entertain the
gentleman for about an hour, by which time Manus would certainly be there, with
all his golden treasure: Upon this, our projector seemed a little easier, got
another bottle which put him into a profound sleep, before the Gold-finder
appeared: In which condition we must leave him 'till the next day, and only
guess at his fortune while he slumbered, by the sequel of the story.

When be awoke, which he supposed to be about 8 the following morning, he was
greatly surprised to find himself alone in an empty house, but what most
increased his astonishment was to find himself totally deprived of his money,
sword, watch, hat, wig, silver buckles, handherchief, and pocket book. However,
up he got, walked about, and called, and cried, and shouted and cursed, and
kicked and danced with vexation, round the house, like a madman, till he made
himself so weary, that he was forced to leave off. Nobody was to be heard of,
nobody to be seen any where ^ear him, but two little boys in a potatoe garden,
who would speak no English, and all that he could understand from them in
Irish, was, that nobody lived in the cabin that they knew of; so, my gentleman
growing very hungry, was obliged to walk back to his inn (above five miles) in
the same moneyless-condition, where he sold his servant's horse to defray his
expenses, and by a new hat and wig, and then returned home, almost as poor as
Whittington was before he sent his cat to the Indies.

The last story that I shall be particular in, is, of a certain gentleman, well
skilled in metal, a sharp man, and one that was resolved not to be imposed on,
as he had heard some others had been. He was introduced to Manus by one of his
young men before mentioned, and after a good deal of discourse over the liquor,
he let him know that he would buy no metal, but such as he would first try with
something he had in his pocket, pulling out a bottle of aquafortis. Manus
seeing him so curious, pulled out his ingot of gold, and pretending to be
drunk, says he, "try dish, for I think it is gold dar a nagh agus, dar a negh,"
which was his usual expression; upon this the gentleman tried the bar, which he
found was good gold, and laid the bottle on the table, expecting to see more in
a little time. Manus got up as if he was going for it; but staggering about the
room like one in liquor, he watched his opportunity and getting hold of the
bottle, "Arra, says he, what sort is dish" and as be was shaking it, a drop or
two fell on his fingers and smoked: then seemingly to be terribly affrighted,
he cries out, as if in great pain. "O maver, O maver," and at the same time
threw the bottle against the wall and broke it. Now farewell aquafortis. The
gentleman taking this for no other than the effects of drunkenness and
ignorance, said nothing at all about the bottle, but laughed at the fellow for
a bit of game. However he took care to ask him for the rest of the bars; then
Manus told him, "that he had borrowed some money of a priest hard, by, with
whom he had lest the bars in pledge, and desired the gentleman to lend him as
much money as would release them; to which he consented, provided that he and
his men would go with him to the priest's house. Manus assented very readily,
and wait^d 'till it was dark; he took the money and put it along with the bar
in his poc^et; he was so drunk, as he pretended, that he could not ride, but he
went on foot along with the gentleman and his man, who rid till he came to a
river by the side of the bog which he said was near the priest's house. There
was a foot-board over the river, and a place a little above it like a ford
through which he desired them to ride, and he would meet them on the further
side. Upon wi^^ (...) they went in easily enough: b^^ before the (...) to the
middle the horses stuck fast in the mire, and threw the riders into the water,
to shift for themselves as well they could in a cold winter's night.

He played an hundred tricks like these, of which I have received no exact
account, but being advertised in the public papers in the year 1735, he was
much disappointed, and his schemes broken, though he kept about Clonbullock etc.
sending out his gang to play at small games now and then with rings, buttons,
etc.

But the methods they now chiefly take to support themselves, is by cheating in
dealing. I Am told they have places or schools in Dublin, and elsewhere, for
instructing their pupils in the art of dissimulation, where they learn to buy
and sell upon trust, and so forth; and he is accounted the chiefest among them,
that can deceive the most artfully, under the greatest show of honesty and
simplicity. One of their gang, as I am credibly informed, lives near R --
street, and by his great art in appearing to be a simple, honest man, has
bought above an hundred horses in three years time, for which he never paid a
fourth part value. There are jockies that attend. Smithfield, who whenever
they-find a horse in the hands of a person unacquainted with their artifices,
come up and tell the seller they can help him to a good chap, an honest man
(they call him too) that lives at some distance; here the horses is hurried to
their friend, who comes out (perhaps as demure as a priest in a pulpit) and
says, 'sure enough I did want a horse some time ago, but now I cannot well spare
the money: However he appears like some body, and if the seller does not
greatly want money, it is an hundred to one but he gets a guinea or a moidore in
hand, and a promissory note for the remainder. Welldo^e, Sim -- ", seen Ch -- y
well, and never fear Fullum going into the louse house. But I hope his grace
may be informed of the matter some time or other.

Some of their gang introduced themselves among pedlars, either to corrupt
them, or defraud those they deal with. At first they seem to deal honestly, and
at length take up a little goods on tick, for which they pay pretty punctually,
'till they think they have hooked sufficient, and then they bid a long adieu to
that quarter. Indeed their artifices are so various, and their knavery so
great, that all dealers and shopkeepers ha^ need to be aware of them.

The Life of James Mac-Faul.
JAMES MAC-FAUL was born in Carrick-fergus, in the north of Ireland, in the
time of the Irish massacre, wherein his father had a great hand, being forward
upon all occasions to plunder and destroy whatever he could meet with, and did
not care what mischief he did, so he could but enrich himself; 'till at last he
was taken by a detachment from the king's army, and hanged upon the next tree,
as an example to deter others from such cruelties.

His son James was brought up by his uncle, and put to school under a popish
priest, but he being very unlucky, could never be kept to his book, as he would
run away for a month together, 'till his uncle not knowing what to do with him,
determined to send him to England, and let him try his fortune, being certain
that the boy had assurance enough to live in any part of the world, and
impudence enough to stick at nothing; yet Jemmy would not be persuaded to
travel, unless his uncle would equip him with a sword, a pair of dice, and a
pack of cards, with which he thought he could do well enough.

He made the best of his way to London, but found it absolutely necessary in
his way to commit some pilfering robberies, for his better support, for one of
which he was well flogged at Bristol, and all his utensils, dice and cards
taken from him; when not knowing what to do, he had some thoughts of going to
service, which he did for a little while; but work not agreeing with him at
all, he borrowed a silver spoon, and some other odd trifles, and marched off
one evening without taking his leave, and went directly to one of his
countrymen, who disposed of his things, but was angry with him for leaving his
place with so little booty, which James begged him not to take notice of, for
another time he should find he would do better.

In a little time after, he got into a noble lord's family, where he behaved
for twenty months very well, and got the love of all the servants, particularly
of Mrs. Betty the chambermaid, who was continually treating him with one good
thing or other, and he in return, professing a great deal of love and
sincerity; which made the girl grow so fond of him, that he in a short time got
all that was in her power to give, and then looked as cold on her as a sinking
tradesman does on a desperate dun; which Betty perceiving, tried all manner of
ways to endear herself to him, but all to no purpose, for the young spark was
fallen in love with an alehouse man's daughter, where the servants used to
drink, and entirely forsook poor Betty; who, enraged at such usage, could not
forbear exposing her folly by upbraiding of him, which had no other effect',
but making herself be laughed at, and hardened him in his impudence; who went
on without control in his amors with his new mistress, and lest his old one
to learn more wit.

The young taplash proud of her conquest, that she should rival one of my
lord's maids, easily gave up herself to his embraces, and denied him nothing
that was in her power to grant, which put Jemmy quite on another footing from
the rest of his fellow servants; she keeping the bar had the care of the money,
so that Jemmy had his watch and what not, and appeared as great as master any
body, and neglected his lord's service to follow his gaming tables and whores,
for which he soon lost his place, and had nothing to depend on, but what he got
from his sweetheart; who continually supplying his extravagancies, reduced her
father to such necessities, that he was obliged to confess a judgment to the
brewer, who, a little after, seized upon all he had, and turned him out of
doors.

Jemmy had nothing now to depend on but his own good fortune, and she proving a
jilt, as she often does to persons given to extravagance, he was soon reduced
to very great wants, when being arrested and thrown into Marshalse^, be got
acquainted with one Thomas Butler, a countryman of his, with whom he agreed to
break out of prison and go on the lay; which they did, and were very successful
for some time, 'till Butler was taken and committed to Newgate, and hung the
next sessions, and Jemmy very narrowly escaped by sighting his way through the
m^^^.

He still kept a correspondence with his mistress, and made her become as
wicked as himself, she turning shop-lifter and pickpocket, and he robbing on
the highway, by which they had got near a thousand pounds, and then agreed to
part, but upon condition of being serviceable to one another; and the town
being too hot for him, he removed to Lancashire, a fortune hunting, and she
continued in town to see what would offer in her way, where she got acquainted
with Moll Flanders, who lodging in the same house with her, passed for a great
fortune; she persuaded her to go down with her into the country, where she
might live much cheaper and with more pleasure at her brother's house, who was
a gentleman of a very good estate in Ireland, or at her sister's who lived near
Liverpool, which Moll at length agreed to, not knowing well what else to do
with herself, but that was more than the other knew.

Upon the road she treated Moll with all the civilities imaginable, and at
Warrington her pretended brother met them in a gentleman's coach, and carried
them to Liverpool, where they were entertained in a merchant's house three or
four days very handsomely, and from thence they went to a gentleman's house
about forty miles distant, where was a numerous family, a noble seat and good
company, whom she called cousins: Here they stayed about six weeks, and then
came back to a village near Liverpool, where her brother, as she called him,
began to make love to Moll, setting himself out as a man of a thousand pounds a
year, and indeed talked as big of his seats and parks, as one would be inclined
to think he had such an estate, but it was all a sham. Moll was not behind in
putting herself off, although she never plainly told them what she had, yet she
did not contradict what her companion said, who reported her to be a widow
worth ten thousand pounds; which so enflamed 'squire Mac Faul, that he was
ready to run mad at the bait, and plunged into debt over head and ears, for the
expenses of his courtship; and for fear his estate should be looked into, he
never so much as asked about her fortune, but took upon trust whatsoever his
old mistress told him, and promised his new one such brave things, that she
imagined she should be a lady, when she had got her estate.

They were soon married, and nothing but love and kindness passed between them,
he every day telling her of the fine things she was to have when they came to
Ireland, and she endeavoring to improve his affections by her fondness and
good behavior; till at length he began to discover her intentions of going to
West-Chester, in order to embark for Ireland, but asked his wife if she had no
affairs to settle at London before she went off; to which she answering No; he
seemed much surprised, and said. Madam, what have we been a doing? I thought
the bulk of your estate lay in the bank: Indeed, Sir, said she, I have no
estate, nor did I tell you I had; I know not what your sister might say to you,
but I did never tell her of any such thing; at which he started like a madman,
and swore he had been imposed on, to the last degree; and then calling his
sister, he asked her haw she could serve him so? Very well, said she, and not
half so much as you deserved; how could you ruin my poor aged father, debauch
me, and bring me into all the vices of life; and at last neglect me, and set up
for a fortue in the country? But, said he, what had this gentlewoman done to
you that you would ruin her? and then looking upon his wife, he fell down upon
his knees and said, you would indeed have been cheated, my dear, but you would
not have been undone; for ten thousand pounds would have maintained us both
very handsomely in Ireland, and I resolved to dedicate every groat to you; I
would not have wronged you of a shilling, and the rest I would have made up in
my affection to you, and my tenderness of you as long as I lived; which he said
with tears in his eyes, and offered to give her a bill of fifty pounds, which
he swore was all he had in the world; which she assuring him was more than she
had, and that she came into the country only to live cheap, her whole income
not exceeding fifteen pounds a year; at which he shook his head, and remained
silent for some time; and then said, Come, my dear, though the case is bad, it
is to no purpose to be dejected be as easy as you can; I will endeavor to find
out some way or other to live: if you can but subsist yourself, that is better
than nothing, I must try the world again: a man ought to think like a man: to
be discouraged is to yield to the misfortune. And then going to bed, he
promised a great many things, but nothing could offer, when thore was nothing
to begin with; 'till at last he fell asleep; and rose betimes in the morning,
and took his horses and three servants, all his linen and baggage, and went
away, leaving a letter on the table, with twenty guineas in it, advising her
with that money to make the best of her way to London; but a terror falling
upon his mind, when he had rid about fifteen miles, he dismissed his servants,
sold their horses, came back, and told her he would accompany her in her way to
London, which she agreed to, and in two days time they set out from Chester, he
on horseback, and she in the stage-coach, and came to Dunstable together, where
he told her it was convenient to leave her, for reasons which were improper for
her to know.

She desired him to stay with her there a week or two, which he agreed to, in
which time she told him how that she had been in Virginia, and that she had now
a mother there; and that if her effects had come safe to hand, she might have
enough to have maintained them both very handsomely as long as they lived; and
that if he had a mind to go there, she believed she could raise about three
hundred pounds, which was sufficient to establish a plantation, upon which they
might live very well; but he would upon no account agree to it; but said such a
sum of money as that would stock a farm in Ireland of an hundred pounds a year,
on which they might live as handsomely as a gentleman of five hundred here, and
that he had laid a scheme to go over and try: which if it did not succeed, he
assured her, he would go with her to America with her with all his heart; and
then he let her into the secret part of his life, and gave her reasons why he
would not accompany her to London, and so took his leave with a great deal of
tenderness and affection.

He had not rid far before he met with the three young gentlemen who were his
servants, and were newly set up in the same business, with whom he j^ined
str^^gth, and they all went in pursuit of a prize together. At first he, seemed
a little fearful, but he soon found they were all as great rogues as himself;
and that if they had not had knowledge of what he was, they never would have
served him half so long, which ^^^y (...) that they might have an opportunity
to rob^^^m, as soon as he had received his w^^^^s great fortune, as was
expected; which then they told him, it made him begin to bless himself, that
his wife did not prove a fortune; ^o^ if she had. ^h^^ght he, in all
probability it would have ^een the cause of b^th our deaths; ^e^tainly, said
he. GOD knows what is better for us than we ourselves; however, I must give
these rogue^ good words, or it is twenty to one but they will either hang or
hill me, for I find they are acquai^ted with the secret part of my life, and to
save themselves, what will not such a par^^^ of villains swear against a man,
which was very true: for one of them being in love with a widow, who kent an
inn at Nor^h^mpton, had determined as ^^on as he came there, to have given an
i^f^^mation against him and have him ^^cured, although he knew nothing of the
matter but what he had by hearsay, which Mr. Mac-Faul understanding by one of
them who was more honest than the rest, resolved to leave them in the next
convenient place, which as he was about to do, a dispute arose, and two were
for going one way, and two another. When he found that his old man John the
groom, took his part, he was far the stoutest of them all. and so got away
without much difficulty, only a volley or two of curses, swearing they would be
revenged on him some time or other.

He, with trusty John, returned to Brickhill, where the landlord received them
with all the tokens of respect immaginable, and after supper and a bottle, each
went to his bed, and in the morning each took his horse, and went about their
business. They had not gone far, before they met with the Chester stage-coach,
in which was an old rich p^tty-fogger, who was coming to London about law;
which they knew was not his right proper business, and therefore they made bold
to borrow of him an hundred pieces, which they told him they would l^y out to
better uses, and so left the lawyer to patch up his cause as well as he could,
all which* Mac-Faul gave to John to settle him in some business, and then made
the best of his way across the c^untry, toward Bristol, in order to pass over
to Ireland.

In his journey he happened to meet the Bath coach, in which were two citizens
wives, who were going to drink the waters, is hopes to return pregnant home to
their husbands, from whom he took their cold watches, rings, and a^^^^ forty
pound^ in money, and then posted to Bristol, where a ship being ready to sail
for Ireland, he went on board, and in two days arrived at Cork, from whence he
went to Carrickfergus, where he set himself up for a man of fortune, and told
his country men that he had been in England, and that he had married a great
fortune, and that she was dead, and left him very rich, and that he was come
over there to purchase an estate to settle amongst them. By my shoul, that is
very good news, said his sister Nanny, for we heard long ago, that you were
turned a rapparee, and hanged at London. No, you fool, says he, there is no
such thing as hanging of Irishmen in that country. We borrow a little money
from some good natured woman or other, as soon as possible, and turn gentlemen,
marry half a score, rather than not be obliging to the fair sex; and when we
have done, break their hearts as soon as we cap. In faith, says Nanny, I Will go
over, and see if I cannot have as many husbands; for one may stay here all one's
lifetime, and never be married, and what then, and who has to do with that? So
thou shall, Nanny, said be; but stay till I return, and I Will take thee along
with me, which happened sooner than he expected, for he having got acquainted
with an English gentleman's family, pretended to great riches, and that he had
a mind to settle there, was admitted to court his sister, who had a thousand
pounds to her fortune, which he managed so artfully by his assurance and
application, that he soon got the lady's consent; and he presented her with one
of the gold watches and a diamond ring, that he had taken from the citizen's
wives in the Bath coach, which made a mighty figure in that part of the
country: with which they were used to walk abroad as if they had been already
married, till all things were prepared for the wedding; when an unlucky
accident happened, which knocked all in the head: For as the lovers were riding
out one day, he dropped a letter, which he had lately received from Moll
Flanders, wherein she informed him what a hue and cry there was after him, and
told him he would certainly be hanged if ever he returned to England, and
therefore advised him to settle there; for she was married to a change broker
at London; which being taken up by one of the servants, and brought to the
gentleman, he grew very uneasy, till the sister came home, for fear they should
be married privately. As soon as she came home, he called her aside, and showed
her the letter, advising her to return those presents she had received from
him, and have no more to say to him, which the young lady wa^ very unwilling to
do; but her brother told her Mac-Faul was certainly a rogue, and this Moll
Flanders, from whom he received the letter was one of the greatest thieves in
London. I have heard an hundred stories of her, said he, when I was last summer
in England; and yet nobody can take her, although she is playing her pranks in
one disguise or other every day.

This was very unpleasant news to the young gentlewoman, who had placed her
affections entirely upon Mac-Faul, who had a very pretty way of address, and in
himself was a good personable man; and what troubled her most of all was, to
part with the gold watch and diamond ring, with which she had made a figure
among the ladies above a month; but if it must be so, said she, and then she
fell a crying, "Mac-Faul can never be a rogue, so fine a gentleman as Mac-Faul
to be a thief, it can never be; this Moll Flanders is some ill woman, who has
contrived this letter, on purpose to min his happiness. I will never leave him,
I will die with him," and a great deal of such silly stuff; so that with all
the brother could do, he could scarce prevail with her to forbear marrying him,
till he heard from England.

The next time Mac-Faul came to the house, the gentleman showed him the letter,
which he stiffly denied, and protested it did not belong to him, and seemed to
wonder who should put suck a trick upon him; for he swore ten thousand oaths,
that he knew no more of it than the man in the moon; but all would not avail,
the gentleman civilly desired him to forbear coming to his house, till he
should be better satisfied from his friends in London, and in the mean time
gave his word no man should make application to his sister in the way of
courtship, till then. Mac-Faul begged only to see her, that he might take his
leave civilly of her; which upon no account would be granted, for the young
lady was as disconsolate as he, and narrowly watched, so that it was not
possible for them to have any intercourse, which so enraged Mac-Faul, that he
sent the gentlemen a challenge who accepted it, and the next morning was to
determine the justice of their pretensions, when the gentleman going to a
coffee-house, to look for another to be second, happened to take up a gazette,
which was over night come from England, wherein he found an advertisement of
the watch and ring his sister had, and a reward of twenty guineas for taking
the man, who by the description he knew could be no other than Mac-Faul; which
he showing to his friend and informing him how the whole matter stood, they
resolved to secure him; but Mac-Faul having a second with him, they resisted,
so that Mac-Faul made his escape, and left his ill gotten goods behind him, and
wrote a letter to his sister to bring his money and clothes to London, where he
would meet her.

Mac-Faul made the best of his way to the bogs and there sheltered himself
among a parcel of rapparees, till he met with an opportunity, and disguise, to
ship himself for England, which he did in the habit of a highlander, and he got
safe to Brecknock in Wales, where he took a lodging at a widow woman's house
whom he gagged and robbed of about forty shillings, and brushed off in the
night: from thence crossed the country, till he came to Shrewsbury, where he
stole a nag out of King's-land, and made the best of his way toward London,
and about two hours after meeting with a country farmer, who was going to pay
re^^^, he told him, he thought he rid very uneasy, and would lend him his
horse, for the sake of his company, which the farmer modesty refused, and he as
impudently insisted on, till coming to a convenient place, he knocked him off
his horse, and swore if he would not change horses, he must saddles, for that
he could ride no further on a piece of blanket; and so taking his, he found in
it fourscore pounds, which made his heart full glad, and much more than he
expected, he having no other design but to saddle his nag, and never dreamt of
any booty, till he came to take it off, and found by the weight there must be
something in it more than straw, although by the outside it did not seem to be
worth a shilling; but he wanted a saddle, and a saddle he must have, to prevent
his being suspected of stealing the gelding.

He had no sooner discovered his prey, but he rode for life, and that day came
to a little house, four miles on this side Coventry, where being benighted, he
asked if he could have any lodging for a man and horse, which the host told him
very readily he might; and introduced him into the kitchen, where he saw the
spit saddled with some ^o. Is and other necessaries of life; he asked, who they
were for? They told him a couple of gentlemen, who they believed would be very
glad of his company, which he was very well pleased with, and desired the
landlord to enquire, if a stranger might be admitted, which they readily agreed
to. and Mr. Mac-Faul was admitted, with as much ceremony, as if he had been a
country justice of the peace, who behaved himself with so much courtesy, that
after a bottle or two, a friendship seemed to be cemented amongst them. The
gentlemen were frank and open, and Mac-Faul as full of enquiry as was
consistent with his interest, till at last he perceived they were a couple of
graziers just come from London, whom he thought persons worth his better
acquaintance, and having informed himself which way they were to travel in the
morning, he said he should be glad of their company, and accordingly setting
out together, they had not rode above two miles, before he told them his
business, and that he must have a little ready money, which was what they did
not care to hear of; however for quietness sake, they were forced to submit,
and gave him what they had about them, which amounted to about one hundred
pounds, with which he rode off, and bid them take care what company they fell
into for the future, which they very wisely told him they would, and wished him
good luck with his bargain; but it seems it was done with a curse.

In half an hour after this, a couple of jolly fellows met him, a^^ gave him
the word stand; which language he not being used to, immediately drew his
pistol, and let fly; this so surpised the two thieves, that they presently
began to capitulate, and upon a little further enquiry, found one another to be
all Cavalier collectors on the king's highway; and although it is said two of a
trade can never agree, yet they entered into a fast triple alliance, that was
never broke till two of them were hanged, and their necks broken with a rope as
you shall hear more hereafter. And now they frankly communicated to each other
the danger they were in, and judged it safest, to make the best of their way
toward Dunstable, near which place they robbed two coaches, and some
travelers of lace, which in all amounted to near five hundred pounds; but were
immediately pursued to Brickhill, where staying a little too long, they had
like to have been taken, had not Moll Flanders, who was married to another
husband that day in the town, prevented the Hue and Cry going after them, by
assuring the high constable that she knew the gentlemen to be very honest men,
and that one of them was a gentleman of a very good estate in Lancashire, from
whence she was then upon her journey.

After this he robbed sometimes with his companions, and sometimes by himself;
but having got seven or eight hundred pounds, he did not run such desperate
risques as formerly, although he met with several hard and desperate encounters
on the road, by which he had received several wounds, and some very terrible
ones indeed, particularly one with a pistol bullet, which broke his arm, and
another with a sword, which run him quite through the body; but it missing his
vitals he it cu^ed again; one of his new comrades having kept with him so
faithfully, that he assisted him in riding fourscore miles before his arm was
set, and then got a surgeon in a considerable city remore from the place where
it was done, pretending they were gentlemen traveling toward Carlisle, and
had been attacked on the road by highwaymen, whom they resisted, one of them
having shot him through the arm.

The cure being pretty chargeable, and they lying about six months out of
business, they made the best of their way to Hounslow, where meet-with a coach
and six, they robbed it of near two hundred pounds in money and jewels, and
twogold watches; but Mac-Faul being not quite recovered of his lameness, did
not ride up to the coach with the other, but stood upon the watch, at a
distance while they robbed the coach; when some gentlemen coming on horseback
from Windsor, hearing there were highwaymen in the road, pursued them, he not
being able to keep company with the others, on account of his wound; who
utterly denied that he had any knowledge of the highwaymen and swore he bad
like to have been robbed himself; but that would not avail, for he was known to
be an old offender, and was carried before a justice of the peace, who
committed him to Newgate, where he lay for above half a year; but no evidence
coming in against him, he was ordered to transport himself, which he did.

The History of Gilder-Roy a Murderer, Ravisher, Incendiary, and Highwayman.
THIS villain was descended of an ancient family, and born in Perthshire in the
Highlands of Scotland; whose father dying just as he came of age, left him 80
marks a year, which he squandered away in less than a year and a half, and then
lived upon his mother, till she found no hopes of reclaiming him. When
withholding her hand, he burst one night into her bed chamber and cut her
throat from ear to ear, and then ravished his own sister and the maid; and
afterward robbing the house, set it a fire, and burnt them both in it.

This unparalleled piece of villainy soon made a noise all over the kingdom,
upon which a proclamation was issued out, promising a hundred pounds reward, to
take him dead or alive, which made him fly into France, where he picked
Cardinal Richlieu's pocket as he was saying mass at St. Dennis's in Paris:
which the king perceiving, Gilder Roy made motions to the king, not to take any
notice, and he should see good sport; upon which the king let him alone; and
after prayers going to the cardinal, he asked him if he had an^ money about him
(...) who missing his purse, fell into a great surprise; but the king knowing
which way it went, fell a laughing; till being tired with laughter, he was
willing the cardinal should know what was become of it: For the king thinking
the thief to be an honest man, was willing the cardinal should have his money
again; but Gilder-Roy had more wit in his anger, than to come near either of
them; which the cardial finding, turned all his laughter against the king,
which made him swear it was the first time that ever a thief made him his
confederate. Upon this, flying out of France into Spain, he went upon a day of
public entertainment to the duke of Medina Call's house, where seeing several
pieces of plate in a trunk, ready for the servants to attend their lords with,
he dressed himself in a Spanish habit, like the steward of the house, and
desiring the servants to sit off the trunk, he carried it away.

By this time Gilder-Roy, thinking all the noise was over about him in his own
country, resolved to go to Scotland again, where he soon became as notorious a
highwayman, as ever was in the country before. He first robbed the earl of Lith
lingow of a gold watch, a diamond ring, and 80 pieces of gold; by which he
became so terrible, that people were afraid to travel; and when he wanted
money, he would go into Athol, Lochaber, Angeni, Mar, Baqueham; Murrey,
Sutherland, and all over the north, and drive away their cattle, unless they
paid him contributions, which they did quarterly.

One time Oliver Cromwell embarking at Donaghadee, in the North of Ireland,
landed at Port-Patrick, in Scotland, which Gilder-Roy hearing of, met him and
two servants in the road to Glasgow, bidding him stand and deliver; when, after
the exchange of some pistols, Gilder-Roy made off, and they pursued him, when
Gilder-Roy turning short, shot Oliver's horse, which falling down broke
Oliver's leg; then he killed one of the servants, and gave the other quarter;
which done, finding Oliver lame, he tied his legs under an ass's belly, and
sent them both to seek their fortune.

Three of his companions being taken, and sent to Glasgow goal, were ordered to
be hanged in chains; which Gilder-Roy resenting, he vowed revenge one time or
other; and a little after, meeting the judge upon the road to Aberdeen, he
stripped his coachman and two footmen, tied them neck and heels, and threw,
them into a pond; he then robbed the judge and killed his four horses, and
carried him to the tree where his companions hanged, (which in Scotland is like
a turn style) where upon the fourth beam he hanged the judge, saying, "By my
sol, mun, as this structure, erected to break people's cr^igs, is not uniform
without another, I'se must ^'en hang you upon the vacant beam." At length, his
villainies grew so intolerable, that he gloried not only in robbing, but
murdering men, ravishing women, and burning houses. But a proclamation coming
out with a reward of 1000 marks, to take him dead or alive, one Peg Cunnigham,
a strumpet with whom he kept company, betrayed him; when finding himself
surrounded with 50 men; he ran into her bedchamber, and ripped up the harlot's
guts, and then killed 7 of his adversaries, before they could take him; but at
last being overcome, he was taken and carried to Edinburgh cast, where he was
kept in irons three days, without victuals or drink, and then hanged without
any process, on a gibbet 50 feet high, in April 1658, aged 34 years; and
afterward hanged on another gibbet 40 feet high, on the road betwixt Leith and
Edinburgh.

The History of Thomas Darbel, a Muderer, Ravisher, and Highwayman.
HE was born at Shafesbury, in Dorsetshire, and put apprentice to a glover at
Blandford; but running away from his master, before he had served his time, he
came up to London; and ^ent upon the highway at the age of seventeen, though in
the first attempt he had like to have been nipt in the bud; for meeting with a
Welchman, and demanding his money, he said, "hur has no money of hur own, but
has threescore pounds of hur master's which hur cannot part with." Quota Tom,
you shall not cant me off thus; money I want, and money I must have; hereupon
the Welchman give him the money, saying, "What will you give but none of hur
own? pray shot shur through the coat, that hur master may see hur was robbed;"
which Tom doing, cots splutter a nails, says Tuffy, this is a pretty pounce;
pray give hur another pounce for hur money; which he did; by St. Davy, says
the Welchman, this is a better pounce than the other; pray give her another;
quoth Tom, I have no more; then says Taffy, hur has one pounce left for hur,
and if hur will not give hur hur money, hur will pounce hur through the body.

After this, Tom was pretty successful in his villainy, for above five years.
Once he undertook for 500 pounds to save a gentleman that was condemned;
hereupon, when just as the judge was about to pass the sentence, he cried out
to the bench that he had committed that robbery; upon which the gentleman was
cleared and when they came to try him, the evidence not presuming to swear
against him, they having sworn positively against the other, he was acquitted
also.

Afterward Tom attacked, on Salisbury plain, the duke of Norfolk, who taking
him, carried him to Salisbury goal, where he was condemned; but for money got a
reprieve, and at length his liberty. After this he went to serve a lady in
Ormond-street, who having a niece coming out of the country, sent Tom to meet
her; whom he first robbed of her gold watch, diamond-ring, and jewels, and then
tied her neck and heels, and debauched her; which being discovered, he was
taken upon pursuit the Wednesday following, at Hammersmith, just after he had
robbed a gentleman of three guineas, and committed to Newgate; from whence he
was removed to Bristol, where he received sentence of death for this horrid
crime. The young lady died a little after, for which he showed no remorse of
conscience: Yet he was hanged on Saturday, the 23d of March, 1714, in the 45th
year of his age; he died very impenitently. After he was executed on St.
Michael's Hill, he was cut down, and hanged in chains, in the road without
Diafford's gate.

FINIS.

