The present Times perilous.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT SULLIVAN, ON THE NATIONAL FAST, APRIL 25, 1799.

BY ABRAHAM CUMMINGS, A. M.

Printed for DAVID J. WATERS, CASTINE.

A SERMON.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 1 -- 9. In the last days perilous times shall come: For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of these who are
good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn
away. For of this sort are they who creep into houses, and lead captive silly
wo^^^n laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts; ever learning, and never
able to con^^^ to the l^^^^dge of the truth. Now, as Jannes and Jambres with
(...) Moses, s^ do these also, resist the truth: ^^n of corrupt minds, repr^^^
co^rning the faith. But they shall proceed (...) farther; for th^^r folty shall
be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.


THE works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them who have pleasure
therein. How frequently and plainly are we enjoined by the voice of Scripture
to behold the works of the Lord and consider the operation of his hands -- To
consider how Infinite Wisdom determines the character and condition of men and
the different ages of the world. Our Lord reproved the Jews for not discerning
the signs of the times. Hence the advice before us. This know also that in the
last days perilous times shall come, etc.

If it was necessary for Timothy to know this, it cannot be less necessary for
us to know it, who are so much more interested in the events of the last days
than Timothy could be, or any other person in that age of the world. Let us
then consider,

What time is here intended by the last days:

And, How it appears that the character of men in the last days fulfils the
prophecy in view.

I. What time is here intended by the last days.

The scripture mentions, at least, two important periods by this appellation:
The last days of the Jews and the last days of the Christians. Gather
yourselves together, said Jacob to his sons, that I may tell you that which
shall befall you in the last days, i. e. the last times of the Jewish
dispensation. God, who at sundry times and in diverse manners, spoke in time
past unto the fathers by the prophets, says Paul, has in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son. Here also it is plain that the phrase means the last
days of the Jewish dispensation. But in our text the phrase is spoken in the
future tense, and therefore must signify the last days of the Christian
dispensation. Such are the present days. It is allowed by the most excellent
commentators, that the moment is very near when time shall be no longer; when
the mystery of God shall be finished; when the Millennium, the third
dispensation of the gospel, shall commence, and when Christ will destroy the
man of sin by the brightness of his coming; but this will further appear if we
consider,

II. How it appears that the character of mankind in these days fulfils the
prophecy in view. The prophecy begins by declaring that perilous times shall
come, times of great danger. And cannot the friends of religion now see the
fulfillment? How perilous are the present times, with regard to the spiritual
welfare of mankind! Our father and fathers' fathers never saw such a day as
this: such a day of delusion in the Christian world. Universalism, Deism and
Atheism have set their mouths against the heavens, and laughed at the solemn
threatenings of Jehovah. They say unto the wicked, It shall be well with him,
and cry, Peace, peace, where there is no peace.

The Apostle Peter, writing to Christians in general, foretells this our
dreadful apostasy: There were false prophets also among the people, even as
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord who bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. Those among us, who have the
proper use of their eyes, can clearly see the accomplishment of those
predictions, which tell us that the Christian world, in the last days, shall be
filled with all manner of delusions, and pernicious, foolish errors. Our false
teachers are now performing the work long since assigned for them, that the
scripture may be fulfilled. Some of them have crept into houses, and led
captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts. When the
infidel false teachers in France published their infamous writings, Mr. Pirie
tells us, that the poisardes or fish-women of Paris were the first objects of
their seduction; and by their means the whole fabric of Church and State was
o^^^ hrow^ in an instant. Weishaupt, the founder of the Illuminees, has given
to his regents particular secret instructions for seducing the women. He says,
That the fair sex, having the greatest part of the world at their disposition,
^o study was ^^^re worthy of the adept, than the art of slattery, in order to
gain them. -- A^^s^a^ Consp. p. 25.


Now I ask, what can render the times more perilous than these pernicious and
damnable errors, which allure such multitudes to everlasting ruin? 'He who
flattereth his neighbor, spreads a net for his feet. There is a way which
seems right unto a man, but the end thereof is the way of death.'

These horrid delusions are the source of horrid immoralities, which render the
times perilous with regard to temporal life, peace and property! For men shall
be lovers of their own selves, says the text.

Men were always lovers of their own selves, in all ages of the world; but now
this evil of evils shall greatly prevail. Selfishness is the essence of sin;
the fountain of all immorality; and as some wicked men are more selfish than
others, so it is not unreasonable to suppose that some wicked ages of men are
more selfish than others. Accordingly the present age exhibits abundant
selfishness. How many are there among us, sustaining public offices, and under
solemn oaths to maintain the cause of virtue and the authority of the laws, who
can trample on both to accomplish their own sinister purposes. Innumerable are
the forms in which this base principle appears; but I shall particularly attend
to those which the text presents to our view.

To show how self-love should operate in the last days, the text declares that
men shall be covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers. Covetousness now appears
every where among all ranks of people, each one looking for gain from his
quarter. Such horrid robbery and extensive violation of property have lately
afflicted the earth and the sea, as were seldom known in former times.

And what age of the world ever heard such boasting as the present? What great
swelling words of vanity do we hear from the lips of our infidel sons of
liberty! What a treat Patriot was Robespiere in profession, ready to die for
his country and the cause of virtue! and was there ever a greater Tyrant? I
shall plant the tree of liberty in London next summer, said Dumourier. These
are but two, among innumerable instances of this kind, which may be quoted from
the history of the present times. The rulers of France have undertook to
regenerate the world, and diffuse liberty, peace and happiness every where; and
more swelling language never was heard from the tongue of man than has
proceeded from the leading part of that infidel assembly, respecting the great
good which the world are to receive by their means. The eloquent Abbe Maury,
speaking of the great and dreadful change of times and laws among them, called
it a b^^^ed revolution. Swelling behavior is one remarkable property of the
frog. Under the sixth vial, now running, John saw 'three ^^^lean spirit, like
frogs, come out of the mouth of the beast, dragon, and false pro^^et^^ enenties
to civil society, morality, and the true religion: 'For they are spirits of
devils, working (...) A p^^in allusion to the frogs of Egypt working miracles
to overthrow divine revelation as exhibited by Moses. And our frogs hate Moses,
with ^h^^^ whole volume of ^^paration, and great are the moral miracles which
they are now performing; miracles of wickedness, as foreign to the common
course of things in the moral world, as the appearance and conduct of the
frongs of Egypt were foreign to the common cou^^^ of things in the natural
world. The frogs of Egypt went fort^^, is a plague, unto the chambers of their
kings; and our modern frogs (...) go forth as a plague, unto the kings of the
earth, to gather the^^ to the ^^^tle of that great day of God Almighty' now at
hand. The language of frogs ^^tering a king's palace is this: We are of a^^^^
(...) importance yet a^; we are all e^^al. And when we see a company of frogs
in their loathsome c^lls, the type of illumi^a^^^m, we obser^^ no ^^^der, no
d^^^^n^tion with respect to power. They all appear e^ual, i^d^^^^^^, and
ha^^^ess. A frog was the ancient hiero^iyp^^^ for all ^^^^^or.


And what high, pompous prosessions of patriotism and philanthropy, bubble
forth in the gazettes, from one year to another. These we know are the effects
of pride; for men shall be proud in the last days. Who more proud than he who
is wife in his own conceit? and who more wife in his own conceit than he who is
wife above what is written, as all our insidels are, while they ridicule every
doctrine, every proposition, which a creature of yesterday, a vile worm of the
dust cannot comprehend. Accordingly they set their mouth in blasphemy against
the heavens, and their tongue walks through the earth: For men shall be
blasphemers, says the text. Never before was there so much blasphemy known
among mankind as sounds in the world at this day. 'We have no other religion
but the Constitution, and no other God but Liberty;' said the infamous Marat,
when the petition of the Baptists in France to be released from bearing arms
was rejected. The impious Cerutideclared in his expiring moments that the only
thing which was matter of regret with him in leaving the world was, that he
left a religion on the earth.

Blasphemous catechisms have been published in France, in which the
Constitution of the Republic was substituted for God, and the National Assembly
for the Saints. Our Savior's incarnation has been the subject of printed
ridicule in the base language of the dregs of the people.

The horrid Massacre at Lions in the year 1793 was introduced by a procession,
which set Heaven and an hereafter at desiance. An ass was dressed in the
vestments of Priests, with the Old and New Testament tied to his tail, and made
to drink out of the sacramental cup: and, when the procession had arrived to a
certain spot of ground prepared for the purpose, the Bible was publicly burnt
amid the shouts and rejoicings of the blasphemous assistants. The impious
courtezan of Hebert at Paris was on a certain public occasion brilliantly
dressed, placed on a throne of ivory, and worshipped as the goddess of Reason;
all with a view to cast contempt on the worship of JEHOVAH. The rulers of
France have declared our blessed Lord and Redeemer to be an impostor; have
prohibited the acknowledgment of him and the exercise of his worship. A
comedian, during the French revolution, appeared personally attacking Almighty
God; saying: "No, thou doit not exist. If thou have power over the
thunderbolts, grasp them; aim them at the man who dares set thee at defiance
in the face of thy altars But no, I blaspheme thee, and I still live. No, thou
do not exist." -- Antisocial Consp. p 129.


But to proceed,

Another evil here predicted is disobedience to parents. How visible is the
difference between family government fifty years since, and that which appears
at the present time! There was such a thing as family prayer in former times;
it was nothing wonderful for a child to hear his father pray and give religious
instruction; but now family worship and government are generally neglected, and
disobedience in children is the natural consequence. The present age is
favored with great light, abundant knowledge, important privileges; but ah!
the ingratitude every where manifest! how great their damnation with whom such
blessings remain unsanctified! But the text must be fulfilled, Unthankful,
unholy.

The next prediction demands particular notice: Without natural affection. The
prevalence of this evil is now clear to every discerning eye. Kinsmen were more
regarded formerly than brethren are at present; I think any person may be
challenged to find in the whole history of mankind so many instances of this
depravity, in so short a period, as have disgraced human nature within the last
ten years. What person, possessed of natural affection, could murder his whole
family at once, as that infidel Mr BEABLE, of Weathersfield.
did in Connecticut? A similar species of murder was lately attempted in the
State of Vermont, by another Deist. For more instances of this kind, look into
France, where infidelity reigns triumphant. There hundreds of fathers and
mothers have been lately led to prison, and publicly accused by their own
children, that they might be put to death, for some difference of sentiment in
politics or religion. Our Lord has foretold this as one sign of his second
coming -- 'Children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be
put to death.'

Montsoy tells us, that a certain child, about ten years old, having been
corrected by his mother for some fault, repaired to the revolutionary tribunal,
and accused her of favoring the Christian Religion. The accusation was
admitted, the boy recompensed, and the mother executed in a few hours. One
Philippe, in Paris, cut off the heads of his father and mother, while they were
asleep, and carried them to the Jacobin Club, as a proof of his patriotism. One
Goutin, of Nantz, beat his father on his death bed. Many children, in that
infidel country, have been known not only to despise and ridicule their
parents, but to beat and lacerate them in a cruel manner, because they refused
the precepts of the new infidel system of politics. The same want of natural
affection has been expressed against other relatives. The Abbe Barruel, in his
History of the French Clergy, mentions a father who led his son to death; of
one O'Sullivan, who led his brother to the guillotine, after he had cast
himself into his arms for protection. And we know that a brother of the late
King of France was one of those who sought his destruction.

Some of the French officers, when they ravaged Swabia and the banks of the
lake of Constance, we are informed, drowned their own children, which they had
by their wives and concubines, to avoid the trouble of providing for them.

That infernal Society, styled the Illuminati, or Illuminces, maintain it, as
one of their important doctrines, that natunal affection ought to have no
existence, and that marriage, the source of all natural affection, is not only
useless but injurious to society, It is the modern doctrine of the
Ency^lopedists and the Illuminees, "That the paternal authority ceases with the
wants of the children: The father would wrong his children, should he pretend
to any authority over them after this period." -- "All th^^^ties of nature, as
well (...) those of government or religion, says Abbe Ba^^^^^" ^^^re to be
^^^^^^d (...) ^h^upt^^ last My^^^^^^." -- Antise (...) Con^^^ p. 164. 165.
-- And the dreadful s^^es^ci^otte oath spares neither parents, friends, nor
relations. How clearly, then, is this prediction verified before our eyes!

Another character of men which the text mentions are, truce breakers.

The word truce, here means any stipulation, covenant, or agreement, which two
or more persons may form with each other. Look now through the land and through
the world: do we not find that truces, stipulations, oaths and promises are
violated every where? The merchant can tell you how few there are at this day,
whose words are more than wind. I do not believe that there was ever a time in
which covenants, oaths and promises were more impudently violated than they are
at this day. Are not thousands of oaths broken in America and England annually?
Some late French publications inform us, that the constituent assembly of
France broke their oaths and promises in the most public manner. The deputies
were all furnished with written instructions, in which they were positively
enjoined to make no innovations as to the form of government; yet they framed a
constitution, by which the government was totally changed. So every individual
of the convention in the year 1792, took an oath to maintain the authority of
the king. What was the consequence? In a few months after, they declared France
a republic, and murdered the king. And it would be tedious to enumerate the
instances of perfidy which the French have exhibited toward the numerous towns
in Europe, which have fallen within the grasp of their insatiable rapacity.

But why should oaths and promises be less regarded now than formerly? The
answer is easy: The present age is the age of reason, the age of infidelity.
Only believe that there is no future misery, no Bible, or no God, and what need
you care for oaths or promises? For the same reason, false accusers are
multiplied, and the incontinent, levers of pleasures more than lovers of God.
Here is the figure meiosis; q. d. They shall wallow in carnal pleasures, and be
filled with enmity against God.

It is impossible for any discerning person, who has lived forty years, not to
perceive how much more numerous intemperate and lascivious persons now are,
than formerly, in proportion to the number of people; ruining property, family,
body, soul and all forever.

Another characteristic of the last days is expressed by the word fierce: What
terrible fierceness has appeared in the conduct of our infidel sons of liberty,
in promoting the cause of their licentious politics! It would be tedious to
enumerate, and horrible to describe the cruelties, the assassinations and
massacres in France and other parts of Europe, by which the savage ferocity of
these wicked men has been diverted and delighted. In the term of three years,
Mr. Harper tells us, that besides those slain in the war, no less than three
millions of persons were destroyed in France; of which there were two hundred
and fifty thousand women, and two hundred and thirty thousand children. My
authorities are not particularly quoted; for they are not with me. If the
reader desires more contirmation, he may consult The Cannibal's Progress -- The
History of Mon^^^y -- Abb^ Barrud's History of the French Clergy -- The l^^^
side View of the Prisons of Paris -- The Cruelties of the Jacobins -- Robison's
Pr^^s of a C^^spira^y -- and P^ri^: Lectures.


But we hasten to the next prediction: Despisers of those who are good. Good
people have always been despised in every age; but there is one new doctrine
peculiar to these last days, which our infidels are rapidly propagating; which
is, that piety, in a candidate for any political office, is no qualification or
recommendation at all. Good men, as such, are of no use at all in any public
employment of the State. Can such a doctrine as this gain ground among a
people, unless good men are despised as they never were before?

The ministers of the Christian religion too, whether they are Papists or
Protestants, are reproached and scoffed at as they never were before, in any
former period. They are considered by multitudes as a nuisance in society, and
a constant impediment to that great something, which the boasting and
licentious politicians of our age have in store for the liberty and
regeneration of mankind. What a parsimenious disposition prevails, at this day,
with respect to the support of the gospel. This presents a melancholy aspect.
The regular and honorable support of religious teachers is opposed by a number
who appear conscientious. Little do they consider what they are doing; how much
they help the devil; what assistance they afford to our modern enemies of all
good order, civil and religious.
But believe the prophecy, my hearers; the day, the dreadful day, is near, even
at the door, when God will teach the world, by an awful lesson, that our
patriotic insidels are as great enemies to the true welfare of civil society as
they are to religion. For the prophecy before us declares, that men shall be
traitors in the last days. The Apostle Peter, describing the apostasy of the
last times, more especially marks out those for destruction who walk in the
lust of uncleanness and despise government. Presumptuous are they, he says,
self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. He represents them
as speaking great swelling words of vanity, and promising liberty, while they
themselves are servants to corruption. The same are the prophetic ideas of the
text: Traitors, heady, high-minded; which clearly presignify that men shall
countenance licentious politics, and be filled with pride and self-importance.
They shall trample on the laws of men, as well as the laws of God, and oppose
the best principles of government and sound policy. Accordingly it is
impossible for any one, who has the proper use of his eyes, not to see what a
traitorous, rebellious spirit breathes among mankind at the present day. We are
a young people, favored by Infinite Goodness with some of the best
constitutions of government that any nation ever enjoyed; but, young as we are,
and happy as we are in this respect, we are already disgraced by three
insurrections. Many there are among us filled with disgust against the wise
measures and even the foundation of our government. Ungrateful people! we know
not our privileges -- we cannot enjoy them: such is our unreasonable jealousy
and coffeehouse: like the man to whom God has given riches, wealth and
honor, so that he wants nothing of all that his soul desires, yet God
gives him not power to eat thereof.

As the minds of men, at this day, are polluted with wicked and licentious
principles respecting religion, so they are with respect to politics. The false
doctrines of liberty and equality, which have contaminated millions of mankind,
have certainly a most pernicious influence in society, and are introductory to
all those horrid scenes of insurrection and anarchy, distress of nations and
perplexity, which must fulfill the prophetic scriptures in the last days. There
are many in our land, who behave as if they esteemed it their indispensable
duty to oppose government and reproach the rulers, whenever the mode of
administration happens not to coincide with their political ideas. What violent
reproaches and misrepresentations have some gazettes poured forth against the
principal rulers of our nation, for that course of administration which demands
our warm approbation!

But what says the scripture? 'Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy
people. Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people.'
When the Roman officer demanded tribute of our Lord and Peter, did they, like
some of our great patriots, refuse or oppose the tyranny of the tax? No: 'Lest
we should offend,' said Christ to Peter, 'go thou to the sea and cast in a
hook, and take up the fish that comes up first, and when thou have opened it,
thou shall find a piece of money: that take and give unto them, for me and
thee.'

Subjection to the powers that be is enjoined by the Apostle upon Christians,
as their indispensable duty. Whereby, I think, it is plain, that Christians
should never appear the first in political revolutions. That mankind every
where should enjoy as much liberty as can be consistent with salutary
government, must be consonant to the feelings of every benevolent mind; but
insurrection is the last mode of redress that even an oppressed people should
ever contemplate. When our states suffered that oppression from Britain which
occasioned the revolution, petition after petition was sent to the British
court, while we suffered injury upon injury, before the sword was unsheathed on
our part Every mild method for obtaining relief was adopted. And after all, the
ruler of Britain, and no we, were the rebels against the C^nstitution of their
government, which plainly prohibited ^^cation without representation.
We find in the scriptures very little which can be construed to favor
political rebellion. 'The Most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it
to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the bas^st of men.' So long as
the plurality of mankind are exceedingly depraved and wicked, all governments
will be afflicted with wicked men and wicked measures, in a less or greater
degree. The hand of piety for the most part has not swayed the civil scepter in
time past, and we may believe never will, while the present dispensation of the
gospel remains. To what purpose then can it be for Christians to be eager in
the business of revolution; to exchange one form of government for another?
since true Christianity, perhaps, will have no more influence under the latter
government than under the former. What great benefit can it be to exchange one
mode of tyranny for another, and one mode of persecution for another? Political
revolutions are frequently political judgments, their circumstances and
consequences being far more dreadful than the oppression which occasioned them.
The ten tribes complained and had reason to complain of the tyranny of
Rehoboam. Accordingly they revolted. What did they gain by it? Their history
declares that their character was far more abominable, and their condition far
more miserable, than they ever were before.

How happy were the Christians in their own view in the days of Constantine,
when the old empire was destroyed. Their prospect was all tranquillity and
peace: Nothing to do now but to bask in the vernal sun of their great
revolution. But clouds, O how black and dismal! soon obscured all this glory.
They soon sound that their new government was not the kingdom of heaven, but
nourished the man of sin, and more dreadful scenes of persecution and cruelty
were now to follow than ever were known before.

Other revolutions, too numerous to particularize, have been attended with
similar consequences.

It is a great truth, that some forms of government are better calculated to
promote the welfare of society than others; but it is not enough that a
constitution be good: it must be in good hands, in the hands, not of Deists and
Atheists, but of those who fear God, and hate covetousness; for 'when the
righteous bear rule, the city rejoiceth; when the wicked bear rule, the people
mourn.' A good constitution in bad hands tends to far greater evils than a bad
constitution in good hands.

When therefore a nation are become exceedingly corrupt and degenerate, the
mere change of their government will accomplish but a poor purpose. There must
be a change of morals as well as government; otherwise their revolution will
prove a curse and not a blessing: For still the wicked will bear rule, and
still the people will mourn.

It is, therefore, in ordinary cases, not only great wickedness, but extreme
folly, for Christians to seek a kingdom in this world by political
insurrection; to seek that by insurrection, which Christ has plainly told them
they never shall obtain by any means whatever. It is the future kingdom of
heaven which Christians are to look for: a kingdom, which will very soon be
established on the earth: for the Judge stands before the door, the Millennium
is at hand; and then 'the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall
be given to the people of the saints of the Most High.' Accordingly we sind
that the first disciples were peaceable citizens: we have no account that
either Paul, Peter, James, or John, belonged to any republican society or
Jacobin Club; though they had far more reason to complain than any class of
white people now have, either in America or Britain. They never swore hatred to
royalty; but 'submit, say they, to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake;
fear God, honor the KING.'

If the observations now made be just, the principles and conduct of
multitudes, at this day, are clearly traitorous, and amply fulfill this solemn
prediction of the text.

But I hear the voice of objection: "What business have the ministers of the
gospel with politicians in their preaching!" The answer is, Because politicians
have business with them. The ministers of religion in France have had business
with infidel politicians, drowning boats and assassinations, because all these
have had business with them. Among the many devices of Satan at the present
day, this is one, that the teachers of religion have no concern with polities.
But had Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and other prophets, no concern in these affairs? Had
the Apostles no concern with them, when they taught subjection to rulers? Read
your Bibles, and determine. Indispensable is the duty of the watchmen, on the
walls of Zion, as they are enabled to discern the signs of the times, to warn
the churches and people of their approaching danger.

But to proceed. While many blaspheme the Lord of glory, others oppose him
secretly, by the form of godliness, while they deny the power, slumbering on
the principles of false religion, as on a bed of down; from such, we are
exhorted by the text, to turn away, deny ourselves, and take up the cross. Gog
and Magog signify covered and uncovered, secret enemies, and open enemies:
these are the two grand persecutors of the church, in the last days.

We now attend to the next prediction. Ever learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth.

The present age exceeds all others for learning; many have run to and fro, and
knowledge is increased. Yet vast multitudes are not only destitute of the
spiritual knowledge of Christ; but they wander more and more in the mazes of
strong delusion, that they all might be damned, who believe not the truth, but
have pleasure in unrighteousness. For, says the text, 'Evil men and seducers
wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.' For 'as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth; men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the faith.' Jannes and Jambres endeavored to represent
Moses as an impostor: so do these men also resist the truth, endeavoring to
represent all the prophets as impostors. 'But they shall proceed no further:
for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.' Jannes and
Jambres were magi, wise men, who became fools, and were shown to be such. And
our modern magi are wise men, in reality, with regard to the sciences; but
professing themselves to be wise with regard to religion, they become fools;
and it will not be long, before God will exhibit them as such to the view of
the whole world.

There were giants in the earth, in those days of wickedness which preceded the
flood; and there are giants in the earth in these days, with respect to
literature, exerting their wisdom against Heaven. The former were destroyed by
water, and these will be destroyed by fire. 'Be patient, therefore, brethren,
unto the coming of the Lord' -- 'For they shall proceed no further.' This is
the last effort which the man of sin shall exert. He was first a Pagan,
Antiochus Epiphan.
then a Christian, and now this son of perdition has become a son of liberty.
And the characteristics by which he is known are as visible now as formerly. He
has committed sacrilege in the temple of God; robbed the churches of their
sacred utensils. He has magnified himself above every god, and spoken
mavelous things against the God of gods. He corrupts by flatteries, promising
liberty. He thinks to change times and laws. He is a revolutionist, with a new
calendar and constitution. He has not regarded the desire of 'women;' but his
laws and license prostrate their honor. He has seized the monasteries, and
'divided the land for gain.' Formerly, the man or sin opposed Christ under the
covering of religion; but now he meets Christ in the open field; and Christ
will soon meet him in the open field, and destroy him by the brightness of his
coming. (...) coming. Not t^^ wh^^^ (...) by fire. Th^^ par^^^^ (...) by
Nebucha^^^ (...) and the whole world. This (...) cut out of the (...) ^^narch,
(...) ^^archy, which (...). If there (...) who is h^^^ (...) may per^^^^ (...)
in the Mi^^^^^^. (...) the time of (...) that ^^^ple who (...) th^^^ sp^^,
(...) will (...) ^^^ned (...) a bright^ (...) the ^^ll of m^^kind.


Then the Deists will see a miracle, and believe the Bible. Ah! infidel, your
anarchy is short: soon will your scoffing mouth cry to the mountains, Fall on
us, and to the rocks, Cover us. Happy, long-expected day! Ye saints, lift up
your heads, and look up; for your redemption draw^th nigh.

INFERENCES.

1. Observe the remarkable analogy between the last days of the Jews, and these
last days of the Christians. The Jews of that time had more knowledge than
their ancestors. There were great ^^vivals of true religion among them, while
the body of the people sun more (...) more in d^^^ion and immorality: they had
great ^iv^^^on^ ^^^ng them, with respect to religion and politics. There were
many who had the form of godling, (...) d^^^^^ the power, and many skeptics and
infid^^^ among them. There w^^ much talk of liberty among them^spun; while they
were falling into a state of anarchy. The same is our condition in all these
respects. Josephus tells us, that the young people among them were fond of
innovations: that somilies were greatly divided among themselves, and the
dearest connexions broke through all restraints, with respect to each other.

How remarkable the resemblance between the Jewish zealots and the infidel
Jacobins of Europe! The zealots were great patriots. "They exhorted one another
to assert their liberty," says Josephus. "They trampled on the laws of men, and
laughed at the laws of God. They ridiculed the oracles of the prophets, as the
tricks of jugglers." "They disannulled the succession of the priesthood, and
ordained vile, ignoble, and undeserving persons for that office, that they
might have their assistance in their wicked undertakings." Such has been the
conduct of the Jacobins, with respect to the laws of men and the laws of God.
The conscientious Catholic priests were driven from their places and livings,
and were succeeded by licentious and perjured persons, who favored the
Jacobins, and taught the religion of reason.

The zealots murdered many of the priests, and destroyed the remains of
political government. "They erected tribunals," says Josephus, "for the
destruction of those who were obnoxious to their n^^a^ious designs. Their
thirst was chiefty after the blood of good families. And while they were
destroying the people, their terror was so great, that no one had courage
enough openly to weep for his deceased friend or relation, or to bury him."
Just like the conduct of the Jacobins, in Robespiere's reign of terror; with
this difference, that the tyranny and wickedness of the latter have been far
more extensive. And as the last days of the Jews were more and more perilous,
till the time of their destruction; so we may expect that our days will be more
and more perilous, till the Christian world are destroyed by fire from heaven:
Christ has expressly told us, that there shall now be such a time of trouble
'as was not from the beginning of the creation; distress of nations and
perplexity, the sea and waves roaring, men's hearts failing them for fear, and
for looking after those things which are coming on the earth.' Many will tell
you that the coming of Christ is far off, and that the Christian world will
soon be filled with holiness and happiness. Believe them not; for these
perilous times are allowed by all to be the times of the seven last plagues.
What is the consequence of these plagues? Is it reformation? No; but blasphemy.
Under the fourth vial, The fourth vial was poured out upon the sun. The civil
powers of our modern infidels, under the sixth vial, a^^ called the kings of
the East, for as the ancient kings of the East, the Medes and Persians,
destroyed old Babylon; ^o th^se are now destroying mystical Babylon. I car^^^
but think there is an implicit allusion to the same people, under the ^^urth
vial. What can be a more lively resemblance of the sun than reason? The sun is
the great foun^^^^ of light in the material world, and reason is the great
fountain of light in the intellectual and philosophical world. The ancient
P^rsians worshipp^^ the fan, and ou^ modern Persians worship reason. The
radiance of reason, in our Fer^tious, infidel philosophers, is, by the judgment
of God, perverted, and, ins^^^d of enlightening the world, has scorched mankind
with the wh^ment heat of the ^i^re^k (...) fury and contention. -- The (...) of
all the vials. I supp^^^^ (...) now (...) ^^^^ne measure, and will be m^te and
more so to the end.
'men blasphemed the name of God, who has power over these plagues? Under the
fifth, 'they blasphemed God, because of their pains and their fores, and
repented not of their deeds;' and under the seventh, they 'blasphemed God,
because of the plague of the hail.' How necessary then it is, that we should be
weaned from this world, and set our affections on things above, that we may
enjoy the best friend in the worst times, and be hid in the chambers of divine
love, till these calamities be overpast.

2. Hence we may expect that the church must drink one more bitter cup of
persecution, before Christ's second coming. This will be the battle of Gog and
Magog, the battle of the great day of God Almighty, when the beast, and the
kings of the earth, and their armies, shall make war against him who sits
upon the white horse, the emblem of purity and victory, and against his army.
At the introduction of our dispensation, when we know that Christ personally
appeared, he was represented as appearing upon a white horse. Rev. vi. 1, 2; so
now, at the introduction of the next dispensation, he is represented as
appearing upon a white horse, as the WORD OF GOD, and, AS SUCH, opposed by the
kings of the earth and their armies. Christ is the essential Word, whence the
written word proceeds; opposed by the armies of infidels. This word will then
be fulfilled in their destruction. This fulfillment they will see and feel with
ineffable anguish, and thus be slain by the sword proceeding out of his mouth.
Then they will laugh no more, but soberly believe that the word of God,
fulfilled in their ruin, is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, of the joints
and marrow.

Some will tell you there is too much knowledge in the world for the existence
of persecution. But this is a great mistake. When Christ and the first
disciples were persecuted, there was more knowledge both among the Jews and
Romans than ever there had been in any former period. The true source of
persecution is neither ignorance nor knowledge, with respect to the sciences;
but wickedness of heart, joined with ignorance of theological truth and the
rights of conscience. The innocent blood in France, which has run in torrents
on account of religion as well as politics within seven years past by means of
the men of knowledge, is a glaring evidence that there may be such a creature
in the world as a patriotic, persecuting philosopher. In that age of the world,
which resembled this, the infidel Romans first persecuted and destroyed a
persecuting church, and then turned their fury against the saints; so our
modern infidels are now persecuting and destroying a persecuting church. This
must (...) understood of Papists, as individuals. Excellent characters are
^ound (...) church, for piety and liberality, entirely opposed to the
perticuting spirit (...) ^^^^ery Babylon. And they are now suffering as true
martyrs for the Christian cause. Come out of her, my people; this strongly
inti^^^^s, that some of God's people may remain in her, and partake of her
plagues. Babylon is now burning with the fire of liberty, I mean
licentiousness. It is woud^^^^ to observe how it catches and blazes in various
coun^^es, notwithstanding all the pains used to extinguish it. Clearly verified
are the following ^^^^ures with respect to mystical Babylon. 'When thou shall
(...) to deal treacherously, then they shall deal treacherously with thee.' 'He
who kills with the sward (...) be ^ill I with the sword.' In the cup which sh^^
has fis^^^ to you, sill to her (...) It re^^ares a sort of men extra^^d (...)
for wicked (...), to ^^^fur to (...) double what she has mea^^^ed to either.
Have (...) Atheist, ^^^^^tinet, in popish count^^^^^ (...) y^on is fallen and
is become the (...) of devils, the hold of every ^oul spirit, the ^age of every
^^dem and ^^^esel bird? There is destruction, I think, between Pab^^^ n^^^ed
the man of sin. Babylon is merely the Roman cla^^, with (...) The m^n of (...)
he who was the former hyp^^erits and th^^ (...).
And soon, we may expect, they will turn their fury against the saints of all
communions: yea, is not this work already begun?

The loud cry of this sort of men against persecution, like that of the Jews,
when they garnished the sepulchers of the righteous, is a solemn evidence that
such a fiery trial is at hand. The old persecuting Papists were under some
restraint, because they believed the Bible and future punishment; but these new
persecutors with triumph over all restraint, denying future punishment, denying
the Biole, and some of them even the existence of the D^ity. But this fierce
persecution will be very short; 'for a short work will the Lord make upon the
earch.'

3. Hence learn the wickedness and folly of those Christians, who are now
promoting infidels, by their suffrages, to important employments in the State,
and putting a sword into their hand to stay us. They promise you liberty, and
loud is their cry in favor of reason and the rights of man. Believe them not;
for they themselves are servants to corruption. They appear harmless, at
present; but in a few years longer, their power will be great, and the people
in general exceedingly corrupt and degenerate. Then it will be sound that our
calendar, churches, and clergy are attended with loss to the public -- loss of
time and loss of money -- and are utterly inconsistent with the wisest
political economy. And then the churches, the clergy, and the observers of the
Sabbath, must be punished as enemies to the State. These or similar
abominations may certainly be expected as soon as the people shall become
sufficiently licentious and degenerate. Such corrupt trees cannot but yield
such deadly fruit wherever the soil will admit of it. The base examples, which
some of them now exhibit, are exceedingly pernicious to society. But if we
refuse the suffrage, you say, the infidel will turn Christian, and obtain his
purpose after all. What then? The fault in that case is not your own, but his.
There is a wide difference, in the sight of God, between our electing an
insidel whom we esteem a Christian, and our freely elevating to political
authority the known and open enemies of God and of Jesus Christ. The wicked
walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted: then certainly we should
never use our influence to exalt the vilest of men, as all infidels are, in the
view of every true follower of Cln

For the same reason, it is the indispensable duty of all Christian churches to
discipline and excommunicate such of their members as obstinately persist in
favoring the political elevation of such licentious characters. Have we not
observed, in our country, the Deist favoring some Christians, and using his
influence to obtain certain privileges for them? What was the consequence? Were
not his votes more numerous? Now, I pray, consider, Is it right or wrong? Is
it, or is it not, agreeable to the will of Christ, to promote and insided to
publy authority, because he has accomplished for you some favorite pur^^^? O
what ^^grace to the Christian name* Alas* must Christians themselves have a
hard in promoting that persecution, not only of religion, but of the mo^^
virtues, which appears so rapidly approaching? T^^^ it not in Gath (...)
pu^^^sh it not in the street, of Ai^cion!
But how lamentable the neglect of discipline in churches! 'I will take away
the hedge thereof, and in shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof,
and it shall be trodden down?

4. Hence learn the necessity of watchfulness and spiritual-mindedness. How
careful! how zealous should we be, to avoid all appearance of those crimes
which must constitute the vil^ character of men in the last days! 'See that ye
walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wife, redeeming the time, because the
days are evil? The abounding of iniquity in the world is apt to be attended
with coldness and indifferency among professors of religion; so Christ has told
us. 'Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold? Let us
then, 'with purpose of heart, cleave unto the Lord, and keep the word of his
patience,' that he may 'keep us in that hour of temptation, which shall come to
try all them who dwell upon the earth? Be this our temper of mind, and what can
we fear? Let perilous times come, distress of nations and perplexity; let the
sea and waves roar around us; our feet are safe on the Rock of ages; our souls
shall survive these days of vengeance, "The wreck of ages, and the crush of
worlds."


