THE Art of Excelling; AN ORATION.

THE ART OF EXCELLING; AN ORATION: DELIVERED IN THE BENEVOLENT CONGREGATIONAL
MEETING HOUSE, AT PROVIDENCE, BEFORE THE SOCIETY OF THE FEDERAL ADELPHI; ON
THEIR ANNIVERSARY, SEPTEMBER 5, A. D. 1799.

BY Tristam Burges, A. M.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY JOHN CARTER, JUN. AT THE NEW PRINTING-OFFICE,
MARKET-STREET. 1799.

RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE, Sept. 5, A. D. 1799.
AT a meeting of the Society of the FEDERAL ADELPHI, Voted and Resolved, That
Col. JEREMIAH B. HOWELL, Major AMOS M. ATWELL, and PHILIP CRAPO, Esquire be a
Committee to wait on Mr. TRISTAM BURGES, with the thanks of this Society for
his Oration, delivered to them this day, and request a copy thereof for the
Press.

GENTLEMEN,
THE thanks of our Society, communicated by you, are too flattering, and excite
too much of my gratitude, to leave it in my power to refuse their request. Such
as they are, both the Copy and the Author are at their service.

TRISTAM BURGES.

THE ART OF EXCELLING; AN ORATION.
EMULATION is commmon to all our race. Competition pervades every age of life,
and every grade of character. From the child who lisps his alphabet, to the
grandsire who tells the story of his better days; from the boy whirling his
ball, to the hero commanding his army; we find all influenced by a similar
spirit of emulation. The object of emulation is excellence. All competitors
wish for excellence, whatever may be the object of pursuit; whether gold or
glory, amusement or virtue. Perhaps we have never known the man who could
willingly see all men excel himself in all things. He might, in many respects,
yield the palm of excellence to many; but he would have some favorite
competition in which he would willingly be equalled by none.

WITH all this ardour for excellence, we commence life with no native
pre-eminence. Our real character is the production of our own exertion. God has
wisely given to man merely essence; he has left the formation of his character
to the effort of his own energies. He has said, that unless he mark himself
with deeds of splendor, which may give him to shine along the current of
duration, even immortality itself shall but perpetuate his insignificance, and
continue him an undistinguished particle in the great ocean of being.

THUS destitute of superiority, and thus desirous of distinguishing merit, each
young mortal awakes from the slumbers of nihility; and, starting off in the
career of existence, eagerly enquires how he must run, to obtain the prize of
excellence. The art of excelling, therefore, is universally important. It
interests every individual of man. It cannot then be improperly chosen for the
subject of a few observations before a Society which has no views separate from
the common interest of humanity.

EXCELLENCE may be obtained, first, by an estimation of our powers; and
secondly, by calling up before our minds the motives naturally urging these
powers into exertion.

AFTER a perfect review of all the energies of his nature, man must be
persuaded that every achievement which can augment human merit, lies within
the reach of human acquisition. The first rule, therefore, in the art of
excelling, is to convince ourselves that we can excel.

FOR want of this conviction, many things are frustrated. All imperfect actions
are the offspring of undecided efforts. If any thing be done weakly or
partially; if any enterprise be feebly attempted and fail in the execution, it
is because he who attempted the performance doubted his skill, his energy, or
his success. This doubtfulness generates that timidity which forever unnerves
the arm of exertion. On the contrary, all noble deeds have been done by those
who greatly believed God had rendered them capable of the achievement. This
generous persuasion of mind gives courage, fortitude, perseverance; and thus
diminishes danger, removes difficulty, and surmounts obstacles.

THESE truths will be still more illustrated and evinced, if we advert to a few
examples. Many a midnight taper has shed its last glimmering ray on the sons of
contemplation, who, but for this persuasion, had reposed themselves with the
children of thoughtless ignorance, or rioted amidst the votaries of dissipation.

DEMOSTHENES, from a timid, lisping, hesitating, stammering schoolboy, formed
himself into an Orator, so perfect -- so persuasive -- so commanding -- that
for years he baffled all the intrigues of Macedonian usurpation; pushed back
the torrent of popular licentiousness; and, while all Greece was falling into
the iron hands of slavery, he, by the mere charms of his eloquence, allured
liberty to hover over his native city, and give at least a momentary luster to
the fading glory of Athens. How did he perform this? He believed he could
perform it. This belief gave him resolution, gave him perseverance, gave him
success.

SOCRATES, the pride of Pagan morality, by constitution was prone to every
vice. He was deceitful, intemperate, voluptuous, addicted to revenge, a
betrayer of men, a blasphemer of the Gods. All these vices were so congenial to
his nature, that they were marked in the very features of his face. But, in
reality, he was the very reverse of all these. He was sincere, moderate, above
the allurements of pleasure, patient of injuries to a proverb, of a fidelity
never to be corrupted, and influenced by an habitual reverence for the gods,
and a devotion to their providence. How was this? How did Socrates thus oppose
the united current of all his propensities, appetites and passions? How did he
thus change, and in a manner re-create himself? It was because he felt a
certain divine conviction of soul, that all this mighty revolution lay within
the reach of his power.

THE discoverer of the new world affords us another illustrious example. All
the avarice, envy, ignorance and superstition of the fifteenth century, rose up
against him. An ocean lay between him and the object of his enterprise. He
could stand on the hills of Europe, and view the wave, rising at his foot, and
rolling until it washed against the distant horizon; but all beyond was
uncertainty. It might be a continent of inaccessible rocks; it might be a world
of waters, by whirlpools and shallows impassable, and vexed with everlasting
storms. What but this undoubting persuasion of mind, could have given him a
superiority to all these obstacles?

IT was the same persuasion which, in the American revolution, carried the
volunteers of New England through the pathless, savage-haunted, winter
wilderness of Maine. It was this which tore the laurel of conquest from the
brow of Albian glory, and wrote the names of COLUMBIA and WASHINGTON among the
stars. If, indeed, any thing good or great, any thing worthy to be heard by
nations, to be told to posterity, and had in perpetual remembrance, has ever
been done, it has been done by those alone who nobly believed success was
within their power. Let, therefore, him who would excel, first be persuaded
that he is capable of excellence. Let him believe he can do all things within
the reach of human achievement; that his mind may progress in improvement,
until nothing but infinity remains incomprehensible, nothing but boundless
benevolence unpractised.

THOUGH we may have surveyed the powers of our nature, and feel the certainty
of success, yet we shall never attempt any enterprise, until we are assured the
completion of it will in some respect augment our felicity. All our actions are
the offspring of motives; and our own felicity is the great motive of all our
actions. We have three great sources of felicity with which every other stream
of delight ultimately mingles itself. The first is self-approbation; the next
the praise of other beings; and the last the eternal duration of all those
acquirements, by which the two others are obtained.

LET us then, as another rule in the art of excelling, contemplate these three
primary springs of our felicity as the great motives of excellence.

IF the mind be not vitiated, self approbation can be acquired by nothing less
than excellence. For if emulation be one of our strongest passions, if the
object of emulation be excellence, if we are convinced that whatever
constitutes excellence lies within the reach of our possible acquisition, then
it will be impossible for the mind entirely to approve itself, until it has
obtained excellence.

PERHAPS nothing more augments our felicity than self approbation. The
approbation of those most dear to us, spreads over the heart the finest touches
of delight. The parent in whose bosom we have been nurtured, and the country
where we first beheld this pleasant light of heaven, are forever dear to us. It
is because their idea, woven into the very texture of our existence, forms a
part of ourselves; and we have it not in our power to rend them away from us,
and not lacerate the fibers of that heart with which they are thus
incorporated. Yet ourselves are more dear; and all the love which we feel for
any part of sensitive creation, is but the offspring of that love which we feel
for ourselves. God has wisely given each man to consider himself the center of
that moral hemisphere in which he has placed him. Things interest him less and
less, as they recede from him; until, by distance, they fade into
undistinguished indifference, and sink below the far-off horizon. If because
our fellow men, our country and our friends are dear to us, we are delighted
with their approbation, what must we feel when our bosoms warm with conscious
integrity, and expand with the exhilirating smiles of our own souls?

THIS consciousness is not all. A pleasure attends the exercise of those
acquirements, which purchase self approbation. When our minds are not vitiated,
what perfects our nature we approve; what depraves it we condemn. The man,
therefore, who thoroughly approves himself, has acquired every perfection of
which his nature is already capable. He is possessed of virtue, knowledge,
science, taste, refinement. The serenity of temperance, the firmness of
fortitude, the magnanimity of benevolence, are among the habits of his heart.
He has contemplated moral and material nature, until his expanded mind seems a
region embosoming the universe; and splendidly ornamented with all the rich
garniture of physical and intellectual systems.

THE value of self approbation is enhanced by its independence. It must be to
its possessor certain and permanent, because it lies within himself. That
vortex of contingency which whirls in its dusty atmosphere all things else of
man, reaches not the still retreat of a self approving heart. Envy, malevolence
and calumny, have no power over it. They gnash their iron fangs, and raise
their nocturnal howls in vain.

SELF approbation is a source of pleasure inseparable from us. Wherever we may
be called by inclination, or driven by necessity; whether in the retreats of
rural solitude, or the noisy tumults of the clamorous city; place us on the
winter-beaten plains of Labrador, or the serpent-haunted shores of stormy
Huron, or in the rocky bosom of the frowning Alleghanies, none of these
peregrinations will ever remove us from a self approving heart. It smiles with
a kind of omnipotent beneficence, will forever strew the vernal glories of
paradise before us. Nay, let these bodies become the sport of accident; let the
corroding current of time wear them away; let their particles, unlocked from
each others' embrace, be driven by whirlwinds round the globe, or subtilized to
ether, and scattered through immensity; still self approbation will be with us
while our consciousness or our souls remain, be they tenants of no matter what
department of duration, whether on this or the other side the billowy waste of
ages.

IF therefore self approbation give sensations so delightful; if it comprehend
all the improvements of our nature; if it lie above the reach of contingency,
and be forever inseparable from us, does it not contain much of that which
makes us blessed? If self approbation can be obtained by no mean acquisition;
if the soul never smile on itself so long as it has tarnished one deed with a
malevolent design, or left one meritorious action unperformed; if nothing but
excellence can purchase self approbation, then surely as much as each man
desires a source of felicity exquisite, comprehensive, independent and durable,
so much will he labor for that excellence, by which alone it can be obtained.

THE praise of that Being, to whom we are all amenable, is a subject too solemn
for the present occasion, too hallowed for the present speaker. With what, and
how many other beings we stand related, is now, perhaps, somewhat doubtful. In
speaking, therefore, of the praise of other beings, as a source of happiness,
and a motive of excellence, the praise of our fellow men only will be mentioned.

For this praise perhaps all have a fondness: It may with justice be said, that
man loves the applause of man. The wise ancients were of this opinion. They
regarded a love of glory as the strongest proof of man's divine original; and
ever considered those minds the most exalted, which had the strongest passion
for praise. Men seem prepared by their nature, not only to admire and applaud
whatever is magnificent in the achievements of others, but also to feel a
peculiar delight in the merit and fruition of that applause which is the just
reward of noble actions. The same men who have readily resigned ease, pleasure
and tranquillity; assumed care, endured fatigue, and smiled amidst perilous
enterprises, have yet trembled at the first approach of infamy. None are so
base, so worthless, so entirely insignificant, so contaminated with crimes or
scarred with ignominy, but they still fancy themselves possessed of some shade,
some faded tint of excellency. Place them on the lowest grade of human infamy,
and even there the cold dank breath of universal neglect cannot entirely
extinguish this god-like passion. From that abyss of depression, they lift
their eyes toward the sun of glory, and vainly solace themselves with
recollection of their blighted honors.

THAT the acquisition of this glory and applause, which men so ardently desire,
will greatly augment the felicity of those who obtain them, cannot be doubted.
It is no less certain, that this applause can be obtained by excellence alone.
In the unvitiated state of public opinion, there seems to be a tacit agreement
among mankind, to bestow extraordinary praise on nothing but extraordinary
merit. This originates from the very constitution of our nature. We never set a
high value on easy acquisitions. Rational men seldom arrogate to themselves any
merit on account of the possession of accidental honor or emolument. But
acquirements made by toil, care, vigilance and long perseverance, are highly
prized. Their value seems enhanced by all the anxiety of pursuit, and all the
difficulty of acquisition.

THE emergencies of society render this constitution necessary. Some social
duties would never be performed, if any thing less than their performance could
purchase the same applause and glory. We are sometimes called to defend our
country. It is true our country involves objects endeared to us by so many
relations, that, without any hope of glory for it, we might be induced to
stretch out our arm in its defense. But this is not enough. Men would fight
with a caution little less than pusillanimous, if they fought merely on the
defensive. More than this must be done in the day of battle. Men must then make
aggressions, must fight for acquisition, rush on danger, and be in a manner
prodigal of life. When this is done, it is only because no other achievements
purchase so much glory as deeds of valor. It is the expectation of this glory
which plucks from the brow of battle all its terrors, softens the field of
slaughter into the bed of honor, and renders dying for our country delightful.

A DIFFERENT constitution would, perhaps, subvert society. If applause were
bestowed on baseness, indolence and cowardice; if the wreath of glory were
unbound from the brow of the valiant defender of his country, and held out to
him who shrunk from the point of danger, or betrayed the armies of his nation
to their enemies, would not that virtue, "which seeks no interest, no reward
but praise," indignant retire from an ungrateful world? Would not vice, thus
countenanced, encouraged and applauded, ride through the nations triumphant?
Yes, the hero of Mount-Vernon would have sunk into contempt and oblivion, while
the traitor of West-Point had not only rescued his name from the gibbet of
infamy, but risen glorious amidst the ruins of his country. God has therefore
said to man, bestow praise and applause on those only, who have deserved fame
and glory by excellence.

IF then nature has given us such a desire for praise; if this passion be
inextinguishable by time or accident; if our feelings, the emergencies of
society, and in a manner the voice of God himself, command us to bestow praise
on those only who have earned it by extraordinary merit, what motive can more
loudly call up all the energies of our souls, and give us a warmer ardour in
pursuit of excellence, than a persuasion, that by it alone, we can obtain that
praise of our fellow men, which the human heart forever so anxiously desires?

THE eternal duration of those acquisitions by which we purchase our own
approbation, and the praise of other beings, is another source of felicity, and
another motive to excellence. All our mental improvements will be ours forever.
The soul's immortality is implied in this consideration. The truth of this
doctrine is denied by the new sect of philosophers. In an assembly like this,
composed of enlightened Americans, we shall not find one of that sect; one who
is delighted with the degradation of his nature; who prefers annihilation to
existence; who disbelieves doctrines because all men believe them, and because
God himself has declared them to be true. If there should be, now listening to
the speaker, one such monster of absurdity, to him no argument can be
addressed. Pity may be extended to him, though his character must be abhorred.
He must have designed or perpetrated iniquity, until he has traveled down all
the grades of wickedness; until, by the lash of remorse, he is driven from the
dominion of reason; and, to escape the scourgings of his own conscience, he
throws himself headlong into the abyss of annihilation.

MEN of rationality can easily perceive that every thing of man evinces his
immortality. He desires it; he believes in it; he hopes for it. His toil, his
exertion, his ambition, all ultimate on things beyond the region of time. If
man be immortal, all nature is consistent; if not, all we know of God or his
creation, is absurdity.

MEN, therefore, starting off in the career of pursuit, warmed with emulation,
and eager for the acquisition of excellence, ought to consider this life as the
commencement of their existence. It will continue forever; and he who, by
superior exertion, advances forward of his fellow beings, may retain that
advantage through an eternal progression. We shall make no improvement in vain;
for when we die in this state of existence, we shall live in another. Those who
have most knowledge, excellence and virtue in this world, will have most
knowledge, excellence and virtue in that. Those who in this world have toiled
for the improvement of their nature; who have refrained from pleasure; endured
self denial; earned their own approbation, and purchased applause and glory,
shall stand brightened by all these excellencies on the shores of eternity.

IMMORTALITY gives importance to all our acquisitions. Write eternity on the
most trivial consequences of our most trivial actions, and they expand
themselves into a magnitude, whose dimensions cannot be reached by finite
conception. The thread, though attenuated down almost to imperceptibility, yet,
if it be infinitely extended, will comprehend the material universe.

INDEED, without immortality, nothing would be worth pursuit. If death be the
termination of our existence, the grave will destroy all acquisitions, and
equalize all characters. The sage and the fool, the philosopher and the child
of ignorance, the virtuous and the debauchee, the hero and the coward, the
honorable and the infamous, the excellent and the contemptible, will crumble
together into one common indiscriminate insignificancy. If this be so, who will
toil to improve his nature, or brighten the path of his existence with deeds of
splendor? Even glory itself would not be worth pursuit. And indeed what is the
glory attainable by one who lives but three score years? A moment's reflection
will discover. Survey the many kingdoms, countries and regions of the earth,
together with the millions who inhabit them; look back over the numberless
generations of men, whose names are blotted out of time; turn your eye forward
to the myriads of their posterity, rising in long succession to follow them
down the same dusky road of oblivion; walk abroad into the universe, beholding
the multitude of worlds swarming with population, and then turn and inspect
this earth, and mark out the spot of which we are tenants, and the number of
beings to which we are known, and in this view of "the amazing whole," must not
a small part of a small country on this little earth be the scene of our most
mighty deeds? And in so short a period, to how few of the countless myriads of
intelligences successively tenanting all space, and existing through all
duration, can we possibly render ourselves known!

NAY, were the fame of our actions to be carried to the remotest corner of the
earth; were posterity to gaze on the splendor of our glory, and even our
buried forefathers to pause amidst their iron slumbers, and listen to the
renown of their sons; yet, how short and how very worthless is that reputation,
to which we must become insensible at the close of this life! If, therefore,
the soul does not live for an everlasting fruition of its acquisitions, nothing
can be more important to man, than the few transitory objects that come in
contact with his senses. "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die," might
justly be his wisest rule of life.

BUT when we measure our existence by the line of eternity; when we know our
present actions will give a color to the whole current of our being; that each
virtue, which in this life blossoms in our souls, shall exhale immortal
fragrance, and blush with beauty forever renovating; that each of our noble
deeds, brightened by the conflagration of material nature, shall with us rise
resplendent from the wide ruins of mortality; we shall feel ourselves warmed,
and elevated, and energized with desires which can be satisfied with nothing
less than immortal excellence.

GENTLEMEN OF THE FEDERAL ADELPHI,

THOUGH we shroud ourselves in mystery, and conceal the arcana of our Society
from the world by unviolated silence, yet improvement was the design of our
institution. As men, and as philosophers, human actions are the most
interesting subjects of our research. The philosophy of them is not more subtle
and curious, than useful and important. A sketch of this philosophy has just
been attempted. If the principles adduced exist in our nature, they give birth
to a train of consequences which ought exceedingly to influence our conduct.

If a conviction that we can excel be the first step toward excellence, then,
as friends to human improvement, we ought to exalt human nature. We may not
depress even a child, in its own estimation; and he who does it, may remember
that he quenches an immortal ardour, "and crushes in the birth a power
etherial."

I KNOW there is a gloomy-minded philosophy constantly employed in decrying
human nature; "the last and best of all God's works" on earth. Men who have
been long lectured by the professors of this philosophy, have at length doubted
their ability to perform even the common vocations of life; and become degraded
in their own estimation, until they were prepared for the most benighted
ignorance, and the most passive slavery. Let their doctrine once he universally
credited, and we shall all adopt the maxims of Indostan philosophy. We shall
say, to sit still is better than to walk; to sleep than to wake; and to die is
best of all. Perhaps there are few methods by which we could more advance human
improvement, than by reasoning or ridiculing from the catalogue of human
opinion, this gloomy, heart-sinking, foul debasing doctrine.

IF self approbation be a motive of action, then our moral taste should be
carefully formed on the principles of rectitude. Though in the healthy state of
the mind, when all its senses are correct and delicate, it approves of
excellence only; yet our mental, like our corporeal senses, may be greatly
vitiated. I know not but our moral sense may be so vitiated, that we may
approve ourselves for actions which we now condemn as vicious. If from infancy,
falsehood and treachery have been recommended to us, may we not finally feel
ourselves more excellent in the practice of these vices, than in the practice
of the most perfect sincerity and faithfulness? If from the birth of reason to
its maturity, we have been taught, by the precepts and examples of all around
us, to contemn science, its institutions, disciples and inculcators, shall we
not look on the preachers of philosophy, and knowledge, and morals, and
religion, as the pilferers and pests of society? Shall we not say to evil, "be
thou our good;" ignorance, be thou our excellency? So far, therefore, as self
approbation is a motive of excellence, we shall aim to excel in what we most
approve. If this be what is good and wise, we shall aim to excel in goodness
and wisdom; if it be what is wicked and foolish, we shall aim to excel in
wickedness and folly.

How important, then, is a correct and delicate moral taste; a taste
approbating ourselves for no action which does not produce felicity!

MAY we not justly doubt that creed, which characterizes actions entirely by
their motives; which teaches means may be sanctified by their end? This
jesuitical casuistry has been modernized in the political laboratories of
Europe. From thence it comes forth an all purifying essence. It gives its
possessor to wade through seas of horrors with garments uncontaminated; or
bleaches his scarlet abominations white as the robes of innocence. Let us stand
afar from its dreadful influence.

IF the praise of our fellow men be a motive of action, then it is important
that the public taste be correct. Though the world will be just, though a
thousand erroneous opinions will fade away, and nothing but uncontaminated
truth finally appear; yet public taste may be at times as much vitiated as that
of individuals. Like a river, it is formed from many streams; and like that,
from all these streams it may be rendered impure. Individual wickedness
vitiates public taste. Voltaire, and his cotemporary tribe of philosophists, by
constantly, silently and artfully infusing into the minds of the French people
their pernicious principles, finally corrupted the whole mass of public
opinion, and entirely vitiated the taste of the nation. How far this will
extend, or how long it will endure, are questions too nice for human
calculation. It may spread round half the globe; it may be a century before the
public mind can be restored to rationality. During this period, and among these
nations, science and virtue must be retrogressive; because public patronage
will sanctify and encourage private wickedness. For, if we perform actions
because men praise them, then, if virtue and science be praised, we shall be
virtuous and scientific; but, if vice and ignorance be praised, we shall be
vicious and ignorant. National taste depends on national instruction. Vicious
writers, vicious preachers, and vicious teachers of children, will form a
nation to relish and applaud vice. What must be the taste of a people where
schools are schools of atheism, pulpits the pulpits of immorality, and the
press groans with licensed blasphemies? The system of national instruction,
therefore, claims the primary attention of the patriotic philosopher. If, my
brothers, we have any influence, hither let us direct it. A good deed here, is
not a solitary, unrelated benefaction; it extends itself to millions, and
passes down through a succession of generations. He who snatches a poisonous
dreg from a fountain whose streams water a kingdom, saves a nation from the
deleterious ruin.

IF the durability of acquisition give its greatest value; if a belief in the
soul's immortality be the strongest incitement to great and good actions; if
this alone involves the idea of accountability, of rewards and punishments, of
hopes and fears, whose objects are unbounded and eternal; if the destruction of
this demolish the last barrier against vice, the last asylum of virtue, with
what indignation ought we to regard the modern moral revolutionists, who
explode this doctrine? The soul's mortality is the first article of their
creed. They wished to prepare men for deeds of enormity. This could not be done
while they felt themselves morally accountable. They have, therefore, labored
to convince their votaries that the close of life is the termination of
existence. What have been the consequences? Behold them in only one dreadful
aggregation of facts. From this cause have originated most of the
extravagances, vices, crimes and atrocities of the French revolution. Here have
been hatched, and nurtured, and sledged for slight, all their full grown
iniquities; sacrilege, blasphemy and parricidal assassination, throw themselves
out from this foul nest of newly generated abominations, hover over Europe like
flights of demons, and darken and contaminate the moral hemisphere of the world.

WHILE, therefore, we view the extent of nature and the difficulty of
excelling; while we give vigor to our energies and animate our perseverance
with the hope of self approbation, the prospect of applause, and the certain
immortality of all our mental acquirements, let us exalt our conceptions of
human nature, correct our taste for moral beauty, purify the public mind into
approbation of none but elevated actions, and repel from credibility whatever
might lessen a belief in our eternal existence and future retribution. As mere
searchers after truth, we ought to do this; as friends of ourselves, of our
nation, of humanity, we ought to do it. Deception and fanciful theory have
assumed the robes of truth and philosophy. An all-transforming spirit of
innovation has stalked forth among the nations. He lays hold of the massy basis
of all philosophy, and is even now laboring to overthrow all civil, moral and
religious institutions. Let us not fall whelmed beneath their ruins; let us
rise up against this dreadful demon, and triumphantly defend whatever wisdom
has devised, or experience improved, or time consecrated by long hallowed and
unviolated veneration.


