A FAREWELL SERMON, To the people of Colebrook, delivered July 14th, 1799. BY
JONATHAN EDWARDS, D. D. RESIDENT of UNION COLLEGE. Printed at the request of
the hearers.

SUFFIELD: PRINTED BY EDWARD GRAY, M,DCC,XCIX.

2. Corinthians, XIII. (...) Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of
good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace
shall be with you.
CORINTH was a famous city of Greece; in which the gospel was introduced and
established by the Apostle Paul. There he exercised his ministry for a year and
six months at one time, besides his occasional visits afterward. There his
ministry was attended with great success. All this appears, as from other
passages in the New Testament, so particularly from Acts XVIII. 9, 10, 11. Then
spoke the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision. Be not afraid, but speak, and
hold not thy peace. For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee, to hurt
thee; for I have much people in this city. And he continued there a year and
six months, teaching the word of God among them. To this church planted by the
apostle himself, he wrote two epistles, of which this from which our text is
taken is the last. At the close of this epistle, he takes his final leave of
this church, in the affecting words of the text. As if he had said, And now,
brethren, after all my acquaintance with you, which has been mutually so
agreeable and profitable; after all my labors among you, which God has been
pleased so greatly to bless; and after my repeated visits and epistles to you;
I bid you an affectionate and final farewell. I ardently wish you prosperity in
every respect; and particularly that you may be perfect, be of good comfort, be
of one mind, live in peace, and then the God of love and peace shall be with
you.

WHAT I propose in this discourse, is to consider the several parts of this
farewell of the Apostle, to the Corinthians.

1. HE wishes them to be perfect. -- We are not to understand here absolute,
sinless perfection. This is not attainable in this life. "There is not" even a
just man upon earth; that does good and sins not. Eccles. VII. 20. "And who
can say, I have made my heart clean; I am pure from my sin:" Prove. XX. 9. "Who
can bring a clean thing, out of an unclean? Not one." Job. XIV. 4. But if any
man has attained to perfection in this life, he is a just man upon earth, that
does good and sins not: he is pure from his sin: he is a clean thing brought
out of an unclean; in direct contradiction to the scriptures just quoted.

IF any person ever has attained to perfection, in this life we may surely
suppose, that some of the Saints mentioned in scripture, were favored with this
privilege. Therefore let us search for perfection among the most distinguished
Saints of both the old Testament and the new. Noah, Daniel and Job are in
scripture mentioned as eminent Saints and as peculiarly beloved of God. Let us
attend to them distinctly. Noah, though distinguished from the rest of the world,
in being saved from the flood and in being employed as a preacher of
righteousness to the old world; and tho in the main he walked with God; yet was
overtaken with gross intemperance, as you cannot but remember. -- Job, was
indeed an eminently good man, so that there was none like him in all the earth,
and for a long time he persevered in his patience, under various most
distressing afflictions, brought on him in a rapid succession, and for a long
time he conducted himself in the most humble and pious manner, falling down to
the ground and worshipping; saying, "naked came I out of my mother's womb and
naked shall I return.

The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; and blessed be the name of the
Lord:" and when he was insulted by his own wife, because he still retained his
integrity, and refused to curse God and die, he made the following most proper
and pious answer. What? shall we receive good at the hand of the Lord, and
shall we not receive evil. Yet to show, that there is no man, upon earth, tho
really just and upright, who lives and sins not; Job at last had his
patience exhausted, so that he "opened his mouth and cursed his day."

WITH regard to Daniel, tho no particular gross sin, is in scripture recorded
concerning him, yet we have no reason to suppose, that he was more perfect,
than the other two saints, with whom he is classed in scripture, as a
distinguished favorite of God.

ABRAHAM was the father of the faithful, and the friend of God; yet he was not
sinless: he fell into polygamy and lived in it for a long time. -- As to David,
in general a man after God's own heart, you know the great sins into which he
fell.

MOSES was a distinguished saint, and the meekest of men: yet he transgressed
at the waters of Meribah, so that he was shut out of the good land. But let us
come to the new testament.

THE eleven apostles, from their constant attendance on the preaching and
miracles of our Lord, and from their daily conception and intimate intercourse
with him, were under great advantages for Christian edification. Yet they fell
short of perfection. For when the multitudes from the chief priests and elders,
came with swords and stones, to take Jesus, his disciples "all forsook him and
fled."

PAUL was the great Apostle of the gentiles, was not a whit behind the very
chiefest Apostles; was a chosen vessel to God, to bear his name before the
gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel; and appears to have done more
to spread the gospel in the world, than any of the other Apostles; yet
according to his own testimony, he came short of perfection; Phil. III. 12 --
15. Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect: but I
follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of
Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one
thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. This you see is an express confession of
his own imperfection. The same thing is manifest from this, that when the
Apostle would do good, evil was present with him; and that he had a law in his
members warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to
the law of sin, which was in his member. -- This surely is not the description
of a perfect man. -- If it should be said, as it has been said, that the
apostle is here describing his state before his conversion and not after; I
answer, that in the same context, and even in the next words he declares, that
he delighted in the law of God, after the inward man; and that with the mind he
served the law of God; which no unconverted man does; because the carnal mind
is enmity against God, and is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can
be. And if it were otherwise; if an unconverted man could delight in the law of
God, after the inward man, he could and would of course delight in God himself,
and love him sincerely. And if he could serve the law of God; he would of
course serve God himself. And what is there more difficult in any part of
religion, or more distinguishing of its truth and genuineness, than the sincere
love and service of the law and of God himself? Indeed this is the root of all
true religion and virtually constitutes the whole.

THUS we have taken a view of the most eminent Saints of scripture, and find
none among them all, who profess to have attained to perfection; and concerning
most of them, we find evident proofs of imperfection. They manifestly fell
short of sinless perfection.

IF this be so, it may be said; if sinless perfection be not attainable in this
life; what does the apostle mean in our text; when he exhorts the Corinthians
to be perfect?

I ANSWER, he doubtless means the same as is intended, when it is said of Job,
that he was perfect and upright, and one that feared God and eschewed evil. By
what has been already observed, it appears, that Job was not sinlessly perfect,
as he cursed his day. It must mean therefore, that he was a truly good man, a
sincere servant of God, a real saint.

IN the same sense we are told, All scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly finished unto all
good works. This means either the same sincerity, to which Job attained, or a
perfection of furniture, a being thoroughly furnished to all good works: and
the latter clause may be understood as explanatory of the former.

IN this sense the apostle Paul, after his express renunciation of perfection,
as to himself; yet assumes it to himself and some of his fellow Christians; as
you may see in Phil. III. 15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus
minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this
unto you: plainly showing, that the apostle uses the word perfection in a very
different sense, when he assumes it to himself, from that in which he had used
it, when he renounced it.

THEREFORE when the apostle in the text exhorts us to be perfect, he exhorts as
to the perfection of Job, to the integrity and sincerity of vital Christianity:
he exhorts us to live up to our profession, to live in Character, to be real
and exemplary Christians.

II. The apostle tells the Corinthians, to be of good comfort. -- Good comfort
naturally follows from the perfection before described. If we be real
Christians, humble penitents and cordial believers in Christ: If we live in
character, and make proper proficiency in our Christian course, leading an
exemplary life, so as to adorn the doctrine of God our Savior; no doubt we
shall enjoy comforts. -- There is peace and comfort in the very exercise of
Christian grace. The carnal mind is enmity against God, not subject to his law,
neither indeed can be. Therefore so long as we are in our native state of
depravity, we are in a state of warfare and opposition to God. The carnal or
native mind of man is opposition itself to God: and such a temper of mind is
directly opposed to peace and comfort. Isai, LVII. 20, 21. The wicked are like
the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. But no sooner is the heart
changed by divine grace, than instead of enmity, reconciliation, submission,
and cordial and supreme love to God are introduced and established in it. Of
course then it enjoys peace and comfort. Cordial submission and reconciliation
are in their very nature placid, peaceful and comfortable.

AND as peace and comfort are implied in the first exercises of the new
convert; so they increase as he increases in grace. The very knowledge of God,
of his law and of divine truth, affords him delight and comfort, and the more
his knowledge is increased, the more are his delight and comfort, increased.
The same may be said of his increase in humility, submission to God,
complacency in him, faith in Christ, and every other grace. The very existence
of sanctification in any person, and especially as it will produce good fruit
both in heart and life, is attended with comfort and happiness. The ways of
wisdom are, in their own nature, ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace.

BESIDES this, sanctification is the evidence of our justification, and in this
view is attended with additional comfort. You are not to imagine, my brethren,
that you are to obtain evidence of your pardon and justification, by any
immediate revelation from heaven, by any suggestion thrown into your mind, that
you are pardoned and accepted by God; or by any text of scripture brought to
your thoughts however suddenly, unexpectedly and undesignedly by yourselves.
All such grounds of comfort and belief that you are pardoned, are delusive. The
word of God gives not the least warrant to trust to such grounds of comfort.
Where in all the scripture, do you find it said, that they who have an
involuntary suggestion, that they are converted and pardoned, are in reality
converted and pardoned. Where do you find it said, He that has a text of
scripture unexpectedly coming to his mind, importing that his sins are
forgiven, is really forgiven of God? -- The scriptural evidences of conversion
and forgiveness, are such as these; "He that believes and is "baptized, shall
be saved;" "repent ye therefore and be "converted, that your sins may be
blotted out;" I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find
me; Hope makes not ashamed because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts; We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren; If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I have commanded you. -- These evidences imply
sanctification of heart and life: and to depend on any thing else, than what
implies sanctification as an evidence of our justification, is unwarrantable
and delusive.

I HAVE insisted the more particularly on this, because it has pleased the
great head of the church graciously to visit you with the effusions of his holy
spirit, hopefully to bring some of you to the saving knowledge of the truth,
and to awaken and convince others: and to be informed what is the proper
evidence of a real conversion, is at such a time peculiarly necessary. I wish
you to apply what I have now said on this subject to the faithful and candid
trial of yourselves.

To be perfect, then in the sense already described, affords comfort, not only
as it implies a placid and peaceful temper of mind toward God, complacency in
God etc. but as it affords evidence, and the only real evidence, of our
acceptance with God, and of our sure title, by the promises of the gospel, to
the future eternal inheritance of heaven and glory.

THIS must certainly be a great source of comfort to every Christian. Thus he
enjoys peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. On his part he is at peace
with God, as by regeneration, his heart is reconciled to God and subjected to
his will: and God on his part is at peace with him, as for Christ's sake he is
reconciled to him, pardons his sins adopts him and makes him an heir of
himself. -- What a source of comfort must these things be to the real Christian!

BESIDES, in this way he enjoys peace of conscience. Just so far as a man is
sanctified, sin, the very foundation of the accusations of an angry conscience,
is prevented or removed: and to be sure in consequence of sanctification, the
foundation of accusing and condemning himself as an enemy to God, a rejecter of
Christ and an unconverted sinner, is removed: Therefore in the same respects,
he has a foundation to enjoy peace of conscience and comfort in his own mind.

NOR is this all: the true Christian is comforted by all the promises of the
gospel, that Christ will never leave nor forsake any of his real disciples;
that he will be with them always, that he will so defend them that none shall
be able to pluck them out of his hand; that he will support and protect his
church even to the end of the world, so that the gates of hell shall not be
able to prevail against it; that he will increase and promote true religion in
the world; that Satan's kingdom shall be over thrown, that Christ shall
generally reign on the earth and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole
heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most high God, that
the whole earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover
the seas; and that finally the kingdom of grace, which took its original from
heaven, shall be transplanted to heaven, its native soil, and shall, there
eternally flourish in perfect rest, peace, holiness, and happiness, to the
glory of God the Father.

ALL these considerations are replete with comfort to real Christians. No
wonder then they are exhorted to be of good comfort. They have reason of
comfort, under the greatest afflictions and persecutions, that ever they are
called to endure.

III. THE apostle exhorts the Corinthians to be of one mind. -- This is of
great importance in every community, and especially in every Christian church
or society. -- They ought to be of one mind in several respects.

I. As to their articles of faith. -- Articles of faith, or at best articles of
infidelity will naturally govern the temper and practice. He who believes there
is no God, will not love and worship him. He who believes that Christ is not
the Savior, will not trust in him for salvation. He who belives not in a
future state of rewards and punishments, will not prepare for it. He who
believes not the gospel to be true, will not be anxious to comply with it. He
who believes that there is nothing in religion, will not embrace, love and
practice it. If then any people be not of one mind in these respects, how can
they walk together?

OR if they differ in things on which the very existence of all religion does
not depend; still even this diversity of sentiment produces discord and is very
hurtful. For instance, if some believe the total depravaty of human nature, but
others believe that we naturally have some good principles in us: If some
believe the sovereignty of divine grace, that God has a right to cast off all
men and would do them no injury, if he should make them eternally miserable;
while others believe either that no man deserves eternal misery, or that those
who are moral and attend on the means of grace, ought not to be finally
rejected: If some believe the entire and total dependence of man upon God, and
his grace; while others think we haven self-determing power in our wills, which
is entirely sufficient for repentance and all the exercises of religion: If
some believe the great importance, usefulness and necessity of public worship
on the sabbath; while others think they can spend the sabbath as profitably at
their own homes: If some believe the necessity and indispensable obligation of
a virtuous and pious education of their children while others are impressed
with no such ideas: If some believe themselves bound to submit cheerfully to
the expense necessary to support both the public worship of the sabbath, and
the schools necessary for the due education of their children, but others
grudge every part of this expense: you cannot but see, that this diversity of
sentiment must work disorder and confusion, and finally, tend to the ruin of
any society.

II. THEY ought to be of one mind in their aims and ends. -- What if some aim
at the glory of God, others at their own glory and applause? What if some aim
at the promotion of true religion and the interest of Christ, and others, at
the promotion of their own interest merely? What if some are willing to deny
themselves and their own interest or applause, for the sake of Christ and his
cause, but others set up themselves as supreme, and make religion itself
subservient to their private ends? It is manifest, that the religious concerns
of such a people cannot proceed with success. As soon as ever religion proves
not to be subservient to their applause, their ambition or their private ends,
a part of them forsake and oppose it; they oppose therewith, oppose
Christianity and oppose Christ himself. And how can we expect any good to the
cause of religion and virtue, in such a course of things as this? -- This shows
the necessity of being of one mind.

III. It is equally necessary that a people be united in their measures to
support or promote religion -- suppose all the individuals of any community are
agreed to aim at the divine glory and the advancement of virtue and piety; yet
if they pursue different paths and take different measures, to secure these
ends; if one be of Paul, and another of Apollos; if while all are wishing to
settle a minister, one choose to settle this man and another that, and each be
fixed in his own measures; what can be done in this case? The great end will
doubtless be lost.

IN these things there must be mutual condescension; and hereby in the case now
described there can be condescension. It is supposed, that all are seeking the
same end: and when the generality are agreed in the measures to secure this
end; for instance the settlement of a particular minister; and wise men in the
society and out of it, judge it best for the society, that he should be
settled; hereby in this case one or two individuals should rather condescend
and fall in with the wishes of the society in general, than that the society
should submit to them, or be broken in pieces. Unless there be condescension in
some such cases, no people can enjoy peace and success in their religious
concerns.

IV. THE apostle exhorts the Corinthians to live in peace. -- Peace follows of
course from what the apostle had before enjoined. There is no danger, that they
who agree in the articles of their faith and religious sentiments, in their
aims and ends, and in their measures to obtain those ends; will fall into
contention concerning religion. And how happy is religious peace! How
comfortable to the church and society! How comfortable to their minister! How
favorable to the advancement of the knowledge of the truth, to the love and
practice of it! and to the increase of true and real religion! On the contrary,
how disagreeable is it to live in contention! How uncomfortable to the church,
to the society and to the minister! How unfavourable to the increase of
religious knowledge, virtue and piety! It is directly opposed to both morality
and piety, and cannot proceed from them, but from the want of them; or rather
from that which is directly opposed to them. Whence come wars and fightings
among you? Come they not hence, even from your lusts which war against the
spirit?

BUT however uncomfortable and hurtful contention is, we may expect it, unless
we be of one mind in the formentioned respects. If every one be strenuous for
his own peculiar opinions, his own ends and his own measures, there can be no
peace in any society. And there is great danger of this from various causes. --
One source of danger is the natural liberty and independence of man. As every
blessing and privilege is capable of abuse, so this is true with regard to
personal liberty. As men feel themselves free and in many respects independent;
some are apt to indulge this independence in adopting peculiar opinions, and in
pursuing peculiar ends and peculiar measures. Some from vanity effect
singularity. They wish to distinguish themselves, and they cannot do it any
other way so easily as by setting up for peculiar opinions, ends or measures.
Thus they effect to show themselves wiser than other men -- The head of a party
is always distinguished, and to be in such a situation is flattering to human
vanity. From this motive some put themselves at the head of a party however
erroneous: and to gratify their ambition, they will rend the society to which
they belong, in pieces, and destroy all peace, all order, and all good.

V. On certain conditions, the apostle promises the Corinthians, that the God
of love and peace would be with them. The conditions are, that they be perfect,
of good comfort, of one mind, and that they live in peace. -- And if we comply
with these conditions, God will be with us in several respects.

I. He will be with us by the presence of his grace in our hearts. All who
comply with those conditions, are truly gracious persons, are the subject of
divine grace communicated in sanctification, by the holy spirit of God, and God
by his grace and Holy Spirit habitually dwells in them. In this respect he
never leaves them nor forsakes them, but is with them to the end of their lives.

II. If we comply with the forementioned conditions, God will be with us, in
the way of divine consolation. This is the natural consequence of the former
particular. It is implied in what has been already said, that divine grace is
comforting in its very nature, as it implies love to God, to the law of God,
and to our Lord Jesus Christ; as it implies faith, truth and hope in Christ,
and as it implies love to mankind; all which are agreeable, pleasant and
comforting emotions; That it is comforting, as it implies the subduing of
native depravity, which is ever turbulent and opposed to peace and comfort; and
as it gives evidence of future grace and support here, and of eternal glory
hereafter.

III. ON the same conditions God will be with us in the way of protection. He
will keep us even as the apple of his eye: he will never leave us nor forsake
us, and never deliver us up into the hands of our spiritual foes, who seek our
ruin. As he really is, so he will act as the captain of our salvation, and
afford us the most effectual aid, in times of need. Nay, he will make all
things to work together for our good; for this is his express promise to them
that love God. And though we may fall into various temporal evils, from these we
shall be recovered, and those evils themselves shall be made to work together
for our good.

IV. GOD will be with us to build us up in faith and holiness. The path of the
just is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day.
We need the same communications of grace to build us up in holiness, as in the
first instance to regenerate our hearts: and this we shall receive on the
conditions specified in the text.

V. GOD will be with us, to prepare us for glory and to receive us to it. He
will never suffer any who are once the subjects of grace, to fail of glory.
Whom he did fore know, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of
his Son; and whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or fraud? Nay in all these
things we are more than conquerors, through him that loved us. For I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, not height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

I SHALL now apply these general observations to the present occasion. -- For
several years past, I have been with you laboring in the ministry,
endeavoring to instruct you in the great and most important doctrines of the
gospel, to inculcate the duties, to excite you to the practice of it, and to
warn you against every error, sin and vice. My connection with you has been
peaceful, agreeable, and of late I hope successful. I expected to continue and
spend the rest of my days with you. And as the proposal of my leaving you was
no object of my seeking; so it has been attended with great anxiety concerning
my duty. As the best expedient in the case, and the most likely means of
obtaining light as to my duty, the whole question concerning my removal has, as
you well know, been submitted to a council mutually agreeable to us both. You
know the result of the council; it was their unanimous opinion, that it was my
duty to accept the call, which invites me to leave you, and your duty to
acquiesce.

HAD they decided, that I ought to continue with you, I should have complied
with their decision, in a conviction, that in that case I should enjoy for more
ease; more leisure, more retirement and more opportunity to prosecute my
favorite study of theology, to indulge many agreeable propensities and to
enjoy many of my most agreeable friends, whose society must be lost by my
removal. And now that they have decided it to be my duty to accept a call to a
distant place, I feel myself obligated to comply with their decision, though with
great reluctance to leaving this dear people, especially at the present
juncture, at which it has pleased the great head of the church to afford his
influences among us; and in the prospect of labor, anxiety, responsibility and
perhaps difficulty, in the undertaking to which I am invited. Yet since it is
by proper judges decided to be my duty, I shall take upon me this arduous
service, and discharge the obligations of it, according to my best ability,
looking to God to assist and support me.

SINCE we must part, what is more proper, than we part as Paul, and the
Corinthians did? After the example of the great apostle of the Gentiles, I do
certainly most ardently wish you to be perfect, to be of good comfort, to be of
one mind and to live in peace; and that you may be animated so to do, by the
motive, that then the God of love and peace shall be with you.

You have heard what has been said concerning the necessity of unanimity and
peace among yourselves. And I dare say you realize it. Formerly, you
experienced the ill effects of dissentions. Let this your experience warn and
guard you against every thing of the like kind in future. Remembering your
affliction and your misery, the worm wood and the gall; let your soul still
have them in remembrance, and be humbled in you. Let me beseech you to
withstand the beginning of dissension. It is like the letting out of water;
once let out, it is hard to be stopped again, and the longer it runs, the
deeper and wider channel it wears, Therefore leave off contention before it is
meddled with.

YOUR union among yourselves, as well as your kind treatment of me, since I
have been connected with you, has been a source of happiness to me. I shall
always remember you with affection, gratitude and kindest benevolence. It is a
most happy circumstance, that since we must part, we part not only with peace,
but with entire mutual friendship. This is a singular case of the dismission of
a minister from his people. That you have acted in this whole affair with so
much candor, with so many and so unequivocal testimonies of affection to me,
and regard to the council which has dissolved our connection, has been often
noticed to your honor. I hope the mutual friendship, which has uninterruptedly
subsisted between us, will ever continue, and that we shall sincerely remember
each other in our prayers.

As your minister is now about to leave you, I sincerely pray and hope that in
due time God will send you a good minister of Jesus Christ a man full of faith
and of the Holy Ghost; and that under his faithful ministry much people may be
added unto the Lord. And as it has pleased God lately to visit you with the
influences of his Holy spirit, to the revival of true religion among you; I
presume you will not be contented to live long, without so important a
blessing, as a Christian minister. If you have tasted, that the Lord is
gracious, you will not be willing to live without the preaching of the gospel
and stated worship on the sabbath. As new born babes you will desire the
sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby.

I HOPE, Brethren, that in settling a minister, you will be attentive to two
things, that he be found in the faith, and that as far as you can judge, he be
a man of true piety. If he be not found in the faith, he will lead you and your
children into error and false religion: and this error and false religion will
naturally descend to future generations, and may prove fatal to thousands. --
And if he be not a man of true piety, with what sincerity can he act in any
part of his ministry? As he will not be friendly to Christ or his cause, he
will not relish the truth, nor heartily engage to promote it. If he do not
directly oppose true religion, which is the most favorable supposition; still
being a blind leader of the blind, he and his hearers will likely both fall
into the ditch.

BUT if you shall settle a good and faithful minister, you will, so far as you
yourselves are rightly disposed, rejoice in him and in his ministrations; you
will have peace and be edified in the most holy faith; and you will have reason
to hope, that God will bless his labors among you, and extend the good effects
of such a ministry to generations yet unborn.

How happy will you be under such a minister! How happy will all your friends
be on your behalf! And how happy shall I be, to hear of your prosperity!

AND now, Brethren, I am to take my leave of you. When Paul took leave of the
elders of the church of Ephasus, they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck and
kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the words, which* he spoke, that they
should see his face no more. How it may be with us, brethren, whether we may
ever be permitted to see each others face again in this world, God only knows.
Therefore finally, brethren, farewell. It is my hearts desire and prayer for
you, that you may prosper in all your real interests; that you may prosper in
your several lawful secular concerns; that you may prosper as a society,
increasing in numbers, wealth and reputation, and be regarded as a truly
respectable people, by all around you. -- That you may be prospered as a
church, established in the faith and order of the gospel, receiving "daily
additions of such as shall be saved." -- And that you may prosper as
individuals that every careless sinner among you may be thoroughly awakened and
convinced; that every unregenerate sinner may be renewed by divine grace: and
that every real Christian may grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. -- In one word, that your souls may be in health and
prosper".

To this end, let me beseech you all to improve the present favorable
opportunity. Now God is shedding down his kind influences among you, to the
awakening and conviction of many and the hopeful conversion of some. Now then
is an happy opportunity to obtain the grace of God. Now is the accepted time;
now is the day of salvation. Should any of you live through such a time as
this, and resist the peculiar and strong motives, which are now exhibited, to
become reconciled to God; it is not likely, that the weaker motives of ordinary
times will have much effect upon you. But you are in the hands of a sovereign
God, to whom you have forfeited every blessing, and who therefore has a right
to have mercy upon you, or to leave you to perish in your sins. You are
dependent on his sovereign grace. Own this your dependence; and expect help
from no other source. Accept the offered grace of God, and lose not that
infinite blessing, by neglect or delay.

TAKE heed to yourselves, and to all the flock, which God has purchased with
his own blood. Take heed, that after my departing grievous wolves do not enter
in among you, not sparing the flock; and that of your ownselves men do not
arise, speaking preverse things, to draw away disciples after them. --
Brethren, I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up and to give you an inheritance among all them, which are
sanctified. May the God of love and peace be with and bless both you and me
respectively; may he watch over, protect and prosper us in our several lawful
ways; and may he especially replenish our hearts with his grace and love. And
when we shall have served our generation according to his will; may we meet
with joy and mutual congratulation before our common judge, be acquitted and
accepted by him, and so may we be forever with the Lord.

FINIS

