Mr. FORSYTH's Election Sermon.

Palida mors, aqua pulsat pede, pauperum tabertas, regumque terres.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT WINDSOR, OCTOBER 10, 1799, BEFORE His Excellency the
Governor, THE Lieutenant Governor and Council, AND THE House of
Representatives, OF THE STATE OF VERMONT.

BY WILLIAM FORSYTH, A. M.

WINDSOR, PRINTED FOR S. WILLIAMS, PRINTER TO THE STATE. M, DCC, XCIX.

State of Vermont. IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY, OCTOBER 12, 1799
ON MOTION, RESOLVED, That Mr. HAY be requested to wait on the Rev. WILLIAM
FORSYTH, to return him the thanks of this House for the ELECTION SERMON,
delivered on Thursday last, before his Excellency the GOVERNOR, and both
Branches of the LEGISLATURE: and to request a Copy thereof for the Press.

Extract from tie Journals of the General Assembly, ATTEST. SAMUEL C. CRAFTS,
CLERK.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
JOB, III.17, 18, 19. THERE THE WICKED CEASE FROM TROUBLING, THERE THE WEARY
ARE AT REST. THERE THE PRISONERS BEST TOGETHER, THEY HEAR NOT THE VOICE OF THE
OPPRESSOR, THE SMALL AND THE GREAT IS THERE, AND THE SERVANT IS FREE FROM HIS
MASTER.
THE rivers and firearms which run along the surface of our globe, are all
equal in their original; whither we consider them in themselves, or. In the
common, causes from whence they all arise. Some puny fountain, or contiguous
mountain taught them at first to flow: but in their courses along, the earth,
they soon become distinguised by ten thousand accidents.

SOME scarce issued from their parent springs, are swelled with snows, and
augmented bv the continual accession of numberless streams, until at length
assembled together from all quarters, in mighty bodies, they roll over the
world with superior majesty. Others, unaided by these accidental causes, admit
but of small increase, and run along in the same humble channel. But this state
of things, however, is not of long duration. They are all to meet finally in
one place. After having run their appointed courses, and displayed for some
little time, their different forces, they fall all into the sea, their common
receptacle: there their waters are blended, their courles lust and even their
names unknown: thus, as they were equal in their original, they are again equal
in their end.

THIS is a just representation of human life -- men as: they stand in nature
are equal; they are equal when they first enter into life, in every material
circumstance: but as they advance, this equality is gradually diminished, and
at length, seemingly altogether destroyed. Some in the course of their
progress, are augmented with birth, with riches, honors, titles and same:
others are endewed with none of all these acquisitions, but continue in their
first humble obscurity. Some are happy, are fortunate, live in the midst of
ease, of health, of mirth; and jovial pleasures; others are unhappy,
unfortunate, pressed with many calamities, have their health impaired, and
their spirits broken: but neither does this state of things continue long; a
few years of this scenery elapsed, and death restores the equality again, and
renders the appearane of human affairs once more uniform.

THIS view of the event, is truly interesting to two of polite se^s of men, to
them who are sufferers by the present inequality which prevails in life, the
prospect of its abolition must be a favorite subject of contemplation. It must
be so in a still higher degree, when these sufferings are brought upon them by
the oppressive exertions of human power, and when they consider it as not only
delivering them from their troubles by placing them beyond the reach of their
oppressors; but as disarming their oppressors themselves of that power, which
they so greatly abused, and reducing them to a level with these over whom they
tyranized. How infinitely pathetic and beautiful is this meditation of Job in
the text, how deeply founded in the original feelings of our nature.

WHILST overwhelmed with miserv and extreme despair, he is represented as
looking forward to the grave as his last resource; considering it as a place
where the long lost equality of nature shall be again restored, where the
wicked shall cease from troubling, where the weary shall rest from their toils,
where the long confined prisoner shall be set at liberty, and where tyranny
shall oppress no more. To the opposite class of men again, to those who are
gainers by the present inequality which prevails in life, the prospect must
appear in a different light, and produce a different effect upon their
sentiments.

BUT in this discourse, I shall confine myseIf to the first class; and consider
the grave in the single light of a relief to the opressed; and in doing this I
shall follow the order of the text, and observe the following method.

I. I SHALL consider the grave as a place where the wicked cease from troubling.

II. I SHALL consider it as a place where the weary are at rest.

III. I SHALL consider it as a place where the distinction of life are leveled,
where nature resumes her rights, and where all men are again replaced in their
original equality.

I. I AM to consider the grave as a place where the wicked cease from
troubling. I mean not at present to address the dissipated and the gay,
unacquainted by their own experience with the troubles of life, they can know
them only by the information of others; and this information should any one be
particular enough to offer it, they may listen to or not, as they are disposed.

THE troubles of the world are heard at a distance and affect not their repose;
they may cease or continue without disturbing their system, or producing any
material effect upon their sentiments. It is you, my brethren, who like myself
have been tried and troubled, whom I now mean to address -- Come then let us
descend into the grave, and view the silent mansions where the wicked only can
despair.

AND in the first place, in viewing the realms of the dead, observe the
profound quiet which reigns there. -- More still than the unruffled surface of
the deep, the face of this mighty empire is tranquil, and all is solitude and
silence.

HERE is no invasion of property, or a dispute about the limits which divides
one man's territory from another. But every one possesses his own narrow house,
nor feels a wish, nor can make a motion to transplant himself into that of
another.

Is strife then ceased? is discord no more? can the wicked no longer trouble?
No, my friends, they can trouble no more:, like them your oppressors shall also
be laid low; like them they shall cease from troubling, and you shall be
delivered. -- That voice which founds to dreadful in your ears, shall fail nor
be able to awake the saint echo of the tomb. Where ye wicked is now your power?
Ye oppressor, is your rage disarmed? Can you cease to insult those, over whom
fortune has given you the advantage? No, but death has interposed, and his
stern orders must be complied with; whether you incline or not, you must resign
your power and cease from your oppression. Of all the appearances which this
world exhibits there is none which affords a larger fund of mortifying
speculation, than to see one man presuming to oppress another. In a mind merely
philosophical, it raises curiosity; in a mind sensible and honest, it excites
surprise; in mind capable of the noble resentment of virtue, it rouses
indignation. Ask that man who squeezes the hard wrought labourer, what right he
has to oppress his brethren? Ask him what the unhappy creature has done to
forfeit his favor? O! he will tell you he is idle and unworthy of favor. This
I grant may be true in some instances; but I fear that it is rather an apology
for oppression; the lurking motive more commonly is, that few favors are done
in this world but from selfish motives, and when your benefactor receives not
the return which he expected, he is disappointed and chagrined -- This is not
benevolence on the part of the bestower, it is an absolute bargain for value to
be received, it is taking a man at an advantage, and making your own terms with
him; it is a racit compact, but of which you have not so much as a suspicion of
the motive. A disinterested benefactor is never disappointed. I maintain that
setting gratitude, good offices reward themselves, and if nature is not forced,
every return which is in the power of a grateful heart will be made*

BUT if these motives affect you not, let me suggest one which you must feel.
In a life so short as this, why would you oppress? you will not long enjoy the
pleasure, if you think it one of hearing the widow mourn; before you can tear
his garments from the orphan, before he is reduced to such a state, as to
render your enjoyment complete, the delusion flies. You yourselves are low and
need that mercy which you now refuse to others. Yes! my affected friends, the
period of their oppression is short, and the more violently they drive, the
more rapidly they will approach to the end of their course; there they will
cease from troubling, their inexorable hearts will beat no more. Free among the
dead, you will enjoy that repose you are deprived of here, nor ever more be
subject to their authority. For,

II. THE grave is a place where the weary are at rest -- The weary are at rest!
How soothing is the sentiment? There is something in the expression which
affects the heart with uncommon sensations, and produces a species of delight,
where tranquillity is the only ingredient! To be delivered from trouble, to be
relieved from oppression, to be freed from care and pain, from sickness and
distress, to lie down in a bed of security, in long oblivion of our woes! how
soothing is the sentiment, how full of consolation! The ocean may roll its
waves, the warring winds may join their forces, the thunders may shake the
skies, the lightnings pass swiftly from cloud to cloud; but not the force of
winds combined, nor the sound of thunder, nor the rage of many seas though
united in one peal, and directed to one point, can shake the firm security of
the tomb! The dead hear nothing of the tumult; conducted to silent mansions,
they cannot be awakened by the fiercest thunders or the loudest clamours. The
unfortunate, the oppressed and broken hearted, rest here together, every sorrow
is hushed and every pang extinguished. Hence in all nations, a set of names
have arisen to convey the idea of death congenial with these sentiments. It is
called the harbor of rest, where the distressed mariner wearied out by winds
and storms, at length moors his shattered vessel, never more to return to the
tossing of the wasteful ocean. It is called the land of peace, where the
friendless exile retire beyond the reach of malice and envy, and the cruelest
arrows of misfortune. It is called the hospitable house, where the
weatherbeaten traveller, saint with traverling pathless defarts, finds a
welcome and secure repose. But this brings me to the third thing proposed,
which was to consider the grave as a place where the distinctions of life are
leveled, where society returns to its first principles, where nature resumes
her rights and where all men are replaced in their original equality.

NEXT to the influence of our passions, the most of the calamities which man
inflicts on man, arise from the unequal though necessary distribution of
property and power. Dazzled with riches and distinctions, we are apt to
consider ourselves when we obtain possession, not as men appointed to collect
and preside over the common stores of providence, but as undoubted heirs of
exclusive advantages and superior in the very nature of things to the common
mass of mankind. Than this, there cannot be an error more fatal either in
theory or in life. This vast globe on which we stand, is inhabited by millions
of rational creatures, who have all an equal right to her productions; but as
it is impossible that we can all possess and as a greater sum total of
happiness results from the present arrangements, it has pleased the policy of
providence to put this earth, with her inhabitants and productions, under the
government of a few, who manage, under God, for the greater good of the whole.
This is the original of all property and power, and the final ends which
providence proposes to accomplish from the present inequality which prevails in
life, and considered in this view, the policy is benevolent as well as
profound. The distinction of ranks, the subordination among men, and the
reverence for power, when confined within their proper limits, and the ends of
their institution, kept in view, are all necessary in our system; but the
amazement of a contemplative man proceeds from this, that these lords of the
earth, who know themselves to be but men, and whose hearts are consequently in
the secret, should from this circurmstance, take occasion to become tyrannical;
that forgeting the ends of their preeminence, they should mistake possession
for right, and act as if this world with its inhabitants, and productions, were
created for their private advantage; that mistaking property for power, they
should erect themselves into taskmasters, and make imperious war upon the
freedom of the species. -- The advantages of society, though numerous, make
perhaps, but poor amends, when her principles are thus corrupted, when the
selfish and tyrannical dispositions, find themselves protected by power, and
when the original equality of men is forgotten and disclaimed. Hence that
insolence of office, the senseless vanity of birth, the mean language of
flattery, and the groans of the oppressed, which ^ound from all quarters of the
earth* Let none imagine that I mean to confine this abuse to that class of men
whom we call the great; it is the consequence of power of every size, be it
great or small, in high life or in low. It is a general but mortifying remark,
that no man or set of men, were ever yet endowed with unlimited privileges,
which they did not wanton with, or abuse. This is a general remark upon the
human character. Today we suffer, tomorrow we oppress. Vain man, how soon, and
by what slight accidents, is his reason overturned. He first by many a weary
step, and by many an anxious prayer to heaven for success, pursues some
favorite scheme of happiness. What vows does he nor make, that if heaven will
but favor his undertakings, he will still retain a grateful remembrance of the
benefit; but he has no sooner obtained the ends of his pre-eminence, than
forgetting all his prayers and vows of gratitude, he presumptuously ascribes
the whole to his own merit; boldly arrogates the partial indulgence of heaven
to himself, as his right, and proceeding from one step of pride, oppression,
and solly, to another; he shakes alost the rod of power, makes himself a god in
his own imagination, and forgets that men are his fellowcreatures.

FROM a review of the miseries of human life, as well those which are the
consequences of power among mankind, as those which are unavoidable, men of
warm fancies, and generous dispositions, have been led to imagine, that human
affairs were not always in this situation. They have imagined, that a scene
such as the present exhibits, could not come originally from the hands of an
all benevolent God. They have imagined a golden age wherein men lived as they
came from the hands of their Creator, free, fearless, innocent, virtuous and
independent.

THEN say they, were there no wars to desolate the world, no frauds put in
practice among brethren. The seeds of animosity were not yet sown, nor was the
soil prepared to receive them. No deceit lurked in the heart, no cloud darkened
the brow; but man met man with erect countenances, the consequences of freedom,
of mutual confidence and independency; nor had luxury as yet invented her fatal
arts, to enervate the mind or rack the body with acute diseases Men lived
simply, reclined at their ease, beneath shady trees, or by the sides of brooks
or streams the first inhabitants of the earth led lives devoted to love, to
joy, and to innocence. And as all the passions were atuned to harmony within,
the elements without, were in perfect concord, with these delightful movements.
No cloud had as yet deformed the face of heaven; no storm had collected over
the affrighted mariner, no thunders had been heard to roll, the sun strone
serenelv, the gales blew softly, the face of the deep was calm; there was an
eternal spring, every heart beat with joy, and all nature was filled with
hippiness. Such they imagined, was the felicity of the first set of men.

BUT whilst we soothe ourselves by looking back to a happiness, which (if ever
it existed) is now no more; it will afford us a higher consolation, to look
forward to a state which really lies before us. Before us lies a peaceful
empire, where all the miseries of life are bushed, and where all the causes
which agitate this upper world are destroyed. In the grave all the distinctions
of life cease; nature resumes her rights, and all things are brought back once
more, to their original level. These the wicked cease from troubling, there the
weary rest from their toils. There no passions distract, and no enemies desame,
their agonizing pain, and wounding insamy and ruthless revenge are no more; but
profound peace and calm passions and security, which is immovable.

THUS, My Brethren, I have exhibited to your view, one of the most interesting
subjects which can occupy the mind of man. In whatever light we view this awful
subject, it presents us with a solemn scene.

WHOEVER left the precincts of mortality without casting a wishful look on what
he had left behind, and a trembling eye on the, dreadful scene before him? How
affecting must it be to disssolve at once, all the connections of life, and to
part with all that is dear below the sun? How mortifying to think of that fair
form, and these active limbs, in which we perhaps, too much boasted, becoming
pale and ghastly, and st^ffening like the clay, and ready to moulder into dust;
but how much more dreadful still is it, for a foul rouled to a consciousness of
guilt, during every moment of its past existence, to burst into the regions of
eternity, there to appear before an awful judge, and to receive sentence
according to the deeds done in the body; a sentence in exact proportion to the
degrees of its guilt.

I COME now to the fourth thing proposed, which was, to draw some useful
reflections from what has been said. And,

I. You who are sinking under the burden of suffering and oppression be
comforted: the day of your deliverance draws nigh; the morning of your
salvation which you are so ardently soliciting. There is only one thing that
can disappoint your hopes, and that is, vice and irreligion; a glorious
redemption awaits you beyond the grave; render not yourselves unworthy of it
All your afflictions and fiery trials which are but for a moment, will work out
for you an high degree of felicity through all the ages of eternity.

AGAIN, you who enjoy the sunshine of prosperity, he not intoxicated; vain is
that pre-eminence on which your state is founded; time is fast carrying you to
the end of your enjoyments, and nothing can avail you but religion and virtue.
In your life, your health, your comforts, your connections, the principles of
destruction work; you are standing upon a precipice, and the ground is fast
slipping from beneath your feet; your own life is also fleeting and transitory;
every thought, every word, every action of your lives, is attended with eternal
consequences; it is either filling up the measure of your happiness or misery;
do not then suffer the shadowy seen here below, to rob you of your supreme
felicity.

AGAIN, thirdly, Let us learn from the whole of what has been said, not to
value ourselves by our situations in life. These situations; are necessary; and
it is necessary that some should fill them. It would seem that God has varied
our circumstances, that we might have an opportunity of acting a part in
different situations; to be flavish in adversity is improper, to be insolent in
prosperity is ridiculous. The only thing that we ought to be solicitous about,
is our conduct. This will survive when distinctions of every other nature are
done away, when we ourselves shall depart, and when all nature shall sink in
one common desolation.

IV. THE tranquillity which death affords to the mind of a good man, arises from
the joyful hope, which Christ Jesus, by his death and resurrection, has opened
up beyond death and the grave.

ACCORDING to the words of an excellent poet,

Hope springs eternal in the human breast,
Man never is, but always to be blessed.
It is hope whch make us face difficulties, wrestle with misfortunes, and rise
unconquered from calamities, which would otherwise crush us to the dust, and
make us cry out in the despair of our hearts, it is better for us to die than
to live. The same principle which accompanies us in every distressful scene of
life, and even prevents us from throwing away life itself, as an intolerable
burden, carries our views into a future state, and disposes us irresistably to
look for that happiness there, which we have labored after here in vain.

THE happiness which we pursue in this state, is deceitful and ^^gacious, it
glitters before us like a false fire, which embarrasses the benighted
traveller. In vain we double our speed and reach after what is not. The vain
delusion still mocks our toil, and eludes our grasp. At length having
suffciently sported with our credulity, it vanishes at once, and leaves us a
prey to perplexity and despair.

NOT so the happiness of a future state. Like a light hung out on stormy coast,
to direct the distressed mariner, we steer to it through millions of surrounding
waves. In vain the tempest besets us, and night falls with all its shades, we
keep it steady in our eye through the gloom, and braves the opposition of the
elements; secure that if we can but reach the desired haven, we shall find a
shelter from the storm, and an agreeable and safe retreat from the perils of a
disastrous voyage. This is the point, my brethren, which we ought to have
always in our eye. This will keep us steady and uniform, amidst all the
fluctuations of this present life; and it will at length land us in that happy
country, where harmony, love and joy shall ever reign.

To encourage you still farther to persevere in one uniform course of religion
and virtue, I shall exhibit to your view, some features of the leading
characters of your nation.

AND the first conspicuous character which I ought to mention, is one who
stands high on the records of ^ame, and I am persuaded high also, in the
affections and esteem of every good man. Like an healthy plant, beside some
nutritious stream, he grew up silently, and perhaps imperceived by the vulgar
eye. However unobserved by others, he was fat and full of sap; the rough winds
of adversity only made him strike the deeper root; and although the winters
blasts often withered his leaves, yet the general spring made him swell and
rise. From storms he was a shelter, and from heat a shade. To the birds of the
air he afforded a secure and safe retreat; and every living thing rejoiced
under his protection. The little hills rejoiced on every side, and the
mountains were refreshed with his shade. The Lion and the Wolf, soothed with
his fragrance, laid aside their fierceness. Under his chequered shade, herbs,
trees, plants, fruits, and flowers with pleasant smiles, reared their joyful
heads. His head towered to the skies, and his leaves sipped the silver dews.

Talia saela snia dixeront curicte Parcae;
Cara deum soboles, magnum jovie incrementum.
Aggredere, Omagnos, aderit jam tempus, honores
Terrasque, tractus que maris, columque profundum,
Aspice, convexo nutantem pondere mundum,
Aspice, venturo letentur ul omnia, saeclo
O! mihi tam long maneat pars ultima vitce,
Spiritus et quantum sat erit tua dicere facta
THIS is the man, Gentlemen, who was at the helm of your affairs; who steadily
conducted the vessel of state amidst the storms and tempests of tedious war.
Although she was much tossed on the surface of the wasteful ocean, yet by his
care and diligence, she was at length conducted into a safe harbor. That rest,
which (through the providence of God) you now enjoy, is in a great measure
owing to his strenuous efforts. He was your Joshua, who, although Jordan was
overflowing his banks, opened up a safe passage for your people. Tell me, you
who know, whither his prudence, his fortitude, his justice, or his temperance,
were the most conspicuous features of his character? Whilst these virtues shone
in his life and conversation, they were constantly brightened by a graceful
piety and an ardent devotion.

SHALL I mention in the second place, or shall I compare, or rather equal with
him, the great man, on whom you have now conferred the most burden some toils,
and the highest office of state. Like him, he has grown old amongst you, and
has exerted all his powers in his countries service.

WHILST the one was steering the vessel of state, the other was shaping her
course; whilst the one brought liberty to your country, the other was providing
a safe reception for her continuance. The one was the most active hand for
preserving your country from a foreign invasion, the other has preserved her
from a diabolical scheme of foreign intrigue. The one was a blessing to you in
time of war; the other is a blessing in time of peace. The one has now laid
aside the burden of public toil; and is enjoying a calm, a delicious and safe
retreat; the other is still stooping under the cares of an extensive
government. In both, prudence, justice, temperance, and fortitude, seem to
reign. Your time would sail me but to mention mauy others, who are highly
deserving of the gratitude of their country. May their deathless names still
live in the hearts and lives of their children, their friends, and in the
hearts of the latest posterity.

THERE is only one character which I shall beg leave to mention; and that is of
one who has been gradually drawn into my view, by the excellent sentiments
which flow in his speeches and proclamations, by the glowing warmth of
affection, expressed by his friends and constituents, and the high encomiums of
those who differ from him in political sentiments. These rays increased and
brightened the nearer I approached the luminous object. "Blessed be the Lord
thy God, who delights in thee, to set thee as the head of this people,
because the Lord has not cast off this people, therefore made he thee ruler,
to do justice and judgment."

I WILL not life flattering titles -- No. Native excellency needs not the
foreign aid of ornament, but is when unadorned, adorned the most. One of the
highest human characters given in the scriptures, is comprehended in three
words: "Enoch walked with God." Your station, your character, your person, your
abilities, call loudly for the highest gratitude and praise to heaven. You live
in the hearts of all those who know you; cultivate true religion und you shall
live also in the hearts of 1atest posterity, and shine as the sun in the
kingdom of your father; many children will be born unto God by your influence,
and will shine as stars to adorn you in the regions above.

To the Hon Lieutenant Governor, and Council, and House of Representatives,

I WOULD also beg leave to present respectful addresses and congratulations, on
this pleasing occasion. In proportion to your elevation, you are drawing the
eyes of the world upon you. What might have passed unobserved in a private
situasion, will be deeply scrutinized in you, who are called to act in a public
capacity. Consider that the interests of the state, their virtues, and their
vices, will be very much influenced by your actions and behavior. Nay, your
influence will perhaps flow to latest posterity. The enemies of your
government, your religion, and your happiness, have been of late increasing in
all countries. In schools, in colleges, and in seminaries of learning, they
have been endeavoring to insinuate themselves and to subvert every steady
principle of human life. Would you wish them to inspire life and vigor into
your infant state; would you wish her to be rendered a blessing in the midst of
the earth; begin then in your several departments, to cultivate true religion.
Let it not be the vain rant of enthusiasts or the mask of hypocrites to deceive
and betray. No. Let it be that steady masculine piety, which actuates the whole
foul, and shines out iu the life and conversation. Let your families, your
connections, your constituents, all bear witness to your devotion, your
justice, your charity, your humility, your candor and truth. Trusting in God
alone, and in Jesus Christ the surety of lost man, steady to abound in every
christian grace and virtue. This is the life of the soul, this is the life of
society, and this will save your country from ruin.

I SHALL now conclude this discourse, with AN ADDRESS TO THS WHOLE BODY OF THE
PEOPLE.

MY BRETHREN,

You prosess yourselves to be the source of power: that all power is derived
from the tree and voluntary suffrages of the people. See then that this
fountain be pure; otherwise, all the streams which issue from it will be
fainted with the corruptions which issue from the source. If I were an enemy to
your government and to your felicity, I would encourage you in keeping religion
from your houses, from your schools, and from your churches; I would advise
speculators to strike in with the leading vices of the youth, and show them how
they may act the madman more genteelly. I would encourage youth to despise
these unwildly and clumsy creatures, whom they call Priests, as only an
interruption and hindrance in the pleasures of life. I would advise them to
reject with disdain, the sordid parsimeny of their parents, as unbecoming their
rank and station. I would encourage them to turn their minds to external pomp
and show, and glitter in the first ranks of socieiy. I would advise them to
strain every nerve to outshine their companions, though at the expense of their
parents, their friends, their honesty, their veracity, and every thing virtuous
and sacred. I would say, rejoice, O young man in thy youth; let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth; walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight
of thine eyes; eat, drink, and be merry. I would advise the leaders of the
people to step before them into the scenes of vice, where they may throw away
their virtue, their religion, and their fortune at once. But what says the
wisdom of Solomon? "Know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee
into judgment." There thou must give an account of the deeds done in the body,
whither they be good or bad.

GOD, My Brethren, has given you a large and spacious country; a country of
mountains and valleys, of hills and dales, of rivers, woods, and plains; a
country loudly calling for the industry of the husbandman; a country teeming
with natural wealth, producing in abundance, all the simple necessaries of
life; a country where the pious man may worship God without fear, and feast
abundantly upon the fruits of his industry. What temptation then can there be
to transgress the bounds of virtue? What need of speculation, of cheating, of
deceit, and accumulating wealth upon the ruin of our fellowcreatures? In
proportion to these high natural adventges which you enjoy, such is the
aggravation of all these crimes which prevail among you. I could easily trace
these crimes to their source, and show you how the mind is warped by early
habit, by the deceit which appears in the lives of parents, and these with whom
we are acquainted in our infancy; from the too ardent desire of pomp and show,
and from the overflowings of vice in other, countries finding a reservoir in
this.

BUT I have no pleasure in wounding your feelings. I shall leave these topics
to your own meditation, and exhort you to lay aside all guile, all hypocrisy,
and evil speaking, and as new born babes to desire the sincere milk of the
word, that you may grow thereby.

WOULD you, My Brethren, trace all these streams of vice to their sources, and
sincerely repent of your sins; would you adopt the resolution of Zaccheus, the
publican, "Show mercy to the poor, and if you have taken any thing from any man
by false acculation, restore it to him four fold," you would be the happiest
people upon earth. But do not think that you can become religious whilst you
retain the gains of dishonesty. No: Do not deceive your yourselves; sooner can
the rivers and streams reascend the lofty mountains, sooner can the Etheopian
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, than you can enjoy true communion
with God, whilst you pollute your hands, by holding of bribes. "Cleanse your
hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded; then draw high unto
God and he will draw high unto you." Let that grace and truth which shone in
your Savior, as its native source, also adorn your characters. Thus your
affections will be expanded, and will diffuse themselves without restraint,
upon all around you. That mutual trust, which is the basis of all other social
enjoyments, will be more and more strengthened. You will become a blessing to
yourselves, a blessing to your parents, a blessing to your children, a blessing
to your state, a blessing to your country. You will be blessed in your basket,
blessed in your store, blessed in your life, blessed in your death, and blessed
through all the ages of eternity.

As I am a stranger, and without political views or interest at stake, I hope
you will listen to me with an unprejudiced ear.

FLY from all enthusiastic rants, and freaks of enthusiasm; let your manners be
simple and plain; let sincerity and truth shine more in your actions than in
your words; let the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind, the orphan and
the fatherless, feel that you are Christ's Representatives upon earth. Religion
does not consist in "bowing down the head as a bulrush, and spreading sackcloth
and ashes order us." No, it consists in "loosing the bands of wickedness, in
undoing the heavy burdens, in letting the opprssed go free, and in breaking
every yoke. It is to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor
who are cast out to thy house; when thou see the naked, that thou cover them,
and that thou hide not thy self from shine own flesh. If these actions flow
from true christian princeples "then shall thy light break forth as the
morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily; and thy righteousness
shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy rearward." Do not, my
Brethren, think that by these exhortations I despise the doctrines of grace,
no, God forbid; but I would not carry that doctrine above what is written; the
grace of God is as neccessary as the warming sun, and the genial influences of
spring are to the swelling year; but remember that it acts as imperceptibly, as
these latent influences.

THESE loose thoughts I have thrown together praying that the God of heaven may
render them effectual in producing some uniformity in religious opinions.

I SHALL now conclude the whole of this tedious discourse, with entreating you
to give a vigorous support to Ministers, Magistrates, and Rulers, Establish
them on such a permanent basis, as to render their several departments
respectable, and objects for the highest abilities to enter into them. Thus
Church and state, will go hand in hand in pouring felicity upon the whole body
of the people.

KEEP this text always in your view; and if it have a due ^^flu^nce upon your
conduct, it will check all the wild falkes of youth the wild ambition, and
pomp, and splendour of middle age; it will relax the iron hand of opprission, it
will envigorate the spirits of old age, it will make you smile in death, and
rejoice through all the ages of eternity. "For I know, says Job. that my
redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: and
that though through my skin warms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God, whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another."
"Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
make yet perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ: To whom be glory for ever
and ever."

AMEN.

