DR. FISHER'S ORATION, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

JULY 4, 1799.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT KENNEBUNK, ON THE Fourth day of July, 1799; BEING
THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY DR. JACOB FISHER.

We contend not for glory or conquest; we exhibit to mankind the remarkable
spectacle of a People attacked by unprovoked enemies. * * * * * * * * * Arise
then, AMERICANS, to your tents, and gird you for battle.

Contin. Cong. '75 and '78. PORTLAND PRINTED BY ^. A. JENKS.

1799.

Kennebunk, July 4th, 1799. SIR,
THE Committee for arranging the Festival of the day, in this place, are
desired by those who joined in its celebration, to return you their thank for
your very ingenious and patriotic ORATION, and to request a copy for the press.

In behalf of the Committee, NATHANIEL FROST.

To Dr. JACOB FISHER.
GENTLEMEN,
THE approbation and request, by you communicated, do me honor; and rather than
fail to comply with the wishes of my friends, I will suffer Criticism.

I am, Gentlemen, with esteem, Your humble servant, J. FISHER.

To the Committee of Arrangement.
ORATION.
JUST twenty three years have rolled on, since the patiotic HANCOCK pressed the
sacred seal of our Independence: Nor trembled his hand, nor recoiled his soul
at the bold deed, "big with fate."

THE affairs of our revolution, abound with the sublime, and the beautiful: but
every part of this amplefield has been explored -- every important plant
gathered, and every flower cropped: To dwell, therefore, on that which has been
so often and minutely detailed, would be but a dry repetition; and is a
sufficient reason for my not following the common track and converting the
history thereof into an ORATION: I shall but sketch the out-lines, by observing
-- that if the first glow of our patriotism -- the unanimity, firmness and
perseverance which succeeded -- the deeds of valor performed in the field,
without discipline, and almost without arms -- the wisdom of our councils --
the renowned INSTRUMENT which gives immortality to the DAY WE NOW CELEBRATE --
the treaty of PEACE -- the orderly return of the army to their several homes
and domestic employments -- the Government, Federal.
plenty and happiness which followed -- all these great acts and events, I say,
if they had happened but a few centuries ago, would have been ascribed to
inspiration and miracle. Indeed, the ignorant and the learned, the believer,
and the infidel, unite in this, that fortune or providence were exceedingly
propitious. Eternal praise and gratitude to the GOD of HEAVEN, who ordained,
that we were born and do exist at a time when HE thus pours a profusion of His
blessings on the land we live in.

BUT the treat of human prosperity and happiness is never served up without
mixture. Our most eligible condition could not last forever. It is not in the
nature and constitution of things. Man was not made for complete felicity here
below -- he participates the changes of all things with which he is conversant;
continually revolving on the axis of FATE; whose rotations bring him
alternately Health and Sickness, Prosperity and Adversity, Respectability and
Contempt; today he is riding triumphantly on the clouds of popularity,
tomorrow the buoyant gas is exhausted, and he sinks to disgrace and infamy.
Thus revolve EMPIRES -- thus revolve WORLDS -- nothing is permanent, nothing
certain; we know that there are some natural bodies, and some moral or
political ones, which have constitutions favorable to longevity: There are also
means to be used with success for their preservation; as temperance and
exercise for the human body; knowledge and wisdom for the body politic -- but
soon or late they both must have an end. Again, as in medicine, so in
Government, there are many unskilful physicians, quacks and mountebanks, who
sometimes lull their patients with opiates, at other times fire them with
stimulents, which produce lethargy or inflammation, and premature death; but if
every earthly thing contains the inherent principles of its own dissolution,
what occasion is there for wars and fightings to promote the work?

WAR, in general, is not only one of the most extraordinary and wicked, but is
one of the most ridiculous things in the world; and it affords abundant
incitement both to the laughing and crying philosopher. Who could have
commanded his risibles, when an infatuated Bohemian General, who, that he might
animate his party, when dead, ordered that his skin should be dressed and made
into a drum! A furious war between the Greeks and Trojans, and which ended in
the extirpation of the latter, was on account of an individual woman. An
important change in the Roman Government was once produced, because the wife of
a Plebeian was not treated with so much respect (perhaps in a company of
gossips) as her sister, the wife of a public officer; what a glorious cause for
revolution! Nine tenths of the bloody contests between citizens and nations,
have as frivolous a beginning. A sovereign affronted in the person of a
contemptible minion, his horse, his mistress, or her favorite lap-dog, kindles
the flame, and the whole realm smokes like a fiery furnace: The military reden
and quake with very rage; the peasantry rave in paroxisms of madness; they arm
with clubs and stones to beat out the brains of their neighbors, or that of
the peasantry of another country, who know no more of the quarrel than the
inhabitants of the moon! If any should be dilatory, the despot drives them to
their duty and loyalty; for he claims an exclusive property in his subjects, as
well as in the earth they tread, and the air they breathe; he thinks the man
sunk in turpitude, who will not come forward with his person and purse, (though
he should lose his life, and starve his wife and children) when his sovereign
has a passion to gratify; the value of ten thousand grovelling lives is nothing
in his estimation, but as they minister to his pleasures. How long shall
mankind be made the tool of mean revenge, and at the same time despised by him
who makes use of them? O shame! O scandal to the human character!

IF mankind had always been at peace, the earth is large enough to have
supported them all, 'till Death in his own natural way should have taken them
off one by one. If there be any who doubt the truth of this position, let them
consider the sumptuary economy of the Lacedaemonians: Their whole nation would
feed on less than would satisfy one epicure; yet their frugal fare afforded
sufficient nutriment to produce the greatest strength and vigor of body and
mind. A Roman, on less than four acres of land, supported himself, and reared a
family of heroes; let any one acquainted with these facts, cast his eyes on the
map of the world; see the thousands of uncultivated acres in Europe; the tens
of thousands in New Holland, and other islands; the millions in Asia; the
millions in Africa; the thousands of millions in America! -- Many of these
lands invite mankind to come and live on their spontaneous productions; almost
all of them would yield abundantly by cultivation. Surely we are not stinted
with a scanty pittance. Man need not clear himself a place with the sword and
the bayonet; -- the axe and the hoe are sufficient. -- War, therefore, does not
arise from necessity, but from the turbulence of man. -- Moroover, the bulk of
mankind derive no advantage from a conquest after they have achieved it. What
have the French soldiery gained by their conquests in Italy, and elsewhere? Not
an acre, or a dollar, falls to their lot: Duped by a few over-bearing
avaricious cowards, who, secure themselves, do gasconade, cry havoc, and urge
the dogs of war -- then let them lose on the human race, that they may share
the spoils of the dead, or have their spacious domains enriched with blood.

THERE is no war justifiable, but an unavoidable defensive war. Such an one is
founded in nature; and such an one, my fellow citizen-soldiers, we are likely
soon to have on hand. "We contend not for conquest or glory" -- we want not the
lands of Frenchmen -- we want none of their goods or money, except on the fair
principles of commerce, and where the advantages would be mutual. But this
"worm-eaten" method of doing business is too ceremonious; they have therefore
adopted the more expeditious mode of requisition. This new system of commerce
may be explained in few words: -- BCONAPAPTE offers to release the Maltese from
their "ancient tyrants" -- they close with his generous proposal, and "submit
to the Yoke," (these were his own words) -- he plunders the public treasury,
and proceeds to emancipate the oppressed Egyptians, obliges the merchant, of
Alexandria to give specie for his bullion. Soon after writes from Cairo to Genesis
KLEBER, who was at Alexandria. There is here an excellent mint -- we shall
again have occasion for all the Ingo's. Call the merchants together and
re-demand the metal. I shall not fail to pay them in produce at a future day.

Letter, July 27, '98.


CITIZENS: -- If we had patience and courage to follow an ignis satuus through a
rude and uncultivated country, then might we trace the French revolution. After
leaping a few walls and ditches, Bastile.
we set forward on a spacious plain of principle; the prospect is charming; the
trees large and fair; here grew the benevolent CAPET, (though entwined with the
poisonous ivy of MARIA ANTONIETTA) -- here grew NECKER, FAYETTE, and their
associates; proceed but a little further, and we are entangled in the briers
and underwood of envy and conspiracy. The noble trees of the forest are
scattered with a furious whirlwind, or felled with the national axe -- the sun
of reason hides himself beyond their western horizon. Following our guide, we
now ascend the burning "mountain" of ROBESPIERRE, DANTON, MARAT, and other
inexorable Cyclops. Here roars the hoarse thunder, and here shoots the vivid
lightning -- torrents of pure blood roll down its sides and tinge the distant
seas! -- Courage! we must now descend down -- down to the regions of the
Directory -- where our glimmering taper disappears, and leaves us in terrible
apprehension. A "great dismal" of horror -- a "black forest" of thick darkness
-- a cursed bog, a quicksand, full of pits and snares of death. One while we
see a howling wilderness -- there vegetates the deadly Nightshade, Manchineel
"A tree of Terra Firma -- It bears a fruit resembling an apple; but under this
specious appearance contains the most subtle poison. The malignity of this tree
is such, that is a person only sleeps under it he finds his body all swollen and
racked with the severest tortures -- the beasts from instinct always avoid it."

GUTHRIE, though undesignedly, has here represented the French in a masterly
allegory.


and Buhon Upas -- there the envenomed spider weaves her net for innocent
victims -- there the wily serpent sings to the harmless bird, and charms it to
destruction -- there the wolf and fell Hyena rush openly to drink the blood of
the lamb -- there the tiger and catamount conceal themselves among the fern and
brakes, to spring upon the prey -- and there the ruthless crocodile "weeps and
then devours." A most treacherous sanguinary and carniverous scene! When lo!
Anon -- we behold a troubled ocean! impelled by storms and raging hurricanes --
the waves thereof surge and lash the stubborn shore, overwhelm their ancient
and appointed bounds, and engulph the neighboring nations in oblivion! --
Again, they raise their rebellious and atheistical heads in the face of high
Heaven! -- Will the great GOD, who sits enthroned in calm omnipotence, suffer
his vengeance to sleep forever?

BUT let us descend to plain language, and contrast the beginning with their
succeeding conduct: -- This revolution was planned and prosecuted at first,
(ostensibly at least) on the principles of humanity and the rights of man:
Their "Constitution renounceed all wars undertaken with a view of conquest." If
such was its commencement, what a departure from original principles and
motives! Now, conquest, rapine and murder, lead the van; and we are induced
(...), that instead of philosophers, and lovers of humanity, that ALL HELL had
opened, and vomited forth its felonious inhabitants to give rulers to FRANCE.

WE hear much of the liberty and equality of this regenerated nation. Pray what
is the emblem of this renowned liberty? -- I will tell you -- it is a little
instrument of a cubit's length, called a dagger, decorated with the best blood
of her own citizens -- with that of Lombardy -- with that of half Europe; --
The Goddess of Gallic liberty wields in her own right hand this murderous
steel! She is a goblin of infernal origin, and takes possession of the heart,
not through the proper medium of the head, but through the medium of the breast --
she outstrips the savage cannibal in cruelty -- the dying shrieks of infants
snatched from the mother's breast, is music to her accursed ears -- her reign
is equivalent to severing the heart strings with red-hot pincers! -- Is this
the Government, the liberty to be wished for by you? Yet you must submit to it,
or support your own: Choose you, therefore, which you will have -- there is no
halting here between two opinions -- defend your rights or surrender them.
"Your money or your life" -- that is their language. Think you, that the
inhabitants of Holland, Venice, Switzerland, See J. MALLET DU PAN, on the
destruction of the Helvetic Union and Liberty.
Egypt, and others, on whom the curse of the fraternal embrace has fallen, were
sinners above all men against the Terrible Republic. -- I tell you nay -- but
except you are vigilent, you shall all likewise perish.

Is there a word in any of the tongues or languages under Heaven, which can
convey all the ideas of such complicated villainy? If so, that word is
Jacobinism. But as jacobinism in this country has dwindled to the mere phantom
of that uncleanly monster it formerly was, I shall say but little respecting
it, and even the honor of censure is more than it deserves: The spirit of the
times, which commands Kings, has laid it low in the dust. -- JUDAS sold his
master, and ARNOLD his country, for a sum of money; RANDOLPH, it is said,
attempted the same, failing in de l'argent, he wrote a book, and swelled his
finances by -- securing "copy-right." JEFFERSON -- (holds a dignified office)
-- MONROE, instead of attending to his diplomatic duty, made a fortune by
speculation, and now casts a longing and retrospective eye on the delicious
onions and garlics of France -- BARLOW is a fallen angel, and assimilates with
the cloven-footed TALLEYRAND TALLEYRAND is deformed in both his sect -- so that
in this respect as well as many others, he is worse than the devil.
-- But the scum of our lank honestine Jacobins, have no such golden excuses to
offer in palliation they verily commit iniquity for its own dear sake, which
infernal propensity in the breast of a wicked man is delineated by the poet, as
follows: Birds feed on birds, beasts on each other prey:
But savage man alone does man betray,
Pressed by necessity, they kill for food;
Man undoes man, to do himself no good:
With teeth and claws by nature armed, they hunt
Nature's allowance, to supply their want:
But man with smiles, embraces friendship's praise,
Inhumanly his fellow's life betrays;
With voluntary pain works his distress;
Not through necessity, but wantonness.


WHAT possible advantage can a man propose to himself by upsetting his own
government and laws: If they are as free and perfect as the nature of such
institutions will admit; more liberty would place us in a state of
licentiousness: Indeed, we border on it now. Hear the sentiments of a
celebrated author, (MILLOT): "If the abuse of authority is dangerous, rebellion
against that authority is more so. Seditious liberty is worse than the
transitory despotism of a monarch. In modern States, the laws and opinions of
the public are a powerful barrier against the excess of tyranny." If these
maxims and doctrines are true as it respects Europe, how much more forcibly do
they apply in our country? How many thousand years of sad experience must
mankind have, ere they will be convinced, that the abuse of liberty is the very
cause why the reins of Government must be drawn tighter and tighter? The
predominant vices and crimes of any particular nation may be known by their
penal code. -- If we had had no seditious Jacobins in this country, there would
have been no necessity for the "Sedition Act." If we therefore are obliged from
time to time to relinquish more of our individual rights to society, we may
thank, or rather execrate, our licentious democrats for the sacrifice. -- These
are the animals who have the consummate effrontery to denominate themselves
exclusive patriots, and who, at the same time, would persuade us to give up our
country, and all that is honorable, to France, and become their "hewers of wood
and drawers of water," without a single effort to retrieve our insulted
character.

BUT I hear some very honest people whine and say, it is madness to venture on
a war, when our coasts are defenseless, our militia undisciplined, and
destitute in a great measure, of experienced officers. Alas! they cry, "where
are our GREENES, our MORGANS, our WAYNES, our GATES, and the long list, adorned
with never-dying garlands, who lately trod the dangerous field! They have been
made thin by the destroyer, and who can supply their places?" Who, do they ask?
-- Where were our Generals before seventy-five? They were employed in the arts
and professions of peace; some steered the honorable plow; the same arts and
professions employ our undeveloped heroes now, but let a proper opportunity
offer, and they will find the same souls which animated our former Generals,
shine forth from a thousand new bodies. -- This is admiting the worst, which is
by no means the fact. -- We are not destitute of experienced leaders -- we
boast a LINCOLN, a PINCKNEY, a KNOX, and many others. -- He also, who before
led us to victory and glory is still alive -- "Yes" they reply, "but what can
be expected from a man of sixty-seven years?" -- In answer to this question I
will state a fair case, which may serve for a criterion to judge by; look about
and select a number of your acquaintance of that age, who have lived
temperately, and are remarkable for retainining their bodily and intellectual
powers (all these apply to the person under notice) are not these men as
capable of planning and superintending business, in their own line, as ever
they were? I answer for you, they are -- Remember that the laurels of
CINCINNATUS blossomed afresh in his autumn of four score. Review the long
catalogue of worthies from old ADAM to the present day, and see if there is one
who may compare with our WASHINGTON; -- Some of them were lost in ambition,
some in debauchery, others in superstition; not one without some fault. Our
worthy (being of the human nature) may also have some faults, but they have not
yet appeared: I repeat it with emphasis, though he may have faults in general,
yet there is no man who can point out any particular one. -- He is pious,
brave, humane, patriotic, prudent, temperate, candid, active, industrious, with
not a virtue, good or great quality wanting: What would you have of the man ye
jacobinical blasphemers of his character would you have him more good, or more
great? Raise him but one small grade higher, and he is no more of our order.

AMONGST the great, we recognize a HAMILTON, to whose abilities even the
arch-fiend FAUCHET subscribed; he is the prophet of politics; his telescopic
mind kens futurity, and contemplates it, as though it now is.

WE have moreover a man preserved of GOD, and his name is JOHN, our President,
mighty in word and deed; a Hercules, wrestling by turns, with the giant of
tyranny, and the hydra of anarchy -- an atlas, sustaining the political world
on his potent shoulders.

THE oracle of DELPHOS dictated wooden walls to the Athenians; so advises our
President, and so echoes the oracle of reason to Americans. We have already
experienced their advantage. Magnanimous TRUXTON! may the music of thy thunder
vibrate on the nerve-strings of every brother commander, and inspire them to
deeds of heroism like thine!

CONSIDER but for a moment, my countrymen, the price of your liberty -- lay it
not in the mental balance to be estimated with gold, but turn back a
sympathetic eye, and view the fields of carnage. Your fathers and your brethren
-- where are they? -- Stretched on the bare ground -- plundered -- uncovered,
in a burning sun -- their life-blud gushing in irregular streams, from their
convulsed and dying arteries -- their eye balls glazed in death -- deprived of
interment -- the voracious birds prey on their flesh -- the wild beasts scatter
their mangled limbs upon the face of the earth -- the winds pass rudely over
their bleached bones -- their hallowed shades cry from the crimson ground,
life, life's the price of your liberty.

AMERICANS, you want none of the inflammatory writings of Tom Pain, to awaken
your indignation -- a man must have a character, as well as a pen to merit your
attention -- (he who prostitutes shining talents, and degenerates into a vile
time-server, deserves to live and die in infamy, and his name to rot) -- You
want no DEMOSTHENES to arouse you to just revenge; the eloquence of injured and
violated humanity, weeping and weltering in her gore, more effectually excite
you to action. Fall in to the background of the picture then, ye smooth,
lukewarm, faith-hearted patriots -- go till the soil, or assist the women at
their dairies. Go, ye are not worthy of Liberty.

ARISE, and come forward, you prominent children of Mars! favored of the lovely
fair -- you who prefer to shed your blood in a glorious defense, rather than
shed your sweat for the emolument of an imperious master. -- Come forward, you
who "inquire not the number of the enemy, but where they are to be found" --
come forward, like the fabled Mammouth, who wards off the thunderbolts with
his mighty forehead -- come forward, again, I say, and present your dauntless
fronts to the shafts of tyranny, backed by avarice, with all the mean and
detestable passions in train -- resist them, and like their father they will
flee from you -- pursue them, and the whole herd will rush violently down the
precipice, to be choked in the lake of black despair.

THUS perish all our incorrigible enemies.


