A FAREWELL SERMON, DELIVERED AT SALEM, IN WATERBURY, APRIL 17, 1799. BY THE
REV. ABRAHAM FOWLER, LATE PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN THAT SOCIETY.

PRINTED BY GEORGE BUNCE -- NEW HAVEN. M,DCC,XCIX.

TO THE READER.
IT is thought necessary to inform the Reader that a sermon preceded this, from
Matthew xvi. 27. For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, with
his holy Angels, and then shall he reward every man according to his works. --
In this discourse, the particular object was to show, that all our conduct, in
every relation in life, will peculiarly interest and concern us, at the final
Judgment. The relation between Ministers and their People, was particularly
considered; the object of the Head of the Church in the appointment of them;
their accountableness to Him, in the discharge of their office; the obligation
of the People to attend to the true Ministers of Christ; and that Christ now
views, and will, at the day of Judgment, treat the conduct of People toward
faithful Ministers, as conduct toward himself, agreeably to his own
declaration, "He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me; and he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me; and he
that dispiseth me, dispiseth him that sent me: He that will not receive you,
nor hear your word, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorra^ in the
day of Judgment, than for him." These sketches are given, because reference is
had to this discourse in the Addresses in the following Sermon, and in other
parts of it also, as will be seen by the reader.

THE Author has no expectation that this Sermon will affect the minds of
Readers as it did those who heard it, as that was a peculiar occasion. His
apology for allowing it to be published, is, that a number of the hearers
wished to have it in their houses. It is hoped it will be of no disservice to
any, and that candor will be exercised by the reader.

A FAREWELL SERMON.
2 CORINTHIANS, xiii. II. Finally, brethren, farewell; be perfect, be of good
comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of Love and Peace shall be
with you.
THE apostle Paul, in the course of his travels, came to Corinth, and there he
preached the gospel about six years before he wrote this last epistle to them.
At that time he tarried among them about a year and an half. During this visit,
many who heard him, believed, and turned from their idols to the service of the
true God, and embraced the glorious gospel of his Son: The happy effects of his
ministry among them through the blessing of God, greatly endeared them to each
other. After having been absent from them about five years, and having in this
time heard of things in their conduct contrary to the spirit of the Gospel, and
being likewise requested by them in a letter to him, to answer some particular
questions; he embraces an opportunity amidst all his other cares, to write to
them, with a manifest design to correct their errors, to lead them further into
the knowledge of true christianity, and to answer their questions. The next year
he wrote them this most feeling and spiritual epistle which contains our text:
these two epistles contain more than he wrote to any other church. It appears
that the church at Corinth was peculiarly on the mind of the apostle, and that
he had spent much time and care for them; but in this epistle he closes his
services among them, and takes his leave.

Tho the church at Corinth, in general, highly esteemed the apostle, yet he had
his enemies; who, tho they acknowleged him great and powerful in reasoning, yet
disliked his personal appearance, and to whom his speech was contempible, as
appears from this epistle. It is evident that this church had some members
unfriendly to the doctrines, the spirit, and practice of the gospel; for the
apostle charges them with being guilty of such fornication, as far exceeded
what was even named among the gentiles; that one should have his father's wife
-- that they were also carnal, selfish, and contentious; that one was for Paul,
another for Apollos, etc. all which proved them destitute of the spirit of the
gospel. Their conduct (...) the sacrament was much to the dishonor of the
gospel, and inconsistent not only with he sobriety and purity of the christian
religion and its holy and solemn institutions, but even contrary to common
decency, that one should be hungry, and another drunken, at this religious
solemnity.

One reason why there were so many insincere professors at Corinth, while the
gospel was generally unpopular, may probably be, that Crispus the chief ruler
of the synagogue believed, and all his house, and also one Gous; these, and
other important characters rendered it popular to profess christianity at
Corinth, tho it was not the case in other places.

It was in vain for these enemies of Paul, publicly to oppose his doctrines, or
to impeach his moral character: they must then use such weapons against him as
they could find. In seeking for objections, nothing could be found for open
attack, but the mere defects of nature. He was not a man of a stately and
commanding visage, nor a good speaker. His letters, say they, are weighty and
powerful; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible. Such
public clamor is often popular with the unstable, irreligious, and
inconsiderate part of mankind; and is frequently a stronger objection against a
minister, in the mind of many, than herecy, or immorality; for neither of the
latter are so contrary to the unsanctified heart. Though this clamor might tend
to hinder the success of the gospel at Corinth; yet it did not alter the
opinions and feelings of the really religious and discerning christians,
concerning the apostle. They considered such objections as groundless cavils,
and the fruits of an unfriendly mind to the gospel of Christ.

Whether these or other reasons operated to prevent the apostle from further
particular attention, care, and labor among the Corinthians, does not appear.
It is evident he lived, at least, about six years after he wrote this last
epistle, as a laborer in the vineyard of Christ.

Whatever might be his reasons, it is clear he felt himself warranted in
ceasing his particular attention to them; and therefore in the close of this
epistle, and particularly in the words of our text, he takes leave of them. It
appears from his epistles, that he dearly and tenderly regarded the real
friends of Jesus; and tho he despised the cavils of these false professors, yet
he wished their good, and sincerely pitied those who might, incautiously, be
ruined by their means.

Far would I be from comparing myself with this great apostle, as a man
inspired, or as being his equal, in natural abilities or real graces; but in
unequal characters, there may be some likeness in circumstantial things. How
far the success the apostle in the beginning of his preaching at Corinth and
some things which happened after, and have now been mentioned, may compare with
what has taken place among us since my settlement among this people, I shall
leave to the judgment of the candid, and acquainted.

In the words of our text the apostle expresses his good will and sincere
desire for the prosperity of that church, which, under God, he had labored to
erect, and build up on the plan of the gospel.

We are not to suppose the apostle intended by this phrase a mere parting
compliment without much meaning, as at this day is become customary: to show
his meaning and real desire that they might fare well in the (...) sense, he
not only joins with it the friendly term of brethren, but also exhibits before
them the way to farewell in the highest degree possible. As the way to this
felicity he exhorts them to be perfect, to be of good comfort, to be of one
mind, and to live in peace; with this assurance, that in so doing, the God of
love and peace, the infinite fountain of good, would be with them.

Perfection intends holiness of heart, and of life, and a strict and constant
walk with God, according to the command of the glorious gospel.

To be of good comfort, is not to sink, and be disheartened at the dark and
gloomy scenes which might happen; but in the exercise of true holiness and
vital piety to God, and benevolence to men; they should place their hope, their
trust, and confidence, in the all powerful care and protection of that God, who
is ever mindful of them that rely on him, that they should be comforted. In a
view of God's constant care of his cause, and of his people, and the unfailing
intercession and wise government of Jesus Christ, who is head over all things
to his church; and who is able to defeat all the devices of the enemies of his
people, and to give them a glorious and complete victory at last, who trust in
him for salvation; that looking unto Jesus the great captain of salvation, and
the mighty conqueror, they might be sure of victory at last, however dark and
critical their present circumstances might appear.

He further recommends to them union and oneness of mind, both in faith and
practice, toward God and men; that they should be united in the faith and
fellow-ship of the gospel; that they might not be rent by divisions and
dissentions, and so be exposed to the ravages of the enemies of God, and of his
people; but that they should be united in love to God, and possess the
fellow-ship of the spirit; as union in the truth, is the great bulwork of the
church against the inroads of the adversary. He exhorts them therefore to lay
aside contention, to study and seek for peace and love in the truth, by all
proper condescension one to the other, which could be consistent with the
religion of the benevolent gospel, of the meek, the lowly and condescending
Jesus; that they should ever shun and guard against an inclination too common
among professing christians to disagree; that they should be agreed in every
thing, in faith and practice, and so escape contention, and party opinion, and
party zeal; that in lowliness, in humbleness of mind, in charity, and
tenderness toward each other, and the truth, they should seek to know the will
of God, and the path of duty, and in this way strive together for the promotion
of the glory of God, the good of his kingdom, and the mutual benefit of each
other, and the good of the whole body; and that they might all be one in
Christ, and be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment, and become one body in Christ the glorious head of all principality
and power.

In this way he assures them that they might expect to be unconquerable, by any
of the arts and devices of the adversary, and might expect that their united
prayers would constantly ascend to heaven with full acceptance; and that God by
his spirit would continually dwell in and among them, and that he would be as a
wall of fire round about them, and the glory in the midst of them.

In these directions the apostle comprises all religion, both of faith and
practice, in a most feeling manner; and also the sum of blessedness that shall
attend it; and this was of high importance to the church at Corinth,
considering their danger, both from some of their own body, who appeared
evidently not to be real friends to the doctrines and duties of the gospel, and
also from a frowning world around them; and I may add, that it was especially
needful to them, as they were now to be denied the aid of that great apostle
for their guide.

But it is proper that we come to a more particular application of what has
been said this day, and especially on the particular occasion and circumstances
of Myself, and the Church and People in this Society.

In this place, allow me to refresh your minds with a very brief recital of
some things, which have taken place in the course of my ministry: -- You will
then recollect, that fourteen years last January, I was, in compliance with the
unanimous voice and desire of this church and society, solemnly set apart, and
took upon me the care and charge of them as their Pastor. At this time it was
at least implied, that we solemnly engaged, before our God, to discharge the
duties of a Minister and People in the fear of God, and as those who must give
account, before his Bar, at the Great Day.

We then began that important relation, exhibited in the forenoon, and which
must occasion us a most solemn meeting at the Tribunal of God, in the presence
of an assembled universe, to account to him for the discharge of our duty, in
this relation.

Soon after these mutual engagements, it pleased God of his infinite kindness
to pour upon us his spirit, to call up the attention of many secure sinners,
and hopefully to bring home a number of souls to the knowledge and
acknowlegement of the truth; joy filled the hearts of the friends of God among
us.

At this time I found it easy, tho very laborious, to discharge the duties of
the ministry. Of this delightful and happy time for nearly two years, many here
present are living witnesses.

At the decline of these joyful and laborious days, to me, another and very
different scene commenced; and tho it lessened my calls for frequent preaching,
public conferences, and private instructions of a spiritual kind; yet it was a
far more troublesome and difficult task to do my duty, to my own satisfaction,
and that of the people, than the other. This troubled my mind, it sunk and
disheartened my spirits. Tho the matters first agitated were mostly small in
themselves, yet they manifestly led to those which were material.

I was much discouraged when I found we could not think alike in those matters;
and more especially was this the case with me, after repeatedly urging for a
mutual council, which was utterly rejected; for this I supposed, and still
conceive, was the only way to compose our difficulties; and such a council, I
am now persuaded, would soon have convinced us of our duty, and pointed out the
path in which we might have gone in peace and harmony to this day.

In a view of these matters, at their first beginning, I think the word of St.
James may well be applied: "Behold what a matter a little fire kindles."

In a view of the difficulties attending a discharge of my duty as a minister
for eight years past, (in my private meditations) I have often had the subject
of the forenoon; the judgment of the great day crowd itself forcibly on my
mind, with regard to myself and you my brethren and hearers, and have been
frequently led to think, whether it was not much to be desired that our solemn
relation to each other (tho vastly important in its nature) should be
dissolved. This has once and again induced me to bring this subject before
this church and society.

But God's time is always the best.

Providence has now brought the event to pass, but not without our exertions;
and probably, not without great blame to some, if not the most of us.

I am far from claiming perfection to myself; nor did I ever pretend to be a
christian of high seize in grace or holiness; tho for thirty-six years, I
have had an hope that I had passed the new birth; and tho I have ever hoped,
yet I have often feared. I feel that I depend on the sovereign mercy and grace
of God, in Christ, and on the holy Spirit, to carry on and complete in me, that
which I hope is begun. This is all my expectation of a glorious immortality.

I can freely say, that in my days of trouble, I have on some occasions been
more disturbed and agitated in mind, than my cooler judgment afterward
dictated. I think, however, I can with truth say, I have not wished nor sought
real evil to this people, nor to an individual; but rather their best, their
eternal good.

I must say also, that in my hours of reflection, on matters that have passed,
I have not been convinced, of having taken the wrong side of the subject.

I think it my duty, further, to say on this occasion, that the doctrines and
duties I have taught you, my brethren and friends, are those by which we must
stand or fall before our Judge at the great day; at which time let us remember
we must have a most solemn meeting: and O that God of his infinite mercy would
grant, that it may be joyful to us all, through his spirit and grace attending
us, in our future lives, and by the glorious atonement of his Son the Judge.

At your request I have resigned that sacred charge and care of your souls,
which once I took upon me, by your unanimous desire; supposing this choice of
yours, and the decision of a mutual council, render it proper and justifiable
before my God.

It being your request that I should in this public way take my leave of you,
allow me to close by a few addresses; the first of which will be to this church:

BRETHREN,
When first I took the pastoral charge of this Church, the whole number was
twenty-nine. The most of those who were the founders and pillars of this
Church, now sleep in dust. In the course of my ministry, ninety-three have been
added; and a large number of these, have obtained an hope of renewing grace,
under my ministry. These have in time past acknowleged me (under God) their
spiritual father and guide. Whatever may be their present feelings with respect
to me, if they are not deceived in their hope, I trust they will again
acknowledge me at the great day, and that I shall yet have them by their free
consent as seals of my ministry, and crowns of my rejoicing before God.

As I leave you, at your own choice, it is natural to suppose you esteem it a
privilege, and not a loss. That it is to the promotion of your good that this
should take place, you cannot therefore expect that I shall have that peculiar
anxiety for you on this event, as if you considered it to your injury, or if it
had happened contrary to your minds. If any should consider this as an occasion
of rejoicing, I would not wish unnecessarily to disturb their feelings; Yet in
faithfulness to God, and your souls, and to the good of Christ's kingdom among
you, in future, I think it my duty to tell you, you are as sheep without a
shepherd; and if it be better than while I was your pastor, yet it is still a
dangerous state, and has ever been found to be such, in every age of the
church, and is considered such by the great Head of the church; and an
insensibility of it greatly increases the danger. If you would support the
character of a real Church of the Glorious Redeemer, let me tell you, your
troubles are not likely to end this day. I think myself so well acquainted with
the state of this Church, and the religious state of our land, as to foresee
you are in danger from every quarter. Within, you are exposed by at least the
remains of an evil heart, by which means, when you would do good, evil will be
present with you. Want of a thorough knowledge of the path of duty may also
expose you to go astray. A subtle adversary who will appear in almost every
shape will beset you: at times he will appear as an angel of light, full of
love and zeal for religion, with some fatal error under a secret cover: at
other times he will boldly attack some essential and fundamental truth, to
which, for want of (...) to defend, many of you may fall a prey.

I must, to be faithful, tell you that many false teachers, flatterers,
corruptors of the word of God, and men pleasers, are gone out into the world,
of whom let me beseech you, beware; for in your destitute state, you will be
apt to be infested with these intruders.

Let me then, my brethren, recommend to you the holy Scriptures for your
constant guide; and entreat you earnestly and sincerely, to look to the great
head of the church for his spirit to lead you into a clear discernment and true
understanding of his holy word, and that he would prepare your hearts, readily
and constantly, to keep and do all things which he has commanded: commit
yourselves, as individuals and as a church, to God's holy and constant
assistance and direction; implore his constant presence and care over you, and
lean not to your own understanding and sufficiency. You need to be constantly
on your guard, and much on your knees, before God, for his constant protection,
to secure you from the errors and mischiefs to which you are exposed, in this
evil day, and that it may please the lord of the harvest, to send you a pastor
after his own heart, and that one of an opposite character may not be imposed
on you. In a word, take the direction of the great apostle to the Corinthians,
be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and may the God
of Love and Peace be with you: and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, may we
meet our glorious Lord and final Judge with acceptance. Finally, brethren,
Farewell.



I would next address those who are heads of families, and who have made no
public profession of religion.

My dear Friends, once the People of my Charge.
As you have made no public prefession of real religion, I trust you will not
be offended if I should in this address speak to you as impertinent, and as
having no special interest at present in the salvation of the gospel. Many of
you have been particularly kind to me; from whom I have received many favors,
and for whom I have ever had, and still have, a very tender regard.

I am now to take my leave of you as your guide in your spiritual and eternal
concerns. It sensibly affects me on this occasion, that my past labors have,
to appearance, been without saving benefit to your precious and immortal souls;
that after all, I must leave you as I found you, with regard to your eternal
salvation. With respect to some of you, according to the course of nature, your
glass is almost run; only a few scattering and doubtful sands remain. That I
must leave you is decided: but how shall I leave you thus? how can I take my
leave of you in this your condition; to meet you hereafter, O dreadful thought!
on the left hand of the final Judge? to have those truths which you have heard
from me, bear witness against you at the great tribunal! O my friends, think on
the scenes before you; think on your present condition, and on that of your
families, your dear children, whose precious and immortal souls, as well as
your own, should be your special care. Think on your present state, as sinners,
and the subject of the endless curse of God's law. Think on the glorious
gospel, which brings salvation to every true penitent. Think on the short and
uncertain time of your probation and opportunity of obtaining pardon, and the
favor of God by Jesus Christ. Realize the final judgment to yourselves, and the
eternity to follow. Let these subjects ever be allowed a place in your minds,
and in your hearts. I may -- I am allowed this once, as the last time, to warn
and invite you to be reconciled to God by Jesus Christ: "Behold then to day,
after so long time, as it is said, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts." Now then my friends, let religion be your great, your chief
concern, in what of your lives remain, that so our meeting at last, before the
tribunal of our final Judge, may be joyful and happy. Realize the religion of
the closet, the family, and the house of God. Remember that without repentance
you will die in your sins, though I should be found to have been unfaithful as
a watchman; and let me add, that I am confident the way I have endeavored to
point out, and urge your compliance with, is that which at the great day of
God, you will find, the only way of acceptance before his throne. In a view of
these truths, and your duty, and in expectation of a most solemn meeting with
you at the great tribunal, and having no longer a right, as your pastor, to
urge these things upon you, and it being your voice that it should be thus, I
bid you, in this relation, a final Farewell.



The youth of this society who have grown up under my ministry, will next claim
my attention:

MY YOUNG FRIENDS,
Travelers to judgment and eternity, hear and receive the last address of him
who wishes the salvation of your immortal souls. Many have been my hours of
sorrow at your apparent unconcern for religion, and your own eternal state.
Will you say I have not faithfully taught and warned you? In reply let me ask
you to reflect on what I have taught you from this sacred desk. Let conscience
answer. Is it through my negligence or yours, that you have no clearer view of
God and Divine things on your minds, and no more concern for his honor and the
salvation of your souls? (...) the doctrines and duties I have taught, such as
the holy scriptures (...)? and have they not been urged upon you as things of
the highest concern? Has my life and conversation justly led you to conceive
religion of no importance to mankind? Or have I, in the course of my ministry,
been peculiarly inattentive to the young? If this be the opinion of any, let me
inform you, that my sermons, if examined, will show, that the youth have been
often particularly addressed on the important concerns of religion and their
souls. A meeting also for the purpose of instructing the youth, particularly in
religion, was instituted soon after my settlement, which proved very useful to
many, and was continued until it was neglected or mis-improved, so as to he
thought, both by myself and others, best it should be discontinued. I mention
these things in a brief manner, to show you that the youth have not been
forgotten by me.

As, my young friends, you are considered in favor of my dismission, and as
being dissuited with me; if this be the case with any, or all of you, let me
seriously ask you, and let conscience give the answer -- Is it not the
doctrines I teach, and the self-denying duties of the gospel, and the
restraints these lay on sensual pleasures, that have rendered me unpopular to
you? Is it not a desire for smooth things, and an easier way to salvation, that
have determined your choice in this matter; and would not these objections lead
your minds in choosing another pastor? If this be true, let me sincerely pity
you, and pray God in infinite mercy to your souls, to disappoint your wishes:
for let me assure you in this my last address to you, that if ever you find
mercy before God, it will be by believing and obeying that gospel I have
preached unto you. I can freely forgive all disrespect to myself; but in duty
to God, and to your best good, I must tell you God will not forgive your sins
and impenitence toward him, except you repent and believe the gospel. My young
friends, my heart's desire and prayer to God for you has been, still is, and I
trust will be, that you may be saved. The little prospects of success among a
people when divisions exist, and especially when the minister is the object of
contention, has at times probably retarded my exertions for the promotion of
religion among you, to a fault. It is my sincere wish that you may be earnestly
desirous of knowledge both human and divine, and that you may obtain this
object, that you may also be sanctified by the Holy Ghost; that you may indeed
love God, and his glory, and the good of mankind; that when you come upon the
stage of action, and your fathers shall be no more, your natural and moral
virtues may be such, and such your benevolence, that you may begin that golden
age predicted in holy writ concerning our disordered and confused world; that
your lives may be holy and happy, your death's comfortable, your resurrection
and judgment joyful, and your immortality glorious. Tho I now quit my
ministerial concerns with you for this world, yet let us remember this is not
our last meeting, nor the last concerning the things which have happened since
my settlement among this people: nor will you be idle spectators at this scene.
You must account to God how you have heard and improved your warnings; and the
reasons must then be known why you have not repented, and believed the gospel.
My young friends, it is a good day for you to prepare for eternity; it is a day
of great mercy with God, for enquiring sinners. Then be persuaded to know the
things which belong to your peace. It is a day of enquiring, of trembling, and
seeking for mercy, and of obtaining in many places, with children and youth.
Were such here present, and had opportunity, they would tenderly invite you to
come and see their glorious Lord, whose consolations transcend every joy they
ever had before, or that this world can afford. Finally, my youthful friends,
let me earnestly beseech you to prepare for our last and solemn meeting at the
glorious and awful tribunal of our final Judge. Farewell.

I must not forget the children of this society on this solemn occasion. As a
testimony of my sincere good will and concern for your best good, and as it is
perhaps the last opportunity of promoting your future happiness, let me tell
you, though you are now young, yet you must soon die, and come to judgment. It
becomes you to love and be kind one to the other; to love and obey your
parents, and above all to love your God and Savior; early learn to know and to
do his will. Though I may never speak to you on these subjects again in this
world, yet remember you will see me at the judgment day, when before God,
angels, and all men, you must be reminded of what I have now, and what I have
heretofore said in your hearing, on your duty to God, your parents, and to all
people. And now bear it hereafter always on your mind, that you must be
condemned before the bar of God at the great day, if you neglect these duties
and obey not the gospel of the Son of God. My little children, Farewell.



Finally, my friends and brethren, the people with whom I have labored in the
gospel these fourteen years, we are now to part. The world is wide in which we
live; we cannot say where Providence may place us in future; God only knows the
scenes and changes we have yet to pass. Let us bear on our minds the present
occasion with its future concern and importance to us; and let us be ready for
death at the summons; be prepared for the sounding trumpet that shall awake us
at the final Judgment. May God Almighty bless us in future with his spirit and
presence, wherever we may be placed on this entensive globe. May he send you
the blessing of a pastor after his own heart, who shall be faithful to God, and
your souls; and may you, my hearers, be ready to receive and improve him to the
everlasting good of your souls; and may you be perfect, of good comfort, of one
mind, and live in peace; and may the God of love and peace be with you always
-- Farewell. Let me repeat it as my sincere wish for you all -- FAREWELL.

AT a meeting of an Ecclesiastical Council convened by Letters Missive from the
Rev. Abraham Fowler and the Society and Church in Salem, at the house of Mr.
Irijah Terr^^, March 12, 1799.
PRESENT,
Rev. Elders, Delegates, NOAH BENEDICT, Deacon MATT. MINER, Woodbury. BENJ.
WILDMAN, Mr. NATHAN CURTISS, Southbury. OLIVER HITCHCOCK, Mr. IRA SMITH,
Columbia. EDWARD PORTER, Mr. TIMOTHY CLARK, Waterbury. IRA HEART, Deacon SETH
BRONSON, Middlebury.

Mr. Wildman was chosen moderator, and Mr. Heart scribe.

The Council was opened with Prayer by the moderator.

VOTES both of the Church and Society, respecting the Dismission of the Rev.
Mr. Fowler from his Pastoral relation to them; were presented and read. Mr.
Fowler, and a Committee from the Church and Society, signified their desire,
that considering the present dissatisfaction among this People, said relation
should be dissolved. It appeared to be the wish of both Church and Society,
that if the Relation between them and Mr. Fowler be dissolved; he should be
dismissed in character, as against him, they have nothing to allege either
Heretical or Scandalous.

The Council having taken the matter into serious and deliberate consideration
--

Voted unanimously --

That under the present disagreeable circumstances of this Church and Society,
it appears expedient, that the partial relation between Mr. Fowler and the
Church and Society in this place be dissolved. They do therefore advise that
said Relation be dissolved; and it is accordingly Dissolved.

While we esteem it necessary to form this result; we feel deeply affected that
a Minister whom we believe to have been a faithful, prudent Preacher of the
Gospel, should be reduced to such unhappy circumstances as render it needful
for him to be dismissed from his labors in this part of Christ's vinyard. At
the same time, we rejoice that the Votes of both Church and Society fully clear
the Character of Mr. Fowler from any impeachment of misconduct; and desire him
to be dismissed as a regular Minister of Christ. This desire being perfectly
accordant with our own opinions and feelings; we do cheerfully and cordially
Recommend Him to the Churches wherever God in his Providence shall call him; as
a sound; faithful and pious Minister of the Gospel.

We lament the unhappy circumstances of this Church and Society which have led
them to desire; and Mr. Fowler to consent to his dismission. We earnestly pray
the great Head of the Church to unite this Church. A Society; to raise up for
them a faithful Minister of the Gospel to improve the future labors of Mr.
Fowler as a blessing to the Churches; to cause harmany and love to abound among
this people and finally that (...) People and their Pastor may have a joyful
meeting at the right hand of their common Lord.

BENJAMIN WILDMAN, Moderator.
(...), IRA HEART, (...).

ERRATA.
Page 6, bottom line, for Gous, read Gaus.

Page 9, Line 13, after him, for comma read period -- and at the end of the
same line for period read comma.

Line 20, dele at last -- after salvation for simecolon read period.

Line 21, dele the great captain of salvation, and,


