Mr. EMERSON'S ARTILLERY ELECTION SERMON.

Piety and Arms. A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE ANCIENT AND
HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY, IN BOSTON, JUNE 3, 1799; THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR
ELECTION OF OFFICERS.

By WILLIAM EMERSON.

BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING. 1799.

AN Artillery Election Sermon.
PSALM cxlix. 6. LET THE HIGH PRAISES OF GOD BE IN THEIR MOUTH, AND A TWO-EDGED
SWORD IN THEIR HAND.
THREE interpretations may be given to these words.

1. It was the custom of ancient, as it is of modern, nations, to excite the
courage of their armies, when going to battle, by instrumental music. The
Etrurians, for this purpose, used the trumpet; the Lacedaemonians, the pipe; and
the Egyptians, the drum. The Hebrew people, ever instructed to borrow nothing
of idolatrous manners, are here taught to acquire the necessary valor to
combat and vanquish their foes, by simply employing their voices in singing the
wondrous power and acts of their divine deliverer. This is one interpretation
of the words. Consult the argument to this psalm in bishop Patrick's Paraphrase.
In its justification is adduced the following passage of the sacred
Chronicles. B. II. Chapter xx. 21, 22.
And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto the Lord,
and that should praise the beauty of holiness as they went out before the army,
and to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures forever. And when they
began to sing and to praise, the Lord set ambushments against the children of
Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were come against Judah, and they were
smitten.

2. A second construction of the text supposes the psalm, from which it is
taken, to have been composed in honor of some recent successes, that had
crowned the Jewish arms, for which the people of God are exhorted to celebrate
his goodness, and, at the same time, to retain their martial habits, as a
constant terror to their enemies.

3. Lastly, It is notorious that the Jews, after returning from captivity at
Babylon, were infested by a dangerous opposition to their liberties at home and
abroad, which, through remarkable assistance of the divine providence, they
finally crushed. Possibly the writer of this sublime and animated hymn designed
to inspirit the patriots of his age to pursue and complete a triumph over their
impious adversaries: and this construction is rendered almost probable by the
context.

Let The Hebrew critic would probably render it, The saints shall be joyful,
etc. they shall sing aloud, etc. But I follow the common translation.
the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds. Let the
high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand; to
execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people; to bind
their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron; to execute upon
them the judgment written: this honor have all his saints.

Since it is now impossible, however, to know the author and date of this
production, it is equally difficult and needless to ascertain the exclusive
meaning of that portion of it, which is prefixed to this discourse. Combining,
therefore, in some sort, its various senses abovementioned, we will consider
the text as giving us the twofold lesson of piety and the use of arms. Let us
examine the operation of both in the light of means, by which a nation may
retain its liberties, and defend its rights against unjust enemies.

I. We will observe the tendency of national piety. It conduces to the
observance of religious institutions, to personal virtue, to the discharge of
relative duties, and to the public order, union, and prosperity.

1. A principle of piety in a people induces its observance of religious
institutions. The heart, that is warmed with the admiration and love of the
divine perfections, honors the means of moral improvement. If revelation had
taught to her disciples no forms of worship, which nature had not suggested to
her children, the servant of God would still have sought in society an
enlargement of religious affections, which the secresy and silence of his
closet could hardly create. His benevolence, too, the offspring of piety, would
have led him to provide for the instruction and consolation of creatures
ignorant, weak, and dependent like himself. But now that the authority of
religious ordinances is known to be divine; now that the law has been
dispensed by Moses, and grace and truth have beamed upon mankind in the gospel
of Jesus Christ, the man of piety is the observer of public worship, not
merely on account of its reasonableness and utility, but from a principle of
regard to God.

Imagine now, my hearers, a whole community attending on the institutions of
religion from a principle of piety. What august and influential notions do they
hence receive of the object of their praises! What a sense of mutual
obligations and dependence; and what motives to relieve, to strengthen, to
defend, to bless society! Indeed, whence but from religious institutions can
that portion of knowledge be derived to the commonalty of a state, which is
absolutely essential to the maintenance of its liberties? Accordingly the
historian of elder times and the observer of the present age uniformly report,
that where the institutes of christianity have been most intelligibly and
conscientiously reverenced, there liberty has dwelt with the greatest security
and pleasure. Yes, ye despots of the earth, and ye, who cruelly invade the
rights of mankind, it is undoubtedly your interest to overturn the altar, and
unhallow the sabbath, because the ashes of these rites produce an ignorance,
which will foster your crimes.

2. A principle of piety promotes personal virtue. As there can be no genuine
religion without morality, so there is no safe morality without religion. If
morals are the lamp, the fear of God is the oil, which must give it a strong
and uniform luster. Regard to temporary health, tranquillity, and honor,
forms, of itself, a character of imperfect goodness. On the other hand, respect
to the will, and reference to the perpetual notice of the Deity, just views of
his benevolence and purity, and a sense of accountableness to him at the final
judgment of the world, deeply imprinted in the soul, tend directly to the
sanctification and exaltation of man. Because he sees suspended over his head
the sword of retributive justice, he avoids anger, pride, and inordinate
pleasures; and he practices meekness and moderation, temperance and industry,
because, by the appointment of God, they are connected with eternal joys. Thus,
a sentiment of religion, whilst it commands the will, enlisteth also the
affections in the cause of virtue.

It is impossible here not to see the connection between piety, and the
political strength and freedom. If the citizens of a state were universally
pious, their labors and diligence would procure them wealth, whilst their
wealth would not be followed by luxury, and the consequent reign of the
malevolent passions. Whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they not
hence, even of your lusts, that war in your members? In a country, where
private virtue is remitted proportionally to the increase of the common
opulence and grandeur, internal competitions and strife will certainly arise:
these the ambitious of neighboring states will employ and point against its
liberties, whilst the distracted citizens, enervated by indolence and vice,
have only to choose between an inglorious death, and a life of servitude and
repentance. It is piety, then, which, by promoting the virtue of individuals,
operates the salvation and happiness of the community.

3. It is piety, that excites a performance of relative duties. A moment's
reflection informs every man, even in younger life, that he was not made solely
for himself. He sees his social obligations multiply with his years. His
friend, his brother, his countryman, the stranger, all prefer him their claims.
Is a principle of self-gratification, of vanity, family-pride, or thirst of
distinction, always competent to their discharge? The history of infidels and
atheists proves the truth of the negative. Ungoverned by a principle of piety,
the affluent and powerful will be insolent and oppressive; the weak and
dependent will be ungrateful and mutinous. Where motives of worldly interest
and fame are suffered to hold the supreme rule, elevation of rank will be used
merely to terrify and control. The servant will tremble in perpetual
apprehension of his lord's displeasure, and the lord will be equally suspicious
of the servant's treachery. There will be a constant war among all classes of
society. Caprice and passion will break asunder the ties of consanguinity and
friendship; and no bands will be found sufficiently strong, by which the most
solemn and lovely connexions in human life can be saved from dissolution.

Religion, on the contrary, strengthens every tie, and fortifies every
obligation. This is a favorite idea of the celebrated Neckar. It is, in short,
the vital principle of his book "On the Importance of Religious Opinions."
It inspires condescension and gentleness in the great, and clothes the
powerful with the sweet and resistless charms of kindness. It helps the lowly
cottager to sustain the inferiority of his station; the innocent prisoner, the
weight of his chains; and the wretched of every name, the burden of his woes;
by presenting to their full view the providence and agency of God; and by
putting, in the place of their feelings, a lively faith, that the virtues of
submission and contentment are destined to enthrone them in the kingdom of
heaven. Mutual confidence is thus cherished amid all ranks in the state. Every
citizen faithfully discharges his respective trust; and from the constant
tribute, which flows to the commonwealth from individual honesty and domestic
continence, her peace becomes as a river, and her righteousness as the waves of
the sea.

4. Still more particularly and directly does a pious principle contribute to
the public order, union, and prosperity. It is this, which binds the subject
to the governor. Without government, there can be no order in civil society;
without oaths, there can be no government; without piety, oaths have neither
use nor meaning. It is, therefore, in religion, that the ruled finds the
guarantee of his rights. Convince him that there is no God, or, which is much
the same, that he does not govern and judge the world in righteousness, and you
subvert his faith in the ruler. He will no longer willingly submit to the
restraints of power; he is at once prepared for insurrection and pillage.

It is the same principle, likewise, that obliges the magistrate to the
subject. It places him beneath the immediate and perpetual cognizance of the
king of kings. It arrests him in every project of personal aggrandizement to
the detriment of the citizen. It confines his studies and toil to the general
good.

Hence the peaceful reign of law and order in the state, the cement of national
union, and the multiplication of resources against the common danger. In no way
can a state realize these blessings, and enjoy its liberties, except by
disinterestedness in the governor, obedience in the private citizen,
observance of public faith, and a prompt execution of justice; except, in
short, by national piety.

Accordingly the frequent recurrence to antiquity on this subject is always
justified, by the multitude of proofs it furnishes, of the rise and glory of
empires by righteousness, and of their declension and downfall by wickedness. It
should be accounted neither puerile nor pedantick in the moralist, when he
tells us, that the ravages of impiety and luxury were more injurious to the
Romans, than those of Pyrrhus or Hannibal; and that vice was the ruin of the
Grecian states. Especially does the page of Jewish history present to our view,
in a luminous and impressive manner the influence and effects of piety on the
Hebrew nation. It was this, that made her populous, free, and rich, and that
poured into her lap the charming joys of peace and plenty. It was this, which
made her beautiful as her own Tirzah, Can. vi. 4
comely as her still fairer capital, and, at the same time, terrible to her
enemies as an army with banners. It was piety, in fine, that so exactly
measured her prosperity, and so notoriously determined her fate, that the fact
was the constant burden of her sacred songs. The Lord takes pleasure in them
that fear him, Psalm cxlvii. 11, 12, 13.
in those that hope in his mercy. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem. Praise thy God,
O Zion: for he has strengthened the bars of thy gates, he has blessed thy
children within thee.

Wherefore it is a just and safe conclusion, that the piety of a people is one
important and happy means of its defense; that it directly serves its internal
wealth, population, order, and union; and that, as eminent virtue spreads a
glory round individuals to the shame and dread of their enemies, so the
righteousness of a community erects, as it were, a wall of fire between it and
its foes.

Such, nevertheless, my hearers, is the disjointed state of morals in our
world, such the restless ambition of man, corrupted by the love and possession
of power, that not even innocence and piety are secure from his depredating and
oppressive hand. The devotion and beneficence of Elijah did not shield him from
the persecution of Ahab; nor did the sanctity of the reverend Baptist divert
the cruelty of the Galilean tetrarch. States, too, are exposed to the
spoliations of states; and the community, whose only defense is virtue, is
sometimes the prey of violence from an unprincipled power.

In its patriotick addresses, therefore, the christian pulpit, contrary to its
pacifick character, is compelled to be the advocate of arms, as well as of
piety. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in
their hand.

II. That there are cases, in which both private and public war is considered
just on the principles of natural and revealed religion, is the general
concession of ethical writers. See especially Hutcheson and Paley.
How would the rights of the individual be deemed safe, if the thief might rob,
and the assassin murder, him with impunity? If no violence were suffered to
inflict punishment on the one, and extort restitution from the other, what
value would be attached to property, or what comfort to life? Unprotected from
the rapacity of the covetous, and the rude blasts of calumny, and unrecompensed
by the court of justice, the boasted blessings of civilized man would be all an
illusion. Contrasted with his condition, that of the hermit, or of the savage,
would be every way eligible.

As long, therefore, as the dissocial passions shall poison and convulse
society, the civil ruler must be ordained to arrest and reclaim disturbers of
the peace. Even the disciple of the friendly Penn, if he would see the
government effectual to its ends, must provide for its exigencies, and put a
sword into the hand of the magistrate. For what is command without power, or
law without penalty?

War between states is justified for the same reasons, which make it righteous
between individuals. If the public enemy of a country will not be governed by
the rules of eternal order, nor by laws established by the common consent of
nations; if he is neither awed into a pacifick temper by the lustrous example
of piety and meekness in the community he seeks to oppress, nor disarmed of
malice by its conciliatory proposals, the intended victim of plunder and
slavery may religiously arm in defense of its rights. Indeed an application of
the principles of force is here public spirited and humane. Tyrants of the
world should be taught to respect the liberties of their fellowmen; and their
destruction in one age should inscribe a salutary lesson on the page of history
for succeeding oppressors.

However, then, the pity and sighs of the sensible heart may be excited, from
contemplating the horrible effects of war, we are obliged, under certain
circumstances, to view an armed association one of the most necessary engines
of state. Corroborative of this sentiment is the language of the scriptures,
which thus animates the pious to resist their insulting and tyrannick foes.

Be of good courage, 2 Samuel x. 12.
and let us play the men for our people, and the cities of our God. Be strong
and courageous, 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 7,8.
be not afraid nor dismayed: for there be more with us than with him. With him
is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord our God, to help us, and to fight
our battles. Psalm cxliv. 1.
Blessed be the Lord, my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight.

Whilst we pay homage to the ancient revelations of the Deity, let us not be
understood to militate with his more valuable dispensation by the great
Reformer of mankind. We vindicate no war, which is not the legitimate offspring
of self-defence; none, incompatible with any sober construction of the precept,
Resist not evil; none, which embraces other objects, than such a restitution to
the injured state, as shall inhibit future aggressions; none, in which a
christian country cannot consistently appeal to the sovereign arbiter of
nations for the rectitude of its cause, and confide the issue to his just
decision.

Hence, although national piety alone must be deemed an insufficient defense of
national right, in the present condition of humanity, it is yet infinitely
preferable to a military system altogether supported by selfishness and
violence. Ruthless ravagers of our race are they, who levy war for the sake of
widening their territory, and filling their coffers. Execrable plagues of
mankind are they, who find an occasion for their arms in the internal
dissensions, or defenseless frontier of a neutral power, or who, for the sake
of connecting their names Read a rhapsody of Buonaparte in one of his letters
to a friend.
with memorable events, lay waste the dwellings of the just.

The war of such heroes is like the fury of sanguinary cannibals, and the rage
of the hungry tiger. Nay, it is impolitick. Their two edged swords must finally
prove fatal to themselves, as well as the people they spoil. After being, for a
while, disturbed by their outrages, the world will rise and complete the
repression of their arrogance. So strongly impressed on the human heart is a
sense of equity, and so happily is this sentiment improved by the diffusion of
religious knowledge, that the time approaches, when the abolition of tyranny
shall be considered the common cause of God and of man.

Wherefore, if a system of national defense, wholly pacifick, be ineffectual to
the general safety, through want of force and arms, a nation of soldiers is
doomed to a transient existence, from a deficiency of religious principle. The
unarmed saint is indeed a defenseless dove, the almost certain prey of the
ravenous hawk; but the impious warrior is a destructive serpent, whose head,
inheriting the universal odium, will eventually be bruised.

So then piety is a defense, and arms are a defense; but since neither, singly,
will enable a nation to maintain its liberties and existence, in this mixed
state, its wisdom consists in teaching its citizens to let the high praises
of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand.

APPLICATION.
1. If the preceding remarks have a foundation in truth, let them instruct us,
my fellow citizens, in these eventful times. Probably at no period of her
existence, could our country have exhorted her sons with greater propriety,
than she now can exhort them, to the exercise of arms. For a number of years
past, we have seen a powerful nation in Europe, evidently actuated by
principles of impiety and unrighteousness, making war upon a great part of the
civilized world. With a force of conquest, scarcely paralleled in any former
age, the French Republic has diffused death and menaces throughout all Europe.
Its arms have made Germany a field of battle: they have overtured the
republics of Venice and Geneva, and wasted their beautiful provinces: they
have vanquished and plundered Italy: they have put the yoke upon Spain: they
have rent in pieces the kingdom of Naples: they have drained Holland of its
wealth, have spoiled Switzerland of its liberties and its glory, and have, in
fact, left to no country, they have assailed, ought but its moans. What is more
interesting, and justly alarming, to us, through each act of this sanguinary
drama in Europe, the emissaries of France have been erecting their standard in
this land of neutrality, and on these, alas, too hospitable shores, digging the
grave of American liberty!

Columbian warriors! where are your swords? If with these facts and examples
before your eyes, you permit them to rust in their scabbards, where is the
expatriated Swiss, or impoverished Hollander, what shade of your fathers, who
fell on Bunker's heights, or bled on the plains of Yorktown, who will not
pronounce you unworthy the joys of freedom!

But I forget that the United States has marshalled her armies, and is prepared
for her insidious foe. God be praised, my countrymen, that we learn wisdom from
history and observation; that the Eye and Light and Strong Rod of our nation
has developed the hostile machinations of France, pointed to the means of
their defeat, and already scourged the Directory in its own cabinet; that our
armament on the seas is protecting our commerce and adding to the naval
disgrace of the common enemy; that our troops are gathering from every corner
of the Union to the accustomed banners of the hoary Chief, whose single name
commands the faith and courage of every American soldier; and that our
political prospects are opening with brighter hopes, as a reward for the pious
and manly efforts of our country to stand fast in the liberty, wherewith she
has been made free.

Let us not, however, be deceived by specious appearances. The fate of the
unhappy Swiss Cantons continually awakens our sad remembrance. Seven long years
was France in dissolving the Helvetick Union, See the instructive Du Pan.
and burying its ancient liberties. If, in the same space of time, she has not
been equally successful in accomplishing her designs against the United States,
let the truth inspirit, not relax, our perseverance in those measures, which,
under the guidance of heaven, have thus far baffled her views. Whilst we
continue our appeal to the divine providence, let us proceed to burnish our
arms and fortify our shores. The most correct information our country can
furnish Late proclamation for U. S. Fast.
assures us, that our dearest interests are still in jeopardy through the
insidiousness and hostility of the French nation. It yet views our lands with
cupidity, and our independence with rage. In such a political juncture, every
measure, which promises the smallest support to the government or defense of
the state, and especially every armed establishment, is unspeakably estimable.

In this point of view, therefore, gentlemen of the ANCIENT AND HONORABLE
ARTILLERY COMPANY, we exult in the continued existence of your institution. We
have loved and applauded your patriotism in the days of peace; but, in this
hour of national danger, we honor and revere you. Permit us to hope, that a
military college, which, for nearly two centuries, has contributed to the glory
of Massachusetts, and whose sons, in times we well remember, have fought the
battles of their country, will, by no means, in the present crisis, forget the
purposes of its creation.

At the same time, Sirs, conformably to the spirit of our ministry, we wish you
to consider those arms, as the sad emblems of an unnatural and depraved state
of society. Under this impression, you will bear them not with pride, but
reluctance, and will consider the necessity of their assumption as a source of
humiliation, and not of glory, to you in common with our kind. Hence, let your
ambition direct itself to the attainment and exercise of that piety, which we
preach, and which, when universally practiced, will render your ordnance
needless, and restore the order of our earth. You will thus be our permanent
honor, as well as present defense. Your contemporaries will equally seek your
virtues as their model, and your standard as their protection. And, having
lived with the praises of God in your mouths, and the sword in your hands, a
just and grateful posterity shall inscribe upon your tombs, These are the men
who died for their country.

2. Our military brethren form not the only class, to which the subject applies
itself. On the duties of piety, it addresses a meek, but solemn, lesson to all
our fellow-citizens. The rulers of France have not only sought the wreck of
civil society, but of the moral world. After profaning the temples in Europe,
they have come hither also with their sacrilege. On this side the Atlantic
they have brought their artillery of destruction to the soul, their books,
principles, vices. This is the cruel war they levy upon our churches, our
religion, our Savior, and our God. These are the weapons, wherewith they
attack our families, our closets, our very bosoms; seeking to despoil us of the
dear hope of immortality, and to darken that heavenly splendor, which has
irradiated the prison of death.

Happy for our country, had this war upon our worthiest affections and hopes
been as successless, as that upon our civil privileges! The fact is otherwise.
Christians, you see its ravages in that dereliction of moral obligation, which
characterizes a part of our citizens. Sabbatical institutions, whose observance
was once the praise of our country, have, in many places, received a wound,
which will bleed before the eyes of all the present generation. The houses of
public worship, venerable from their appropriation, and endeared to our
feelings from the constant visits of our pious ancestors, begin to be
neglected, and the holy precepts of pure christianity to be contemned.
Particularly do you see the triumphs of Gallick infidelity in that factious and
disorganizing spirit, which has stalked through the United States for the
purpose of destroying our confidence in the officers of the Federal government,
and of undermining the government itself. For still we are obliged to assert
the connection between religious rituals, and the life of liberty. Our enemy
well knows, that the amiable tabernacles of the Lord of hosts are the only
sanctuary of the people's rights; that christianity is the very temple of
freedom; and that the despotism he adores cannot exist with the high praises of
God. It is therefore he meets us on our sacred ground. It is thence he aims at
us his deadly weapons, weapons, not indeed carnal, but mighty through a vain
philosophy, to the pulling down of the strong holds of virtue, casting down
principles of piety, and every thing that exalts itself against disorder, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of the devil.

Whoever, hence, in this war with atheists, will acknowledge the being, and
celebrate the perfections, of God, is a real patriot; and who, in this contest
with infidels, will be a good soldier of Jesus Christ, shall have the honor of
warring for his country. Here is a warfare, Americans, in which we all may
engage advantageously; so easily maintained, as to admit recruits without
distinction of age or sex, and yet so necessary, as that, without its support,
all other means of defense are nugatory.

In vain is it for you, legislators, to levy taxes, and establish armies, for
the safety of the republic, if we, the subjects, by our luxuries and sloth,
consume the political body.

Vain is it for you, faithful soldiers, to hazard your lives in the field,
whilst we, the citizens, by our disunion at home, act in union with the enemy.

And ye ministers of religion, you may as well keep closed, as open, your
churches, if we, your pretended hearers, expend that day in scenes of
voluptuousness, which is consecrated to religious improvement. It is no longer
needful for you to teach us the divine philosophy of Jesus Christ, your master,
which was designed to make us the happy citizens of both earth and heaven, if
we suffer the Voltaires and Volneys of our age to destroy our usefulness in
this world, and to terminate our hopes at the sepulcher.

Descendants of a brave and pious race, let us, therefore, universally resolve
to be the defenders and saviors of our country, by the devout observance of
religious institutions, by the practice of that personal virtue, which ennobles
the human nature, and adorns the christian profession, by sacredly and
faithfully discharging our relative duties, and by seeking with a steady and
enlightened zeal the public order and felicity.

Thus, although we may fail of conquering our earthly enemies, we yet shall be
victorious over foes infinitely more dangerous, I mean our vices; and though
unsuccessful in defending the country, which gave us birth, we shall,
nevertheless, be certain of possessing another and a better country, even an
heavenly, where the high praises of God will be in every mouth, and the use of
the sword will be no more known.

AMEN.

