LETTERS ON THE EXISTENCE AND CHARACTER OF THE DEITY, AND ON THE MORAL STATE OF
MAN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH
SECOND STREET. 1799.

PREFACE.
THE following letters were written at the request of a young friend, and were
occasioned by some conversations on these interesting subjects: on such
subjects new discoveries cannot be expected: most of the thoughts are such as
the author had met with in the course of reading or conversation, some few may
have been the result of his own reflections: he did not think it needful, and
in most cases it was not in his power to refer to the authors from whom he had
gleaned: he arranged these thoughts according to his own judgment, and the
whole are only sketches or outlines not filled up. They were designed as
materials or hints for thinking, and are published with an earnest desire of
drawing the attention of young persons to the study of those subjects which are
universally important. It is not expected that these few pages will reform the
world, but if they should catch the attention of a few, and be the means of
leading them to inquire and judge for themselves, they will not have been
published in vain.

PHILADELPHIA, Feb. 1799.
LETTERS, etc.
LETTER I.
DEAR SIR,
I NOW send you some thoughts on the hints which occurred in our late
conversation, relating to the arguments of modern philosophers, who, while they
admit the existence of a Deity, discard revelation, and endeavor to deduce the
principles of moral rectitude from the operations of reason, unassisted by the
sacred records.

Doctor Wilson, in a work which he published about the middle of the eighteenth
century, remarked, that, If all the philosophers and advocates for the
sufficiency of natural religion who ever existed were assembled in one synod,
their united wisdom could never have discovered this simple proposition: Genesis
i. 1. In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth. -- And the
philosophers and philosophical divines set to work to overthrow his assertion,
but they were not able to do it to their own satisfaction.

Indeed the reason of their failing need not be wondered at. We have not many
channels of acquiring knowledge: they may be all reduced to these three,
Observation, Reasoning, and Testimony. It will be difficult to find any other
sources of information.

Our senses bring us notices of many things, and the more our observations are
extended, the greater number of objects fall under our observation; but we need
not be told that all these, however extended, must necessarily be sensible
objects, and can never furnish us with any primary evidences of the existence
of a Deity.

We can reason, and the things which come under our sensible observations
furnish subjects for analogy, and in this the powers of the human mind are very
extensive. We can compare and judge of the agreement and disagreement, not of
things only but also of ideas, both simple and compound, in their various
relations; and these reasonings and the conclusions drawn from them are of very
great importance in the affairs of man and society, but do they lead us a step
nearer to the discovery of a Deity? All our reasonings about sensible objects
and their qualities must necessarily terminate in sensible objects and their
qualities, for the stream can never rise higher than the fountain whence it
flowed, and it is impossible that our ideas of these things can ever carry the
mind above things of the like nature.

I know it has often been urged, that the consideration of ourselves and all
around us, must lead us to think that there must be a powerful and intelligent
being who made and directs all things. For instance, when we see a piece of
mechanism we must infer that it was the work of a mechanic, and when we see a
house we naturally conclude that somebody built it. True, we very justly
conclude so, because we previously know that mechanics make pieces of
mechanism, and that men build houses: these are things which have been done,
and when we see them we very naturally infer that such persons must have made
them; but do we know of any person making a rock, a hill, a river, or a tree?
Have we been accustomed to see worlds made, that when we see them we
necessarily infer their maker? Here the case is widely different, we have
neither experience nor observation here to direct our conclusion. These things
have been as they are, as far back as we can recollect, our parents or
ancestors, as far back as can be traced, have never seen such things made. The
most natural conclusion, therefore, perhaps the only one which we could draw
from such premises, would be, that these things never had a beginning, but had
always been as we now perceive them, allowing for such occasional variations as
we may observe in our own day; that seas, rivers, earth, mountains, rocks, etc.
had always existed; that animals and vegetables had sprung from their parents,
as we know they do now; that as the change and succession of seasons and the
general order of the universe, as far as we can perceive, are pretty uniform,
they have always been so, and we cannot find any reason to suppose that they
ever began to be as they are now. The appearances and order of the universe may
be matters of curiosity and of astonishment, but we are possessed of no data to
furnish any hints for solving the phenomena, and consequently nothing to give
rise even to a conjecture of a first cause producing and directing the course
of the universe.

Do not these things then contain any evidence of the existence and government
of a Supreme Being?' Yes, verily, they contain and exhibit sublime lessons, but
how shall we benefit by them without revelation? Put the works of Sir Isaac
Newton into the hands of a man who cannot read, of what use are they to him?
But let him be taught to read and instructed in the nature and design of these
works, and he may come to understand the greatest discoveries of that great
philosopher. So let a man learn from revelation, either traditional or written,
the existence, character, or conduct of God, and all the works of nature will
speak to him a very intelligible language. To him "The heavens will declare the
glory of God, and the firmament show forth his handy work,"

"For ever singing as they shine,
The hand that made us is Divine."
There is another source of information -- Testimony. -- But the testimony of
other men, who have only the same means of acquiring knowledge which we
ourselves possess, though it may differ in degree must of necessity be the same
in kind with our own observations or reasonings, and for the reasons already
assigned can never lead us a step nearer to the discovery of a first cause.

But it is said, that the most savage nations which have yet been discovered,
have always had among them some ideas of a God or Gods, and some notions of
religious worship, however absurd these may be, which shows that mankind
possess the knowledge of a Deity without having ever heard of revelation.

The premises are true, but the conclusion does not seem fairly drawn, but
quite the reverse. It would rather appear that they had heard of revelation,
and that the knowledge and religion which they possess, however corrupted in
their progress, must have originally flowed from that source, and that it must
have been a very general cause which has produced an effect so very extensive
as to show itself in all nations. -- By the by, this circumstance seems to show
that it was probably not the result of deep philosophical research among these
nations.

It shows likewise that at some time revelation was known to all mankind, and
that in their various migrations this knowledge accompanied them, though
corrupted by various people in various ways, and therefore traces of it are to
be found in all nations in one form or another. Thus it appears, that the
knowledge of a Deity, without the intervention of revelation, must always have
remained totally undiscoverable by man.

Not only the knowledge of a Deity must have been unattainable without
revelation, but what must have been the situation of man with respect to
principles of moral rectitude? It has been said that moral principles arise
from the fitness of things. What is this fitness of things? or how came we by
the knowledge of it? By revelation only: and it may safely be asserted that no
good moral principles have ever been established, but what have been drawn from
this source.

Even those who discard revelation, have in part availed themselves of it in
the formation of their systems of morality; but how vague and uncertain are
they! without a solid foundation, without energy, without sanction, except the
hopes or fears of present good or evil; and how insufficient to check the
conduct, in circumstances where detection is not feared!

But what human wisdom could never have reached, revelation unfolds with the
utmost ease and simplicity.

In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. This short proposition
shows us at once the existence, the power, the wisdom, and the goodness of God;
and in the amplification of his character in the sacred scriptures, Creation is
spoken of as exhibiting his almighty power, with such sublimity as shines, even
under all the disadvantages of a translation, with unrivalled splendour. Genesis i.
3. God said, Let there be light, and there was light. Isaiah xlv. 7. I form the
light and create darkness. Verse 12. I have made the earth, and created man
upon it, I, even my hands have stretched out the heavens, and all their host
have I commanded. Chapter xliv. 24. I am the Lord that makes all things, that
stretches forth the heavens alone, that spreads abroad the earth by myself.
Chapter xlviii. 13. Mine hand also has laid the foundations of the earth, and my
right hand has spanned the heavens. Chapter xlii. 5. Thus says God the Lord, he
that created the heavens and stretched them out, he that spread forth the earth
and that which comes out of it: he that gives breath to the people upon it,
and spirit to them that walk therein.

His infinite wisdom and goodness are set forth with equal dignity and
sublimity in the sacred records. -- His moral character is unfolded with great
simplicity in the 34th chapter of Exodus, verses 6 and 7th. The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth.
Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and
that in clearing will not clear the guilty. Visiting the iniquities of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and to the fourth generation (chap.
xx. 5, 6.) of them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands (of
generations) of them that love me and keep my commandments.

Thus we see the existence of God is clearly exhibited in the scripture, and
his character manifested with such simplicity and perspicuity, that every
person, even of the meanest capacity, is fully competent to the knowledge of
it; and the simple reader of the word of God acquires with the utmost ease, a
better grounded, and more unequivocal knowledge of the existence and character
of the True God, than all the boasted discoveries of deistical philosophers
have ever pretended to.

In the scriptures we find the purest principles of morality flowing from a
source fully adequate to the production of such principles, -- the will of God,
and that expressed, not with the ambiguity of heathen oracles, or the
farfetched, often uncertain conclusions of philosophical deduction, but with
the utmost precision and distinctness, that he who runs may read, and
sanctioned not only with the hopes and fears of present good or evil, but with
the certainty of future rewards and punishments, flowing from a tribunal where
mistakes, deceptions, and injustice are absolutely impossible. Where it is
impossible that the good should miss the reward of their goodness, and equally
impossible for the wicked to escape the just punishment of their wickedness.

LETTER II.
AS I am persuaded that revelation is the source of all the most valuable
knowledge we possess, and that it furnishes the only data for solving the
phenomena in the moral world, let us try what accounts we can find of the
dissemination of revelation among mankind.

When we read the three first chapters of Genesis, we learn, not only that God
created the heavens and the earth, but that he also created all their
inhabitants: and when the earth was covered with vegetables and peopled with
animals, and the seas and waters stored with fishes, and the air with winged
inhabitants; as the last and most dignified of his works, God formed man of the
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man
became a living soul: that he created them male and female, blessed them, and
gave them dominion over the earth, and all its productions and inhabitants.

In this state man was familiar with revelation. God talked with him, and gave
him a law for the regulation of his conduct, and connected with the breach of
it the punishment of death. What would have been the situation of the human
race if Adam had continued in his obedience, may be conjectured, but not
distinctly ascertained.

He did not continue, however, to keep the law which was given to him, and the
threatened penalty, Dying, thou shall die, came into operation. Death began its
operation, and continued it until he returned to the dust from whence he was
taken. His disobedience placed him in a situation very different from that in
which he was created, but did not deprive him of revelation, of which he now
stood in more need than in his former state; and accordingly we find that
immediately subsequent to his fall, revelation was renewed to him with some
peculiarities.

The discipline under which he was now to be placed was shown to him: it was
announced to him that the seed of the woman was to overcome the serpent.
Sacrifice also seems to have been instituted and explained, and hence Abel
offered a sacrifice in faith; and from the circumstance of Cain and Abel both
offering their first fruits, we may conclude that many things were revealed,
and many institutions established, which were afterward incorporated in the
laws and ordinances recorded by Moses. We find also in the instructions given
to Noah, that the distinction between clean and unclean beasts had been
established, for it is mentioned to him as a thing well known.

That the knowledge of the true God was preserved, and its influence
understood, we learn from various circumstances between the creation and the
flood of Noah: thus Enoch is said to have walked with God. No explanation is
given; hence it would seem that none was needed, there was no difficulty in
understanding what walking with God meant. The reason why the flood was sent to
destroy man from the face of the earth, was, because the wickedness of man was
great. -- All flesh had corrupted his way. Men being wicked and corrupting
their ways, necessarily implies the knowledge of a law for directing their
conduct; because it is disobedience to a known law which constitutes wickedness
or corruption. The depravity of mankind was become so very general, that Noah
only was found righteous before God in that generation. He was a preacher of
righteousness; and God's speaking to him is spoken of in such a way, as
intimates that such communications had not been uncommon, and therefore not
surprising.

The same history informs us, that according to the threatening, the flood
came, and swept away the whole human race, excepting only Noah and his family.
He, by the direction of God, had prepared an ark, wherein his family and pairs
of all the animal creation were preserved, and by them the earth was repeopled
after the flood.

Noah, after the descent of his family from the ark, offered a sacrifice to the
Lord of all clean animals, (an extra number of which had been preserved with
him) hence we learn, that the knowledge and practice of sacrifice, and all its
relatives, was preserved, and prepared for being disseminated among all the
posterity of Noah: and that the true import thereof was understood and properly
attended to, appears from God having accepted the sacrifice.

It has been urged that there was no writing in those days, and therefore
revelation must have been very imperfectly known. -- Admitting that there was
no writing, (which is by no means certain) this remark is very easily obviated
by observing the great longevity of the people of those times.

Adam lived for many centuries after his posterity were multiplied on the
earth, being above nine hundred years old when he died, by which time
Methuselah had opportunity to converse with him for above two hundred years,
and Noah had opportunity for above two hundred years to converse with
Methuselah, which afforded ample time for Noah to acquire a complete knowledge
of all that had been revealed from the creation till the flood: his children
also at that time had enjoyed the conversation of the antediluvians for about
one hundred years, and Noah himself lived with them three hundred years after
the flood, which gave him sufficient time to instruct his posterity thoroughly
in the knowledge of the character and will of God.

Noah lived till the days of Abraham, and Shem lived till Isaac was well
advanced in years -- indeed Jacob was forty-eight years of age when Shem died.
So that these living chronicles might well convey the traditions of revelation
to their posterity, who for so many centuries had opportunity of learning from
their mouths, the great works and words of God which they had witnessed.

For some time after the flood, mankind (...) to have lived in the same
country, for perhaps a whole century, to the days of Peleg, in whose days the
earth is said to have been divided. Genesis x. 25. About this time it seems likely
the scheme of building a city and a tower or temple to the heavens, was formed,
and they set to work with it in the land of Shinar, when God confounded their
language, that they should not understand one another's speech.

Hutchinson remarks, from the formation of the Hebrew words, that the confusion
which took place and caused their dispersion, was not a difference of language;
but as they had by this time departed from the simple worship of the true God,
to worship the heavens, their tower was intended to be dedicated, as a general
temple, to the worship of the heavens. The confusion was, such a disagreement
about the objects and manner of worship, that they separated from one another,
as has often happened since; and as they divided the earth among them, they
carried with them the knowledge of the true God, mixed with the various
corruptions and innovations which they had so early introduced. Thus, while the
traditions of the knowledge and worship of the true God were spread over the
world, corruptions and innovations were gradually introduced, till they changed
the glory of the incorruptible God into images made like to corruptible things:
and because they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, he gave them up
to the lusts of their own hearts. See Romans i. 21, to end. And hence came the
vile, degraded and corrupted state of the traditions of revelation, which have
gradually sunk and degraded nations to the savage state, in which many of them
now are, and from which others are but lately and in part emerged.

But this was a work of time, and progressive evil. In the early ages the
knowledge of God, and even communications from him, were not uncommon, even in
those nations who had already in part obscured the light of divine revelation:
as in Egypt, Genesis xi. 17, 18, 19. in Sodom, Genesis xiv. 22. in Gerar, Genesis xx. 3
-- 7 and 26, 28. in Syria, Genesis xxxi. 24. Many other instances might be
brought, that the knowledge of the character and laws of the true God were not
obliterated at once; but in a succession of ages became so obscure, as to be no
longer distinctly discernible; and that not till after the Most High had
separated the seed of Jacob for himself, and set up his tabernacle among them,
to be a light to the surrounding nations.

From this view it will be easy to perceive, that whatever has been found good
and true in religion and morals, among the nations of the earth who have not
the knowledge of the written word among them, are shining fragments of that
glorious light, which shone in its primitive splendour among their more remote
ancestors.

When we consider the character of God, as delineated in the sacred oracles,
and the manner in which his attributes are exemplified, unfolding by degrees,
new and amiable, and interesting views of his perfections, are we not ready to
conclude, that Goodness is, if we may so express it, the leading
characteristic? and when we view him as a Creator, who has made provision for,
and given life to so many millions of creatures of various classes, does it not
forcibly strike us, that his goodness is manifested in communicating happiness
to all the works of his hands?

The irrational animals are directed to their proper good by instinct, which
seldom or never misleads them: this is the law of their nature, and they are
generally observant of it. To man, the chief of his works in this world, he has
also given rules for his conduct, reason to enable him to judge, and lest he
should still err, the precepts and injunctions are illustrated by examples: the
principles and hopes exhibited in the sacred records, are adapted for his
guidance by infinite wisdom and infinite goodness.

LETTER III.
THE necessity of revelation need not be proved, it being impossible that man
could acquire the knowledge of the existence and character of God, or discover
proper principles of moral rectitude without it. It is equally needless to
prove that revelation has been given; the ideas of the existence, and the
worship of a Deity, and the knowledge of moral good and evil, unattainable
without it, being to be found in some degree in all nations.

Various collections of writings have claimed the honor of being the
revelation of God. The comparison has been made, and after the strictest
examination, the scriptures of the Old and New Testaments stand unrivalled in
their claim to that character.

The truth and authenticity of the Old Testament has evidences, such as appear
amply sufficient to satisfy the most scrupulous inquirer.

The law was given from mount Sinai, in the sight and hearing of the whole
people of Israel without exception. They had been all witnesses of the mighty
works whereby God had brought them out of Egypt. They had all seen the sea
divided, and every one had passed through the sea on dry ground, while the
waters stood up as a wall on each side. They had witnessed the destruction of
the Egyptians, by the sea returning to his channel. They had been conducted in
the day by a pillar of cloud, and by night the splendour of a pillar of fire had
directed their movements: and now, when the whole nation was assembled, in
expectation of a public display of the Divine presence, they saw the awful
manifestation; and all the individuals in the whole nation were made to hear
the words of God, proclaiming in the most unequivocal language, his existence,
the relation in which he stood to them, and that glorious law which they ought
to keep.

Here was no ambiguity, the words were explicit, and not only all heard, but
every individual understood them; and that all dispute of what the law was,
might be precluded, it was written by God himself on two tables of stone, and
the custody of it publicly committed to a whole tribe, in the presence of all
the people. And that the knowledge of it might continue universal among them,
and the practice of the precepts constant, every man was commanded, not only to
have a copy of the whole law, but to write it also on the most public places,
on the posts of his house and on his gates, that it might become the subject of
inquiry to their children, and that every man might be qualified to explain the
reasons of the institutions to succeeding generations.

Their being conducted through the wilderness, and placed in the land which God
had promised, was such a proof of the Divine veracity as left no room for doubt
to enter. The declarations of God, that he would bless them if they kept his
laws, and would punish them if they were disobedient, have been most accurately
accomplished, as is corroborated by the history of other nations: and their
dispersion at this day, according to the predictions in the scripture, is such
a living witness to the truth of these scriptures, as never was exhibited by
any other nation. So accurately indeed have the predictions of the prophets
been verified, that those who disputed the Divine authority of the scriptures,
finding no other way to evade the force of their evidence, have contended, that
the books were written after the events took place; but this allegation was
rendered null, by the knowledge, that before several of these events took
place, the sacred books were translated into Greek, and copies multiplied in
many parts of the world.

That a man, or a few men, may be themselves deceived, or that they may impose
upon others, may be true; but in this case a whole nation are the witnesses,
and in cases where the testimony confessedly militates against their own
characters; and their very existence in their present state confirms it, and
the whole exhibits such a weight of evidence, as seems to set at defiance even
incredulity itself.

So very careful were the Jews of their sacred books, that it is said they
counted not only the books and divisions, but even the letters themselves, and
carefully noted down not only their relative positions, but even their
numerical order in the shorter divisions, that they might guard against the
smallest alteration.

This, it will be said, was a superstitious veneration for the letter of their
sacred books, while they neglected the spirit of them. -- Be it so. -- It has,
however, proved one of the means which have brought down the Hebrew Text of the
Old Testament to our times, in such purity, that in the collation of many
hundreds of the most ancient MS copies which could be sound, there is not
observed a variation which alters the signification of a law, a prophecy, or a
doctrine; and when compared with the Septuagint translation, which was made
above two thousand years ago, that is, before the coming of Christ, there is a
wonderful harmony and coincidence between them. So that we may safely rely on
the integrity of the parts, as well as upon the evidence of the whole.

The authority of the Old Testament being established, forms a basis for that
of the New. The first promise of victory to be obtained by the seed of the
woman, was gradually amplified in the Old Testament, and thus formed a
foundation for the faith of the ancients, who, understanding the import of the
symbolical institutions, looked-forward to the promised Deliverer. God promised
to Abraham, that in his seed all the families of the earth should be blessed,
when his wife had been barren till her ninetieth year, and past all hopes of
being a mother. The promise ran in the line of Isaac, and of Isaac's sons Jacob
had the promise: and among the twelve sons of Jacob, it was foretold that the
Messiah should be a descendant of Judah, in whom (as the name imports) the
praise of Jehovah should be manifested. And the last predictions of Jacob, Genesis
xlix. 8 -- 12. and of Moses, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 7. had evident reference to this.

After David was called to be king, the promise was renewed to him; to which he
refers, 2 Samuel xxiii. 1 -- 5. In subsequent times, the prophets frequently
spoke of the coming of the Glorious Holy One, particularly the seraphic Isaiah,
vide chapter iv. and chapters xi. and xii. chapter xxxii. also chapter xxxv. chapter xl. chapter
xlii. chapter xlix. chapter lii. chapter liii. and indeed the greater part of the whole
book: and all the prophets, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold
concerning him. In the prophecy of Daniel, the particular time is specified
when the Messiah should come, being four hundred and ninety years after the
going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, which was at
that time desolate, but the seventy years of her captivity were near a close.

The coming of John the Baptist, as the voice of one crying in the wilderness,
was likewise foretold, Isaiah xl. 3. and in Malachi 3 and 1. and in both
instances connected with the coming of the Messiah.

That there was such a person as Jesus Christ, is acknowledged by deists, Jews
and Mahometans, and that he came at the time which the Christian Scriptures
declare. The Koran acknowledges, that he was a prophet sent by God: the Jews
and deists deny it.

That he was the promised Messiah, appears by the predictions of the prophets
being verified in him. He came at the appointed time, when the general
expectations of the people were so raised, that when John appeared it was a
question, whether he were the Christ or not.

In him were fulfilled the prophecies: Isaiah vii. 14. compared with Matthew. i.
22, 23. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of
the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being
interpreted is, God with us. He was born in Bethlehem: compare Micah v. 2. with
Matthew. ii. 6. -- Thus it is written by the prophet, And thou Bethlehem, in the
land of Judah, art not the least among the princes of Judah; for out of thee
shall come a Governor that shall rule by people Israel. He was called out of
Egypt: compare Hoseah xi. 1. with Matthew. ii. 15. That it might be fulfilled
which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, Out of Egypt have I called my Son.
The general voice of the prophets was, that he should be called a Nazarene,
Matthew. ii. 23. He came to those who sat in darkness: compare Isaiah ix. 1 -- 7.
with Matthew. iv. 15, 16. The people who sat in darkness saw a great light, and
to them who sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up. He
healed the sick, and preached the gospel to the poor: compare Isaiah lxi. 1.
with Luke iv. 18. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed
me to preach the gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal the
brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable
year of the Lord. See also chap. vii. 20 -- 23. He came to Jerusalem as the
King who came in the name of the Lord: compare Isaiah lxii. 10, 11. Zechariah
ix. 9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion: shout, O daughter of Jerusalem:
behold thy King comes unto thee. He is just and having salvation, lowly,
riding upon an ass, even a colt the foal of an ass; with Matthew. xxi. 1 -- 9.
Mark xi. 1 -- 10. Luke xix. 29 -- 38. and John xii. 12 -- 16. He was betrayed
by one of his friends: compare Psalm. xli. 9. Yea, mine own familiar friend in
whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me;
with Matthew. xxvi. 21, 25, 47 -- 50. Mark xiv. 18 -- 21, 43 -- 45. Luke xxii.
21, 22, 47, 48. John xiii. 18, 21, 26. chapter xviii. 2, 3. He was sold for thirty
pieces of silver: compare Zech. xi. 13. with Matt. xxvi. 15. chapter xxvii. 3 --
10. And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was
valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value, and gave them for the
potters field, as the Lord appointed me.

False witnesses rose up to condemn him: compare Psalm xxvii. 12. and xxxv. 11.
False witnesses did rise up, they laid to my charge things that I knew not,
they rewarded me evil for good; with Matthew. xxvi. 59 -- 61. Mark xiv. 55 -- 58.

He was silent when falsely accused: compare Isaiah liii. 7. He was oppressed
and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a lamb to
the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth; with Matthew. xxvi. 63. and xxvii. 12 -- 14. Mark xiv. 61. and xv. 3 -- 5.

He was delivered to Pilate a Gentile governor, and by him sent to Herod:
compare Psalm. ii. 1, 2. Why do the heathen rage and the people imagine a vain
thing? The kings of the earth set themselves and the rulers of the earth take
counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed; with Matthew. xxvii.
2. Mark xv. 1. Luke xxiii. 1, 7. Acts iv. 25 -- 28.

He was crucified, his hands and feet pierced: compare Psalm. xxii. 16. The
assembly of the wicked have enclosed me, they pierced my hands and my feet.
Zech. xii. 10. -- They shall look upon me whom they have pierced; with Matt.
xxvii. 35. Luke xxiv. 40. John xix. 37. and xx. 25 -- 27.

The soldiers parted his garments, and cast lots for his vesture: compare Psalm.
xxii. 18. They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture; with
John xix. 23, 24.

His legs were not broken: compare Psalm. xxxiv. 20. He keeps all his bones,
not one of them is broken; with John xix. 33 -- 36. but, His side was pierced
with a spear: compare Zech. xii. 10. with John xix. 34.

He was buried: compare Isai. liii. 9. with John xix. 41, 42. and Jonah i. 17.
with Matthew. xii. 40. He was raised from the dead without seeing corruption:
compare Psalm. xvi. 10. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thine holy One to see corruption; with Acts ii. 31. He ascended on high:
compare Psalm. xvi. 11. Psalm. lxviii. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have
led captivity captive; with Mark xvi. 19. Luke xxiv. 51. Acts i. 9. Ephesians. iv. 8.
Acts ii. 31, 32. and chapter v. 30, 31.

These are a part of that wonderful assemblage of predictions, which have found
their fulfillment in Jesus Christ, and which, while they carry conviction of his
being the Messiah, fill the mind with astonishment: and such appears to have
been the kind of evidence with which the apostles testified that Jesus was the
Christ.

LETTER IV.
WITH regard to the apostles, the preachers of Jesus Christ: they were either
themselves deceived by an impostor, and became dupes to his designs; or they
were themselves impostors, and meant to make mankind subservient to their
designs; or the were so thoroughly convinced of the truth of the doctrines
which they preached, and so strongly impressed with a conviction of the
importance of their truths, that they were willing to suffer the loss of all
things, and even of life itself, rather than fail in communicating this
knowledge, so important to all mankind.

All the impostors whose history has reached us, have been persons whose real
views and designs were very different from what they avowed as their
intentions, and their cunning superior to that of those whom they made
subservient to their purposes.

The acquisition of power, riches, or fame, or all three, have been their
ultimate objects; and their deceptions have been practiced for obtaining these
ends. It was necessary that they should hold out to their followers something
particularly alluring, to be enjoyed exclusively by them, thereby to induce
them to assist in the prosecution of their schemes, with that enthusiastic
energy which is most likely to ensure success.

The character of Jesus Christ was so very different from all this, that even
the deists themselves have not commonly imputed imposture to him.

He always declared his designs to be the happiness, not of any particular
nation, but of all mankind; and that he was to accomplish this end by leading
them to the knowledge of the true God, and the practice of moral holiness: and
accordingly he embraced every opportunity of communicating the most important
instruction.

He professed that God was his Father, and that all the wisdom, and all the
power which he possessed, were derived from him; and he showed his filial
obedience by an invariable observance of the will of his Father and his God.

He declared that he was sent of God, not to do his own will, but to speak the
words and do the works of his Father, and accordingly he showed forth the power
of God in the miracles which he performed and the doctrines he taught. He
healed the sick, made the lame to walk, the deaf to hear, the blind to see. He
cast out devils, raised the dead, and preached the gospel to the poor. -- He
went about doing good. -- While he himself went about teaching and doing good,
he reproved with authority and freedom, what was evil in the doctrines and
practice of those who perverted the law of God; and thereby exasperated the
rulers of the Jews to such a degree, that they persecuted him till they at last
accomplished his murder: but he, with a perfect understanding of their enmity,
and a clear perception of its issue, was not deterred from doing the will of
his heavenly Father: he shrunk not from obloquy, reproach, persecution, and a
cruel death, seeking not honor from men, but solicitous only to do them good,
and to glorify his Father and his God.

Whilst in his own conduct he exhibited a character of spotless purity and
patient submission, he did not flatter his disciples with promises of exemption
from evil, or of exclusive enjoyments; but carefully instructed them, that the
happiness which he promised was designed for all mankind, as well as for them;
and they understood it so: that he designed to make them servants, to proclaim
his gospel to the world: and that in the course of this service, they would be
exposed to all manner of injuries, persecutions, the hatred of all nations, and
death itself, without any earthly privileges.

From this slight view of the subject, it evidently appears, that Jesus was not
and could not possibly be an impostor; and therefore his disciples were not
deceived, but fairly and honestly instructed in what they were to expect; and
they found the predictions verified.

There was as little chance that they themselves should be impostors. The
nature of their doctrine, which was peace and good will to men, was opposite to
imposture of any kind. They were men capable of understanding the instructions
which they had received: they had seen their master uniform in his conduct and
testimony: they had seen him confirm it by his blood: and he whose name was
cast out as the execration of the rulers and people of his own nation, was not
by any means adapted to become the hero of an imposture, and that too in the
very city where he was known and crucified. They professed to be sent by the
power of God, to testify his resurrection from the dead to the very people who
had murdered him, and to preach salvation through his name as the only Savior;
and this testimony was confirmed by such striking and incontestible miracles,
that even their enemies were constrained to acknowledge their reality and
force. They taught the same doctrines, and inculcated the same practice which
their Master had taught and exemplified in their presence: and like him, they
arrogated nothing of discovery or of power to themselves, but uniformly
testified that they had no claim to merit of any kind, and that the doctrines
which they taught, the miracles which they performed, were not their own, but
exhibitions of the power, wisdom, and love of God, manifested through Jesus
Christ, the one mediator between God and men. At the same time, their
intrepidity in testifying the sublime truths they were charged to preach, in
the face of all opposition; their patient enduring every injury to which they
were subjected, and even sealing their testimony with their lives, showed that
they counted nothing too great to do or to suffer for Christ's sake. They
counted nothing dear or precious to them, but what contributed to promulgate
and enforce the precious and important truths, which they had in charge to
communicate to mankind. The only concern which they had about themselves was,
that they might fulfill the ministry which they had received of the Lord, and
that they might confirm and corroborate it by holy and unblamable lives,
animated by their conviction of the truth, and by those precious hopes, which
they considered themselves as possessing in common with all who received and
kept their testimony.

Thus it appears, that the character and conduct of the apostles of Jesus
Christ, were in every respect the very reverse of imposture. That having
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor
handling the word of God deceitfully, they commend themselves to the conscience
of every honest man, as honest witnesses of the truth which they themselves
believed.

The apostles of Jesus Christ, fully instructed by their master, directed by
the spirit of God, and endued with the capacity of speaking in various
languages, and the power of working miracles in attestation of their divine
mission, were properly qualified to preach the gospel to all mankind: and
accordingly they began at Jerusalem on the day of pentecost, about seven weeks
after the resurrection of Jesus, at a time when there was a great assembly of
people from various nations present, who were astonished to hear the wonderful
works of God declared in the languages of all the nations from which they had
come, and this by a few men who were known to be illiterate Galileans: and when
inquiry was made, What means this? and others scoffing said they were
drunken, Peter standing up with the eleven, showed the people that this was the
fulfillment of the prophecy of Joel; and what they now saw and heard, was the
result and proof of Jesus of Nazareth, whom they had crucified, being raised up
and seated at the right hand of God, as the Savior of mankind; and exhorted
them to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
of their sins. This was the first public testimony of the apostles, and the
effect was the conversion of about three thousand in one day. The subsequent
miracles by which the divinity of their mission was authenticated, were of such
a nature, and exhibited in such public and unequivocal instances, in the
presence of their enemies, as evidently showed that deception or collusion were
impossible; insomuch that the rulers of the Jews who had murdered Jesus Christ,
finding his resurrection and subsequent power and glory, witnessed by such
incontestible evidence, knew not what steps to take for the suppression of his
doctrine. We find them expressing themselves thus: Acts iv. 16. What shall we
do to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle has been done by them, is
manifest to all them who dwell at Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.

It will readily occur to our reflection, that miracles never were intended for
the proof of any moral proposition or doctrine, but for the confirmation of the
facts which the apostles testified, viz. the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and
the dignity and power with which he was invested, and the authority whereby the
called all men every where to repent, and proclaimed forgiveness of sin, and
salvation to all who believed and obeyed the gospel.

That the books of the sacred scripture were written by the men whose names
they bear, has been admitted in all ages, with at least as much evidence as
that the works of any of the ancients were written by the authors to whom they
are ascribed. Indeed with much stronger evidence, as has abundantly appeared by
the acknowledgment of the learned for above three thousand years past. -- The
Old Testament has been, and still is known and maintained to be the writings of
those whose names the different books bear, by the whole nation of the Jews,
who surely must have known the works of their own writers better than any other
people; and those who would reject their testimony in this respect, ought at
least to substitute something better authenticated in its place: and till this
is done (which has not yet been attempted) their testimony must stand good.

With regard to the New Testament, its credibility and authenticity have been
amply shown by various able writers; such, for instance, as Lardner's
Credibility of the Gospel History; and a shorter view of it in Paley's
Evidences of Christianity.

Besides the sketches already given, there is another source of evidence,
called the internal evidence of Christianity, that is, the evidence which
arises from the sublimity of the discoveries, and the originality and purity of
the morality contained in the sacred writings, and which are unattainable
without revelation: but this will be better understood from a view of the
peculiar doctrines and principles themselves.

LETTER V.
ON looking into the Bible, the very first thing that strikes our attention, is
a discovery of the being and attributes of God. Genesis i. 1. In the beginning God
created the heavens and the earth. This meets us on the threshold of our
inquiry, and claims our first attention.

As we have already seen that human reason and philosophy, unassisted by
revelation, are incapable of discovering the character, or even the exitence of
a Deity, let us inquire what account the scripture has given of his character,
his designs, his conduct, and the reasons of it.

He is represented as infinite in power: indeed the creation of the heavens and
the earth evidently intimate this. He spoke and it was done, he commanded and
it stood fast. Ps. xxxiii. 6 -- 9. He claims this character to himself, Genesis
xvii. 1. I am the Almighty God. Exodus vi. 3. I appeared unto Abraham, unto
Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty. It is not necessary to
multiply instances of the ascription of infinite power to him: they occur
through the whole of the scripture, and his works confirm it beyond any room
for doubt.

His wisdom is infinite. Prove. iii. 19. The Lord by wisdom has founded the
earth, by understanding has he established the heavens. Job xxviii. 20, 23.
Whence then comes wisdom, and where is the place of understanding? God
understands the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof. His wisdom is
manifested in all his works. It is high as heaven, deeper than hell, longer
than the earth, and broader than the sea. Job xi. 8, 9. His knowledge and
understanding are represented as directing and superintending the exertions of
his power in all circumstances, and in every place at the same time, through
every the most minute part of his creation, so that not a hair can fall to the
ground without his cognizance. Hence he is represented as present every where,
superintending or controlling every thing or event. The thoughts of the heart
are naked and open before him; perfectly understanding all our thoughts, words
and actions, and all their consequences, even the most remote, and prepared to
direct, restrain, or check them, that they cannot ultimately defeat or impair
the accomplishment of his own purposes.

It is impossible that any secret can elude his omnisience, or that to his
prescience any thing can be contingent. Past, present, and future, are
perfectly under his immediate inspection, with a perspicuity and accuracy
absolutely inconceivable to the most exalted created intelligence. His
operations and superintendence, extend from the most minute atom or its
qualities to the utmost possible extension of the universe; while his immutable
existence and eternity of duration, preclude the smallest possibility of error
in his government and conduct.

The interesting point of view in which we are taught to consider the Supreme
Being, is that relative manifestation of his character, designs, and conduct,
which more immediately respects mankind: and hence, in what has been called his
moral character or attributes, we are led more particularly to observe this
relation to our state and prospects, which naturally suggests the state of man
as a subject of consideration, which may be briefly stated in this place, and
further discussed in the course of our inquiries.

Revelation directs our views to the creation of man in a state of happiness,
subject to a law with a capacity of obeying it, and probably, of improvement in
felicity. He was commanded to keep this law, and threatened with death as the
consequence of disobedience. He disobeyed and became subject to death; and all
his posterity have been and are subject to death, as well as himself. The moral
state of mankind appears greatly deranged; wickedness is diffused over the
world; and men, so far from seeking to be reconciled to God, became more and
more estranged from him, so that at length the knowledge of the true God became
obscured among them through their wickedness: but still the consciousness of
deficiency which they retained from the traditions of revelation, however
obscured, led them to multiply false gods to themselves, vainly seeking from
them relief from their consciousness of guilt. Enemies to God, and to one
another, their disobedience to him became the source of misery to themselves;
and with some faint ideas of a future state of retribution, derived from the
traditions of revelation, they were destitute of certainty, well grounded hope,
or rational consolation. With talents capable of promoting the happiness of of
society, they oppressed one another by domestic discords and foreign wars; and
the peace and comfort of families were destroyed by the cunning or the passions
of individuals: so that instead of genuine amelioration of their moral state,
their hopes were deceived by false prospects; and deception only smoothed the
surface of things, whilst numberless evils rankled under the delusive
appearance of improvement.

Such a dismal situation stood in need of the cheering rays of revelation, to
dispel the gloom, and by exhibiting natural evils in the light of moral
discipline, to make them subservient to the best and most important interests
of man. Hence such a display of the Divine character and conduct, as was
adapted to the condition and necessities of mankind, must be peculiarly
important and interesting: and accordingly we find in the Divine record, that
goodness is a leading feature in the Divine character.

The Lord is good to all* his tender mercies are over all his works. He makes
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and
on the unjust.

As goodness forms a leading feature in the Divine character, a little
attention will lead us to observe the modifications of his goodness in every
part of his conduct; and all his attributes are in the most perfect harmony
with it, and contribute to promote the accomplishment of the plans of infinite
wisdom and infinite goodness, with infinite power. Consistently with this, the
apostle says, Ephesians. i. 9, 10. Having made known to us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure which he has purposed in himself, that in the
dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together in one (or
reunite under one head) all things in Christ, both which are in the heavens and
which are on earth, even in him. That he will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth. 1 Timothy ii. 4. therefore the gospel is
preached unto all men, and unto the principalities and powers, for their
recovery, according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus
our Lord. Ephesians. iii. 9 -- 11.

In the character which he assumes to himself, as before remarked, Mercy is the
very first attribute which meets our view: The Lord God, merciful and gracious.
Exodus xxxiv. The condition of man, as having transgressed the law of his God,
admitted of no hope but from the mercy of God. In many cases, if a man has
injured his neighbor he may have wherewith to make him adequate compensation,
and thus repair the damage which he had occasioned; but when man trangresses
the law of God, what equivalent can he render to him? All that which he
possesses is the property and the gift of his maker; he can have nothing
independent of him to make compensation for his misconduct. Wherewith, then,
shall he come before the Lord? The answer is, Let the wicked forsake his
wickedness, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; let him return to the Lord
who will have MERCY upon him, for our God will abundantly PARDON. Hence the
Knowledge of salvation is by the remission of sins, through the tender mercy of
our God. Luke i. 77, 78. And indeed, through the whole of the scriptures, the
mercy of God is exhibited as the foundation of man's confidence toward God.

The mercy of God, therefore, his forgiving sin, and freeing the repenting
sinner from the imputation of guilt, is celebrated in the Old and New
Testaments as universal, and as enduring for ever: showing mercy unto thousands
(of generations) of them that love him and keep his commandments. Exodus xx. 6.
-- His mercy is from generation to generation unto them that fear him. Luke i.
50. He is merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abounding in goodness and
truth. Exodus xxxiv.

Holiness is one of the attributes of God, and inseparable from his character
and conduct. Holiness seems to be that perfect purity and freedom from any
immoral stain, which is totally incompatible with any possible error or There
is nothing in the Divine character or conduct that can have the smallest
affinity to moral evil on his part, as its author or perpetrator; nor is it
possible that moral evil can be in any way pleasing or acceptable to him. He is
of purer eyes than to look on iniquity. The throne of iniquity cannot have
fellowship with him.

Consistently with this holiness, his mercy is always exercised. The wicked
must forsake his wickedness before he can be pardoned: men must be turned from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, before they can receive
forgiveness of sins. -- It is part of his character -- Clearing he will not
clear the guilty -- consequently it is impossible that any man can receive
pardon from God, or come with acceptance before him, so long as he continues an
unrepenting sinner, for, Without holiness no one can see God.

This also is a part of his goodness, for if men could even receive forgiveness
whilst they continued in the career of wickedness, not only no moral advantage
would be derived from it, but men would be encouraged to continue and even
increase in wickedness without restraint, and both society would be more
injured, and the individual would be incapable of reaping any benefit from such
pardon, and therefore its end would be defeated. -- Hence he is represented as
long-suffering, and waiting that he may be gracious; that is, he has long
patience with men, till the discipline and means which he employs, have the
effect of humbling and making them sensible of their wickedness, and making
them earnestly seek forgiveness, that their hearts being turned to him, like
the softened wax, they may receive deep and indelible impressions of his
gracious kindness; and thus a moral amelioration is effected in them.

God is represented in the Scripture as inflexibly just, invariably connecting
vice with misery as its necessary consequence and punishment, and continuing
and varying the chastisements with unremitting attention, in order to produce
the reformation of the vicious. If we attentively read the 26th chapter of
Leviticus, we will find an example of the severity of God, and the purpose for
which it is inflicted, and see that all the punishment which he inflicts is
intended for the benefit of the sufferers. He chastens for our profit, that we
may be partakers of his holiness. Heb. xii. And from his immutability the
conclusion is obvious, that in every instance, and in all his dispensations,
this end is invariably pursued; for he is unchangeable, not in his modes of
operation, which are always adapted to circumstances; but in the principles
upon which he conducts his operations, and the to be obtained. -- But the
justice and faithfulness of God consists not only in inflicting punishment on
the disobedient: they are equally manifested in the fulfillment of his promises
as in the accomplishment of his threatenings. He has connected the promises of
blessings with obedience, and never fails to fulfill these promises with the
same invariable justice and faithfulness, with a view to confirm his servants
in their love and attachment to himself, by their experience of his fatherly
kindness.

His justice, therefore, in all its modifications, in every instance, in all
his dispensations, whether in the present or in a future state, is conducted
upon the same principle of goodness, directed by unerring wisdom to the
attainment of its benevolent end.

LETTER VI.
AS the purposes of God have in view the happiness of his creatures; as he
designed that all men should be benefited by the dispensations of his Goodness;
be brought to know, to love, and to obey him, as essentially necessary to the
highest felicity of which their natures are capable; so he has adapted his
measures for the accomplishment of this benevolent end, with infinite wisdom
and goodness.

He early announced to mankind that he would send a Deliverer, intimating that
from the woman should proceed one who should bruise the serpent's head, and
that in the conflict the serpent should bruise his heel. The institution of
sacrifice was at a very early period, and the whole of the ancient ritual was
emblematical of the way of salvation by Jesus Christ.

The character of Jesus Christ the Savior, is a very important subject of
consideration; as the right apprehension of this is connected with the
knowledge of the only true God, and leads to a satisfactory understanding of
the Divine economy.

He is represented as, The first born of every creature. Col. i. 15. The
beginning of the creation of God. Rev. iii. 14. That, He is before all things,
and by him all things were created. Col. i. 16, 17. God created all things by
Jesus Christ. Ephesians. iii. 9. All things were made by him, and without him not any
thing was made. John i. 3. Compare Prove. viii. 22 -- 30. as being Rich. 2 Cor.
viii. 9. In the form of God. Phil. ii. 6. And possessing glory with the only
true God before the world was. John xvii. 5.

From these and similar testimonies it appears, that he was in a peculiar sense
the only begotten of the Father, the first being whom God brought into
existence (at what time is impossible to be known) and the Agent by whom he
created all things; and he is recognized by his Father in that character. Psalm.
cii. 25. quoted by the apostle, Heb. i. 10. Thou, Lord, in the beginning have
laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands.

He is likewise represented as Upholding all things by the word of his power.
Heb. i. 3. By him all things consist. Col. i. 17. Consistent with this view he
seems to have manifested himself to Adam, Genesis iii. 9. to Noah, chap. vi. 7, 8,
9. to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Genesis xii. 1, 3. and xvii. 1. and chap. xviii.
chapter xxvi. 1, 5. chapter xxxii. 24, 30. chapter xxxv. 9. to Moses, Exodus chap. iii. iv.
etc. etc. etc. to Joshua, Josh. i. 1, etc. etc. etc. to Gideon, Judges vi. 11,
etc. chap. vii. 2, etc. to Samuel, and to the prophets in a great variety of
instances. Hence we may conclude, that all things were under his direction and
management, previous to his coming in the form of a servant. From these
testimonies, which are so very explicit, it would appear, that those who deny
the existence of Jesus Christ previous to his coming into the world in the
reign of Augustus, are mistaken, as they are thereby reduced to the necessity,
either of rejecting considerable portions of the scripture, or of interpreting
them in some way very different from what appears to be their most obvious and
natural signification: and while the system is pressed with this difficulty
which there seems no way of avoiding, it does not contribute to give us more
consistent apprehensions of the character and conduct of God, or of the state
and prospects of man.

The glorious dignity which Jesus Christ enjoyed before he took upon him the
form of a servant, shows us the strength of his filial obedience, and his
condescension and love to man, when he who was RICH for our sakes became POOR,
that we through his poverty might become rich, and shows us the greatness of
the sacrifice which he made, when He emptied himself and made himself of no
reputation, and became obedient even unto death, that he might save us from
destruction.

He came as the prophet had foretold, as a root out of a dry ground, having no
external dignity to make him an object of attention or desire. His whole
deportment was modest, unassuming, the pattern of humility and the greatest
philanthropy; and though clothed with Divine power and authority, as the
prophet had declared. Isaiah xi. 1, 5. the spirit of the Lord rested on him,
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the
spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord; yet he assumed no dignity to
himself, but uniformly declared himself to be the Son and Servant of his God
and Father, and that all the power belonged to his Father. And in the
prosecution of the work which God had given him to do, he submitted to poverty,
contempt, suffering, and death, with perfect resignation to the will of his
Father. He went about teaching and doing good. All his doctrines, his conduct,
his miracles, showed the most perfect love to God, and the most unconquerable
benevolence to men.

Hence we are led to contemplate the character of Jesus Christ, not merely as
the instrument by whom the love of God was manifested to man, but also as an
active voluntary agent in the great work, who loved mankind himself, and with a
perfect understanding of all the evils and sufferings to which such
condescension would subject him, willingly offered himself for the purpose of
reconciling sinners unto God. Compare Psalm xl. 6, 7, 8, with Heb. x. 5.
Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire: mine ears have thou opened: burnt
offering and sin offering thou have not required. Then said I, Lo I come: in
the volume of the book it is written of me: I delight to do thy will, O my God,
yea thy law is within my heart. Therefore the Apostle, 2 Cor. v. 14. says, The
love of Christ constrains us to live no more to ourselves, but to him who
died for us and rose again: and he is celebrated, Rev. i. 5. by the character
of Him who loved us: and Ephesians. v. 25. Christ loved the Church and gave himself
for it. Many other instances occur in the New Testament.

He is represented as a Priest, made such by an oath, Psalm. cx. 4. The Lord
has sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest forever after the order of
Melchizedeck. Comp. Heb. v. 6, 10. and vii. 17, 24. He offered up himself,
verse 27, and, Because he continues ever, he has an unchangeable Priesthood,
verse 24. Therefore he is able to save to the uttermost, them that come to God
by him: Seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, verse 25. that if
any of his servants trespass they may be reclaimed by his power and grace, and
obtain mercy and forgiveness of God through his intercession. 1 John ii. 1. --
If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
Who appears in the presence of God for us. Heb. ix. 24. to purify the repenting
sinner from his transgressions; to purge the conscience from dead works to
serve the living God. Heb. ix. 14. agreeably to the declaration of the angel,
Matt. i. 21. He shall save his people from their sins.

Being raised from the dead, agreeable to his hope, Psalm. xvi. 10. Acts ii. 30,
31, 32, 33. he is invested with all power in heaven and in earth, according to
his prayer, John xvii. 5. comp. Mat. xxviii. 18. and set on the right hand of
the Majesty on high, as was declared, Psalm. cx. 1. compare with Acts ii. 34,
35, 36. to reign until all his enemies shall become subject to him.

In this view we are taught to consider him as the agent by whom the Father
exercises his supreme authority; directing, controlling, or checking the
conduct of individuals, societies, or nations and empires, and often making
them productive of events very different from what the actors contemplated; and
so overruling the physical evils which men and nations are suffered to inflict
upon one another, as to make them subservient to the purposes of his moral
government.

Jesus Christ is represented as the one Mediator between God and man. 1 Timothy
ii. 5. We have no knowledge of any intercourse between God and man, or between
the Creator and his creatures, but what is conducted through the hands of a
Mediator. No man knows the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son will
reveal him. Matthew. xi. 27. I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man
comes unto the Father but by me. John xiv. 6. also Heb. viii. 6. and ix. 16.

Hence he is called the Shepherd, whose office is to gather in the strayed
sheep: and for this purpose, it pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell, that having made peace by the blood of his cross, by him to
reconcile all things to himself. Col. i. 19, 20. With this view also the
apostles were sent with the ministry of reconciliation, testifying, that God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. 2 Cor. v. 19. and through him
or in his name, salvation by the remission of sin, is declared to all those who
repent and obey the gospel.

Possessed of all power in heaven and earth, and the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge dwelling in him, he is fitly qualified to exercise the office of
Mediator of the New Testament, which, by means of his death, has a
retrospective view, and includes those who had lived before his coming, as well
as those who were to come after him: for the former had all lived under his
control as well as the latter, whether they were his voluntary subjects or his
enemies; and by his ministrations all are to be reconciled and willingly submit
to government.

His God and Father has promised, and confirmed it by an oath, that every knee
shall bow in the name of Jesus Christ, and every tongue shall confess that he
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. Every thing is to be subjected unto
him, excepting only the Father who subjects them under him. And as he reigns
with a perfect knowledge of all men, a perfect comprehension of every thought,
word and action, he is fitly qualified to be the universal judge; for, The
Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son, that all
men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father. John v. 22, 23.

Those who by a patient continuance in well doing have approved themselves his
faithful servants, who have loved God, and made his law the rule of their
conduct, will enter into the enjoyment of felicity; but those who were
contentious and would not obey the truth, will be placed under a more severe
course of discipline, and effectually learn, that chastisement is the native
consequence of their perseverance in wickedness. Even then the infliction of
sufferings will proceed on the invariable principle of benevolence, which
applies various degrees of chastisement in order to effect the purpose of
voluntary reformation; until all without exception, becoming sensible of the
exceeding evil of sin, shall turn from it with abhorrence, and with their whole
heart turn to the Lord. Then, all enmity being subdued, Jesus Christ will
deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, all things being perfectly
reconciled through him, according to the Divine purpose, that God may be all in
all.

Such appears to be the general outline of the designs of God, to be
accomplished by Jesus Christ, and this design is invariably kept in view
through all ages and dispensations: and though individuals may, for a time,
deprive themselves of the happiness which would result to them from believing
and obeying the truth, the means which Jesus Christ has in his power to apply
in the course of his administration, will at last be successful, in undeceiving
them, and bringing them to a perfect consciousness of the extreme evil of their
wickedness, and of the Divine benevolence, which has directed the whole of his
conduct toward them; that humbled to the dust, under the deepest sense of
their own unworthiness, and acknowledging his mercy and love, they shall
earnestly solicit forgiveness of their sins, and shall not solicit in vain.

LETTER VII.
THE dignity and the depravity of human nature, are themes which have been
largely descanted on, and doubtless human nature exhibits evident signs of
both. Various conjectures and reasonings have been attempted to account for
these appearances, by tracing them to their source.

Revelation assures us, that God created all things by Jesus Christ; and there
seems good reason to conclude, that when his works came from his hand they must
have been very good, and of course that such must have been the state of man
when he came from the hands of his Creator. How he came to be as he now is, has
been long a subject of dispute, and not yet settled. It has been supposed, that
every individual of mankind existed in a former state as moral agents, enjoying
happiness, and capable, by their continued obedience to the law of their God,
of continuing in felicity. That by the abuse of their freedom they fell, though
not all in equal degrees: that God was pleased to connect them with grosser
materials to prevent their destruction, and, placing them in Adam, to render
them capable subjects of a course of moral and physical discipline, for their
recovery to a state of moral holiness and consequent happiness; a system which
he is carrying on under all the varieties of dispensations which his wisdom
sees proper, to induce them to attach themselves to obedience and holiness, as
the objects of their deliberate choice, the rational result of their own
experience and conviction, and the only way to the highest felivity of which
their natures are capable. This supposition does not appear to be any way
inconsistent either with scripture, or what we observe among mankind. When man
was placed in Eden, it seems pretty obvious that he was in a situation which
needed restraint, and he was put under one, and threatened with death as the
consequence of disobedience. His Maker said, it was not good for man to be
alone; he needed a help, and God made an help meet for him. These hints may
intimate, that man was now placed in a situation where his propensity to evil
was restrained, and death might not be necessary; but when he disobeyed he
broke through the restraint, and a change in the mode of discipline became
necessary: the evil propensities formerly restrained were now loose, and it
became proper that he should be subjected to death. The situation to which Adam
had now reduced himself became also the state of his posterity: their
propensities were not under the restraint of his former state, and it became
equally proper that they should be subjected to the same discipline under which
he was now placed.

It was now that their various dispositions began to appear, and they still
appear in such diversity of mildness and ferocity, of candor and duplicity, of
docility and obstinacy, of intelligence and stupidity, as has afforded ample
room for inquiry and discussion, which seem as far from settling the point as
at the beginning; therefore there does not appear any impropriety in assuming a
supposition, which seems at least as likely to account for these appearances as
any other.

Admitting then, that men in their former state had fallen, but not all to the
same extent, we may conceive these various dispositions or propensities to
result from the different degrees of malignity which they had acquired in their
deviation from their original rectitude; and now that their propensities are
broke loose from the restraint under which man was placed in Eden, they show
themselves in the various appearances which human nature now exhibits. -- It
will not be a sufficient answer, to say that these are the fruits of imitation;
for it is yet to be shown what were the original patterns for this imitation:
nor can we say that God placed a pure spirit in a contaminated body, which
should pollute it with moral defilement, for thus we should suppose men morally
wicked without any personal agency of their own.

Another circumstance offers itself to our attention. It will be admitted that
suffering is the effect of sin; but we know that infants are subject to various
kinds and degrees of suffering, and even to death, while they are yet in a
state which appears incapable of transgression. Is there any other supposition
which offers a more rational account of the cause of that suffering, considered
as a part of moral discipline?

But it will be said, that infants are incapable of discerning the relation
between the cause and the effect, and therefore are not proper subjects of
moral discipline. -- The first is true, but it is a difficulty which presses at
least as much on any other supposition, and therefore does not peculiarly
invalidate what has been supposed above. As to the latter, we cannot pronounce
with certainty that they may not, even in that they may not, even in that
state, be subjects of moral discipline.

It is a fact that moral education may be, and sometimes is, conducted in part
at least, by way of impression rather than reasoning, See Dr. Rush's ingenious
Essay on the Influence of Physical Causes on the Moral Faculty.
and however limited the power of man may be, it does not follow that it is not
competent to the power of God, to make even the delirium of a fever, or
continued insanity, subservient to moral amelioration. Indeed a case much in
point occurs in the book of Daniel; it is the case of Nebuchadnezzar. When his
heart was lifted up with pride, he was deposed, and deprived of his reason, in
order to make him know and acknowledge that the Most High God ruled. See Daniel
iv. 24. to the end, and chap. v. 18 -- 21. In this instance, it appears to have
been the method which Divine wisdom saw meet to employ, for the very purpose of
moral amelioration, and it answered the purpose for which it was used.

In this case however it may be said, that Nebuchadnezzar had his reason
before, and when it was restored to him, he recollected and knew the cause and
design of his abasement. True, and if it can be shown that the present state of
existence is the only state of moral discipline, and that God cannot or will
not restore to mankind, or even to those who die in infancy, a perfect
recollection and consciousness of all that they have been, done, or suffered,
this case must be given up; but that cannot be shown, the contrary is evident
from scripture. See among many other places, Matt. xxv. 34. to the end: so that
this must be admitted to be a case very much in point.

Indeed the idea has no novelty; it appears to have been general among the Jews
in the days of Jesus Christ, and was referred to in a question which his own
disciples put to himself; and he did not intimate to them that the notion was a
wrong one, and he never failed to correct their sentiments when they were
wrong. It occurs in John ix. 1, 2, 3. The question, Who did sin, this man or
his parents, that he was born blind? and the answer of Jesus, Neither has this
man sinned nor his parents, appears to intimate, not that either of them were
sinless, but that his being born blind was not the fruit of any particular sin.

Upon the whole then, this supposition does not appear to be any way
inconsistent with reason or scripture, and may be safely admitted, if it can be
of use to solve any of the phenomena of man.

Whatever we may suppose to have been the previous state of man, revelation
informs us that God formed him of the dust of the ground, and breathed into him
the breath of life, and man became a living soul. His Maker taught him
language, and made him acquainted with those things with which he was
surrounded; so that he gave apposite names to all the beasts of the field, and
the fowls of the air: and those who contend that Hebrew was the language of
Adam, say that these names are, in that language, descriptive of the most
distinguishing characteristics of the respective birds and beasts; which
indicates that he was not only taught language, but also its proper application.

His having dominion over the whole animated creation, whether on the land or
in the waters, implies that he must not only have understood their natures, but
also the treatment which was proper for them; and his being placed in the
garden to dress and keep it, presupposes that he was endued with universal
knowledge of the whole vegetable world, and the various soils and manures
suitable for the cultivation of the various classes, genera and species, as
well as a thorough knowledge of the virtues and uses of their respective
productions, as food for himself and all the creatures under his dominion.

It seems probable also that the elements of the arts and sciences were
likewise communicated to him by his munificent Creator. The knowledge of
husbandry and agriculture seem to have been coeval with Adam, the science of
music was known, the harp and the organ were employed in his days; which
implies an acquaintance with mathematical and mechanical science. Metallurgy
was understood, which presupposes a knowledge of chemistry; and scientific
instruction given to the artificers in brass and iron, which indicates an
acquaintance with the arts and sciences in the days of Adam, little thought of
by philosophers and discoverers in modern days, who do not advert to the
dignified extent of mind bestowed on our progenitor.

With respect to the moral state of Adam, it was no less exalted. God made man
upright, Eccl. vii. 29. He was made the capable subject of a law; instructed in
the knowledge of life, the knowledge of good and evil, with their respective
consequences; and provided with a suitable and amiable companion to give
occasion for and encouragement to the practice of the social virtues; to share
his labors and to increase his felicity by friendly participation and social
intercourse. Possessed of the friendship, and honored with the visits of his
Divine Benefactor, whom he also daily contemplated in his works, and whom he
always pleased by his conduct, while he continued obedient to his law; his
dignified state must have been such as we can have but very imperfect ideas of
from the hints given by Moses.

But Adam in his best estate was of the earth, earthy; he was not a spiritual,
but a soulish man. The scriptures represent man as consisting of body, soul,
and spirit, as in 1 Thessalonians. v. 23. and Heb. iv. 12. The soul may be that faculty
by which we can apprehend, contemplate, and enjoy rational pleasure, or suffer
pain from this material system in which we live; and the spirit that by which
we can have intercourse with, and enjoy happiness from spiritual and Divine
objects. Hence, 1 Cor. ii. 14, 15. the natural, or soulish, man receives not
the things of the spirit of God -- because they are spiritually discerned; and
therefore those whose highest wisdom (James iii. 15.) is earthly or soulish,
cannot know them, and hence too the natural or soulish body, 1 Cor. xv. 44.
seems to be a body adapted to the material system in which we now live, and the
spiritual body adapted to the spiritual state in which the righteous will be
placed after the resurrection. Therefore the first Adam was made a living soul;
the last Adam a quickening spirit.

Adam being a soulish man, of the earth, earthy, verse 47. was only capable of
soulish seize and enjoyments. The spirit, which in Prove. xx. 27. is
styled the candle of the Lord, was in him probably as a lamp not lighted; and
it is likely he could not be capable of spiritual ideas in the state in which
he then was, at least not in that early stage of it which only was accomplished
before he fell. His fall, which is briefly stated by Moses, made death a
necessary consequence to himself and his posterity; and from the concurrent
testimony of scripture, it becomes a beneficial consequence to man, for mankind
are now, as Adam was, soulish, and can never be completely freed from that
state but by death: till then they must in some degree bear the image of the
first Adam, insomuch that the Apostle, 1 Cor. xv. 44. says, that at death the
body is sown a natural or soulish body. Now Jesus Christ is the quickening
spirit, whose word and spirit quickens the spirits of the children of men, that
they may bear his image, (verse 49.) and the change which this quickening
produces, is spoken of as regeneration, 1 Pet. i. 13. New Birth, John iii. 3. 1
Pet. i. 23. Ephesians. ii. 1, 5. and many other figures, where the change is spoken
of as begun but not completed: and death appears an important step in the
Divine economy, for completely dissolving the connection with the first Adam,
that the image of the second may be perfected.

In the same point of view may all the distresses and afflictions of mankind,
with propriety be considered as valuable and important parts of moral
discipline, made necessary by sin, and applied by infinite wisdom and
benevolence for the purpose of producing moral good. We may form some idea of
the propriety of this, by considering the importance of medicines to a diseased
body; or surgical operations, such as the drawing of a tooth, or the amputation
of a limb, which though extremely painful, are performed with a benevolent
intention, and often with a beneficial effect. There is this difference
however, that though men often fail in accomplishing their designs; it is
impossible that the purposes of God can be ultimately frustrated.

It has often happened, that from a mistaken view of the physical evils to
which individuals and societies are subject, arguments have been started
against the government of God, and objections brought against the scriptures;
whereas a proper view of the subject is a vindication of the Divine government,
and an irrefragable proof of the Divine origin of the scriptures, where alone
can be found a rational explanation of obvious facts, which without revelation
must have forever remained inscrutable.

When we consider this subject it will be a very obvious and just reflection,
that all mankind are sinners, for all without exception are under this
discipline: and from the scope of the whole scriptures, it would seem to be the
design of God to recover all mankind to holiness and consequent happiness. This
appears to be the uniform object of all the Divine dispensations in every age
and state, and will continue to be the object of all the dispensations of God
toward man in every future state, till the whole shall be saved, and not one
lost.

If we miss this idea, it is owing to our taking partial views of the
scriptures and of the Divine economy, which will naturally lead to mistaken
apprehensions of the purposes of God, and the designs of his dispensations.
This has been a fruitful source of doubts and disputations among those
professing Christianity; and many, who would not take the trouble of judging
for themselves, have turned with disgust from the discordant interpretations so
frequently offered, and rejected the scriptures altogether, without inquiry, as
unintelligible or contradictory.

If we inquire into the evidence of this doctrine, it will be natural to
reflect, that as infinite power, wisdom and goodness are essential to the
character of God, we might rationally suppose, that when he brought intelligent
beings into existence, his design was to make them good and happy; because we
have no ground on which to conclude, that any design or work of the Supreme
Being could possibly be inconsistent with infinite goodness. Hence we may
fairly conclude, that the designs of infinite benevolence could be nothing
short of the highest felicity of which his creatures were capable. The contrary
supposition would picture to us a character the very reverse of Him who is good
to all. -- Hence the declarations, that all the families of the earth shall be
blessed in the seed of Abraham: that his purpose is to reunite all under Jesus
Christ, the one head; to reconcile all things by Jesus Christ to himself: that
he will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Hence it appears, that the existence of moral evil makes physical evils
necessary, as a part of moral discipline: and the universal extent of the
latter forms a decisive proof of the universally benevolent designs of God, and
of the unceasing progress of his means for the accomplishment of these designs.

This view of the subject, while it embraces the scope of revelation, furnishes
a strong evidence of its truth and Divine origin, by exhibiting to us a
consistent, a consolatory, and glorious prospect, unattainable from any source
but revelation alone.

As all who admit the truth of the scriptures, agree that the design of God, in
that revelation, was to recover men from sin to holiness, and from misery to
happiness, it is of great importance to consider the means which he employs to
accomplish this purpose; which will lead to a more particular view of the
dispensations of God, and the present and future state of man. But as the
subject, even a slight sketch of it, is too extensive for my present
avocations, I must leave it for the present, and intend to resume it when I
have more leisure.

I am, with great Sincerity, Dear Sir, Your affectionate Friend.

THE END.

