MR. FISKE'S ORATION.

AN ORATION PRONOUNCED AT CLAREMONT, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF American
Independence.

JULY 4th, 1799.

BY SAMUEL FISKE, A. M.

WHERE a wise government is wisely administered, where morality is inculcated,
and virtue and religion are universally practiced, there the people will be
happy and the nation will be blessed.

WINDSOR: PRINTED BY ALDEN SPOONER.

M,DCC,XCIX.

APOLOGY.
THE Reader is requested to note the following facts, and to make his own
deductions from them, with all the candor with which he is possessed.

HE will recollect that the subjoined performance, was undertaken only a
fortnight previous to the day upon which it was delivered -- that, of this
short interval, the Author was obliged to be absent more than a week, on a
journey to Boston, and, that much of the remaining part of his time was taken
up in his business, which at that period peculiarly demanded his attention.

SUCH were the circumstances which attended the writing of the following
Oration -- and such the facts that plead emphatically for the candor and
benevolence of the reader.

As it was written with reluctance, though at the request of the Militia
officers and a number of other respectable Citizens of this town, so with
diffidence are their wishes complied with, in submitting to them a copy for
publication.

CLAREMONT, 4th July, 1799.
AN ORATION.
UPON ordinary occasions, where the Speaker is to address a variety of
characters, to the greater part of whom, perhaps, he is unknown -- where many
listen, but to criticize, and criticize, but to condemn, it might not be
unnecessary for him to solicit the candor of his audience, by a long exordium.

BUT, upon an occasion like the present -- the anniversary of a day which has
given birth to an extensive empire, and secured the freedom, happiness, and
independence of millions of inhabitants -- when every heart is dilated with
joy, and every feeling tuned to delight; it might discover a want of charity to
doubt your candor, and a want of confidence to suspect your generosity.

INSTEAD of detaining you then, my Friends and Fellow Citizens, by making any
apology for my want of either time or ability to do justice to the occasion,
that now animates every American bosom, I shall offer a few observations that
naturally arise, when contemplating so vast and glorious an event, as that
which we are now celebrating -- an event, which has at once arrested the
progress of tyranny and usurpation -- humbled a haughty and imperious power,
and placed America in a conspicuous and exalted station among the nations of
the earth.

SUCH is the event, that has distinguished this day above every other, and
consecrated it a JUBILEE throughout confederated America.

NOT, like the poor, deluded Sansculottes of degenerated France, are we
assembled to mock heaven by our mirth -- not like them, are we come together,
to chaunt Paeans to a few unprincipled demagogues, each of whose little finger
is thicker, and heavier laden with oppression, than the loins of their good
king, whom they have cruelly murdered -- not like them, are we keeping a
festival, instituted by the nation, to perpetuate the most savage barbarities
-- the butcheries and assassinations of the greatest and wisest characters of
our country: -- But like rational and sober citizens, who know how justly to
estimate their privileges, and who feel grateful for the blessings they enjoy,
we have now turned aside from our ordinary labors to do homage to liberty, in
her real character; and to confirm our allegiance to a government, planned by
wisdom, and administered by virtue, talents and integrity.

THAT man was formed for society, is a truth deeply impressed upon every heart.
Such is the imbecility of his nature, and such the variety of wants with which
he is surrounded, that without the aid of his fellow creatures, existence would
soon become insupportable.

FROM a commerce of benefits, it is, says Seneca, that life is rendered easy
and pleasant, and, hence it is, we are enabled to defend ourselves against any
sudden insult or attack. Nature, which has denied to man that strength, and
those weapons of defense, with which she has supplied other animals, has
liberally compensated for her parsimony in this respect, by endowing him with
reason and sociability, whereby he, who alone, could make no resistance,
becomes master of the whole. It is this same union which supplies him with
remedies in his diseases, assistance in his old age, and comfort in his pains
and anxieties -- it is this, which enables him, as it were, to bid defiance to
the frowns of fortune. Abolish society, and the union of mankind is destroyed
and human happiness annihilated.

SOCIETY being necessary for the welfare and happiness of man; so government
and subordination are necessary for the preservation and well being of society.
This is a truth sufficiently attested by the experience and practice of every
preceding age, from the earliest period of the world down to the present day.
Such is the diversity of tastes, dispositions, and talents, of which man is
possessed -- so strong is his propensity to deviate from the strict rules of
rectitude and virtue; and so powerful is that love of self, which is implanted
in every bosom, and which too often inclines its possessor to seek his own
interest, though in opposition to the good of the whole; that, without some
social compact, formed for the general welfare, without sacrificing to the
community some of the less rights and privileges, that those which are of more
importance may be enjoyed with the greater freedom and security, mankind would
soon become a heterogeneous mass, fluctuating in their principles and conduct
just as their caprice, their interest, or their passions might chance to
dictate.

THAT "all men are born free and equal," is a maxim more frequently repeated
than understood -- a maxim well calculated to tickle the ears of the populace,
and to gain proselytes to the modern schemes of innovation in Religion and
Politics. Though in a limited point of view, "Liberty and Equality" may justly
be considered as the natural inheritance of all men; yet when made use of
without any qualification or restriction -- when perverted to the vilest
purposes -- to the subversion of all Government, order and happiness, then it
is they become the inheritance of none but fools or madmen.

THERE are certain rules prescribed by Heaven, against which, no one, though in
a state of nature, has the liberty of infringing; and Nature has, in no
instance, distributed her favors with so equal a hand as to place all upon a
perfect level. To some she has given five talents, to some two, and to others
but one. It is absurd then to suppose, that, by Liberty, is meant the privilege
for every one to do that which is right in his own eyes, though it should
operate to the detriment and hurt of others; or that by equality, should be
understood, that all have an equal right and equal ability to hold the balance
of justice, or to wield the scepter of Government.

THOSE facinating sounds then, which of late, "have set the whole world in an
uproar," and, by which most of the Governments of Europe are in danger of being
annihilated -- The magic of whose sound, has raised many an ignorant and
unprincipled wretch from the kennels of France, to bask in the sunshine of
power, or to fatten on the spoils of those innocent victims, whom they have
inhumanly sacrificed to their capacity, can mean, in reality, nothing more than
the liberty which all naturally possess, of exercising their own reason, and
following the dictates of their consciences, so long as they are careful not to
invade the rights of others -- of choosing their own form of Government; and of
possessing an equal claim to its protection, and an equal right (so far as
their merit is equal) either by themselves or their representatives to a share
in its administration.

BUT, as every thing of human invention, is stamped with imperfection, so a
perfect form of Government can never be expected. That Government, which then
approaches the nearest to perfection -- which is the best calculated to secure
its citizens in the enjoyment of their persons and properties, rights and
privileges -- which holds out the greatest encouragement for virtue and
talents, and imposes the severest checks upon vice and irregularity, is to be
preferred above every other, and no doubt will be maintained, though a host of
modern Philosophers and French disorganizers should wear out their longs in
declaring against it.

THAT the American Government embraces every possible object for the benefit of
the people, is proclaimed to us in the most emphatical language. As "every tree
is known by its fruit," so the wisdom and excellence of our Federal
Constitution is seen, both in the general prosperity of the Nation, and in the
security and happiness of individuals -- in the vast influx of respectable
foreigners, who have fled from the galling yoke of oppression in other
countries, and in the rapid increases of its natural citizens -- in the
encouragement that is given both to the liberal and mechanic arts, and in the
scrupulous care that is manifested to guarantee to the citizens the liberty of
conscience, of speech and of the press, so essential to the security of freedom.

BUT, that we may taste the blessings that surround us with a keener relish and
feel more forcibly the obligations we are under of publicly testifying our
gratitude for the many great and signal advantages we have derived from our
emancipation from British tyranny, and the establishment of American
Independence, let us cast our eyes across the Atlantic, and see to what a
wretched and deplorable situation some of the nations of Europe are reduced.

BEHOLD Holland, that once commercial and flourishing Republic, by the industry
of whole citizens almost a miracle was wrought, in converting "the sea into dry
land" -- behold is now squeezed almost to suffocation by the loving embraces
and "fraternal hugs" of their generous protectors the French! See their
Commerce annihilated -- their Cities depopulated -- their Government abolished
-- their Arts neglected and their Country inundated. Not only is a part of it
literally overwhelmed by the waters busting through their long-neglected dikes,
which labor and industry had raised to oppose and keep out this destructive
element; It is well known that a great portion of the territory of the united
Netherlands, is what the inhabitants have gained from the sea by means of
dikes, which they have raised, and, for many years, supported at vast labor
and expense. These, like all their public works, having been wholly neglected
since the country has been overrun and impoverished by the French, have at
length become so much out of repair, as in many places, to give away and let
the water in upon the inhabitants to the destruction of much property, a number
of towns and villages, and many of their lives.
but by hordes of French soldiers and French taskmasters, who like the locusts
of Egypt, have "darkened all the land, and devoured every green thing, and all
the fruit" that had been accumulated by the toil and hard labor of many
preceding years.

VIEW Imperial Hamburgh, the only monument of the sparing mercy of the
"generous Nation," servilely counting out its wealth to purchase an exemption
from French fraternity and benevolence!

BEHOLD Spain crouching to the five headed monster and meanly eyeing its hand
in all her operations, lest she should incur its hot displeasure, and be
subjugated to its galling yoke! Behold also her subjects groaning under the
oppression of their own Government, and impoverished by its exactions.

SEE Germany and Switzerland devastated -- the Kings of Naples and Sardinia
driven from their territories, while their subjects, whom they could no longer
protect, are butchered and plundered. See all the states of Italy
revolutionized, and Rome its capital, the once famed mistress of the world,
humbled and debased: To complete the horrid picture; turn your eyes to
regenerated France, the nursery of every crime, and the author of the most of
these evils that now agitate the world: Behold a people boasting of their
emancipation from slavery, and proclaiming to the world the sweets of liberty,
while a few unprincipled and ambitious wretches are riding upon their necks and
subjecting them to the worst of tyranny. The most unjust and oppressive measure
is adopted and made to go down with the multitude, barely by prefacing it with
this apology -- "imperious circumstances require it, and the Directory wills
it."

VIEW their military conscriptions, which are arbitrarily enforced to fill up
the deserted and broken columns of their armies! Behold sons, husbands and
fathers, inhumanly torn from their homes, their families and friends, to do
journeywork for the "King of Terrors" -- compelled to wear out their lives in
acquiring new conquests for the aggrandizement of those in power! Look into
their Military Tribunals and Courts of Justice, and see what bribery and
corruption is daily practiced there! See the lives and property of the citizens
converted into sources of speculation by those who are bound to protect them in
the enjoyment of their rights! Listen to the declaimers in their National
Assemblies, and hear the blasphemies that are there uttered against, not only
every Government that has not been revolutionized by the force of their arms,
or the influence of their "diplomatic skill;" but against all religion and
morality, which are the foundation and support of civil society.

AND, the more thoroughly to effect their pernicious schemes, see them
abolishing the Sabbath, that day of rest, which all are commanded to keep holy;
and boldly, and impiously declaring to the world that they will not have, even
a God, to reign over them!

SUCH is the wretched picture which an imperfect survey of some of the nations
of Europe has exhibited, and such the character of that people, who are
practicing every art, and straining every nerve, to add this country to the
number of their conquests.

AND shall Americans -- "the sons of Liberty" tamely bow their necks to a
foreign yoke? shall they, like Esau, barter away their birth right for a mess
of portage? or, like the unsuspecting lamb, servilely "lick the hand that is
raised to shed its blood?"

BECAUSE from selfish motives -- for the sake of weakening and dismembering a
rival power, France once condescended to assist us, must the stock of our
gratitude never be exhausted? Must we passively sit still and see our property
piratically taken from us -- our commerce interrupted -- our citizens
plundered, abused and imprisoned; and the whole nation insulted in the persons
of our late Envoys, and the chief Magistrate of the union?

FORBID it Honor -- forbid it Justice -- forbid it the Shades of all those
worthy Heroes, who gave their lives as the purchase of our Liberty and
Independence.

As France was friendly, we loved her -- As she was generous, we rewarded her;
-- but as she is treacherous, let us spurn her from our bosoms as a viper, that
is endeavoring to insinuate her poison throughout our whole political and
moral system.

HAVE we not heard her proclaim to the world that we are a divided people? Have
we not heard her boast her "diplomatic skill" to sever us from the government
of our choice, which concentres in it all the wisdom and experience of ages?
Have we not heard her threaten to ravage our coasts, and plunder and burn our
sea ports from Georgia to Newhampshire, should we offer to vindicate our
rights, or lift a hand against the "terrible Republic." Have not our ears been
insulted by a demand of tribute for the purpose of assisting them to carry on
their wicked and ambitious schemes, together with a "small Douceur for the
pockets of the Directory?"

ALL this our ears have heard -- All this our eyes have beheld! Where then is
the spirit of '75, which blazed forth with such universal ardour, when Britain
sought to "draggoon" us into slavery? Where is that love of freedom, which
induced the DECLARATION of INDEPENDENCE, when our country was young and
inexperienced, both in the art of Government and of War? At a time too, when
she was destitute of resources, and when a powerful, veteran army, stood ready
with unsheathed swords, to glut its rage upon those who should dare oppose the
measures of the then mother country? Was not this the language, which, at that
time, was echoed through every village and hamlet in the United States -- "it
is better to die freemen, than to live slaves."

AND have Americans soon become surfeited with the political blessing that
Heaven has so liberally showered upon them? Has the short term of three and
twenty years, given them an aversion to freedom, and made them weary of the
task of governing themselves, that they would now confide this sacred privilege
to the hands of foreigners and strangers?

THANK Heaven the situation of our country has not yet become so desperate!
Thank Heaven the American Character has not yet sunk to so low a pitch of
infamy and degradation: No -- The same sacred and God-like spirit, which glowed
in the bosoms of our Ancestors, and inspired them with the (...) of flying from
the persecutions of King James to this then inhospitable clime, and the same
attachment to Liberty and Independence, which impelled their descendants to
resist the arbitrary measures of George the III when his Parliament arrogated
to itself the "right (...) the colonies in all cases whatsoever," still warms
the heart and actuates the conduct of every real American.

THE long suffering of our Country being exhausted in consequence of repeated
insults, and accumulated aggressions -- her patience having been construed into
weakness and her generosity into cowardice, she has at length assumed an
attitude, which is applauded by the world, and which has given a tone to the
wavering and doubtful councils of some of the Cabinets of Europe. After
frequent and vain attempts at Negotiation, for an accommodation of our
difficulties -- after seeing the proffered Olive branch repeatedly rejected,
and rejected too with scorn and contempt, she has stretched forth her arm, and
in a dignified and decisive tone, has declared to her once acknowledged sister
and ally, that, "thus far shall thou go in thy piracies, and no further, and
here shall thy insults and thy perfidy be stayed"

INSTEAD of paying the tribute that has been insolently demanded in the current
coin of France -- viz. -- Specious promises, Dutch Rescripts, or French
Assignats; our Government, with the promtitude of an honest and an able D^b or,
has wisely determined to make the disbursement in a more weighty and powerful
MEDIUM, COINED FOR THE PURPOSE IN THE FOUNDARIES OF THE UNITED STATES; a
specimen of which has not long since, been forwarded to them by the hands of
the gallant TRUXTON, who has returned to his country with ample testimonials of
his having faithfully executed his mission, by bringing with him the avouchers
of its reception, written in French Blood Such alone is the tribute which
Americans will condescend to pay as the purchase money of this national
Independence -- such is the tribute with which a WASHINGTON will welcome those
to our shores whom the Directory may appoint to come forward with the demand.

WHO is there among us then, who knows the origin of our nation? who is there
acquainted with the wisdom and excellence of our federal constitution? who is
there that has experienced the benefit and protection of our laws, who does not
rejoice that he is an American? Who is there that does not feel his heart
warmed with gratitude and benevolence, at the return of this natal day of our
political happiness? Who is there possessed of such a contracted disposition,
who would grudgingly cast his mite into the treasury of his country, whenever
the exigencies of the nation require pecuniary contributions? Who is there that
would reluctantly come forward to support so good a government, or to defend so
happy a land.

ALAS! with pain we are compelled to acknowledge that the American soil has
produced some worthless characters, whose conduct has merited the odium and
contempt of every lover of his country.

As venomous insects and noxious weeds are warmed into being by the vivifying
rays of the sun, so a number of unprincipled and detestable paracides, have
been nourished into life, by the mild influence of the American government.

THESE are they, who are found "standing in the market places, and in the
corners of streets" preaching up French politics, and French perfidy; and
declaiming against every wise and efficient measure that has been adopted by
Congress for national defense. These are they, who, not long since, kindled the
flame of sedition and erected the standard of rebellion in some of the western
counties of Pennsylvania. These are they who voted the late inflammatory and
disgraceful resolutions of Kentucky and Virginia, for the purpose of alienating
the affections of the people, from the federal government. These are they who
leave no art -- no measure unattempted to stir up a tempest sufficiently
powerful to overwhelm the nation, that they may have an opportunity to enrich
themselves upon the plunder of the wreck.

BUT from such characters American citizens have but little to apprehend, so
song as the channels of information are kept open in every corner of the United
States, and the people are attentive to their elections: especially since the
guardianship and protection of our country, more particularly upon all sudden
emergencies, is wisely confided to a national militia, formed from the great
body of its enlightened and most respectable citizens.

To you then, Fellow Citizens, in arms, and to your worthy brethren, your
country will turn her anxious eyes whenever her rights or her territories are
invaded. To you is committed the ark of her political safety, and upon your
voice depends either the destruction or the salvation of your country. May you
duly consider the importance of the trust confided to your care, and cheerfully
rally around your government whenever its safety shall be endangered, either by
foreign foes or domestic traitors. And from the same pure and ethereal spirit
of patriotism, which has hitherto distinguished our nation, may we all be
induced, in the language of a much celebrated, modern song, to lift up our
hands to heaven, and swear, That never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea roll's its waves.


FINIS.

