AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT TAUNTON ON THE 4th of July, 1799

BY SIMEON DOGGETT, JUN.

-- Facilis descensus Averni:
Noctes atque dies patet atri Janua Ditis:
Sed revocare gradum superasque evadere ad aurus,
Hoc opus, hic labor est.
VIRGIL. NEW BEDFORD, (MASSACHUSETTS) PRINTED BY JOHN SPOONER.

1799.

AN ORATION.
RESPECTED AUDIENCE,
UNDER an all-supporting Providence, nothing but an undoubting reliance upon
your candor, and the warmest cordiality in the sentiments this day embraces,
could have given me assurance to accept the honor and enjoy the pleasure of
addressing my Fellow Citizens upon an occasion so entirely interesting as the
present: But thus supported, my diffident heart animates, with sympathetic
ardour, to felici^^^ you on the return of the illustrious aniversary of our
nation's birth. On this auspicious day may the hallowed fires, which, through
the United States glowed so ardently on the altars of FREEDOM and INDEPENDENCE,
during a most distressing, but victorious war, again rekindle, blaze to the
heavens, spread light and joy over the western hemisphere, and flash terror
across the Atlantic.

THE day we now celebrate ever brings its subject with it, that of LIBERTY and
our National INDEPENDENCE.

THE principles and facts these involve, having long occupied the minds and
arrested the hearts of freeborn Americans, having been often explained by our
civilians, narrated by our historians, sung by our poets, and enforced by our
orators, you will not, at this late day, expect any thing new on these
important subjects. But so far from displeasing, this is the very circumstance
which peculiarly interests the patriot. He loves to travel back the well fought
ground; to review the principles that gave rise to this great day; to feast
upon the dignified emotions and vast transactions, connected with it, and, from
the grand drama, to sublime his heart, reanimate his patriotic resolutions, and
transmit to posterity the magnanimous sentiments. This disposition let us now
indulge.

RELIGIOUS liberty is a complete toleration to every citizen freely to form,
and seriously to promulge his own creed; and, without molestation, to worship
according to the dictates of his own conscience, provided he disturb not the
good and wholesome laws of the community. That Religious Liberty, thus defined,
is one of the natural rights of man, needs no arguments to prove, more than the
definition itself. But notwithstanding this important doctrine is, to the
unprejudiced mind, intuitive, yet it seems never to have been fully understood
in the eastern world. The great whore of Babylon, the Romish Church, assuming
the keys of heaven and the scepter of empire, enforced her creeds forms by the
curses of heaven and all the horrors of persecution. Thousands, yea millions of
the human race, have been sacrificed upon the bloody altars of ecclesiastic
infallibility. And though protestantism reformed many of the errors and
corruptions of the Romish church, yet it seems never in Europe, and not until
very lately in America, to have assumed just sentiments of Religious Liberty.
The enlightened nation of England has ever been disgraced with ghostly tyrants;
and, what is more strange, even a Calvin must persecute. Swayed by this
unaccountable spirit, the government of England passed the Act of Conformity,
that the Thirty Nine Articles of the Episcopal faith might bound the principles
and mould the worship of the whole nation. Having thus erected the standard of
infallibility, the iron rod of persecution is extended to scourge mankind under
its sanguinary banner. Under this rod our pious ancestors long anxiously
groaned. To escape from this, and enjoy that religious liberty, which, they
were convinced, was the unalienable right of man, with hearts resting upon the
Almighty, they tore themselves from their native country, and nobly adventured
to this western world, then a dark, unbounded forest, teeming with bloody
savages and beasts of prey. Their sufferings were unparalleled: but supported
and animated by the power of religion, the principles of liberty, and the
blessings of heaven, their resolutions were unconquerable, their perseverance
unbroken, their success and rising glory miraculous.

CIVIL and Religious Liberty are nearly related, and generally disposed to walk
hand in hand. "Civil liberty is the not being restrained by any law, but what
conduces, in a greater degree, to the public welfare," and a security against
all such restraint. This is very different from natural liberty, that is, for
every man to do as he pleases; which can exist only in a state of solitude. As
ever mankind begin to associate, they begin to find the necessity of restraint.
Many of their natural rights, that are less important, must be given up to the
restraints of general laws, formed to secure those which are more important.
Hence, as a celebrated Author observes, "that people, government, and
constitution is the freest, which makes the best provision for the enacting of
expedient and salutary laws." No government among all the nations of the earth
now existing, so fully answers, I concieve, this description, as that of the
United States. The principles of this government were early imbibed by our
patriotic Ancestors. As a grateful return to our parent country, the colonies
were ever willing that she should regulate and command our external trade; but
never would they consent that the right of internal legislation should,
unrestrictedly, and without a representation, be rested in the British
Parliament. On, this important hinge the great revolutionturned. The parliament
declared that they had, and of right ever ought to have power to make laws
binding the colonies in all cases whatever. This power they exercised in many
acts inconsistent with British liberty, even to the taxing of us without
ourconsent. And, at last, "to enforce their mad pretentions," and to humble and
awe the Colonies into obedience, their fleets and armies were ordered across
the Atlantic. The Colonies, truly loyal, address the throne in the respected
language of petition and remonstrance. Treated with contempt, persuaded that
humble submission to the arbitrary measures of Britain was slavery, with hearts
burning with the vivid glow of liberty, and invoking heaven to witness the
Justice of their cause, they grasp the sword, as the last resort, determined to
live free, or die in the glorious contest. Standing on this firm and exalted
ground, the United States, in their national Congress, ushered upon an admiring
world this ILLUSTRIOUS DAY, which now reanimates our patriotism.

WHEN we look back upon the circumstances of this transaction, consider the
vast resources of the British nation, the unequalled power of their navy, the
distinguished discipline and heroism of their armies, and their determinations
to humble us; the infancy of the United States, their inexperience in the art
of war, the deranged state of their government, their destitution of the means
of defense, and the entire exposure of their extensive coasts and frontiers;
astonishment agitates the heart, at the imminent hazard, and a conscious
dignity rests on the American character. GOD looked benignly on the amazing
scene. Britain, expiating her crimes with her treasure and blood, is obliged to
retract! America, covered with the scars of glory, is FREE and INDEPENDENT.

CIVIL and Religious Liberty, Independence and Country, to all nations objects
the most dear, are remarkably so to Americans from peculiar considerations.

IN the first instance, we possess a country to which the GOD of nature has
been highly bountiful. As we are equalled by few nations in extent of
territory, so also in the quantity, value and variety of productions. No
country on earth, perhaps, is more richly supplied with the necessaries of
life, and where comfortable living may, more certainly and easily, be obtained.

AN illustrious and pleasing proof of this, is the unexampled increase of
population, which our country has for many years, experienced. The vast forests
our boundaries enclose, are teeming with inhabitants; splendid cities rising
where beasts and savages lately burrowed; and spacious colleges and holy
temples reforming and humanizing man. And while our country seems a vast
storehouse of provisions, nurturing and encouraging population, our climate
breathes salubrity, interweaving firmness and heroism into the habits of our
robust sons, and painting the rose of health upon the cheek of our fair
daughters. Commerce too, with all her blessings, smiles upon us. Our safe and
numerous harbors are open to the four winds of heaven: our country perforated,
in all directions, with large and beautiful rivers, and abounding in the most
valuable materials for manufactory and trade. Hence the American flag is seen
streaming on every sea: all nations courting her commerce, and, with a lavish
hand, pouring upon us their productions.

WHILE our natural privileges are great, our moral are much greater. Our
government, formed from the experience of all nations, is acknowledged the best
in the world. Uniting freedom with energy, it is equally removed from the
curies of despotism, and the disorganizing principles of French equality. Here
can exist no haughty lord to oppress, nor factious demagogue to anatchize. With
an established system of government of our own forming, regularly administered
by men of ourown choosing, our liberties, civil and religious, lives and
properties, are guarded, on the one hand, from the usurpations of the tyrant,
and on the other, from the rapacious jaws of the leveller. With such natural
and civil advantages, the Arts and Sciences find, in the United States, a
congenial soil. Here have they, already, shot deep their roots, and are rapidly
repullulating in all the beauties and excellencies of distinguished genius. And
here, especially in New England, education, governed by true republican
principles, extends her all-forming hand to citizens of every class. While
this, and this only, lays the foundation of permanent Democracy, it also
happily prepares the way for rational religion. Hence the mild genius of
christianity has spread her benign wings over this western world, and incense
of pure devotion, from off a thousand altars, unrestrainedly ascends to the GOD
of nations, and the blessed Emanuel.

THESE national blessings, which reflect distinguished glory on the United
States, are peculiarly endeared by the expense at which they were purchased.
For these, we have seen our illustrious ancestors making a sacrifice of those
close attachments which endear a natal country; and, in want of all things,
plunging into this then western forest, inhabited by beasts of prey, and men
more savage than the beasts. For those distinguished national blessings, that
we are now enjoying, great were their labors, great were their sufferings. For
these also have the successive generations of their posterity, ever jealous of
their rights, and appretiating their privileges, most zealously toiled, prayed,
faught, and nobly bled. Especially, for these, have you, my countrymen,
gloriously struggled: For these you exhausted your treasures, and undauntedly
met the awful thunder of Britain; and many of our Fathers and Brethren, Sons
and Husbands, freely bled away their lives on the field of battle. When we thus
bring into view our high national privileges, and the enhanced price at which
they were purchased: see our fields whitened with the bones of those who
gloriously fell combating for their country, and consider our liberties as
sealed to us by the choicest blood of our nation; who is not ready, with hearts
flaming with holy ardor, to adopt the Apostle's style, let us stand fast in the
liberties wherein GOD has made us free. By the pious sufferings of our
Ancestors; by the toils and blood of our friends; by the anxious counsels of
our civilians, and the prayers of saints; by the cause of humanity and
posterity, and by the voice of GOD, are we called to stand firm on the precious
ground of LIBERTY and INDEPENDENCE; with united energy to support our excellent
constitution and government, and to assume the character of an impartial,
generous friend to every pacific nation, while we exhibit the strong arm of
terror to the hostile and disorganizing. This exalted ground, I conceive,
irresistibly invites the foot of every free born American, who is not deluded
or corrupted with foreign politics. Standing here, we oppose not one nation in
order to favor another; no, we glory in INDEPENDENCE on all; holding the olive
branch in one hand, and the sword in the other.

THESE, Citizens, I firmly believe, are the principles that have ever actuated
our Federal Government. On these principles have been predicated the important
measures of Government, that respect the rival powers of Europe, which have
been so unhappily viewed by many worthy citizens. With minds full of the
principles of '76, and with a large view of the politics of Europe, Government
have laid the whole train of their measures to form a powerful barrier of
security against the hostile struggles of Europe, and especially against the
unprincipled, all grasping jaws of France. These measures, important as our
liberties, wise and firm as the mind of an ADAMS, and the patriotism of a
WASHINGTON, demand the united and most powerful support of all the principles,
passions, and exertions which confirmed the day we now celebrate. Is it
possible that Americans, who glory in INDEPENDENCE, should oppose those
measures, dictated by the highest wisdom of our nation! I will not say, that
those, who continue to censure andreproach our government for their European
measures, design to encourage the insults and depredations of France: but I
must say, that they have done it. I will not say, that those who oppose these
measures, wish to sacrifice the INDEPENDENCE of the United States to France:
but I must say, that the measures, they oppose, are those which secure our
INDEPENDENCE. This is evident from the causes that have given rise to those
measures, and the effects they have produced. These causes are, principally,
the politics of France. I will venture to say, the history of man does not
furnish aninstance of such a total loss to every thing that is good, and such
an entire corruption of manners, as the scene which France has exhibited. Many
centuries had they waded down, loaded with systems of government, and religion
perfectly despotic. These, unnatural and erroneous, continued to deprave and
corrupt the public mind as long as they retained sufficient energy for their
support. When this ceased to awe, and their tyranic forms yielded to
revolution, the people, devoid of rational principles, and fascinated with
false ideas of liberty and equality, rushed, like a bursting Ocean, into the
most vile excesses, and awful enormities! Erasing from the mind every sacred
idea of religion, and abolishing all its forms and ordinances, nothing remained
to restrain the full operation of the worst and most corrupted passions of the
human heart. With the most horrid convulsions and tremendous havoc, revolution
rapidly succeeds revolution. Having sacrificed more than three millions of
their inhabitants, in the unexampled scene, the throne of the Directory rises
upon their ruins, all covered with crimes and blood. By this all-grasping,
unprincipled, godless monster, every resource of the nation is turned into the
channel of war, and the people, charmed and duped with the sounds of LIBERTY
and EQUALITY, are governed by the guilotine and thesword.

THIS horrid picture of Frenchmen, at home, is exceeded by nothing, except that
which their conduct exhibits abroad. To support and pay their vast armies, and
to satiate their own unbounded lusts, the Directory are driving their
depredations and conquests to every point their mad hopes can carry them. They
approach with the Siren voice of philanthrophy, announcing their designs to
emancipate and regenerate: but their meaning is to divide and conquer;
sacrifice and plunder! That these are their motives, Holland, Venice, with
several other states of Italy, Genoa, and Switzerland, stand, this day, at
once, sad monuments of testimony, and flaming beacons of admonition to an
astonished world. In the fate of these nations, we read in letters of blood,
the character and politics of France. Let us, in imagination, if imagination
can sustain the scene, for a moment follow the French into Switzerland. In this
garden of Eurupe, we see a people industrious, free, contented with their
government, and nationally happy. We see the subtle emissaries of France enter
this nation: we see them scatter jacobinic poison: we see the Helvetic body
convulsed with revolutionary paroxisms: thus weakened to the awful crisis, we
see the unprincipled Armies of the Directory, thirsting for conquest and
plunder, rushing upon them: we see them an easy victim, robbed of their wealth,
and their country ravaged; their innocent women falling a sacrifice, and the
Alps reddening with human blood. We see Switzerland a subjected, tributary
province of France, awed to obedience by a powerful army of Frenchmen in the
heart of the country. Can a freeborn American, who knows the value of LIBERTY
and INDEPENDENCE, view a spectacle like this, and not feel his heart throb with
a noble indignity: address the throne of heaven for suffering humanity; and go,
and reexamine his trusty sword?

BUT if we come nearer home, we shall not only know, but realize the views of
the Directory. Early in the European contest, did that great and prudent man,
the immortal WASHINGTON, as Father of his country, assume for her a neutral
position. To hold this position, was the policy and anxious study of our
government. While this policy secured to us the peace and friendship of other
nations, France is determined on evil. Our country swarmed with Frenchmen,
practicing their diabolic skill of disorganization; our seas are covered with
their pickaroons, and commerce falls a sacrifice to their piracies. Government
address the Directory by their ambassadors of peace; wish for a fair
explanation of existing difficulties, and offer to throw into their power every
advantage in our trade, which any other nation possessed; the negation of
which, had been the pretext for their cruel depredations. Our ambassadors of
peace are repeatedly rejected and insulted. Under these circumstances, what
shall independent Americans do? Shall they turn Frenchmen, sacrifice their
religion and government, and, in alliance with them, in opposition to heaven
and earth, rush upon the wild ocean of revolution? Or, what is preferable,
shall they become a humble tributary province? No, my Countrymen, we know too
well our privileges and strength for humiliation like this. Shall we then call
our shipping from the ocean, and lock them safe in our ports? Suppose it done,
and view the consequence. We now see millions and millions of our hard-earnt
wealth rotting upon our shores. Instead of ten-thousand joyous streamers
ornamenting our coasts and rejoicing the heart of the mariner, our numerous
harbors exhibit the dreary prospect of a desolated forest. We see our country
deprived of many of the comforts of life; our numerous and flourishing cities
at once begin to decay; thousands and thousands of citizens thrown out of
business, and reduced to poverty; failures multiplying, and our revenues
decreasing. Presented with this scene of distress, we have to consider, that
the life and property of every citizen have an equal claim upon government for
protection, and that the whole community is bound to defend every part and
member of itself. Why then would we thus see our whole country vastly injured,
and a large body of our worthy citizens plunged into the greatest distress?
Why, simply, because we are afraid of Frenchmen! The honor and dignity of the
United States will not be tarnished with injustice and cowardice like this.

Our government, actuated by sentiments of duty, and the true principles of
LIBERTY and INDEPENDENCE, nothing doubting of the same principles, in the great
body of the nation, adopt a system of measures for security and defense. French
incendiaries are ordered from our country; seditious practices restrained; all
intercourse with France suspended; a navy thrown upon our seas, and a
provisional army put in a train. Illustrious measures! worthy of an ADAMS,
becoming Americans, and terrible to Frenchmen. By these the dividers of our
nation, and the infesters of our commerce escape from our coasts, and our
commerce rises; the Directory lower their tone; the United States gain great
honor abroad, and increasing union and advantage at home. Shall we censure our
government for measures like these, with their importance and happy influence
staring us in the face, and revolt at the necessary subsidy? Ye sacred
principles of INDEPENDENCE forbid it! Forbid it humanity, virtue! Heaven forbid
it! Instead of weakening the operation of these salutary measures, and
encouraging the views of foreign enemies, who watch for our halting, by
scandalizing our government and spreading dissatisfaction, we are, on this
auspicious day, most powerfully admonished to come forward upon the ground of
INDEPENDENCE and defense, heart and hand united. Divided we fall; but on this
ground united, with an ADAMS in the Cabinet, and a WASHINGTON in the Field, we
will, under the wing of Heaven, abide firm as the eternal rocks, biding
defiance to all the storms and thunders of the eastern hemisphere.

WHEN we thus cast our eyes over the vast scene of our nation's history,
nothing more entirely interests our hearts, and more powerfully addresses our
patriotism, than the illustrious characters it has exhibited in every act.
While gratitude embalms their memory in our hearts, be excited to imitate their
shining virtues, and, like them, to step forward in the glorious cause of our
Country, Independence, and Posterity. Among this countless band of patriots,
who reflect high honor upon our country, and human nature, the character of a
SUMNER arrests our hearts, while his recent death floods our eyes! While
mildness and dignity rested upon his countenance, magnanimity and philanthropy
reigned within, at once commanding our respect and our love. With a character
unmaculated from earliest youth; an ardent lover and active promoter of order
and literature; a friend to his country; a firm believer of christianity, and
an ornament of the church, he early commended the notice and confidence of a
grateful people. He reached the summit of honor, ere he reached the meridian
of life. Formed to decide and to command, we hardly know which to venerate
most, either Judge or Governor SUMNER. While cruel death has torn him from our
embraces and the chair of state, our charity follows him to the skies, near the
throne of GOD, reaping congenial joys with the christian patriots of his
country, who have gone before him. Let his shining example touch our mourning
hearts. Let us honor his memory by imitating his virtues.

WE live, my Friends, in an age of revolution and disorganization; not only in
government, but in education, morality and religion. France, a restless
fountain of all impurities, that the objects of her prey might become an easy
sacrifice, is deluging the world, not only with revolutionary factions, but
with licentious notions of Equality, destructive of all subordination, the
foundation stone of education and, what is still more to be dreaded, with Deism
and even Atheism. Not only their politics, but their equality and inequality,
have crossed the Atlantic. These principles are not only alienatingour people
from their ^^^^^^ment, but are secretly stealing into our ho^^^ and our
seminaries; engendering dissatisfaction and disorder: also depredating the holy
Sabbath of (...) fathers, the grand bulwark of morality and religion, and
unhinging the faith of many, and alienating their minds from their SAVIOR and
GOD. Such is the tendency of the boasted principles of the age of reason the
French philosophy; infinitely more terrible and more to be guarded against than
all the power of their arms. Shall those who are honored with the holy style
of christians, who glory in the piety of their Ancestors, and the high moral
privileges of their country, view France with a careless eye? Shall they even
give her the voice of (...), to the hazard, not of our government only, but of
our holy religion? Do we revoit at those false ideas of liberty and equality,
calculated to spread disorder through our houses, our schools, and our country?
Do we shudder at infidelity, which erases from the heart every principle of
virtue, opens every possible avenue to vice, and draws down the judgments of
heaven upon a nation? then let us (...), zealously oppose (...) men and French
philosophy; and rejoice at (...) ^^^^eration of the Alien Law, and the
annihilati^^ (...) all intercourse and connection with France.

Do we love and honor (...) memory of our Forefathers: do we love order and
(...) holy religion of ^^^lested (...): do (...) families, and anxiously pray
for the prosp^^^^ (...) rising glory of succeeding ages of posterity? (...) let
us rouse our every exertion to oppose the aw^^^ torrent of licentiousness that
is flowing acrose the Atlantic. To accommodate the Apostle's nerv^^ ^^yle, we
have my Countrymen, to Wrestle not ^^^inst flesh and blood, but against
principalities (...) against powers, against the rulers of the dar^^^ (...)
this world, against spiritual wickedness. (...) ^^mined then by all that is
good and great, (...) the whole armor of GOD that we may (...) to stand
against the wiles of the Devil.

FINIS

