TRAVELS OF JONAS HANWAY, ESQUIRE. THROUGH RUSSIA INTO PERSIA, AND AFTERWADS
THROUGH RUSSIA, GERMANY, and HOLLAND.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH and JAMES CRUKSHANK, No. 87,
HIGH STREET.

TRAVELS OF JONAS HANWAY, ESQUIRE.
JONAS HANWAY, Esquire. so distinguished as a philanthropist and a real Christian,
was born at Portsmouth on the 12th of August, 1712. His father was an naval
officer; but losing his life at an early age by an accident, the care of
rearing and educating the family devolved on the mother, who put Jonas to
school in London, where he acquired such branches of learning as might qualify
him for a commercial life, and made some proficiency in Latin.

At the age of seventeen, he was bound apprentice to a merchant in Lisbon,
where he served his time with great credit to himself and satisfaction to his
master Soon after he returned to London, and accepted the offer of a
partnership in the house of Dingly, a merchant at Petersburgh, who was engaged
in a Persian trade through Russia.

In this capacity he performed the travels which form the subject of the
following pages. His work early obtained celebrity; and the character of the
man gave the stamp of authenticity to his descriptions, and of solidity to his
remarks.

Mr. Hanway, having closed his commercial engagements, took up his residence in
London, where he employed his time in literary pursuits, and in the far more
valuable occupations, of disinterested benevolence and public-spirited services.

It is impossible to follow him through all his charitable and praiseworthy
undertakings. His country and mankind were bettered by his various exertions in
their behalf; and he lived to reap the applause that was due to him. Honored
and respected, he closed this transitory life on the 5th of September, 1786, in
the seventy-fifth year of his age.

We now proceed to his travels. In April 1743, he embarked from the port of
London for Riga. On his arrival there, about the end of May, he was carried
prisoner to the Castle of Dwenamund, because he had come without a regular
passport, though it was not customary to carry one. However, having letters of
recommendation from the Russian ambassador, at the court of London, to the
great chancellor of the empire, he was soon liberated.

He found the weather here as hot as it generally is in Portugal; for the sun,
at this season, sinking below the horizon only for three or four hours, neither
the earth nor the air had time to cool.

Mr. Hanway was received with great kindness by the British factors at Riga;
but as a war at this time subsisted between the Swedes and Russians, the
governor had received express orders to suffer no one to proceed to Petersburgh
without the particular permission of the court. This being at length procured,
Mr. Hanway provided himself with a sleeping wagon, which is made of leather
and hung upon braces, and in this manner he rode post to the capital.

Riga was founded about the year 1190, when this country first embraced
Christianity. It is the metropolis of Livonia, and was taken from the Swedes by
Peter the Great in 1713. The chief commodities here are masts, timber, flax,
and hemp, with which a considerable number of ships are annually laden. The
houses are built with steep roofs, and are seldom above two stories high. The
German language is generally spoken here.

Having passed through several inconsiderable places, Mr. Hanway arrived at
Narva, the capital of Esthonia, famous for the battle fought here in 1700, when
one hundred thousand Russians fled before a handful of Swedes. This city stands
on a rising ground, and is clean and well fortified, though not large. Its
trade chiefly consists in hemp and timber.

Our author reached Petersburgh on the 10th of June, and was much pleased with
the general aspect of the city. Soon after his arrival here, it was judged
expedient that one of the partners, in the commercial house to which he
belonged, should proceed to Porsia; and the intimation he received of the
distracted situation of that country did not deter him from offering his
services, which were accepted.

Having obtained a passport from the court of Russia, he provided a sleeping
wagon, for himself, a second for his clerk, and a third for his baggage. He
was also attended by a Russian servant, a Tartar boy, and a soldier; and took
upon him the charge of thirty-seven bales of English cloth, which was sent
forward on the 1st of September, and on the 10th, Mr. Hanway followed it.

In two days he reached the river Volcoff, where the ferry-man, discovering he
was a merchant began to be insolent; for the Russian boors entertain no high
respect for the commercial character. The soldier, however, brought the fellow
to submission, by exercising his cane, and our traveller was carried over in
safety.

On the 13th, one of the wagons stuck in a morass, which obliged him to spend
the night in that situation Next day they reached Baanitz, near Novogorod,
where they found the weather mild, and the roads open and pleasant. Provisions
were so cheap, that beef might be purchased for three farthings a pound, and
matton and pork in proportion.

The 15th brought them to Valdal, the inhabitants of which are chiefly Poles,
who were taken prisoners in former wars; but the distinction between them and
the original natives is almost lost. The dress of the women, however, is nearer
than the generality of the Russian peasants; but they greatly lessen the effect
of their personal charms by paint and giddiness.

The surrounding country is very pleasant; and from the many love songs, which
are here the delight of the Russians, it might be supposed that Venus had once
fixed her residence here; but the refined pleasures are scarcely known among
the present race.

The next day, Mr. Hanway overtook his carravan at Twere, and fearing that he
might not be able to reach Persia so soon as he intended, he ordered an
additional horse to be put to each carriage.

The Russian conveyances for merchandise are about ten feet long and three
broad, principally composed of two strong poles, supported by four slight
wheels, nearly of an equal height. The bales are laid on a thick mat, and over
them are placed other mats, with an outward covering of raw cow hides.

Twere is a very ancient city, seated on the Twersa, which runs into the Volga*
It is a great rendezvous for merchants, who carry on their traffic along the
banks of the last-mentioned river.

On the 20th, Mr. Hanway arrived at Moscow, the ancient metropolis of the
Russian empire.

Among other grand projects of Peter the Great, was a road, to extend from
Petersburgh to Moscow in a direct line, for the space of seven hundred and
thirty-four versts, or four hundred and eighty-seven English miles. This is in
part executed, over such impediments as would have terrified a common genious.
For about one hundred and fifty versts, it is wholly made of wood, laid over
morasses, till then thought impassable.

Moscow stands in 55 degrees. 40 min. north latitude, and is built after the
eastern manner, having few regular steets, but many gardens mixed with the
houses. It is sixteen English miles in circumference; and the river Moskwa
meandering through it, adds greatly to its beauty and convenience,

The imperial palace is chiefly remarkable for its thirty chapels, and its
pendant garden. The number of churches and chapels in this city almost exceeds
credibility. They are said to amount to one thousand eight hundred, but many of
them are very mean.

The great bell of Moscow is at once a monument of art and folly. It weighs
four hundred and forty-three thousand seven hundred and seventy-two pounds, and
was cast in the reign of the late empress Anne; but the beam on which it hung
being burnt, it fell to the ground, and suffered considerable damage.

This city is the general residence of the Russian nobility, who are not
obliged to follow the court; and it contains the chief merchants and
manufacturers of the empire. The dreadful conflagrations which have repeatedly
happened here, and the removal of the court, have united to diminish the
grandeur and extent of this place; and now there is scarcely accommodations for
the imperial retinue, without distressing the people.

Having made the requisite preparations, on the 24th of September, Mr. Hanway
left Moscow, and passed through a picturesque and pleasant country, till he
arived at Perislawl, where he found himself in another climate: for the harvest
here was not yet gathered in. The prospects are delightful, and the soil is
well watered, but the inhabitants exhibit proofs of indigence and distress.

Traversing a pleasant country by good roads, on the 1st of October he entered
the Step, where he overtook a caravan, consisting of forty loads of European
goods, belonging to Armenian merchants Next day he arrived at Novochoperskaja,
the Russian frontier toward the Don Cossacks, which is indifferently
fortified, and is almost hid in a grove of oaks. The adjacent country is very
delightful, and the traveling commodious.

In the Cossack towns, the people appeared neat in their persons and
comfortably clothed. The woman were gay and comely; they wore a high cap, with
two points, in the form of a crescent; and their shifts were ornamented with
red crosses.

In traveling through the Cossack country for three days, Mr Hanway saw little
more than land and sky, except some woods which covered the mountains to the
eastward. At length they arrived at Grigoriskoi which, forms a kind of
peninsula. Here the inhabitants catch vast numbers of craw-fish, and export the
eyes for medicinal purposes. They dwell in oaken huts, and marry very young.
Our author saw a boy of fifteen contracted to a girl of the same age.

On the morning of the 9th, they arrived under the lines that are thrown up
from the Don to the Volga, for the distance of fifty versts. The fosse is about
sixteen feet deep, and a mound of earth rises to the height of twenty feet,
with a strong wooden rail near the top. At certain distances are placed
sentry-boxes, from which the guard can communicate an alarm to the chief
garrison at Zaritzen, which terminates the line on the western bank of the
Volga. On this spot Peter I intended to join the Don with the Volga, and this
canal was actually begun for that purpose; but it now serves as a defense
against the incursions of the Tartars on that side

The Kuban Tartars were once very formidable; but they are now kept in
subjection. These people made their appearance in small parties. In a deep
valley, near Zaritzen, which stands on a high bank of the Volga, was an
encampment of Calmuck Tartars. They have the same turn of features with the
Chinese; but are fierce and savage. Their arms are bows and arrows; and they
feed on the flesh of horses, camels, dromedaries, and almost whatever falls in
their way. They throw their dead to the dogs; and if six, or more, feast on the
corpse, they esteem it honorable to the defunct. What a singular and barbarous
idea!

They pay religious adoration to little wooden images, which they caress when
they are pleased, but beat and ill-treat when the weather is unfavourable, or
fortune frowns on them.

Our traveller now set about procuring a vessel to carry his goods to Astracan,
and found one, which he purchased for forty roubles or ten pounds. This bark,
in her materials and equipment, was one of the most crazy and indifferent that
was ever trusted with such a valuable cargo, particularly in such a dangerous
navigation; but there was no alternative -- a better was not to be procured.

Having given the necessary instructions with regard to the conveyance of the
goods, he prepared for his own voyage down the Volga, by engaging, for himself
and attendants, two boats, each navigated by five men, with the addition of six
soldiers, by way of protection. This precaution was requisite, as the Volga is
frequently infested with pirates, who make use of row-boats, that carry from
twenty to thirty hands, and are provided with firearms. These marauders appear
chiefly in the spring, when the river overflows its banks, and facilitates
their escape, should they meet with resistance. They seldom fail to murder, as
well as rob, those whom they can overpower; but if taken, they meet with the
most exemplary punishment, which, cruel as it is, is not always sufficient to
deter the rest of the gang.

The Russian soldiers are encouraged to take them alive; when they are put on a
float, wherein a gallows is erected, armed, with iron hooks; and the wretched
pirates, being suspended on them by the ribs, with a label over their heads
signifying their crime, are launched on the stream, and writhe in agonies
inexpressible till death releases them. It is a capital offense to give them
the least relief, or even to dispatch them by a less painful death.

It is reported, that one of these miscreants found means to disengage himself
from the hook, and, though naked and faint with the loss of blood, he got
ashore, when the first object he saw being a poor shepherd, he knocked him on
the head with a stone, in order to obtain his clothes. Such is the lamentable
depravity of some natures, that no danger can intimidate them, no example,
however dreadful, can reclaim them!

On the 14th of October, Mr. Hanway put off from shore, and sailing down the
river, he saw several water fowl, larger than swans, which the Russians call
Dika Baba, or the wild old woman. They live on fish; and their fat is esteemed
a specific in aches and bruises.

During their progress, the weather proved calm and the current moderate. In
many places the banks were high and undermined; in others they found a flat
shore of various extent.

On the 17th they stopped at Chernoyare, about half way from Zaritzen to
Astracan, from which it is distant two hundred versts. This place has some
fortifications, and carries on a considerable trade, with the surrounding
Tartar nations. Next night they had a providential escape from being lost; and
what enhanced their gratitude for their deliverance, was the sight of several
wrecks cast on the shore, near the spot of their danger.

On the 19th, he reached Astracan, where he was obliged to wait for a vessel,
commanded by Captain Woodroofe, which was to convey him to Persia; and employed
the interval in viewing this city and its environs.

Astracan is the metropolis of a province of the same name, and stands in 47
degrees. north latitude, within the limits of Asia, in an island about sixty
English miles from the Caspian Sea. It contains about seventy thousand
inhabitants, of various nations, whose different manners and customs exhibit an
epitome of Asia. It is surrounded by an old brick wall, and is well garrisoned
by six regiments of Russian troops. The houses are of wood, and most of them
very mean. The upper part of the town commands a view of the Volga, which is
here near three miles broad, and, from its occasional inundations, is said to
render the air insalubrious, and to bring on various diseases.

Many gardens and orchards surround Astracan; and grapes are carried from
thence, twice a week, to the court of Petersburgh, though the distance is not
less than one thousand two hundred English miles* The melons are very good; but
though the grapes are in such high request, the wine of this country is very
indifferent.

About ten miles below Astracan is the small island of Bosmakoff, remarkable
for its large storehouses of salt, from whence an immense extent of counrry is
supplied. In this place likewise are very capital fisheries, particularly of
sturgeon, beluga, and assorta.

This country is much infested with locusts, which sometimes appear in such
swarms that they darken the sky, and wherever they alight, leave not a blade of
vegitation. Captain Woodroofe informed our author, that once sailing down the
Volga, a cloud of these insects had fallen into the river, and obstructed the
motion of the boat for many fathoms together.

The trade of Astracan consists in red leather, linen and woollen cloths, the
greatest part of which is exported to Persia, from whence they receive silks,
cottons, and drugs, particularly rhubarb. The last article is engrossed by the
government, and private persons are prohibited from dealing in it, on pain of
death.

While Mr Hanway was here, the governor invited him to a feast at which were
nearly three hundred dishes, which gave him an opportunity of seeing a singular
specimen of Russian intemperance, in drinking goblets of cherry-brandy to
excess. This feast was occasioned by the birth of the governor's
granddaughter; and each of the guests, made a present to the mother, according
to his rank and abilities. In the opinion of our author, this is an ingenious
way of levying contributions on merchants and others; and though less delicate
than some of our own usages, is at least as honest and creditable.

For several miles round the city wherever the soil will admit of cultivation,
are settlements of the Crim Tartars, a very civil and industrious people,
subject to Russia. They raise goods crops of manna, oats, and watermelons; but
their chief riches consist in their wives and children, their sheep, horses,
and cattle.

When a daughter becomes marriageable, they cover her tent with white linen,
tie a painted cloth on the top with red strings, and place by the side a
painted wagon, which is to be her dowery. This is a signal for those who want
a wife, and the girl is generally disposed of to him who offers her father the
most valuable present.

On the 8th of November Mr Hanway left Astracan under convoy of the governor's
barge, with twelve grenadiers, and slept the first night near a Calmuck
settlement, composed of circular tents about twelve feet high and fifteen yards
in circumference. In the center of the tent they make a fire, and the smoke
issues out by a vent at top.

These people are miserably poor, and subsist all the year round on fish, which
they catch in the Volga. They prefer living on the banks of that stream, where
the flags and rushes grow to a great height, and assist to shelter them from
the severity of the winter's cold.

At the efflux of the Volga are numerous small islands, and the whole scene
appears wild and inhospitable. Arriving at Terkie, Mr. Hanway embarked on board
an English ship, the Empress of Russia, pleased to exchange his crazy bark for
a vessel of good oak. It gave no less delight to see the British flag, and to
receive the attentions of his countrymen.

On the 3d of December, having anchored in Langarood Bay, he sent to Mr. Elton,
a British factor, to inform him of his arrival, when that gentleman waited on
him, and conducted him to the shore, where he gave him a cordial reception.

Mr. Elton's habitation at Langarood, was eight English miles from the sea, in
the midst of woods, surrounded by marshes, where the roads were almost
impassable. This situation naturally made the place very unwholesome

Here Mr. Hanway spent several days in conversing about the Caspian trade. It
appeared that Mr. Elton was actually engaged in building ships for the shah, as
had been reported in Russia; and Mr. Hanway took occasion to point out his
apprehensions of the danger that might arise to their trade and settlement in
Russia, in consequence of his engagements with that prince.

One great inducement to open the Caspian trade, was the hope of establishing a
new branch of commerce from Astrabad to Mesched, from whence Mr. Elton thought
it practicable to extend it to the northern cities of the Mogul's empire. To
attempt the execution of this design fell to Mr. Hanway's lot. He had brought
with him goods to the value of five thousand pounds, for which he found no
market in this country; and though the shah had made an express decree for his
safe conduct in all parts of his dominions, he was under considerable
apprehensions, till he found that, in case of danger, he might obtain a guard
of soldiers.

Having taken leave of Mr. Elton, our traveller got on ship board, and they
directed their course for Astrabad, where they arrived on the 18th of December
The sea here, as in other parts of the Caspian, makes great inroads on the
land, so that in many places, trees lie on the shore.

The ship having cast anchor, Mr Hanway sent an Armenian servant to know if he
might land his goods in security; but he soon returned without any information.
Instantly they saw many fires lighted, the signal of alarm; for, it seems, the
natives took them for pirates, and had put themselves on the defensive.

Two days after, Mr. Hanway went on shore, and having satisfied the natives
that he was come on a friendly errand, they received him kindly, and conducted
him and his attendants to a small village, the way to which lay through thick
woods and winding paths.

Having dispatched his Armenian interpreter to Mahomet Zaman Beg, the governor
of Astrabad, with his compliments, that chief returned him an assurance of his
protection, and cautioned him against putting any confidence in the natives on
the coast. A few days after he received a visit from Nazeer Aga, a Persian
officer attended by a grave old man named Myrza, who had a high reputation for
wisdom. The former had been recommended to Mr. Hanway as a person of great
probity; and on this occasion he made him offer of his house at Astrabad, which
our author accepted with grateful thanks.

About this time the vessel narrowly escaped being burnt, from the accidental
conflagration of a quantity of raw cotton, which was with difficulty
extinguished with little damage, after it had nearly reached the powder chest.
Same night their alarm was renewed by the mountains appearing in a blaze, which
fire was intentionally kindled to destroy the insects; but, spreading by the
wind and the long-continued drought, it made such progress, that the butter in
the ship was melted by its heat, and the natives were obliged to labor with
all their might to divert its course from their villages.

On the 2d of January 1744, Mr. Hanway pitched his tent on the shore, and made
preparation for conveying the goods to the city. That day they were entertained
with extempore songs, dances, and congratulations by the natives; and in the
evening they witnessed their devotions. Next morning Myrza's brother and two
sons brought horses for Mr. Hanway, and in a few hours they reached the city.

The succeeding day our author waited on the governor, and made him a present
of several cuts of broad cloth and sugar-loaves. He was attended by several
persons of distinction in the city, and behaved with great condescension,
telling Mr. Hanway that he was welcome to Persia, and that the city of Astrabad
was now at his disposal. For this high-strained compliment, our traveller
returned due acknowledgments, and expressed the grateful sense he felt of his
kindness and protection.

Mr. Hanway, who was about to become the dupe of his own integrity and want of
suspicion, now waited on Nazeer Aga, of whose politeness he had received some
signal proofs. He was far advanced in years; but while his age and his white
beard rendered his appearance venerable, his manly cheerful manner made his
company perfectly agreeable. This person had been the companion of Nadir, when
he was no more than the chief of a party of robbers in the neighboring
mountains; but seemed too honest and unassuming for a favorite; yet those
qualities had, perhaps, been his safeguard through life. The old man received
Mr Hanway with many tokens of good will, and sent for some master carriers to
agree about conveying his caravan to Mesched. Here our traveller first received
an impression of the equivocating disposition of the Persians; he found it
impossible to fix them to any thing, and therefore took his leave for that time.

A day or two after, several of the principal persons of the place came to pay
their respects to Mr. Hanway. Most of them had an air of importance, and spoke
little; but after sitting and smoking the caallean, a mode of using tobacco
through water, for a few minutes, they rose and took their leave.

The difficulties and delays made by the carriers gave him great vexation, and
some of the townsmen frequently importuned him to open his bales there, and
sell them what they wanted. To this proposal he did not think it prudent to
accede; but to keep them in good humor, he made the most considerable persons
presents of cloth enough to make a ^^at.

At length, on the persuasion of Nageer Aga, though contrary to his own
sentiments, he suffered the carriers to set out with ten loaded camels, two or
three days before he was to follow them with the horses, and appointed a place
of rendezvous, on the other side of the mountains.

These being dispatched, Mr. Hanway made a visit to the governor, who appeared
agitated and confounded. He pretended to be employed in providing horses to
convey part of the king's treasure to Casbin, which prevented him from
accommodating our traveller with soldiers and horses as he wished. This
intelligence extremely startled him, but fortunately for his peace, he was at
this time ignorant of the real extent of his unhappiness.

Determined to follow the caravan immediately, he prepared to set out; but
while he was giving the necessary orders, Nazeer Aga told him this was not a
lucky hour, and that he must not depart. Our author expressed his reliance on a
good Providence who ordered all events, and that all hours were the same to
him. However, the catastrophe was now ripe. Scarcely had Nazeer Aga left him,
when the hoarse sound of trumpets was heard to call in the neighboring
inhabitants, the shops were ordered to be shut, and the townsmen to man the
walls.

Mr. Hanway now began to recollect many incidents which assisted to develope
the plot. Nazeer Aga advised him to send or his ship, as they were all in
extreme danger from a rebellion which had broken out in the vicinity of the
city; but the vessel had sailed to another port; and he found that no one was
allowed to leave the city; so that the loads of cloth he had sent forward were
devoted to the insurgents without opposition.

It now appeared that Mahomet Hassan Beg, who had left the city some days
before, had put himself at the head of a party Khajars and Turcoman Tartars,
with an avowed intention of seizing the shah's treasure, and particularly our
traveller's caravan.

The only consolation that Nazeer Aga could now give Mr. Hanway, was the
assurance, that while he lived, he should be secured from personal danger. The
respect which had always been shown by the chief of the insurgents to this old
man, induced him to venture himself among them; but he used his eloquence and
influence in vain to recall them to their duty, though they suffered him to
return to the city.

A besieged city, with a faithless and weak garrison, was a new scene to Mr.
Hanway; and the idea he had formed of the barbarity of the Turcoman Tartars
increased the gloom inseparable from his situation. His attendants would have
persuaded him to assume the Persian dress, but he chose to remain without
disguise. The governor, however, and Nazeer Aga escaped by night in the habit
of peasants, and left the townsmen to take c^^e of themselves.

Those who had not engaged in the rebellion now cursed our traveller as the
cause of their distress, alleging that it was his valuable goods that had
tempted the insurrection.

But he could not reproach himself with having given any just cause of offense
to any one; and patiently waited the event. The town was surrendered on the
17th, and the king's treasure being seized, the general and his attentendants
next visited Mr. Hanway, who, having collected his men into one room, sent a
Tartar boy, who spoke the Turkish language, to introduce those hostile guests,
and to tell them that he entreated humanity.

They assured him of personal security, and that as soon as the government was
settled, his goods should be paid for; demanding at the same time to know where
they were lodged, and asking for his purse, which they returned, after counting
the money.

It was now apparent on what principles Myrza Mahomet had acted. He was in the
secret of the rebellion at the time he invited Mr Hanway to the city, and had
brought him there as a victim, devoted to ruin; but having nothing more than
his life to lose, he dessembled the perfidy he had experienced, and endeavored
to secure the protection of Baba Sadoc, the new governor of the city, to whom
he made a present of a piece of rich silk that he had found means to secret.

His purfe, however, was again demanded, and he was obliged to give it up.
Indeed he found that the Turcomans were not satisfied with his spoils; they
proposed to Mahomet Khan Beg to have him and his attendants given up as slaves;
and fearing lest he should be carried away by those barbarians, into their own
country, he resolved to effect his escape.

The victors soon quarrelled about the plunder, and an order was issued that no
one should pass the gates without the knowledge of Mahomet Hassen Beg. However,
Mr. Hanway having given the governor a regular account of the real value of the
goods, the better to carry on the farce, was presented with a bill for the
amount, payable as soon as the new order of affairs was settled. The governor
also directed that a guard and horses should be provided for him and his
attendants.

Accordingly, on the 24th of January, they took their leave of the city or
Astrabad, accompanied by Myrza his brothers, and two sons. At the end of the
first day's journey, one of Myrza's brothers offered to conduct Mr. Hanway to a
house belonging to him in the adjacent mountain, which scheme he resolutely
declined; and in this he was confirmed by the carriers, who expressed their
apprehensions for his safety, if he complied.

It seems this villian supposed our traveller was still possessed of some
concealed property, and having got him in his power, was determined to make use
of the opportunity which presented itself of stripping (...) of every thing.
Finding he could (...) i^vi^gle him by false pretenses, he scrupled not to
declare, that he would not suffer him to proceed a mile farther, unless he left
his baggage, as he could not answer for his safety.

This crafty veteran, whose perfidiousness was exceeded by nothing but his
hypocrisy, was playing a deep game. If the rebellion succeeded, he intended to
make sure of the baggage; if it failed, be wished to have the merit of pleading
his loyalty, by preserving it for the (...). Mr. Hanway saw himself wholly at
his mercy, and therefore, after having concealed every thing that was portable,
he delivered up the rest to him.

Next day, our author advanced with his Company about twenty English miles, and
took up his lodgings in the open fields. Finding that his conductors sowed
rebellion wherever they came, as the government of the shah was become very
unpopular, from his tyranny and exactions, he determined to part with them as
soon as possible. They had engaged to carry him to Balfrush, the capital of
Mazandera; but hearing that the admiral of the coast, Mahomet Khan, was raising
forces to check the progress of the revolters, they were intimidated from
proceeding to the place of their destination, and left him on the sea coast,
before he knew how to manage without their services.

After a very perilous navigation, he providentially got safe to Meschedizar,
and soon after waited on the admiral of the coast, who congratulated him on his
escape with life, and joined in the assurances which he had received from the
merchants at Balfrush, that the shah would make him a compensation for his
losses. This served to revive his dejected spirits; but next day, the rebels
having advanced within a few miles of the city, and the admiral painting the
dangers of his own situation, as he neither was in a condition to give battle,
nor dared to retreat for fear of his master's displeasure, Mr. Hanway saw there
was no time to be lost, and escaped by one gate as the Tartars entered by
another.

The distresses he now underwent would be painful to relate. Hunger, cold,
fatigue, and the most imminent danger surrounded him; but after various
adventures, he had the good fortune to arrive at Langarood, which he had left
seven weeks before; and was received by Mr. Elton with open arms, who rejoiced
at his having escaped with liberty and life.

Mr Hanway had been twenty three days in reaching this place, from the time he
left Astrabad; and for sixteen days he had not taken off his boots, nor enjoyed
a moment's comfortable repose. His legs and feet were much swelled and bruised;
and he was in want of every necessary.

Being now in safety himself, his cares returned for his attendants, whom he
had been obliged to abandon to their fate. Mr. Elton immediately sent servants
and horses in quest of them, and if the disasters which befell Mr. Hanway
himself were great, the calamities which Mr. Hogg, his clerk, had been doomed
to suffer, infinitely surpassed them. This unfortunate man was almost expiring
of a consumption, when he was brought to Langarood; he had been exposed, for
three days and as many nights, to the cold and rain, without food or shelter;
he had been five times robbed, and at last stripped of his clothes, and left
almost naked; and would infallibly have perished, had he not been relieved by
the charity of some dervises, who^^ retreat in the mountains he had the good
fortune to discover.

One of the Armenian servants, named Matteuse, and his companions, did not
return till three weeks after, and had the good fortune to escape many of those
hardship^* Sadoc Aga had given them a passport, the dictation of which will
give a pretty good idea of the idiom of the oriental languages, as well as of
Persian arrogance. "To the victorious armies be it known, that Matt^use, the
Armenian is here. Let him not be molested, but live under our shadow."

Being recovered from his fatigues, Mr. Hanway set out for Reshd, and after
traveling seven miles, arrived at Lahijan, which is seated on an eminence, and
is reckoned the most healthy town in the province of Ghilan. The rains had
filled a large flat with water, in the center of which stood (...) grove on a
moderate elevation, which serve^ to beautify the prospect, and to render it as
delightful as the season would permit.

Here he was received by Hadjee Zamon, Hadjee, or Sacred, is a title given to
all those who have made a pilgrimage to Mecca
a man of sense and authority, who loudly complained of the inhumanity of the
shah and his officers. Supper being brought in, a servant presented a basin of
water and a towel to the guests, to wash and dry their hands with; and then a
kind of tea-board was set before each, covered with a plate of pleo, in which
was a small quantity of mineed meat mixed up with fruits and spices. Plates of
comfits, sherbet, and other weak liquors, were also served up. Every viand in
this country is so prepared, that it may be eaten with the fingers; to cut
dressed meat is reckoned an abomination.

Supper being finished, warm water was brought in to wash with, and then the
conversation was resumed. This was carried on with great decency and attention
to the sentiments of the aged. It is not the richest man who is here regarded,
but he who is most esteemed for wisdom and experience.

Next morning our traveller set forward to Reshd, well pleased with his last
night's entertainment; and the following day arrived at that city, where he had
the pleasure to be visited by two English gentlemen, and three French
missionaries. Soon after, he paid a visit of ceremony to Ordo Kouli Beg,
governor of the province, who received him with much politeness, and ordered a
chair to be set for him; a mark of attention not often paid in this country,
where European fashions are little regarded. The apartment was full of people,
seated on felts of camel's hair. After some general conversation, Mr. Hanway
related the history of his misfortunes, and soon took his leave.

Having here provided himself with clothes, arms, mules, and horses, he pursued
his journey on the 26th. In the vicinity of Reshd, are rice fields and
plantations of mulberry-trees. The mountains, however, are composed of naked
rocks, piled on each other to a great height, and the only fertility is in the
vales.

On the 28th they passed the river Kizilazan in canoes, and swam over the
horses and mules; but the rapidity of the stream rendered this very dangerous.
As they ascended the mountains, they found the climate much altered; and the
wind blowing fresh, they were obliged to dismount and lead their cattle along
the narrow paths among the precipices. The rocks here almost rose perpendicular
from the river.

Continuing their progress over the mountains, on the 1st of March they came to
the great plain of Casbin, then covered deep in snow, which reflected such
brightness from its surface as painfully affected the organs of sight. The
villages in this plain are built in such a manner, that half the tenement is
under the surface of the earth, and the roof is raised into a cone, the better
to carry off the snow. That night they lodged in a ruined stable; and next day
resumed their journey before sun rising.

When Mr. Hanway arrived at Cast in, he waited on Hadjee Abdulcrim, the
principal merchant in the town, who provided him with a handsome lodging, and
told him that it was impossible to proceed farther at present, on an account of
the snow.

The houses of Casbin are almost wholly subterraneous, and many of the gardens
are below the level of the adjacent lands, to facilitate the conveyance of
water to them. In general they build with unburnt brick, and use a strong
cement of lime. Their habitations are flat roofed, and consist of two divisions
within an enclosure of mud. In the exterior court is a spacious room called the
Aviam, open on one side, and supported by pillars, where the men dispatch their
business; and behind this is the haram, or women's apartment. Niches in the
walls supply the place of tables. The floors are covered with large carpets,
and large pieces of felt are used by way of cushions.

Mr. Hanway was handsomely entertained by the Hadjee on the 3d of March. His
host enquiring how he liked Persia, our traveller told him the disasters he had
met with; when he received the comfortable assurance, that the shah would do
him justice; but gave a pathetic description of the misery to which the country
was reduced; and instanced Casbin, which was reduced from twelve thousand
houses to less than a tenth of that number. Mr. Hanway sensibly remarked, that
when the sovereign had accomplished his designs, there was reason to suppose,
he would alter his system; for that it never could be his purpose to destroy
his people, as that would be annihilating his own consequence.

In Casbin is a palace built by Nadar Shah, which Mr. Hanway visited. It has a
long avenue of lofty trees before the entrance, and is enclosed by a wall of
about a mile and a half in circumference, with only one entrance. Within this
area are four large squares, adorned with trees, fountains, and running
streams. The apartments are raised about six feet from the ground; and the
aviam, or open hall, which stands in the center, shuts in with folding doors.
The rooms are ornamented in the Italian taste, and the ceilings are embellished
with moral sentences, arranged in squares. Most of the windows are composed of
painted glass, in which the figures are drawn in proper shades, and executed
with great felicity of design.

The haram makes a magnificent appearance, and is quite separated from the
other parts of the palace, by a wall of its own. The rooms are sinely
decorated, and the whole is refreshed with fountains, and adorned with elegant
and expensive embellishments.

Near the haram is the eunuchs' apartment, remarkable only for its having but
one door. Here are likewise some old apartments built by Shah Abas, in which
are some indifferent pictures, by European artists.

The city of Casbin is fortified by a wall and turrets. It is famous in history
for having been one of the chief cities of the ancient Parthia, the residence
of many of the Persian kings, and the burial place of Hephoeston, the favorite
of Alexander the Great. However, the greatest part of this once-celebrated
place was now in ruins.

On the 11th of March the snow being chiefly dissolved, and the weather warm.
Mr. Hanway set out with a caravan, that was carrying money to Shiras, under a
guard of eight hundred Afghans. As he advanced, scarcely any thing met his view
but ruin and devastation, which was the more pitiable in a climate and soil
naturally good.

In Persia it is an established custom for the military to pillage wherever
they go, or at least to compel the natives to furnish them with whatever they
want. This hard treatment steels the hearts of the peasants against the calls
of humanity. They defend their property by barricadoing their houses, and
consider every stranger as a foe, by which means the innocent suffer, as well
as the guilty.

Mr. Hanway at length discovered that all his Persian fellow-travellers were in
the custody of a messenger. One of them who was a native of the eastern parts
of Persia, particularly attracted his notice. He was almost black; and
apprehended himself to be in considerable danger from the resentment of the
Shah. Being of a communicative disposition, and finding that our author was an
European, he freely spoke his sentiments.

"I am come from Ispahan," said he, "where I have been two years engaged in
raising forces for the shah; and, in return for my services, he has lately
extorted four thousand crowns from me, and I am now under the dread of some
other act of violence. It is no unusual thing for my master to send for a man,
in order to strangle him; and, for my part, I should be glad to compound for a
severe beating."

This prisoner endeavored to learn a prayer by heart, which, if he repeated
right in the presence of the shah, he said, it would divert his wrath. He had
also another spell, which was the repetition of ten particular letters of the
alphabet as he entered the royal tent, closing a finger at each, and keeping
his fist clenched till he came before the throne; when he was suddenly to open
his hands, and by the discharge of his magic artillery, to subdue his
sovereign's resentment.

It is astonishing to see in how many instances the Persians demonstrate the
highest superstition. Almost every motion of the body is considered as
possessed of magic power.

Sneezing is held a happy omen; and they fa^cy that falling meteors are the
blows of the angels on the heads of the devils. Cats are held in great esteem,
and dogs are proportionably detested. The Turks, however, are not behind hand
with them in superstitious folly. In the reign of Shah Abas, the grand seignior
sent to desire that he would not suffer any of his subjects to dress in green,
which color belonged to the prophet and his descendants. Shah Abas, who was a
man of an enlightened mind, returned this humorous answer: That if the grand
seignior would prevent the dogs from watering the grass in Turkey, he would
comply with his request.

On the 17th, they began to approach the camp, and already fell in with the
advanced guard. As they drew near the place where they expected to find their
doom, the fears of the Persian convoy increased, and they took leave of our
author with heavy hearts. Their conductor, on wishing them to get on quickly,
was asked, why he hastened them; "for, do thou not know," said one of them,
"that to condemned persons, every hour of life is precious?"

Mr. Hanway having sent forward his interpreter to the shah^s minister,
appointed for the reception of strangers, to receive instructions; on the 20th
pitched his tent near the royal standard, and had the satisfaction of hearing
that the rebellion of Astrabad was suppressed. But be had not been long in this
situation, before a loaded piece, accidentally going off in his tent, had very
near deprived him of life; nor was he free from apprehension of being called to
account for the danger in which this involuntary business had involved others,
particularly as it happened so near the royal residence. However, it passed
with no very serious consequences to any one.

Having paid his respects to Mustapha Khan, he was received with many marks of
civility, invited to dinner, and made comfortable, by the assurance that
justice should be done him. Meanwhile he delivered his petition into the
chancery; and had the pleasure to hear that it was believed, his majesty would
pardon the Persians who had accompanied him from Casbin, as a compliment to him.

In a few days, the royal standard was taken down, as a signal for striking the
t^nts, and the whole army moved with great regularity, and again encamped about
two leagues and a half distance.

Soon after our traveller received a decree, by which it was ordered, that he
should deliver in the particulars of his losses in writing, to Behbud Khan, the
general in Astrabad, who had orders to restore whatever part of the goods might
be found, and to pay the deficiency, out of the sequestered estates of the
rebels, to the last farthing. As this laid him under the necessity of returning
to Astrabad, it was not quite what he wished for, but he thought it prudent to
acquiesce.

Mr. Hanway being now made easy on the subject of his loss, amused himself with
taking a ride round the Persian camp. The tents of the ministers and officers
were pitched in front, near that of the shah, and occupied a considerable
space. The pavillion, in which his majesty usually sat to give audience, was of
an oblong form, supported by three poles, adorned at the top with gilt balls.
It had no appearance of appropriate magnificence, and the front was always
open, even in the most unfavourable weather The roof was covered with cotton
cloth, lined with clouded silk. On the floor were spread carpets, on which the
shah sometimes sat cross-legged, and sometimes he indulged himself with a sofa.

At a distance behind were the monarch's private tents, where he retired to his
meals; and almost contiguous were the tents of his ladies, separated from each
other by curtains. The boundaries of the shah's quarter were occupied by his
eunuchs and female slaves; and almost the whole enclosure was surrounded by a
strong fence of network, guarded by a nightly patrole, that exercised severity
against all intruders.

The camp market was about half a mile in extent. It consisted of tents ranged
like the houses in a street, where all kinds of provisions and articles of
convenience were sold. An officer superintends this district of the camp, and
rides up and down, to preserve peace and order. All the dealers are under the
protection of some of the courtiers, who are themselves the principal
speculators in grain, by which they make vast profits.

The shah had about sixty women, and about the same number of eunuchs. When he
changed his station, he was preceded by running footmen, chanters, and a watch
guard, that spread a mile or two, to give notice of their master's approach,
and to warn the people from intruding. However, when he traveled without his
women, this precaution was not attended to, and his subjects were allowed to
approach him. His women, and other ladies of distinction, rode astride on white
horses, or were carried on camels in a kind of elegant panniers. Women of
inferior rank mixed among the crowd; but not without a linen veil over their
faces particularly those of Persian birth, who are very scrupulous in this
respect. About one female to ten males is the usual proportion in the shah's
camp.

The horse furniture belonging to Nadir was to the last degree expensive. He
had four sets of it, one mounted with pearls, another with rubies, a third with
emeralds, and a fourth with diamonds of great magnitude. The immense value of
those trappings could only be equalled by the barbarous taste in which they
were executed. In a visit to Mustapha Khan, our traveller offered to get a
complete set of horse furniture made up in Europe for the shah, which would
infinitely surpass the workmanship of such as he possessed; but the khan,
perfectly knowing his master's temper, replied, "the shah has not patience
enough to wait till they are finished."

The officers, and even the soldiers, seem to have a pride in the splendour of
their horses' trappings; and, indeed, their accoutrements and arms in general,
are very rich. It seems to be a principle of policy in the monarch, to keep his
army dependent, by encouraging them to expend their money in articles of vanity.

Mustapha Khan, one of the best and greatest men in the Persian court, showed
so much attention to Mr Hanway, that, out of gratitude, he presented him with a
gold repeating watch, some fine cloth, and silk. The chief at first declined
accepting them; but at last, being prevailed on to honor our traveller so far,
he made a return in some jewels, which had once decorated the headdress of an
Indian. The principal jewel consisted of a large sapphire set in gold, and
encompassed with diamonds

On the 27th of March, Mr. Hanway left the Persian camp, and had two soldiers
assigned for his protection They now took a different route; and had every
where the melancholy prospect of vast tracts of land, of the richest soil,
lying waste, and towns and villages, once populous and handsome, reduced to
ruin and desolation

Next day, in the vicinity of an inaccessible mountain, they discovered five
persons, who put themselves into a threatening posture, which gave our author
some uneasiness. The soldiers entered into a parley with one of them, and
purchased a stolen horse, belonging to the party of marauders, who, it seems,
were intimidated from attacking Mr. Hanway, by the reputation which the
Europeans possess for their dexterity in the use of firearms. From this
adventure, our author had no very exalted opinion of the reliance he could
place on his military guards.

On the 29th, they ascended the summit of a very high mountain, where they
found the air so extremely subtle and piercing, that it was with difficulty
they could breathe. Descending, however, into the valley, they enjoyed a very
different climate, and Abar appeared before them with an enchanting aspect. But
this city had suffered like the rest, and it was with difficulty they could
procure a lodging in it.

The mountains, over which their direct road lay, being still covered with
snow, they were obliged to take a circuit us route, and in the space of four
leagues, they had occasion to cross a branch of the Kizilazan no less than
sixty-five times This river was about thirty feet wide, and between two and
three deep: the stream was rapid, and the bottom stoney and rough.

After a journey of ten hours, they arrived at a desolate caravansary, where
they found nothing but water; but some hospitable inhabitants of a village they
had previously passed through, had supplied them with provisions. Next day, on
approaching the mountains that cover Ghilan, they found the reflection of the
sun so strong, that it was with difficulty they saved themselves from the
scorching heat. At length, being almost exhausted, they came in sight of the
village of Arsevil, which being barricadoed with large fir trees, except one
narrow passage, excited a suspicion that it was in a state of rebellion. This
apprehension, however, was soon relieved, by their learning that the
inhabitants had thus secured themselves from the couriers of the shah, who
seize their horses, and ride them without mercy. They gave our traveller and
his attendants a kind reception; but in two hours after their arrival, eight
couriers arrived, well-armed, employed on some mission for their sovereign.
These couriers exercise many acts of wanton cruelty, and think the authority
under which they act is sufficient to protect them. The postmasters, who supply
them with horses, are subject to grievous oppressions, and have frequently
demands made upon them beyond what they can answer. One of these contractors
being charged by Nadir with disappointing his couriers, made this bold reply:
"For every ten horses in my power, you send me twenty couriers; and a man had
better die at once than live to serve a rascal." With this he immediately
stabbed himself. The shah exclaimed, "Save him! he is a brave fellow!" but
humanity was now too late: the wound was mortal.

While in this village, Mr. Hanway had the pain to see some youths, invested
with military power, striking old men, whose aspect entitled them to reverence,
for trivial omissions, or for no fault whatever. His Armenian servants seemed
inclined to imitate their example; but he restrained them, by the assurance,
that they should suffer tenfold punishment if they injured any one.

After crossing a high mountain, they descended into a pleasant and fruitful
valley. Spring had already strewed the ground with her finest bloom; and the
brightness of the sky, together with the picturesque appearance of the country,
filled the mind with the most pleasing ideas. The river Kizilazan meandered
through this delicious spot, and the most beautiful woods and lawns diversified
the scene.

How happy, says Mr. Hanway, might Persia be, did not a general depravity of
manners involve her inhabitants in such inextricable confusion! But how much
happier still are those countries, though under a less favorable sky, which
enjoy a mild government, and whose inhabitants are inspired with sentiments of
true religion and virtue, which alone can blunt the edge of those ills to which
mankind are universally subject!

On the 1st of April, Mr. Hanway passed the defiles of the mountains, which
guard the province of Ghilan, and next day arrived at Reshd, where he had the
pleasure of meeting some of his friends. On the 5th, he reached Langarood,
where he once more found himself happy in the society of Mr. Elton and the
French missionaries.

Though near the scene of his former sufferings, and obliged to have
intercourse with some of those who had contributed to his disasters, with a
mind superior to revenge, he indulged that Christian charity which alone can
ensure tranquillity, and render the mind happy when it turns on itself.

Mr. Hanway was here visited by a Persian priest, in company with Shahverdie
Beg. They entertained him with several quotations from their p^ets,
particularly in regard to love and women; and expressed themselves on this
subject with great delicacy. The priest, or mullah, observed, that though their
laws allowed of four wives, besides concubines, he considered that man as the
most virtuous, who confined himself to one; while, on the other hand, he
regarded celibacy as a crime against nature

The Persians may marry for a stipulated time, and after (...) ^xpired, both
parties are at liber^y; but if the woman proves pregnant, (...) obliged to
support her for a year, and if she produces a male child, it belongs to the
father; but if a female, she retains the exclusive right to it. Even legitimate
marriage does not seem to entitle the women to any distinguished privileges;
for they are considered as little more than creatures formed for the pleasure
of their lords.

The women of Ghilan are fair and handsome. They have black eyes and hair; and
they darken the former by art. They are generally low in stature, and have
delicate features. The children of both sexes have fine complexions; but the
boys soon contract a tawney hue.

The women here are very industrious, and are frequently employed in the toils
of agriculture, on which occasions they do not always conceal their faces with
a veil. When women of rank, however, go abroad, they are not only veiled, but
have a servant to clear the way for them; and it is reckoned the greatest mark
of unpoliteness to look at them. How singular do the customs of some countries
appear, when contrasted with those of others! An European lady would seldom go
abroad, if she did not hope to att^act notice. Yet vanity is characteristic of
the sex in every country.


The Persians are much governed by show and external parade. Hence some of the
European factors have carried their ostentation to the most ridiculous pitch.
Perhaps this conduct is politic among a people who are swayed by appearance;
but it seems in some cases to be carried too far.

The province of Ghilan is partly surrounded by mountains, and has many
difficult passes, for which reason it is not easily kept in subjection. Reshd,
the capital, was formerly reckoned a most insalubrious situation, from the
thickness of the woods which surrounded it; but some of these have been
cleared, and the place is no longer so fatal to life. The whole province
however is marsay; and it is observed by the natives, that only women, mules,
and poultry enjoy health, which may possibly arise from the confinement to
which they are generally subject.

But though the climate is unpropitions, the soil is rich, and produces
exuberant crops. Fruits of all kinds are very plentiful; but the grapes, for
want of cultivation, are but indifferent Indeed, most of the fruits are
unfavourable to the health of strangers, particularly the peaches and figs,
which partake of the pernicious moisture of the soil.

Having taken care to provide himself a proper armed guard, on the 1st of May,
Mr. Hanway set out for Astrabad The first evening they were benighted and lost
in a wood, though they had successively procured several guides, who abandoned
them through fear. In this dilemma they advanced toward a light, where they
found a house barricadoed with trees. In vain did they use their entre^ties
with the (...) conduct them to Radiz^r: they were obliged to break into his
house by force, and to carry him with them in a rope. Unwarrantable as this
conduct may appear, it is consonant to the practice in this distracted country;
and they took care to reward him for his services, though they were involuntary.

Next day they entered the province of Mazanderan. On the 4th their cattle were
attacked by a large wolf; but being driven off by the guard, the savage
contented himself with killing a cow. Soon after they fell in with a detachment
of fifty soldiers, the commander of whom courteously offered his service to
guard them. Ten men were accepted, and the officer was complimented with cloth
for a coat.

As they advanced farther into this province, which greatly resembles Ghilan in
its soil, climate, and productions, the peasants began to grow daring, and one
of them seized the commander of their troop by the throat As it is dangerous to
proceed to extremities, Mr. Hanway recommended forbearance, and even withdrew
from the house assigned for their lodgings to a tent in the open air, that he
might not incommode the women and children belonging to the family. Such
attentive humanity is very amiable in any person, and probably was little
expected among the people of this country. However, night drawing on, he found
himself in a very bad neighborhood; for these ^^^lagers having engaged in the
late rebellion, began to be apprehensive that the strangers were sent to seize
them, and took to their arms, but soon retired. The inhabitants of the
neighboring mountains were equally disaffected, and several horsemen poured
down into the village in the night, no doubt, with a view of plundering them;
but finding Mr. Hanway and his party prepared, they returned without attempting
any thing. It was evident they were considered as extremely rich; for the
natives would not be persuaded, but that all the brass buttons on their clothes
were solid gold.

As soon as it was day, they left this unpleasant situation, under a hot sun,
which the Persians seemed little to regard. During the heat of the day,
however, they took shelter in a wood, resolving in future to travel only in the
cool. As they approached toward Amul, the country appeared still more
pleasant. The city stands at the foot of Mount Taurus, and is washed by a fine
river, over which there is a bridge of twelve arches.

The Persians have a tradition, that if any governor or commander passes this
bridge on horseback, he will soon be deprived of his office, if not of his
life. On this account, though the stream is very rapid, the natives generally
ford it; and as our author did not choose to be regarded as a person excluded
from the common bounties of heaven, he thought proper to gratify opinion so far
as to alight, and lead his horse over this fated bridge.

Here are the ruins of an old fortress, which appears to have been very strong
and regular for Persia; and likewise a stone palace, in which Shah Abas often
resided, which commands a pleasant prospect, and is well contrived for coolness
and convenience. In the garden are cypress trees of extraordinary size and
height.

In this city our traveller met with a writer belonging to Mahomet Khan, who,
after detailing the particulars of the late rebellion, invited him to a concert
of music. One instrument resembled a flute, another a guitar, and a third a
kettle-drum; to the music of which an old man and two boys sang and danced.
Dancing is considered in this country as mean and ignoble, and is practiced by
none except such as make a trade of it for hire. It seemed principally to
consist in gesticulation.

To entertain Mr. Hanway to the best of his power, the writer then sent for a
priest, celebrated for his voice; but neither the vocal nor instrumental music
had much ch^^ms for an European ear.

In the evening of the 9th, Mr. Hanway left Amul, and traveled through a
delightful country till they reached Balfrush, the capital, where he learned
additional circumstances relative to the fate of the rebels. Among the rest, he
was told, that the governor appointed by Sadoc Aga, being seized, had holes cut
in his flesh, and lighted candles put into them, in which shocking condition
the unhappy chief was led ^aked about the market place, till he expired with
loss of blood.

A day or two after Mr. Hanway paid a visit to Mahomet Khan, who had a
delightful residence a few miles from the city. It was far from being superb;
but the adjacent woods and rivulets gave it an air of charming simplicity,
beyond the finest strokes of art. In the area before the house, one hundred and
fifty men were drawn up under arms, in double lines, to receive the guest. Our
author alighted from his horse at a small distance, and advanced toward the
khan with the usual salutation. He was sitting in the aviam, or outer court,
and received him with many expressions of kindness; and, as a proof of his
regard released a man that was tied and condemned to be beaten; adding, that he
did this purely to honor his visitor.

Our traveller made this chief a present of some fine cloths, and a case of
choice liquors, of which he was immoderately fond. Having prevailed on his
guest to tarry all right, he ordered poultry and a sheep to be killed.
Resolving to show him such attention as would wipe off the stain of his former
oil treatment; for which he condescended to make an apology.

After dinner, music and dancers were ^ent for, who tortured the nerves of our
author the whole evening with their noise and gesticulation. When the dancing
men finished, they presented Mr Hanway with an orange, which was a civil
intimation that they expected a recompense for their trouble.

This entertainment being over, the khan invited him to drink brandy with him,
and expressed his astonishment, when he found that an European and a Christian
was not fond of spirituous liquors The khan, and his friends, indeed, showed no
reluctance in this respect; and after Mr. Hanway retired, it is probable they
finished the strong waters he had presented him with. The usual mode is for
each person to have a plate of sweetmeats before him, and to drink their liquor
out of tea-cups, till they drop with intoxication.

Next morning, Mr. Hanway viewed the monument of the khan's favorite wife, who
had lately been buried in an adjoining wood. It had an epitaph, in which the
trite sentiment was repeated, of comparing life to a flower, that blossoms in
the spring, attains the full luster of beauty in the summer, begins to wither
and decline in autumn, and when winter comes on, is liable to be blown to the
ground by every gust of wind, where it lies and rots

Mr. Hanway now left Balfrush, and proceeded on his journey through a fine
country to Alleabad, which has a palace of mean appearance, but delightfully
situated. The most capital work of art in this vicinity is the causeway, built
by Shah Abas the Great, which extends from Keskar, in the south-west corner of
the Caspian, to Astrabad, and beyond it; comprising, in the whole, an extent of
three hundred English miles. It is raised to the middle, with ditches on each
side, and, in some places it is bordered with a thick wood, whose luxuriant
branches afford a delightful shelter to travelers.

At Sari, the next stage, are four temples of the Guebres, or worshippers of
fire, who formerly possessed all this coast. These religious edifices are
rotundas about fifty feet in diameter, raised to a point of near one hundred
and twenty feet in height, and are formed of the most durable materials.

Continuing their route to Ashreff, they had a view of the mountain Demoan, on
which, the Persians say, the ark rested, while the Armenians ascribe this
honor to Mount Arrarat, which in clear weather is also visible on the western
coast of the Caspian.

At Ashreff, they saw a celebrated palace of Shah Abas, the most magnificent of
any on the coast of the Caspian Sea. Over the entrance are the arms of Persia,
a lion with the sun rising behind him, emblematic of the strength and glory of
this empire. Within the gate is a long avenue, on each side of which are thirty
apartments for guards. The next gate opens into a garden, through which runs a
stream of limpid water, that falls in several cascades, with a basin and
fountain at each.

In an adjacent building is a princely aviam, painted with gold flowers on a
blue ground, and containing several portraits, by a Dutch artist, of no
masterly execution. On the sides of the aviam are several small apartments, and
behind them other waterfalls that pour down the sides of a sleep mountain
clothed with wood.

The garden is chiefly laid out in walks, bordered with rows of pines, orange,
and other fruit trees. Beyond this is another garden, which seems to be
considered as sacred ground, as they were not permitted to enter it.

They next visited a banqueting house, dedicated to a grandson of Ali; and out
of respect to this place, they were desired to leave their swords at the door.
The solemnity with which our author was introduced here, inspired at first a
kind of awe; but it was soon exchanged to contempt, on seeing the room adorned
with such paintings as could only please a voluptuous Mohammedan.

They were then shown another house and garden, in which was a stately dome
whose top was painted, and the was covered with Dutch tiles, as far as the
gallery. On an eminence, at some distance, stood a building intended for an
observatory.

The whole structure commands the view of a fine country and of the Caspian
Sea. In short, every circumstance conspires to render this place delightful,
and filled our author with many pleasing ideas; but the wretchedness of the
people constantly recurred to his thoughts, and damped the pleasure he felt
from a view of the country.

On the 15th, they left Ashreff, and on the way met a courier from Myrza
Mahomet to beseech Mr. Hanway to hasten his journey, and use his interest to
save his life. As they approached the city of Astrabad, they met several armed
horsemen, carrying home the peasants, whose eyes had been put out for taking a
part in the late rebellion. Near the entrance of the city on each side, was a
stone pyramid, full of niches which were filled with human heads that made a
most ghastly appearance.

On entering Astrabad for the second time, Mr Hanway found it a scene of misery
and desolation That day the eyes of thirty persons had been scooped out, four
had been beheaded, and one burnt alive; two hundred women had been banished the
city, one hundred and fifty of whom had been sold to the soldiers as slaves.

When Mr. Hanway was introduced to Behbud, the king's general, he found him
surrounded by soldiers, and employed in judging and condemning the unhappy
insurgents. After the first compliments, our author delivered the shah's
decree, which was received with every mark of respect, and given to the
secretary to read. A speedy compliance with it was promised, and Mr. Hanway was
then entertained with sweetmeats, and large white mulberries, which are a
delicious fruit. During this repast, the prisoners were removed, and the
secretary made a complimental speech on the utility of merchants, who ought,
for their services to kings and countries, to be protected by all parties, and
injured by none.

Sadoc Aga, who had a principal hand in Mr Hanway's misfortunes, was then
brought before the tribunal. When our author saw him before, he was a youth of
more than common vivacity, was richly dressed, well armed, and full of mirth.
What a change now appeared! His garb was mean, his eyes were deprived of sight,
he drooped his head, even the tone of his voice was altered. The general told
him he must pay for our traveller's goods, and enquired how they had been
disposed of. "All I know of them," said he, "is, that they were taken by
Mahomet Hassan, and by him distributed to the people. Would to God! that
Mahomet Hassan, and his whole house had been buried deep in the earth, ere I
had heard his name! And how can I refund? I have nothing left, but this mean
garb you see on my back; and this, indeed, is more than sufficient; for, after
you have deprived me of fight, of what value is life to me?"

This feeling speech was accompanied with that emotion, natural to a daring
spirit: it ought to have melted the tyrant; but to silence him, he cruelly
ordered the miserable man to be struck on the mouth, which was done with such
violence, that the blood gushed out.

Sadoc Aga being removed, Myrza Mahomet was brought in, loaded with wooden
fetters, and a heavy triangular wooden collar about his neck. Mr. Hanway might
then have retorted the wrongs he had received, had he been a brute; but he was
a man, and a Briton, and wounded with the piteous objects before his eyes, his
heart was too full to bear the sight any longer.

He then visited Mahomet Hussein Khan, whose son had been governor of Astracan
before the rebellion, and who had been charged with the murder of Shah Toehmas,
the last legitimate sovereign of Persia. He assured Mr Hanway that his business
should be expedited according to the shah's order, and observed, "I am charged
with a particular commission to excecute punishment on the rebels. I must do
that for which I know I shall be damned. Tomorrow is a day of blood; I will
make them pay you, though I pull the money out of their throats."

This was too much for humanity to hear: Mr. Hanway was incapable of thanking
him for this bloody intention. The unhappy rebels had acted, indeed, as if they
mean to devote themselves to ruin; yet an opposition to such execrable tyranny
wanted only more strength and wisdom to give it the stamp of glory.

Next day, eight Turcoman Tartars being taken, were brought into the city, on
which the general expressed great satisfaction, observing, that many niches in
the pyramid called by his own name, were yet unfilled. In Persia a malefactor
is executed with little ceremony; he kneels, and pronouncing his creed, "There
is but one God, Mahomet is his prophet, and Ali his friend," his head is struck
off with a scimeter

When Mr. Hanway waited on Nazeer Aga, who had been his firmest friend, he
expressed great satisfaction at seeing him alive, after the dangers they had
both run through. This person had been well remunerated by the shah for the
services he had rendered him during the rebellion

In a few days after Mr. Hanway was informed that Captain Woodroofe was arrived
in the bay of Astrabad, and Nazeer Aga advised him, by letter, that, as several
of the hordes were still in arms, it might be dangerous for him to trust his
property on board the ship. Our author thanked him for his care; but affecting
security, as the best means of preventing danger; he returned for answer, that
the great guns would deliver them from the most numerous assailants that might
have the temerity to attack the vessel.

On the 21st, Myrza Mahomet delivered to Mr. Hanway the greatest part of his
baggage, and also paid him as much money as, he said, was in his hands, or in
his power; in hopes that our author would intercede in his favor. Next morning
he waited on the khans, and told them that Myrza had restored his baggage, and
that he hoped he would be pardoned "For your sake," said the khan, "he shall be
saved. His majesty has shown you honor, and it is my business to do the same."
Mr. Hanway made his acknowledgments, and Myrza was liberated.

Mr. Hanway had now received to the value of about five thousand crowns; and
was requested to take a part of the remainder in female slaves. This he
positively refused to do, perhaps to the astonishment of the general, who,
learning, he was only thirty-two years old, seemed to be looking for a solution
of his continence in his hoary locks, till he was told that he wore a wig.

Delays still intervening about the payment of the remainder of the money, the
governor pressed Mr. Hanway to take his obligation for it, payable in ten or
fifteen days, as the general was obliged to march, and avowed that he could not
depart without a receipt; and that he must kill men till he completed the sum.
Mr Hanway expressed his hope that no one would suffer on his account; but that
he could not answer to his principals to give a receipt in exchange for any
obligation whatever.

Some days after, our author privately conveyed on board the ship, money and
goods to the value of eleven thousand crowns, and on the 29th he visited the
ship again with five thousand crowns more; leaving Matteuse, his old Armenian
clerk, and two servants to solicit for the remainder, that was due, in
conformity to the shah's decree.

Before Mr. Hanway takes his leave of Persia, he give some account of the
religion of the Guebres, which is still preserved by some of the posterity of
the ancient Indians and Persians. This religion sprang from Zeroaster, who
lived about the year of the world 2860. This great philosopher, struck with the
demonstrations he observed of the perfection of that self-existent Being, who
is the author of all good, taught his followers to worship God under the symbol
of light or fire, considering the brightness, activity, purity, and
incorruptibility of that element, as bearing the most perfect resemblance to
the nature of the beneficent Being Thus the Persians honored the sun as the
brightest image of God, and offered up their sacrifices in the open air,
thinking it injurious to the majesty of the God of Heaven, who fills immentity
with his presence, to confine his service within walls.

About six hundred years after the first Zeroaster, another philosopher, of the
same name, arose, who refined on the doctrines of his predecessor, and caused
temples to be built, in which the sacred fire was ordered to be continually
preserved. The Guebres, or Gaurs, still adhere to the tenets of those two
philosophers, with a few modifications, and their veneration for fire is
unabated.

What is commonly called the everlasting fire, is a phenomenon of a very
extraordinary nature. This object of devotion is to be seen about ten miles
from Bakir, a city of the Caspian Sea, where are several ancient temples of
stone, supposed to have been all dedicated to this active and pure element.
Among the rest is one, in which the Indians now perform their devotions. Near
the altar is a hollow cane, from the end of which issues a blue flame, like
that of a lamp burning with spirits. This flame, the worshippers pretend, has
continued ever since the general deluge, and they believe it will last till the
consummation of all things.

Round this temple are generally forty or fifty poor devotees, who come on a
pilgrimage from their own country, and are charged with the expiation of the
fine of their friends and neighbors, which, it seems, can be done by proxy.
They mark their forehe^ds with saffron, and the most distinguished for piety
among them, observe certain painful and invariable postures of their limbs.

At a small distance from the temples is a low cleft of a rock, with a
horizontal opening, near six feet long and three broad, from which issues a
blue flame, like that from the reed or cane in the temple. In serene weather it
burns low, but during a high wind, it sometimes mounts to eight feet; yet
without apparent effect on the rocks or surrounding objects Here the devotees
also pay their adorations

What is still more singular, for two miles round this place, on removing the
surface of the ground to the depth of two or three inches, the uncovered part
immediately takes fire on applying a coal or torch to it; but though it warms
the earth, it does not change its substance. If a cane, or even a paper tube,
be fixed, about two inches deep in the earth, and a live coal be held over the
top and blown on, a flame instantly issues, without burning either the cane or
the paper, provided their edges be luted. Three or four of those burning canes
will boil a pot, and in this manner the people dress their victuals.

Though this flame burns so spontaneously, it may be as easily extinguished as
that of spirits of wine Round this remarkable spot, brimstone is dug, and
springs of naptha are found. The springs boil up highest when the weather is
thick and hazy; and the naptha often kindling on its surface, spreads with
incredible rapidity to a considerable distance. In short, the everlasting fire
is really natural to the soil, and may be traced to brimstone and naptha. The
latter, indeed, is the only fuel the inhabitants use for domestic use, and is
generally kept in earthen vessels under ground, and at a distance from their
houses, because it is apt to kindle of itself.

In the peninsula of Apcheron is a kind of white naptha, of a thinner
consistence, which the Russians use medicinally, and it is said to be carried
into India, where, being prepared, it forms the most beautiful and durable
varnish known.

But to resume the narrative of transactions: Mr. Hanway, having lived some
time in a very friendly manner with Mr. Elton at Langarood, finding his health
declining, removed to Lahijan for change of air, and from thence to Reshd.
About this time Mr Elton, who had hitherto shown him the extremest kindness,
being much offended with our author's employers for their submission to the
Russian court, and apprehensive that he might be blamed for his engagements
with the shah, which were absolutely inconsistent with the views of the Russian
company, suddenly contracted an unreasonable enmity against our traveller. But
the details of quarrels can never be pleasing to the benevolent, and therefore
we pass over them

Mr Hanway having, with extreme difficulty, and after long delay, obtained a
recompense for his losses, he disposed of the cloth he had recovered, in Reshd;
and laid out the produce, as well as the money that he possessed, in raw silk.

Thus having finished his mercantile transactions, he left the city of Reshd on
the 13th of September, and arriving at Perrybazar, he embarked in a
flat-bottomed Persian boat, and on the 29th reached Yerkie, where the commander
of a guard-ship, stationed there informed him, that if he had any goods on
board, which were not the produce of Ghilan, and did not declare them, the law
made it capital to the offender, and decreed that the ship and cargo should be
burnt.

The Russian consul, it seems, had informed the governor of Astracan, that the
plague was raging at Cashan; and, in consequence of this, Mr. Hanway was
strictly interrogated, if he had any goods on board from that place. They were
then ordered to land on a small desolate island to the east of the channel of
the Volga, where a surgeon examined them with the usual precautions; and, after
being satisfied they were not under infection, their letters were dipped in
vinegar, and delivered to him.

Renewed enquiries were made, as to the places from whence they had taken their
cargo, and where they had personally been since they left Russia.

In this state matters remained, till the 11th of October, during which space
they suffered both from the weather and the want of fresh provisions. At last,
a signal was made by the guard-ship for Mr. Hanway and the captain to come on
board, when they had the mortification to be enjoined the performance of
quarantine on an uninhabited island, still more to the eastward. But what
affected them most, was to learn that all their letters, dispatches, and
passports, with the lives of twelve soldiers, were lost by the attacks of the
Calmucks, on the party which carried them.

At length, the governor of Astracan signified his permissi^n for Mr. Hanway to
come up as far as the island of Caraza, situated on a small branch of the
Volga, on condition that he brought neither clothes nor baggage with him. At
this place he was lodged in a house detached from the crew and the other
passengers, and, before he was suffered to proceed further, he was required to
strip himself entirely naked in the open air, and to pass through the
unpleasant ceremony of having a pail of warm water thrown over him.

Having undergone this discipline, he embarked in a large barge rowed by twelve
grenadiers, and sailed for Astracan. The day after his arrival, he waited on
the governor, whose behavior appeared much changed since he visited him
before. On the subject of trade in general he was very reserved, though very
inquisitive about Mr. Elton's proceedings; and not even the application of a
handsome present could procure more than distant civility and constrained
attention.

Every danger of infection appearing visionary to the most scrupulous, our
author obtained leave to depart for Petersburgh on the 22d of November; but the
Volga being covered with floating ice, he resolved to travel by land, and
finding a Russian convoy under a guard of Cossacks, pursuing the same route, he
was happy to join them, with his two servants; and in this form they crossed
the Volga

On the 28th they met a large caravan on its way to Astracan; from which they
learned, that four persons in the neighboring towns were missing, and, as a
bloody shirt had been found on the way, it was concluded that they had been
murdered. This intelligence taught them to keep a stricter watch than usual,
and induced those to keep close together, who, from the impatience to get
forward, were before inclined to separate from the convoy A few days after,
they found a Russian wagon and the harness of several horses, which belonged
to the persons who had actually been murdered

At Zaritzen, where they arrived on the 3d of December, Mr. Hanway dined with
one of his fellow-travellers, who acted as sub-governor of the town. This
gentleman presented his wife to the company, who saluted her, as is customary;
after which, she presented them with small cups of brandy on a salver, and
which she again repeated after dinne^* though she did not sit at table. At this
entertainment the viands were numerous, but ill-dressed; and the quantity of
liquors drank was almost beyond belief

It appeared, this feast was made on purpose to reconcile a friend of the host
and a principal merchant of Astracan, who had quarrelled. Their healths being
drank, they were desired to kiss each other; and then the rest of the company
saluted them in a similar manner. To complete the farce, they immediately began
to reproach each other for past injuries; so little reliance is there to be
placed on friendships contracted at the social board.

As the snow at this season rendered the roads impassable for wheelled
carriages, Mr. Hanway caused his wagon to be placed on a sledge, and set out
on the 6th, accompanied only by two servants Next day the cold was so intense,
that wine froze under his feather bed At night he reached Cashaliena, situated
on the Don, where he found poverty, but liberty and content The winds now blew
so excessively keen that the carriers could not always venture to face them;
for which reason they were frequently obliged to halt, and generally to direct
their way by a compass.

On the 13th, they stopped at Brusano, where the inhabitants informed them,
that the preceding night a band of robbers ^^d broken into some houses, and
(...) ^^undered the inhabitants of (...) find, but tortured them, (...) between
their fingers, to (...) their money. These villains were closely pursued, but
escaped.

During this inclement season, the peasants live in the most miserable manner.
Few of their huts have any chimney, and as the smoke of the stoves is carried
out through the windows, they are so filled with smoke, that it is impossible
to breathe at more than two or three feet from the floor, till the wood is
burnt to ashes; and therefore, such as wish to escape suffocation, must crawl
in on their hands and knees.

At Moscow, where our author arrived on the 22d, he received letters informing
him of his accession to a considerable fortune by the death of a relation. He
staid at that metropolis four days and provided himself with a light sledge, in
which he determined to travel post. These vehicles are so well adapted to the
climate, and so easy that Mr. Hanway slept, at one time, without waking, while
he had been carried one hundred versts, or sixty-six English miles.

The whole road between Moscow and Petersburgh is marked out in the snow by
plantations of fir-trees on both sides; and at intervals are large piles of
wood, which may be lighted when any person belonging to the court passes that
way in the night. The distance between the two capitals is no less than four
hundred and eighty eight English miles; yet Peter the Great once performed the
journey in forty-six hours.

Mr. Hanway arrived at Petersburgh on the 1st of January, after having been
absent about a year and four months, in which space he had traveled above four
thousand miles by land.

Petersburgh, it is universally known, was founded by Peter I. in the beginning
of the present century, and may now be considered as the modern metropolis.
Though the soil was formerly a barren morass, the genius of the founder has
converted it into solid land, and raised an elegant and superb city on a spot
the most unpromising. This place ranges on both sides of the N^va. At the upper
end of the north side stands the citadel, which is more remarkable for the
number of lives sacrificed in building it, than for its strength.

As Peter took Amsterdam for his model, this city is intersected by canals;
but, singular as it may appear in such a climate, the houses are chiefly built
in the Italian ta^^^, and have more numerous windows than the buildings in
England. By the heavy duties which have been laid on windows in this country,
modern architecture is deformed; for few now can afford to study the beauty of
appearance, but only the saving of expense.


The climate in the Russian dominions is very various. In the month of
February, at Petersburgh, the su^ generally shines bright, the sky is clear,
and every object seems to glitter with gems, while the human frame is braced by
the cold. Riding on sledges then constitutes the principal amusement of the
young and active.

March commonly brings showers, which, with the increasing heat of the sun,
begin to melt the surface of the ice, which in the Neva is sometimes three
quarters of a yard thick. About the end of that month, it frequently breaks up,
and navigation begins to be restored.

April is often warm, and serves as the prelude to the spring: but it is
sometimes the beginning of June before vegetation has made any considerable
progress. The heat at that season becoming very intense, its effects on nature
may be visibly traced from day to day.

From this time, till the middle of July, the sun is almost constantly above
the horizon, except for about two hours every night. The heat, at this period,
is even disagreeably intense; and would be still more unpleasant did not winds
and showers occasionally refresh the air Mr. Hanway, who resided here five
years, once experienced a delightful season till the end of September; but this
rarely happens: August closes the scene of rural beauty and vegetation; so that
three months alone in the year, nature appears animated.

In October and November the Neva is always frozen, and when once the ice
becomes solid and the snow hard, the period of speedy and secure conveyance by
sledges commences. At that season, it is nothing unusual to bring fresh
provisions to market at the distance of one thousand English miles* In December
and January the cold is so very severe, that many persons, who are exposed to
it, either perish, or lose their limbs.

The Russians are generally of a middle stature, though many of them are tall
and comely. The women, however, are less lovely in Russia than in many other
countries, and even what charms they naturally possess are obscured by paint.
It is an avowed sentiment with them; that if they have sufficient plumpness,
they can procure themselves beauty.

The common people are dressed in long coats made of sheep skins, with the wool
inwards, and they wear fur caps* However, persons of rank, dress nearly in the
same manner as the English, except wearing a great coat lined with fur, with a
fur cap, whenever they go abroad.

Except the difference of petticoats, the lower class of women wear sheep skin
coats, like the men; but those who move in a higher sphere have silk cloaks
lined with furs, which are rich or ordinary, according to rank and fortune.

Having closed his commercial engagements at Petersburgh, on the 9th of July
1750, Mr. Hanway left this place, and proceeding along the banks of the Neva,
came to the palace of Strelna Musa, about twenty versts from the capital. It is
situated on an eminence, and commands an extensive view of the Gulf of
Finland. The gardens are laid out in a fine taste, and the whole edifice was
intended to have been on a magnificent scale, had Peter lived to realize his
ideas. However, Peterkoff, which that great monarch left a mean building, by
the partiality of his successors, has risen into grandeur; while Strelna Musa
has been neglected Indeed, Peterkoff has many local advantages. It has fine
water works, said to resemble those of Versailles, and the landscapes it
commands are highly picturesque.

Mr. Hanway passing the Gulf of Finland, arrived at Cronstadt, where
unfavourable weather confined him here several days. This delay gave him an
opportunity of examining the dry dock, contrived by Peter the Great, which is
one of the most stupendous works of the kind in the world It extends above
seven hundred sathoms, is sixty feet wide at the bottom, eighty at the top, and
forty deep, furnished with different flood gates. Fourteen line of battle ships
may be accommodated here at once. Adjoining is a capital reservoir.

The Island of Cronstadt is about eighteen miles in circumference, but very
barren. The great resort of mariners, however, to the town, renders it a
populous and flourishing place.

On the 15th our author embarked in a small yatch, and in three days landed at
Revel. This place is the capital of Estonia, and lies fifty leagues from
Petersburgh It submitted to Peter I. by capitulation, and is only taxed with
the accommodation of five thousand soldiers, and three thousand sailors. The
population within the walls is calculated at eight thousand souls; and the
suburbs are large and well inhabited. The people seem to be formal and precise
in their manners, but are extremely industrious, and live in the most perfect
security. The houses are all adapted for the reception of merchandise, and
there are large magazines of corn, with which the country abounds.

Great part of Revel stands upon an eminence, and has regular fortifications.
The streets are neither wide nor uniform, but some of the edifices are stately,
particularly the public buildings, though they contain little remarkable.

On the 19th, Mr. Hanway re embarked, and passing the Isle of Gothland,
belonging to Sweden, on the morning of the 24th they entered the Vistula, and
sailed up to Dantzic. This city is about three English miles in circumference,
and is well fortifi^d with lofty works and a double wet fosse. The
fortifications require about one thousand five hundred men to man them; but
this city cannot maintain so many, unless on emergencies.

The houses of Dantzic are generally five stories high, which, with other
peculiarities in their structure, takes off from the apparent width of the
streets. The inhabitants are very agreeable in their manners, and the women
have all the personal attractions of the English ladies. Here women of
distinction affect the Polish manners, and the most respectful way of saluting
a lady, is to kiss her hand, or rather the hem of her petticoat, as is commonly
practiced by the Poles.

A republican spirit pervades this great commercial city, which is under the
protection of Poland. So many revolutions have taken place in this part of
Europe within less than half a century, that the politician is confounded, and
the philosopher and the Christian ^^in new force to their argumen^^ against
expecting stability in human affairs.
The arsenal is well filled with arms of different kinds; but many of them are
old and useless.

Among the curiosities which chiefly attracted our author's attention, was the
great Lutheran church, a very ancient structure, which still retains the
crucifixes and other emblems of popery. This, it seems, is not merely a matter
of indifference, but was stipulated by treaty. Among the paintings is one on
wood by Van Dyke, representing the resurrection. It is much admired for its
expression, though it is said to be one of the first performances in oil
colors.

Corn is the principal article of traffic here, which in plentiful seasons, is
brought down the Vistula in amazing quantities. The vessels employed in this
trade are about fifty tons burden; and sometimes no fewer than one thousand six
hundred of them pass down the Vistula within a year.

Our traveller having spent a week very agreeably at Dantzic, and provided
himself with a chariot, took leave of his friends. He soon entered the Prussian
dominions, and at Stolpe, a small pleasant city, he was examined whence he
came, and whither he was going This is usual in Prussia, and gives a good idea
of vigilance and military discipline.

He now traveled over an open pleasant country of arable lands, pretty
populous, but not rich. At Stargard, the metropolis of Prussian Pomerania, is a
cathedral church of great antiquity; and three reformed churches, in one of
which service is performed in the French language.

Our author next arrived at Koeninsburg, a small town on the Oder, which river
he crossed by a timber bridge. On the north bank is a fine palace and garden,
belonging to the Margrave of Schwedt, with a very neat town, bearing the same
name, adjacent. Near this place he saw the bodies of two malefactors, who had
been broken on the wheel. A gallows, he observes, is planted near every town on
an eminence, though the vigilance of the government prevents the perpetration
of many crimes, and consequently executions are rare.

The palace of the margrave is the only object that has any grandeur of
appearance for many miles. Men of family and fortune generally flock to court;
and the country is thus deprived of their active services on the spots from
whence they draw the income that supports their state.

As he approached to Berlin, the face of the country began to wear a more
cultivated aspect; but the want of enclosures is a defect in rural
embellishment; nor is that vivid verdure to be seen here which captivates the
eye in England.

From Dantzic to Berlin, the distance is fifty-seven German, or about two
hundred and fifty English miles.

The entrance into the metropolis of Prussia is airy and elegant; the streets
are regular and clean, and the houses uniform. Near the Pont Neuf, over the
Spree, is an equestrian statue of Frederick William the Great, which is
esteemed a piece of excellent workmanship. The palace of the Pont Neuf is also
a magnificent pile.

The first object that strikes a traveller is the royal palace, called the
castle. The walls of the grand front are seven or eight feet thick, which,
though they add to the strength of the building, give a dark and gloomy air to
its apartments.

The economy used in this court deserves notice. The common articles of
furniture are of massy silver, in which the fashion does not exceed seven per
cent. so that four millions of dollars might be easily realized, should the
exigencies of the state require it. In this palace are the pictures of Charles
V. and his empress, the frames of which are of solid silver, and weigh six
hundred and sixty pounds, or six centners. There is also a grand crown luster
of seven centners, and m^^y separate articles of four or five centners weight.
A music gallery is beautifully ornamented with silver; and one end of a
gallery, for about twenty feet high, and as many in width, is wholly furnished
with gilt plate, which is entirely for parade.

The king's private apartments are simply elegant; the prevailing taste is
stucco gilt. Several of the rooms have tables with pens, ink, and loose papers,
which indicate the dispatch of business, rather than the pomp of royalty. The
hall is decorated with several large and excellent paintings, and the grand
saloon is hung with tapestry, representing our Savior driving out the
moneychangers, the last supper, the miraculous draught of fishes, and washing
his disciples' feet.

The throne in the audience chamber is of velvet, embroidered with gold, in a
grand, but chaste, taste. In the old quarter of the palace, the most remarkable
piece of furniture is a bed of crimson velvet, adorned with above two hundred
ciphers, with electoral crowns, all set with pearls: the chairs in this
apartment are all in the same style. In this bed it is usual for persons of the
blood royal to consummate.

The arsenal forms one side of the palace, and is said to be well stocked with
arms; but as visiting it is attended with some disagreeable ceremonies, our
author declined an inspection. The external, however, of this edifice is very
fine: it has indeed a profusion of ornaments.

From the palace he proceeded to visit the library, which he observes, would be
but a mean apartment for a common school. But its regulations are excellent,
and liberty is allowed to every person who has the appearance of a gentleman,
to study here from ten in the morning till two in the afternoon. In this
collection are five hundred Bibles of different languages and editions; and one
is kept as a kind of relict, said to have been that which Charles I. of England
used on the scaffold, and which was presented to the Elector of Brandenburgh by
Dr. Juxon Like other ^^lics, this Bible appears to be multiplied. The writer of
this saw another, bearing the royal arms and cipher, which was exposed to sale
a few years ago, at Little Compton, in Gloucestershire, among other effects
belonging to Lady Van^, the representative of the Juxon family.
Here is also a Koran in MS. in such a minute character, and on such thin
paper, as to be only an inch and a half in bulk.

The opera house is an elegant modern edifice, adorned with splendid scenes in
an exquisite taste. It has three galleries, and is capable of containing two
thousand persons. The columns which support the roof are ranged in such a
manner as to throw the whole into a grand saloon. The orchestra consists of
about fifty performers.

This amusement is entirely supported at the king's expense, and in some
measure is made subservient to political purposes. His majesty is extremely
attached to music, and has acquired great knowledge of that science.

The fortifications of the city of Berlin are regular, though not formidable.
The French language is almost as prevalent here as the German. Many or the
public structures are magnificent, and the streets being regular, give the
whole an air of grandeur.

Several thousands of French manufacturers having found protection in this
country, the arts and manufactures are carried to a great degree of beauty and
perfection. Gold and silver lace, and wrought silks, are scarcely to be
purchased on such advantageous terms in any other place.

Before Mr. Hanway left Berlin his curiosity carried him to Charlottenburg,
about a German league distant. This palace was fou^^^d by his majesty's
grandfather, but has been finished in a fine style by the present sovereign. It
has a range of ten apartments well disposed, ornamented with stucco and
gilding. The ball room, in particular, is worthy of the king who designed it.
It has ten windows on each side, and is decorated with busts, statues, and
large mirrors.

Mr. Hanway's character of Frederic II. king of Prussia, from the impartiality
of the author, deserves to be recorded. He says, that he had an early taste for
literature and the polite arts, and distinguished himself by the delicacy of
his manners, in opposition to the inelegant customs that prevailed in his
father's court. The late king was much addicted to drinking, a reigning vice in
Germany: the prince abominated this beastly practice, and in consequence of
this and other causes of dissatisfaction, he determined to retire from court in
a private manner, and take up his residence in England; but his intentions
being discovered, an unhappy gentleman, who was in his confidence, lost his
head, and the plan was frustrated.

When princes are really God's vicegerents, religion must be the basis of their
government. This prince, however, is by many reputed a free thinker of the
worst class; but the rule of his government, and his exemption from the
vanities and mean gratifications of life, do not favor so harsh a judgment.

In one circumstance his majesty excels any European potentate; I mean in
economy. The allowance of his table is but thirty crowns a day, fish and wine
excepted, in which he is by no means extravagant. Potsdam is his favorite
residence, and here he avoids the empty parade of a court. He entertains at his
table twelve persons: his favorite ministers and foreign ambassadors, who
happen to be in attendance there, are first invited, and his military officers,
even to an ensign fill up the vacant places. But this is not the only method he
takes to ingratiate himself with his soldiery. The humblest officer knows that
his injuries will be redressed by the king; for wherever he may be stationed,
he needs only to write to his sovereign, and by the return of the post he may
expect an answer, frequently written by the prince's own hand. He sometimes
even condescends to advise, where he thinks the party errs in judgment, or is
influenced by unreasonable desires.

His conversation is free and easy, even to pleasantry; but he knows how to
support his dignity, not only through fear but affection.

He is choice in his food, but eats moderately; and mixes water with his wine.
He takes Spanish snuff to excess, and his clothes frequently bear the marks of
this harmless though inelegant practice.

His face is florid, and his looks inclined to the pensive, or rather are
expressive of the incessant labor of the mind. He begins to stoop, and is
plump rather than corpulent. He often appears in boots, and always in
regimentals; and he is master only of one change for the winter, and another
for the summer. Our author saw his wardrobe, which is either mean or noble,
according to the impression it makes on the spectator. Little minds, which are
caught by show, will receive small gratification from the display.

So little does he observe useless forms, that he has risen from his chair at
his writing table, and ordered his secretary to take his place, and write down
what he dictated standing. He often asks his most familiar favorites, if they
think the condition of a king desirable above all others: and then tells them
how easily they may rectify their opinion, by observing what labor and
attention the duties of a king impose on him.

Besides his great skill in music, in which he is a composer as well as a
performer, he has a taste for poetry; and after undergoing the fatigues of a
general in the day, he possesses such tranquillity as to answer letters of
pleasure and politeness in the evening, or even to compose verses

The grand secret of life, with regard to the execution of business of every
kind, is a proper distribution of the several hours of the day; which nobody
understands better than his Prussian majesty. He generally goes to bed early,
and, after seven or eight hours rest, gets up, and pursues his stated routine
of business or amusement. When not engaged in war, he generally spends a short
time every morning in playing on the German flute, before he enters his
cabinet, where he stays till eleven: he then receives foreign ministers, and
transacts other public avocations till noon; when he usually goes abroad and
gratifies himself in performing the duties of a general, and keeping up the
spirit of discipline. Soon after one, dinner is served up: about three, a
secretary comes to read to him; and in the evening he has a concert. This is
the usual mode in which he fills up the day; and the regularity of the
sovereign is carried into every department of the state.

His reputation is established on the firmest foundation, was it only for that
bold and generous stroke in politics, by which he delivered his country from
the jaws of hireling lawyers, who, before his time, sported with the sufferings
of the wretched, and saw unmoved, the tears of the widow. In the Prussian
dominions the decision of causes cannot be protracted to a ruinous length, nor
carried to an enormous expense. We will venture to affirm, that a prompt and
cheap execution of distributive justice, is one of the greatest blessings of
any country, and without it, no country can be happy.


Potsdam is agreeably situated on a branch of the Spree, and is an elegant and
regular town. The palace is small but handsome; and some of the apartments are
richly furnished with works of mechanic art, and the finest productions of
taste and genius

Here the royal guards are quartered, who amount to two thousand men, all of
large stature, personable, and well clothed. They are distinguished by wearing
silver laced hats and black cockades. His present majesty has wisely declined
the oppressive measures practiced by his father, to keep up a race of giants,
and yet they are still remarkably tall. The officers dine every day in a large
apartment at the king's expense.

The Prussian soldiers, in general, have remarkably short coats, strengthened
at the elbows with leather, in the form of a heart; which prevents the
necessity of patching an old garment. A soldier here is never seen in rags; but
as far as respects personal neatness, all appear to be gentlemen. The guards,
and some other regiments, have new clothes every year; but in general, two
suits serve for three years. The pay of a common soldier is eight grosch, or
fourteen pence a week, out of which they are supposed to spend three pence in
washing, and in materials for cleaning their arms; but it should be observed,
that they are furnished with bread gratis

Our traveller next visited Sans Souci, in the vicinity of Potsdam. It stands
on an eminence, and enjoys a fine view of the town, and a small branch of the
Spree which washes the gardens. The apartments are chiefly on the ground floor,
and are splendidly furnished From the palace to the lower end of the garden is
a descent of one hundred and twenty yards, by six several ranges of stone
steps, and as many terraces, the sides of which are planted with vines under
glass frames, by which means the grapes are brought to great perfection. The
lower part of the garden is adorned with several fine statues, particularly
Venus drawing a net, and a Diana with game, on pedestals, richly ornamented
with alto relievo. At the eastern extremity is an Egyptian pyramid embellished
with hieroglyphics.

Mr Hanway now took his leave of Berlin, and proceeded through woods and sandy
plains to Britzen, which is the Prussian frontier. He then entered the
Electorate of Saxony, where the brightness of the verdure, the richness of the
soil, and the various productions of nature, both animate and inanimate, gave
the idea of plenty, superior to what he had seen in Prussia; yet, many of the
inhabitants of the latter have been tempted, by political advantages, to change
their country for the more steril soil of Prussia. Hence the towns erected by
his Prussian majesty on his frontiers, are almost wholly peopled by Saxons.

At length our author arrived at Wittenburg, a fortified town on the Elbe,
famous for a manufactory of coarse cloth, the wool of this country being good
and plentiful. Clothes are sent hither from all parts to be dyed, and the blues
and greens, commonly called Saxon, here are supposed to receive their finest
tints.

In this place is an academy, with nearly seven hundred students, and here is
the Sokoloff church, where Martin Luther first preached the doctrine which gave
rise to the reformation. In this church too, that great reformer is inferred;
but has no other monument than a brass plate with an inscription, except his
original portrait painted on wood, and well preserved.

The people here have a strong tincture of the Romish superstition, and the
credulous maintain, that the devil visited Luther in the library, now belonging
to the academy; but that the reformer received him by throwing his inkstand at
his head.

In passing through this electorate, Mr. Hanway observed, that the fertility of
the soil did not operate much to increase the opulence of the inhabitants. On
the 25th, he saw Molsberg, a hunting palace of the Elector of Saxony, situated
on an eminence near the village of Isengberg Its approach is by a long avenue,
planted with wild chestnut trees, and is encompassed by woods, in which the
prince takes such delight in hunting the wild boar, that he fixes his residence
here sometimes for months successively.

Hunting, indeed is the favorite diversion of the Saxon court, but by
indulging this too far, the subjects are more distressed than the brutes. Above
thirty thousand head of deer are said to range in the open fields and forests;
but though they commit terrible depredations on the crops of the farmer, he
dares not kill one, under the penalty of being sent to the galleys. In every
town of note, five men keep watch every night by rotation to frighten the deer
away, will bells, from destroying their corn.

The peasants of this country carry their provisions to market from a great
distance in wheelbarrows, whose structure is well adapted for this purpose. The
wheel is bound with iron, and is both larger and lighter than those used in
England

Dresden, the capital, is seated in the midst of a plain, surrounded by lofty
distant hills, the nearest of which are converted into vineyards. The Elbe
divides it into two parts, over which is a stone bridge, five hundred and forty
feet long, and thirty-six broad, consisting of eighteen arches Upon this
structure stands a brazen crucifix of curious workmanship.

The city contains many handsome buildings, six or seven stories high, and
several elegant squares Near the entrance of what is called the New city is an
equestrian statue of Augustus II. erected on a lofty pedestal, said to have
been executed by a common smith, and as such deserves admiration, though it has
many capital defects

The trade of Dresden is very inconsiderable, consisting chiefly in silver
ingots, brought every fifteen days from the mines of F^idburg, to the amount of
twenty thousand dollars. This silver is immediately coined into florins, of
higher value than the current coin, on which account it is conveyed into the
neighboring territories, and melted down into pieces of other denominations.

Among the calamities under which this electorate labors, that of religious
jealousy is none of the least. The Lutheran clergy oppress the Calvinists;
while both think themselves extremely injured, by the countenance given at
court to the Roman Catholics. The Protestants deem it a gross absurdity to be
ruled by a Catholic prince; for, according to the established Saxon
constitution only one Catholic church can be allowed at Dresden. A chapel,
however, is connived at, as a private place of worship.

Our author visited the Grune Gewolbe, a part of the royal palace, consisting
of several apartments; replete with curiosities, which have been collected at
an immense expense.

The first chamber contains one hundred small, but exquisite, statues,
principally in brass. Among others, are an equestrian statue of Augustus II.
King of Poland, Frederic William the Great of Prussia, after the famous statue
of Berlin, Lewis XIV. Mercurius, Centaurs, etc.

The second chamber contains a variety of ivory figures, among which are
Abraham offering up his son Isaac, with the angel descending, all of exquisite
workmanship; a fine crucifix; and a ship completely rigged, with ropes of gold
wire.

The third is filled with silver ornaments, in particular, a large fountain,
and four vases of vast size.

The fourth contains vessels of pure gold, and silver gilt. The pannels of this
apartment are of looking glass

The fifth is a spacious room, in which are many precious stones, wrought with
great art; a cup of lapis nephriticus; a statue of Charles II. of England; a
hall of crystal, six inches in diameter, without a blemish; a large goblet set
round with the most curious and costly antiques; several tables in mosaic; and
the angel Michael vanquishing the devil, admirably executed in wood, and which
cost in England, where it was made, two thousand five hundred pounds.

The sixth chamber contains a collection of precious stones, with an infinite
variety of pearls, set in a multiplicity of forms.

The seventh and eighth apartments are stored with jewels of immense value,
enclosed in glass cases. Among other rich curiosities, is a representation of
the throne of the Great Mogul, in silver figures enamelled, and adorned with
precious stones, with a view of princes offering their presents, and falling
prostrate, with elephants, soldiers, servants, and attendants.

Mr. Hanway having gratified his curiosity here, paid a visit to the cabinet of
curiosities, called the Kunstkammer

The first chamber contains a series of prints, from the commencement of
engraving to the present time.

The second is filled with minerals, ores, and earths, from every country.

The third contains petrifactions, particularly of animals and wood.

In the fourth chamber are different kinds of wood, and other vegetable
productions; in particular, a cabinet, with three hundred and fifty squares,
about the size of the palm of a hand, all run in flat, as drawers, of as many
different kinds of wood. In this apartment, likewise, are the portraits of a
man and his wife, who lived near Tamiswar: the man was one hundred and
eighty-five years old, and the woman one hundred and seventy-two.

In the fifth chamber is a small cabinet of skeletons, and other anatomical
preparations. The sixth contains the skins of many different animals stuffed.
The seventh the skins of fishes stuffed. The eighth is devoted to shells. In
the ninth is a cabinet of about six feet high and four broad, every drawer of
which has some natural curiosity in amber. In the tenth is a grotto with
springs of water The eleventh contains corals The twelfth is filled with the
skeletons of lions, bears, and other extraordinary animals, particularly that
of a horse, whose mane is said to be three ell and a half long, and his tail
twelve and a half.

Our author was then shown, in an apartment at some distance, a model of
Solomon's temple, with all its furniture, which cost twelve thousand crowns.

The gallery of pictures next fell under his observation, which is one of the
finest in the world. It contains one hundred pieces of superlative value, all
said to be originals, and to have cost half a million of crowns. The whole
collection consists of above two thousand pieces, the capital works of Raphael,
Rubens, and Corregio. Their aggregate value is about half a million sterling.

The Chinese palace, as it is called, is a capital object of attraction. It
stands on the Elbe, and is built in the Chinese taste throughout. In its
different apartments are many natural and artificial curiosities, too numerous
to be particularized. Among other articles are forty-eight China vases of great
size, with which the father of the present elector was so charmed, that he
purchased them of the late king of Prussia, at the price of a whole regiment of
dragoons.

The royal gardens, though fine, want that charm which arises from an
inequality of ground. They contain a small palace, in the front of which is a
field for tournaments, and behind a sheet of water. They are adorned with a
profusion of marble statues, many of them colossal; and pourtray the genius of
the late King of Poland, Elector of Saxony, who, being entirely devoted to his
amors, left them as monuments of his laciviousness

Some of the palaces of the grandees are very beautiful, particularly that of
Count Bruhl, which is fitted up with princely magnificence. His library is two
hundred and twenty feet long, and well furnished with books. Nor is his gallery
of pictures much inferior to some royal collections.

It is said that Saxony contains thirty thousand towns and villages, of which
sixty are to be seen from some eminences near Dresden. The population of the
electorate is computed at four millions; but this seems to be exaggerated. The
people are burdened with many heavy taxes, and the expenses of the court, in
delicacies only, is said to be twice as much as the King of Prussia allows for
his whole table.

During Mr. Hanway's residence here, he was introduced to M. Calkoen, who had
been ambassador from the United Netherlands to the Ottoman Port, and was now
envoy to the King of Poland.

He had formerly resided in England, and professed himself an admirer of that
nation. At his table were Polanders, Italians, French, and Germans. The
conversation, at first, turned on Nadir Shah, when our author was asked, which
of the countries he had seen he thought most agreeable, and where a man of
sentiment would choose to spend his days. Mr. Hanway modestly replied, that his
knowledge of the world was very limited; that he had seen a great deal of
misery in one shape or other, in every country he had visited; but, after a
pause, determined in favor of England The company seemed surprised at his
hesitation; and expressed their suffrage by a loud, but polite applause, and
unanimously agreed in praise of this happy isle.

On the 30th of August, Mr. Hanway left Dresden, and traveled toward Meissen.
He was captivated with the rural charms of the country; the cornfieldsd, the
vineyards, and the different prospects of the Elbe. On approaching Meissen, the
valley contracts, and some of the houses of this town are built on lofty rocks
that rise perpendicular from the Elbe, and have a most romantic appearance.

The castle of Meissen, in which the porcelain manufactory is carried on,
stands on the western bank of the Elbe, and is a large building, capable of
some defense. No person is admitted here without an order from the governor of
Dresden, nor are the workmen allowed to leave the gates, on pain of being
closely confined; though, in fact, they are all prisoners in a limited sense.
They amount to about seven hundred; and so moderate is their pay, that the
annual expense of this establishment is not estimated at more than eighty
thousand crowns. This manufacture, which is kept so secret, is entirely on the
elector's account, who sells porcelain to the amount of one hundred and fifty,
or two hundred thousand crowns a year.

After passing the Elbe, and mounting a steep ascent, our author entered on a
fine champaign country, where the soil is rich and well cultivated, and towns
and villages agreeably intermixed. At length he arrived at St. Hubertsberg,
another hunting palace, belonging to the elector, which is extremely well
situated for its destination. This building is large, and some of the
apartments are superlatively fine.

Proceeding on his journey, he met with nothing worth notice till he came to
Leipsic, one of the greatest trading towns of Germany, though it has no river
of any magnitude near it. Here are three fairs, -- on New Year's Day, Easter,
and Michaelmas, to which resort, people of almost every European nation, either
to buy or sell. But what adds to the pre-eminence of Leipsic over many cities,
which have superior local advantages is that liberty of conscience granted to
all religions It is astonishing that the obvious advantages resulting from
toleration, have not yet put a final end to bigotry, and that men should still
be weak enough to think they honor God by persecuting his creatures.
Hence the inhabitants are distinguished for their industry, and their progress
in moral and intellectual improvement. This is the seat of a considerable
university. The inhabitants amount to about forty thousand within the walls,
and the suburbs are also very populous.

The fortifications seem rather calculated for the use of the inhabitants to
walk on, than for defense. The citizens, however, maintain two hundred
soldiers. The streets are clean and commodious, and the houses in general are
lofty, with elegant fronts.

In the vicinity of Leipsic are fine gardens; that called the Apel garden, in
particular, is laid out in an excellent taste, and is ornamented with statues,
which, though not masterly performances, are so ranged as to have a pleasing
effect.

In his road to Landsperg, Mr. Hanway had a distant view of Hall, famous for
its university. At Landsperg he re-entered the Prussian dominions; the
transition from one sovereignty to another, being very rapid in Germany, from
the intermixture of property, and the small extent of principalities. Indeed
the subjects of the petty states of Germany, which are very numerous, are the
most oppressed of human beings. Their princes, by every art of exaction, can
scarcely raise enough to support their affected dignity; though it may be
supposed that their necessities render them ingenious in devising the means of
obtaining supplies. Yet poverty and morality seem in this country at least to
be intimately allied; for thefts and robberies are hardly known.

On the 3d of September, our author arrived at Magdeburg, distinguished for its
fortifications, which are immensely strong. This city is under the sovereignty
of the King of Prussia, and is remarkable for its magazines of merchandise,
which are spread from this center over the surrounding country. In the great
square is an ancient statue of the emperor Otho, who is said to have founded
this city in the year 930

Soon after quitting Magdeburg, Mr. Hanway had a fracas with a custom-house
officer, on account of the postillion attempting to evade the payment of a
certain duty. However, by his spirited conduct, he brought himself off in the
most honorable manner, and was allowed to pursue his journey without
molestation. It should be observed, that the German postillions wear the
liveries of the countries to which they belong; and use small French horns,
which some of them sound in no unpleasant manner.

At Helmstet, belonging to the Duke of Brunswick, are two hundred students,
chiefly supported by the bounty of their sovereign. Four German miles farther,
lies Wolsinbuttel, where our traveller arrived after the gates were shut, but
procured admission.

The fortifications are neat and regular, and the houses appear comfortable,
but not grand. The ducal palace answers the same description; but it has
several well-furnished apartments, and two small galleries of pictures. Mr.
Hanway declined seeing the public library, for want of time to examine its
contents, thinking that the simple view of books is a more barren
entertainment, than surveying the sky, without contemplating him who made it.

Next day he reached Brunswick, a well fortified place. This is the ducal
residence, and has an arsenal well filled with every kind of armor and
ordnance. On the ramparts is a brass mortar piece, made in 1411, which is ten
feet long, and nine feet in diameter. It requires fifty-two pounds of powder to
charge it, and will carry a ball of seven hundred and thirty pounds weight to
the distance of thirty-two thousand paces, and throw a bomb of one thousand
pounds weight.

The military are clothed and trained nearly after the Prussian model: in times
of peace they are estimated at thirteen thousand men; and yet the revenues of
the country are said not to exceed two hundred and sixty thousand pounds
sterling a year.

Brunswick contains several churches, one of which is a very ancient Gothic
structure, and has its ceiling ornamented with twenty large paintings,
representing the prophets in the Old Testament in the clouds of heaven, which
communicate a very solemn air to the edifice. The high al^^^ is of marble,
supported by Aaron and Moses, and surrounded by statues of the four evangelists.

This court is distinguished for its politeness, particularly to the English,
who pass this way The duke seems more attached to ease and happiness, than vain
parade. His coach is generally attended by no more than seven servants, and
some of his family always occupy the vacant seats.

The palace of Saltzdahlen stands above a German mile from Brunswick, and is
chiefly constructed of timber, lined with painted cloth, which gives the
apartments an air of grandeur at a small expense. The picture gallery is a
noble apartment, and contains many capital productions of the pencil. The left
wing is furnished in a grotesque taste, with porcelain; and another is filled
with painted enamelled ware, great part of which is said to have been executed
by Raphael d'Urbino, while he was enamoured of the potter's daughter.

Among the most celebrated paintings, are Adam and Eve viewing the dead body of
Abel, and trying to open his eyes; Abraham embracing his own son, after the
trial which God had made of his faith; Peter delivered from prison by the
angel; Judith and her attendant holding the head of Holifernes, which still
seems to retain the last traces of life; Cephalus and Procris; and various
others.

The duchy of Brunswick carries on a pretty extensive trade with Bohemia. It
abounds in hops, esteemed the best in the empire; and much oil is made from
turnip seed.

On approaching the city of Hanover, it appeared embosomed in trees, through
which vistas are cut; and so extensive are the woods in the environs, that
though our author says it was computed eighty thousand trees had been blown
down in a late storm, they could scarcely be missed.

Hanover, in many respects, is a pleasant place, and may be esteemed elegant.
It is washed by the Lena, a branch of the Alie^^ which runs into the Weser, and
consequently it has a communication with Bremen.

The electoral palace is seated on the banks of the Lena. It has several
courts, and many grand and commodious apartments, some of which are hung with
very rich tapestry. The opera-house and the theater for the French comedians
are both within the palace. During the winter, plays are regularly performed,
and concerts are given twice a week, when the courtiers, without exception,
take place, according to their military rank. A guard is always mounted, and an
open table kept for the council of state, even when the king is not in his
electoral dominions.

The military force, in time of peace, is about twenty-four thousand men, and
the revenues of the electorate amount to seven hundred thousand pounds, a
considerable part of which arises from the silver mines.

Herenhausen, situated about two English miles to the north of Hanover, is
always considered as an object of attraction to travelers. Our author says, he
knows not whether he was more mortified or surprised, to find that this
celebrated palace fell vastly short of his expectations. It was built in the
year 1670, by the elector Ernest Augustus; the greatest part is of wood, and
though the apartments are large, they are far from being magnificent Some of
the furniture, however, is rich, and the pictures deserve admiration.

The gardens are very beautiful. Mr. Hanway says he had seen none in Germany to
be compared with them, though they were not laid out in that exquisite taste,
of which there are so numerous specimens in England. They are adorned with
statues; and the jet d'eau, formed in 1716, by Mr. Benson, perhaps, is
unrivalled, as it throws up the water seventy feet high. Here, according to the
German taste, is a sylvan theater, adorned with statues, on which are sometimes
exhibited plays and masquerades.

On the 15th of September, Mr. Hanway set out for Zell. By the road, he
observed in several places, the remains of ancient buildings, about three feet
high, which the vulgar ridiculously imagine are of an era coeval with the deluge

Zell, which is subject to Hanover, is a considerable fortified place The
palace is situated on an eminence commanding a fine prospect, and is itself a
strong post. The houses are mostly mean wooden structures. This place has an
inconsiderable trade with Bremen, by means of the river Aller.

In his way to Weissendorf, he passed through a barren country, fit only to
support flocks of sheep; and indeed this electorate supplies the greatest part
of Germany with mutton, as Westphalia does with hogs, and Hungary with be^f

On the 17th he arrived a Hamburg, below which city the banks of the Elbe in
some places rise to a great height, and afford a delightful view of several
islets in the middle of the river, which is five or six miles broad.

Hamburg is one of the towns belonging to the Hanseatic league, and is a place
of the greatest importance. Its situation for trade, and the reputation of its
laws and government have peopled it with opulent merchants, who carry on an
extensive commerce. It stands in the duchy of Holstein, on the north side of
the Elbe, where that river forms many islands, and some of the streets are so
low, as to be frequently inundated by the tides.

The houses in general are substantially built, and make a stately appearance;
but many of the streets are so narrow, as to render it difficult to use wheel
carriages. However, there are some parts of the town which are open and airy;
but these being more remote from the river, are less frequented by commercial
people.

Hamburgh is, with respect to Germany, what Amsterdam is to Europe -- the
general emporium of natural produce and manufacture. By means of canals, ships
may unload at the warehouses, which are stored with the most valuable
commodities.

The whole number of vessels, of considerable burden, belonging to the town, is
computed at four hundred; some of the largest of which trade to and from
London. The British factory here is possessed of as many distinguished
privileges as any body of foreigners enjoy in the commercial world.

The fortifications on the land side are reckoned very strong. The walks round
the ramparts extend about four English miles, and, in most places, are very
pleasant. On the east side of the town is a fine piece of water, formed by the
Alster, within the walls, which, in the summer, is covered with pleasure-boats.
The citizens have several gardens on the banks of the Elbe and the Alster; they
are kept in the neatest trim; and, from their diminutive size, appear more like
a puppet-show than a rural scene.

The city is divided into five parishes, which have as many capital churches.
Lutheranism is the established religion, and Roman Catholics are objects of
great jealousy; but the Jews, the universal brokers of nations, live unmolested.

The government of Hamburg is vested in four burgomasters, and twenty-four
senators; fourteen of whom are chosen from among the merchants, and ten from
the professors of the law. There are also four syndics, who act as secretaries
of state, and as many professed secretaries. Besides, every parish has the
appointment of three officers, in the nature of the tribunes among the ancient
Romans; and nothing of moment is determined by the senate without their
concurrence. The population within the walls may be computed at one hundred and
eighty thousand souls, and it is probable, that the suburbs and adjacent
villages contain about half that number. Except sugar-baking and cotton
printing, the manufactures of this place are very inconsiderable.

The better sort of people, among the men, are very affable; but the women
appear reserved. State and grandeur are here lost in the superior attention to
commercial pursuits. Indeed the easy circumstances of the majority of the
inhabitants, and the equality of the constitution under which they live, have
infused a certain degree of republican independence, which tinctures their
manners. This spirit of insubordination is perceptible even in the lowest
classes; not that it prompts them to acts of riot, but it gives them a kind of
consequence, which, where the gradations of rank are observed, would appear
insolent.

On the 20th of September, Mr. Hanway proceeded to Blankeness by a delightful
road, on the banks of the Elbe, which affords a fine and extensive view of part
of the Hanoverian dominions on the west, and of Holstein an appendage of
Denmark, on the east. For some days he observed nothing worth notice in the
country or towns through which he passed.

On the 1st of October, he reached Closter Seven. The surrounding territory is
thinly inhabited; but, as he approached Bremen, the aspect in fertility and
population began to improve About three English miles from Bremen, he observed
three stones bearing the British arms, which mark the limits of the Hanoverian
dominions.

Bremen is seated on a plain, on both sides of the Weser, over which it has a
bridge. This duchy formerly belonged to Sweden; but being conquered by the
Danes, was sold to the Elector of Hanover in 1716; yet only a small part of the
town is subject to that electorate. The rest, with its adjacent territory, is
independent, and is governed by its own laws and magistrates.

Calvinism is the prevailing religion here, and there are five churches for
citizens of that persuasion. The inhabitants amount to thirty thousand; and,
were we to judge from the frequent appearance of Soli Deo Gloria, painted in
large characters over their doors and windows, both within and without, we
should conclude that they were pious indeed.

Most of the streets are narrow, but many of the buildings make a handsome
appearance, and the shops are full of merchandise. In the marketplace is the
figure of a giant fourteen feet high, clothed in armor, s^id to represent a
general who saved the city when it was in the utmost danger from its enemies.
The great dome devoted to the Lutheran religion, is the most remarkable
structure in the place. It is built in the Gothic style, and seems to possess
the quality of preserving the bodies of the dead from corruption. In
confirmation of this, it is reported that corpses, which had been buried one
hundred and fifty year, were discovered entire, with their skins black and
parched, but the features distinguishable, and the cohesion of the parts
unaltered. The vault in which they were deposited, is about six feet below the
surface of the earth, arched over, and seems to have nothing extraordinary,
except that the air is temperate, and perfectly dry.

Several persons have offered considerable sums to have their bodies deposited
in this receptacle of mortality: but the priests, it is said, refused the idle
boon; alleging that it is the decree of heaven, "that man should return to the
dust from which he was made."

The vicinity of Bremen being subject to inundations, a long causeway is raised
for the convenience of traveling. Passing along this, Mr. Hanway re-entered
the Prussian dominions, and at length arrived at Wildeshausen, a principal
town, and the residence of the great bailiff of the district.

From thence he advanced to Hasselune, a pretty agreeable town, in the
electorate of Cologn. Poverty and superstition reign here unrivalled: a
crucifix is erected on almost every spot subject to observation.

Lingen was the next stage. This lies in the circle of Westphalia, and is
subject to the King of Prussia The town is fortified, and the buildings are
neat, the general character of places under the sovereignty of Prussia.

Our author now approached the confines of the United Netherlands, where the
women appeared almost blinded with the smoke arising from the turf, which is
here the usual fuel. The little towns he began to pass through, exhibited that
characteristic cleanliness, for which the Dutch are so remarkable.

In a short time he arrived at Daventer, a large city in the province of
Overyffel, which formerly constituted one of the Hanse towns, but is now
subject to the States.

It stands on the river Yssel, which is navigable for vessels of large burden.
Over this stream is a wooden bridge, where passengers are subject to a heavy
toll. The town is well fortified, and has a strong garrison. The houses and
streets are neat, and the inland trade is considerable.

From hence is a regular stage to Voorthusen, and about midway is Loo, a famous
seat of the Prince of Orange. Voorthusen is a mean village, and the environs
are not very inviting.

At the distance of two German miles beyond this, lies Amersfort. On
approaching this place, evident signs appear of the persevering industry of the
Dutch. The tobacco plantations are formed with great labor, and for an
article, whose consumption is so universal in the Netherlands, perhaps no
expense or trouble is too great

Amersfort is an ancient and pretty large town, on the small river Eems, which
runs into the Zuyder Sea. The houses are clean to an extreme, but the manners
of the people are far from being equally delicate; and their rusticity is shown
in their contempt for strangers.

About two English miles from this town stands Soesdyke, a palace belonging to
the Orange family, with a park of eight miles in circumference.

Our author being impatient to reach Amsterdam, declined visiting Utrecht. In
his way he passed through Naarden, the boundary of the province of Holland, and
a well fortified place, standing near the Zuyder Sea. From hence to Amsterdam
is reckoned two German miles. The whole country appears below the level of the
sea, but is enriched with gardens and luxuriant pastures. In the avenue to
Amsterdam, is a causeway lined with villages and gardens, which add greatly to
the beauty of this artificial country.

The city of Amsterdam, as well as many others in the Netherlands, are works of
art and labor, not inferior to the greatest monuments of human industry in
ancient times. It stands about two hundred and twenty miles eastward from
London, and derives its name from the river Amstel, or the dam of the Amstel,
which, by corruption, assumes its present appellation.

Our author computes that it is about four hundred years old from its first
foundation, and two hundred and seventy from the era that it was enclosed with
walls. In 1570 the Dutch began to lay the basis of their opulence and power.
Embracing Calvinism, and wearied with the oppressions of the Spanish
government, they emancipated themselves into liberty, after a long struggle and
many conflicts, and formed a great republic.

About the year 1660, the flame of liberty occasioned such a conflux of people
to Amsterdam, that the walls were extended, and by subsequent enlargements,
they are become three leagues in circuit. The city is esteemed nearly one third
as populous as London or Paris; and within the walls are computed to be
twenty-six thousand five hundred houses.

The main strength of the place consists in the difficulty of access both by
sea and land; but the numerous shoals that obstruct the mouth of the Texel have
proved no bar to commercial enterprise, though they render navigation dangerous
to ships of war. Economy is here perceptible in every thing: even the bastions
of the fortifications, which are very numerous, have each a windmill.

Many of the streets are lined with canals and planted with trees. No wheel
carriages are allowed to be drawn here, except on paying a heavy duty. Coaches
are set on sledges, drawn by one horse, and on the same vehicle goods and
merchandise of every kind are conveyed from one place of the town to another.

The houses are rather distinguished for neatness than elegance; and the
principal care of the inhabitants seems to be laid out in keeping them clean,
which the nature of the climate renders in some measure necessary; but personal
elegance is far from keeping pace with domestic neatness.

Of all the buildings in Amsterdam, the townhouse is the most remarkable Its
front extends two hundred and eighty-two feet in length, its depth is two
hundred and thirty-two feet, and its height one hundred and sixteen feet,
exclusive of the cupola The expense of its erection cost three millions of
Guilders, which, considering the value of money at that period, is an
astonishing sum; but it should he considered, that it stands on thirteen
thousand large piles of wood, so that the foundation greatly enhanced the
expense.

This immense fabric contains the offices and tribunals for the execution of
the laws, in every branch of government. It is nightly guarded by a body of the
burghers, who are charged with the protection of this great reservoir of the
wealth of the United Provinces. The bank, which is kept in the lower
apartments, is said to contain immense sums of specie.

The Exchange is likewise a spacious and convenient structure. It is supported
by forty-six pillars marked with numbers, and every merchant has his particular
station, that he may be the more easily found.

Though Calvinism is the established religion, all persuasions are allowed the
free exercise of their modes of worship. The Jews are very numerous, and have
several synagogues. To render marriages, however, valid, they must either be
performed according to the rites of the established church, or the parties must
first enter into a contract before the civil magistrate; after which they are
indulged with their own particular ceremonies.

In passing over the Ya to Saardam, our author observed the various purposes to
which windmills are applied in this country. They are used for sawing timber,
for grinding woods and other materials for dyeing, and for almost every
manufacture to which machinery is applicable.

The dykes are prodigious monuments of labor, and many of them are lined with
large stones. That which bounds the Zuyder Sea, is raised sixteen feet
perpendicular, and goes off on an easy slope.

The danger of such a dreadful element as the sea, is almost equal to that of a
volcano, and the Dutch have often suffered from its inroads. In spite of their
utmost skill and industry, their dykes have proved ineffectual to secure them.
In 1530, a great part of Zealand was overflowed, and in the same century,
seventy-two villages on the coast of Holland were swallowed up, and twenty
thousand people perished. Other inundations have happened at different periods,
and spread desolation over extensive tracts

Amsterdam is a prodigious magazine of corn, wine, timber, and naval stores.
Its herring and whale fisheries bring in immense wealth; and the rich
productions of their oriental possessions being poured in here, add immensely
to the opulence and commerce of this emporium.

Though there are many Hollanders who live elegantly, the manners of the common
people are extremely boorish. Our author observes, that he has seen a boatman
in a great city, strut up and down a room with his hat on, and spit with a
careless air of insolence at the feet of a gentleman who was treating him with
civility, and throwing emolument in his way. This behavior they mistake for
liberty, as if liberty were inconsistent with propriety of manner.

Cheese, beer, Geneva, brandy, and tobacco, with red herrings, are the luxuries
of the common people, who in their cups are apt to mix rusticity with cruelty.

Constant employment, coldness of complexion, and an ungenial kind of food, may
perhaps account for their indifference to the passion of love. Except among the
higher ranks, female beauty is scarcely to be met with, nor does their dress
set off their homely persons to any advantage.

The women here are generally past parturition at thirty years of age, and as
the men are singular for their large breeches, so the women are remarkable for
using pots of live coals, which they place under their petticoats as they sit,
to warm themselves; which is not only an offensive custom, but in a physical
light, is attended with many ill consequences. Hence the proverb, "that the
dirtiest piece of furniture in a Dutchman's house is his wife."

Mr. Hanway quitted Amsterdam on the 16th of October, and embarking at the
Haerlem gate, proceeded down the canal in a treckscoot to that town, passing
through a succession of rich meadows well stocked with cattle.

From Haerlem he proceeded to Leyden, through a pleasant and rich country. This
city is well known for its university, to which students resort from all parts
of Europe. The houses are neat, and the surrounding gardens very pleasant; but
here the water becomes stagnant, and in consequence disagreeable.

Our author next visited the Hague, which having no enclosure, is denominated a
village though it is the most elegant place in the Netherlands. The streets are
broad, and the gaiety and splendour of the inhabitants form a striking contrast
to the style of life in the trading cities. The assembly of the States General
being held here, draws hither all the principal people of distinction of the
different provinces, and the ambassadors from the other European courts. In
short, the Hague is the seat of amusement, of parade, and magnificence, in the
United Provinces

Delft, which was the next place our author visited, is a very ancient and
pleasant town, environed by meadows of considerable extent. This place is
famous for its earthen ware, and its population, is computed at twenty thousand
persons.

Rotterdam, about seven miles distant, may justly be considered as the second
city of Holland. Indeed it has several advantages over Amsterdam itself,
particularly with respect to the southern trade of Europe: besides, the
navigation of the Maese is more safe and commodious than that of the Texel, and
the air and water are better.

Among other public structures, is an exchange for the merchants; but the most
remarkable edifice is the great church of St. Lawrence, in which are the
monuments of several persons of distinction On the great bridge is the statue
of the illustrious Erasmus.

The British factory here is chiefly composed of North Britons, who have a
Calvinistic church. During the wars in Flanders, under the great Duke of
Marlborough, an episcopal church was erected by the contribution of the English
officers, merchants, and mariners, which is said to be the only regular
episcopal church, countenanced and established, belonging to the subjects of
Great Britain, in a foreign country.

On the 27th of October, Mr. Hanway sailed down the Maese to Helvoet Sluys.
Though this is one of the best harbors in the United Provinces, the town is of
no great extent. Here our traveller had the pleasure to find a small squadron
of British ships of war, under the command of Lord Anson, intended to convey
George II. to England. The sight of his country's ships of war was the more
agreeable, as he had not enjoyed such a view for the long space of eight years.

Embarking at this place next day in the packet for Harwich, he landed safe on
the British shore, after a passage of twenty-four hours, and thus closed his
extensive perigrinations.

FINIS.

