THE CASE OF THE GEORGIA SALES ON THE MISSISSIPPI CONSIDERED.

With a Reference to LAW AUTHORITIES AND PUBLIC ACTS AND AN APPENDIX,
Containing certain Extracts, Records, and Official Papers.

Philadelphia: PRINTED FOR BENJAMIN DAVIES, No. 68, HIGH STREET. 1797.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The following piece was drawn up at the request of some gentlemen who are
interested in the purchases of land on the Mississippi and Donbigby, lately
made from the state of Georgia. It was their object to obtain, not merely a
legal opinion, but such a statement and examination of the subject, as might
enable persons inclined to enquire into it, to understand the case, and judge
for themselves. With this view it is now presented to the public by their
direction. Whatever may be thought of the authors conclusions, it is hoped that
his statement and references will be found of some use.

Philadelphia Feb. 3, 1797.
THE CASE OF THE GEORGIA SALES ON THE MISSISSIPPI CONSIDERED etc.
THE Opinion of counsel is required on the following points.

I. Whether any claims of the United States can affect the purchases of land
made from the state of Georgia in 1795, by the Upper Missisippi and Georgia
Companies or either of them? II. Whether those purchases can be affected by the
Act of the Georgia legislature passed February 3, 1796, and commonly called the
Repealing Act?
In answering the first of these questions it will be proper to consider the
claims of the United States under two points of view; first as they respect the
state of Georgia itself; and secondly, as they respect the purchasers under the
state. For, though in general, purchasers stand, as to all legal intents, in
the same situation with the seller, there may be particular circumstances which
will create a wide difference between them. It will be proper to enquire
whether these lands or any part of them belonged to the United States at the
time of the sale? and, in that case, whether it was attended or preceded by any
conduct on their part, which will render it valid against them in the eye of
the law?

In discussing the question "Whether any part of these lands belonged to the
United States at the time of the sale" we must carry back our attention to the
first discovery of North America, and take a review of the various public acts
by which the rights of soil and jurisdiction, to that part of it where the
lands in question lie, have been affected from that period to the present time.
Such other transactions as it may be necessary to recur to in other parts of
the investigation, though they have no immediate relation to this point, will,
for the sake of perspicuity, be noticed in the order in which they occurred.

It was a principle admitted by all the European nations in the establishment
and regulation of their American colonies, that prior discovery, accompanied by
actual occupation, and, in some cases, without it, vested the right of soil and
jurisdiction. Spain thus acquired her extensive dominions in South-America; and
by the same side she laid claim to Florida in the southern parts of the
North-American continent. England, also, by virtue of discoveries made under
her flag in the reign of Henry VII. claimed the whole extent of North America
from Florida to Hudson's bay. The boundary between her discoveries and Florida
remained for a long time uncertain, and was frequently the subject of dispute
between the two crowns. She claimed, however, as far south as the latitude
twenty-nine; and Spain at length ceded Florida to her, which put an end to the
contention.

England made settlements, at a very early period, in the northern and middle
parts of this extensive region, and erected governments which now compose the
states from Virginia to New Hampshire, inclusive. These governments were of two
kinds, royal and proprietary. In the former the right of soil and jurisdiction
remained in the crown; and their boundaries, though described by its letters
patent, were subject to alteration at its pleasure: for, as it possessed the
rights of soil and government, and delegated them to its governors, during
pleasure, it might dispose of them in what manner and to whom it thought fit,
might alter, extend, or abridge the delegation as its inclination or policy
might dictate. In the latter, the proprietary governments, the right of soil as
well jurisdiction was vested in the proprietors. Their charters were in the
nature of grants, and their limits being fixed by these charters could not be
altered but by their own consent. This distinction is particularly noticed
here, because in the progress of the discussion it will appear to be of very
great importance.

Most of the governments were at first proprietary; but, in progress of time,
the greater part of them, either by the forfeiture or surrender of the
charters, became royal.

The first of these charters, under which any settlement took place, was given
by Queen Elizabeth to Sir Walter Raleigh in the year 1584 Hazard's collection,
33.
. Like the previous charters from her and Henry VII. to Cabot, Sir Humphrey
Gilbert and others Ibid. 9, 11, 24.
, it was merely a commission to discover any countries not occupied by
Christian people, to take possession of them, and form settlements under the
allegiance of the crown of England. It also prohibited any other persons from
settling within two hundred miles of any place where he should (...), "within
six years." Under this charter he made two settlements: one south of the
Chesapeake, composed of about one hundred persons, who arrived in June 1585,
and returned to England in the June following: the other near the mouth of
James' river, and consisting of about the same number of settlers, who arrived
in the year 1587, and continued there. In the title of the charter it is said
that it shall continue in force for six years, and no more; but in the body of
it there is no limitation. In the year 1603 State trials, vol. i. p. 186.
, however, it was forfeited by the attainder of sir Walter Raleigh, for
treason, and the right re-vested in the crown.

In the year 1606, James I. by his letters patent dated April 10 Hazards col.
50.
, gave permission to two companies to form settlements on any part of the coast
of North America, between latitudes 34 and 45. These companies were denominated
the first and second colonies of Virginia: The first was to make its
settlements between 34 and 41 degrees of latitude, the second between 38 and
45. Neither was to settle within two hundred miles of any place previously
settled by the other. Each was to possess all the lands along the coast fifty
miles in both directions from the place of its first settlement, one hundred
miles back into the country, and all the islands within one hundred miles of
the coast. A council was appointed for the government of each colony, and it
was provided that all the lands contained within the above mentioned limits
should, on petition to the crown, be granted to such persons as the respective
councils should recommend.

It does not appear that any such grants were ever made; but James I. by
letters patent, dated May 23, 1609 Hazardss col. 58.
, separated the first colony from the second, and, on the petition of the
persons composing it, erected them and a number of others into a corporation
under the name of "The treasurer and a company of adventurers and planters of
the city of London, for the first colony of Virginia." All the lands along the
coast, two hundred miles south, and an equal distance north, of point Comfort,
and extending west to the South Sea, with the islands within one Hundred miles
of the coast, were granted to this company, commonly called the London company,
and their successors, in fee simple; in trust however, to be distributed among
settlers: and the powers of government were vested in two councils, one in
England, and one in America.

Point Comfort being about latitude 36, 30, the limits of this charter must
have extended south to about latitude 33. It is not easy to determine whether
the government erected by it ought to be considered as royal or proprietary;
but it has more the appearance of the former.

On the 12, of March 1612 Ibid. 72.
, James I. granted another charter to the London company, which confirms the
former, and adds to their territories all the islands within 300 leagues of the
lands formerly granted to them, and between the 30, and 41, degrees of latitude.

The company continued to exercise the powers of government, and dispose of the
rights of soil, within the limits allotted to them, till about the year 1624,
when the affairs of the colony appearing to be badly conducted, their charters
were forfeited by quo warranto Hazard's col. 83.89.
, and the government with all the rights of soil and jurisdiction taken into
the hands of the crown. By this resumption Virginia became, if it were not so
before, a royal government; and its boundaries became liable to abridgment or
alteration of the pleasure of the monarch.

The rights of soil and jurisdiction in all the lands south of the Chesapeake,
not actually appropriated being thus re-vested in the crown, king Charles I.
made a grant to sir Robert Heath, his attorney general, extending from the 30,
to the 36, degree of latitude north At. genesis report, 28.
. This grant was ever afterward considered as void, but whether by surrender,
nor user, or in what other manner, does not appear.

The next grant of this country was by Charles II. to lord Clarendon and others
bearing date March 24, 1662. It included "all that territory or tract of ground
situate, lying and being, within his said majesty's dominions in America,
extending from the north end of the island called Lucker island, which lies in
the northern Virginia seas, and within six and thirty degrees of the northern
latitude, and to the west as far as the South-Seas, and so southerly as far as
the river St. Matthias which bordereth upon the coast of Florida, and within
one-and-thirty degrees of northern latitude, and so within a direct line as far
as the South-Seas aforesaid." These grantees were afterward called "Lords
Proprietors," and the country contained within their boundaries was erected by
the charter into a province, under the name of "Carolina." Extensive immunities
were conferred on settlers, and the rights of soil and government, were vested
in the proprietors in fee simple.

By another charter from Charles II. bearing date June 30, 1664, the former was
confirmed, and its limits extended from latitude 36, 30 to latitude 29
inclusive, and from those points due west to the South Sea. At. genesis report,
47.


On the 25, of July 1726, the lords proprietors by deed duly executed,
surrendered to the crown all their rights under these charters Ibid. 44.72.
, lord Carteret alone one of the number, retained his share, and it was
afterward separately alloted to him in the northern parts of the province. The
surrender was accepted and confirmed by act of parliament, and by virtue of it
Carolina became a royal government. It was afterward divided into two
provinces, called North and South Carolina, by a line beginning at the north
end of long Bay, and running thence north-west to the latitude 35, and thence
due west to the South Sea; lord Carteret, better known by the name of lord
Granville, had his part laid off in North Carolina

George II. by letters patent bearing date on the 9, of June 1732 Ibid. 91.97.
, erected lord Dereival James Oglethorpe and others, into a corporation under
the title of the Trustees for establishing the colony of Georgia in America,
and granted to them and their successors, in trust for future settlers, all
those lands countries and territories, situate, lying and being, in that part
of South Carolina in America, which lies from the northern stream of a river,
there commonly called the Savannah, all along the sea coast to the southward
unto the most southern stream of a certain other great water or river called
the Alatamaha, and westward from the heads of the said river, respecttively, in
direct lines to the South Seas. This country was erected into a province called
"Georgia," and power was given to the trustees for twenty-one years to frame
laws and regulations for its government; after which all the rights of soil and
jurisdiction were to vest in the crown.

Under this charter Oglethorpe took possession of the country for the trustees
and made several settlements: and in the year 1752, the trustees by deed duly
executed, surrendered their charter to the crown At genesis report, 97.
, Georgia therefrom bcame a royal government.

By the treaty of Paris in 1763, Spain ceded to Great Britain, Florida,
Pensacola, and, in general, all that she held in North America east and
southeast of the river Mississippi: and a line drawn down that river from its
source to the sea, was established as the western boundary of the British
dominions See an extract from the treaty, appendix, No. 1
.

Soon after this cession the British government, by a proclamation for the
regulation of its colonies being dated October 7, 1763, errcted Florida into
two governments called East and West Florida. They were divided from each other
by the Apelatchicola river; and the latter was bounded by the gulf of Mexico
on the south, on the west by lakes Pontchartrain and Maurepas, and the river
Mississippi, and on the north by a line drawn from that part of the river
Mississippi which is intersected by latitude 31, due east to the Apilachicola.
The northern boundary of East Florida was a line drawn from the confluence of
the Chatahocchee and Flint rivers, where they form the Apilachicola, to the
head of the St. Mary's, and down it to the sea.

Disputes in the mean time having arisen between the governments of
South Carolina and Georgia, about the lands, lying between the Alatamoha and
St. Mary's, they were, by this proclamation, annexed to Georgia See the
proclamation, Appendix, No. 2.
, whose southern boundary, stretching only to the Alatamoha by its original
charter, was thus extended to the river St. Mary's.

The proclamation also contains a clause, "Reserving under the sovereignty,
protection and dominion of the crown, for the use of the Indians, all the land
and territories not included within the limits of the governments thereby
erected, or within the limits of the territory granted to the Hudsons Bay
company; as also all the lands and territories lying to the westward of the
sources of the rivers which fall into the sea from the west and north-west,"
and it forbids "the governors of all the colonies to grant warrants of survey,
or pass patents, for any lands beyond the heads of these rivers, till the
further pleasure of the crown should be known."

When the first British governor took possession of West Florida he found its
limits to the north so contracted as to cut him off from the most fertile and
healthy lands, and even to exclude from his province some very considerable
settlements, which had been formed under it, and made part of it, while subject
to Spanish government. He made a representation of these circumstances to the
crown Ibid. No. 3.
. It was referred to the board of trade and plantations; and by their advice
the province was extended to the north, "By a line drawn from the north of the
Yazoo river where it unites with the Mississippi, due east to the
Apilachicola." This extension, which took place before the year 1770, was not
made by proclamation, but by instructions to the governors of that province,
and their commissions See appendix No. 4. An extract from the instructions to
governor Chester. It is not known that any copy of any other of these
instructions or commissions exist in America. See also At. genesis report, 21.
. They went on to exercise jurisdiction and grant lands in the country thus
annexed to their government, till it was ceded to the United States by
Great Britain, at the peace of 1783.

When the British colonies, including South Carolina and Georgia, dissolved
their connection with the mother country in the year 1776, and erected
themselves into independent states, they agreed that each should hold by its
former limits; that each state should possess the same extent of territory that
had belonged to it while a colony. This indeed was not readily contented to:
for as the limits of several colonies, as Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York,
Pennsylvania, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia, included a
great extent of unsettled country, while others, as New Hampshire,
Rhode Island, Jersey, Delaware, and Maryland, possessed little or none, the
latter contended that these unsettled lands should be considered as a common
property among all the states, and appropriated for their mutual benefit; and
some of them, particularly Maryland, refused to accede to the union, until some
of those states which possessed the most extensive limits, should relinquish a
part of their claims for this purpose. This was at length done; Massachusetts,
Connecticut, New York, and Virginia, made relinquishments, retaining however
very considerable portions of the land in question. The articles of
confederation were then ratified, leaving all those states which had made no
relinquishment in the quiet possession of the whole territory comprised within
their ancient limits. Of this number was Georgia; which was so far from
relinquishing, that on February 7, 1783 she passed an act asserting that her
jurisdiction and right of soil extended "over all the country between the
Missisippi, the Atlantic, the southern boundary of the United States as
established by the treaty of peace, and the Southern boundary of North Carolina.

By another act passed February 7, 1785 she proceeded to exercise the rights
which she had thus asserted. It was thereby enacted "That all the country
contained within a line to be drawn down the Mississippi from where it receives
the Yazoo, till it intersects the 31st degree of North latitude, then due east
as far as the lands might be found to reach which had at any time been
relinquished by the Indians, then along the line of relinquishment to the river
Yazoo, and down it to its mouth, should be erected into a county called
Bourbon, and that when the land-office should be opened, all persons previously
settled there should have the right of preemption at one fourth of a dollar per
acre."

Under this act, commonly called the Bourbon county act, no settlements were
ever made. The relinquishment of land which is spoken of in it took place at
Mobile in May 1777, by virtue of a treaty between the Choctaw nation, to whom
that country then belonged, and the British superintendant of Indian affairs,
and was confirmed by the treaty between those Indians and the United States
held at Hopewell on the 3d of January 1786. It extended from the mouth of the
Yazoo 110 miles down the Missisippi; at the upper end it was 15, at the lower
60 miles broad.

About the same time a dispute arose between the states of South Carolina and
Georgia respecting their boundaries. South Carolina contended that as the
original boundaries of Georgia were the rivers Savannah and Alatahama, and
lines drawn due west from their sources to the Mississippi, all the land lying
south of the Alatamaha and of a line drawn due west from its source to the
Missisippi, as far as to the northern boundary of the Floridas, continued to be
a part of the province of South Carolina, out of which Georgia was taken: and
that when the British crown, by its proclamation of October 7, 1763, annexed to
Georgia, "all the lands lying between the rivers Alatemaha and St. Mary's" it
meant only the lands actually between those rivers below their sources, and not
such as lay above those sources, and between lines drawn from them respectively
west to the Missisippi; which tracts of country, of course, even after the
proclamation, still continued a part of South Carolina. Georgia, on the
contrary, maintained that when the proclamation annexed to its governmeet "all
the lands lying between the rivers Alatamaha and St. Mary's it meant to include
not merely the tract of country which lay between those rivers, below their
sources, but also the whole territory held by the British crown between the
northern boundaries of the Floridas, as established by the same proclamation,
and the ancient southern line of Georgia. This dispute was referred to congress
under the articles of confederation by a petition from South Carolina Journals
of Con. vol. x. p. 190.
. A court was appointed, and a day fixed for a hearing between the two states.
But they afterward agreed to withdraw the petition and settle the matter by
negotiation Jour. Con. Vol. xi. p. 218.
. Their commissioners met at Beaufort in South Carolina for this purpose and on
the 24th of April, 1787, agreed on a convention by which that state
relinquished the claim. On the 29th of February 1788 this convention was
ratified by an act of the legislature. It had previously been laid before
congress and filed among the official papers of the United states Vol xii. p.
130. See also appendix, No. 7.
.

On the 21st of December 1789, the legislature of Georgia passed an act for
selling all this country from the mouth of Coals creek, which is a little above
the Natches, to latitude 35, and from the Mississippi to the Donbigby. Two
companies were to be the purchasers, one called the South Carolina, the other
the Virginia Yazoo company; and they were allowed a pre-emption of two years,
on their making the stipulated payments, within which periods they were to
receive grants. But a dispute having arisen between them and the state about
the mode of payment, the pre-emption expired without payments having actually
been made, and no grants were passed See the act -- appendix, No. 8.
.

On the 7th of December 1793 a representation was presented to the court of
Spain on the part of our government, in which the dispute between us and that
power respecting boundary was stated, and our claim supported. This
representation insists on the latitude 31. as the Southern boundary of Georgia,
and rests our title to the disputed territory which lay above that latitude,
entirely on the right of that state See appendix No 9 -- an extract from the
representation.
. Indeed it is of importance to remark here, that in the whole progress of this
dispute, which being definitively settled by the late treaty between the United
States and Spain, need not now be discussed, our government held up the right
of the state of Georgia to the territory above latitude 31, as altogether
indisputable, and made that right the sole foundation of its own pretensions Se
appendix No. 10 -- An extract from the report of the Secretary of state to the
President, which was the basis of the instructions to the commissioners at
Madrid.
.

On the seventh of January 1795, the legislature of Georgia passed an act for
selling parts of the territory on the Mississippi, above latitude 31, to
several companies, one of which was called the Upper Mississippi, and another
the Georgia company. These are the companies whose rights are the subject of
the present investigation. The land allotted to the first was directed to be
bounded by a line "Beginning at the Mississippi river where the northern
boundary line of this state (Georgia) strikes the same: thence along the said
boundary line due east to the Tenessee river; thence along the said Tenessee
river to the mouth of Bear Creek'; thence up Bear Creek, to where the parrallel
of latitude twenty-five British statute miles south of the northern boundary
aforesaid strikes the same; thence along the said last mentioned parrallel of
latitude, across Tombigby or twenty mile creek, due west to the Mississippi
river; thence up the middle of the said river to the beginning." The boundaries
of the Georgia company were a line, "beginning on the Mobile Bay, where the
latitude 31, degrees north of the equator intersects the same, and running up
the said Bay to the mouth of the lake Tensaw; thence up the said lake Tensaw to
the. Alabama river, including currys and all other islands therein; thence up
the Alabama to the junction of the Coosa and Danfuskee rivers; thence up the
Coosa river, above the big shoals, to where it intersects the latitude 34
degrees north of the equator; thence a due west course to the Mississippi
river; thence down the middle of the said river, to the latitude 32, 40;"
"thence a due east course to the Dunbigby, thence down the middle of the
Dunbigby to its junction with the Alabama; thence down the middle of the said
river to Mobile Bay; and thence down the Mobile Bay to the place of beginning."

It was provided that the companies should each make a certain deposit of
money, on account of the purchase money of the lands, in the treasury of the
state; and that on their producing receipts from the treasurer for these
deposits, the governor should give them grants, taking at the same time
mortgages of the lands to secure the remaining payments, which were to be made
on or before the first of November following. In case of failure in these
payments, the mortgages were to be instantly foreclosed, the first payments to
be forfeited, and the grants to become void. It was also provided "That the
lands to be conveyed by virtue of the act should be free from taxation till the
inhabitants of them should come to be represented in the legislature of the
state See the act. Appendix No. 11.
.

The deposits were made accordingly, and the grants passed in pursuance of the
act. Before the first of November, the final payments were completed, and the
mortgages taken up. The companies afterward proceeded to sell parts of this
land to various persons in New York, Massachusetts, South Carolina, and
elsewhere, for valuable considerations.

It must be remarked that previous to this act, the various companies had made
formal proposals to the legislature for the purchase of the lands; which were
accepted and a bill passed through both houses accordingly. But the governor,
judging these terms not sufficiently advantageous to the state, refused his
assent to the bill, and stated his objections at large. Another bill was
immediately framed so as to obviate the most material of these objections. It
was passed, and received his sanction See appendix No. 2. clause of the
repealing act, which recites these facts.
.

The whole sum of money paid into the treasury of Georgia, on account of these
purchases, was five hundred thousand dollars. Of this sum one hundred thousand
dollars were appropriated by laws of the state distinct from the abovementioned
act, and persuant to those appropriations were actually expended in the course
of the year 1795 See appendix No. 3. Governor Matthews's communication to the
legislature.
.

On the 13, of February 1796, the repealing act was passed. This act however,
makes no mention of repealing that of January 7, 1795, but after stating
various objections against it, declares that it was originally void, and
directs such part of the money paid in under it as then remained in the
treasury, to be re-funded to the purchasers, provided they should apply for it
in the course of eight months; otherwise to be forfeited to the state, and in
the mean time to remain in the treasury at their risk and expense. No provision
is made for the reimbursement of that part which had been expended for the use
of the state See appendix No. 14. The repealing act.
. In this situation the affairs now remains.

From this view of the subject it seems sufficiently clear that no part of this
country, above a line drawn due east from the mouth of the Yazoo to the
Apalachicola, belonged to the United States, at the time of the sale. This it
is believed will appear, in a satisfactory manner, from an attentive
examination of their claim, under all the points of view in which it seems
capable of being presented.

There are but three foundations on which the claims of the United States, in
this country can rest.

In the first place it may be contended, that those clauses in the proclamation
of 1763, by which the sale and settlement of land in the colonies were
restricted to the heads of the rivers falling into the Atlantic, from the west
north-west, did in fact curtail the extent of the colonies, and reduce them
from the Mississippi to a line drawn from north-east to south-west, through the
heads of those rivers: and that this line having thus become their western
boundary, all the lands beyond it must be considered as waste territories of
the crown, not subject to any colonial jurisdiction; in which case they must
have been vested in the United States by the cession from Great Britain in the
treaty of peace.

In order to decide how far this principle is well-founded; it will be proper
to advert to the words of the proclamation itself; to the manner in which the
British government acted under it before the revolution: and to the
construction which it has received from the several states, and the government
of the United States, since they became independent.

From a careful review of the proclamation itself, and a comparison of the
various parts with each other, it seems evident that the clauses in question
were intended, not as a restriction of the territorial limits of the colonies,
but an instruction to the governors respecting the time, place, and manner, of
granting lands and making settlements.

The proclamation appears to have had five objects in view. 1. To erect certain
new governments composed of the territories which Great Britain had recently
acquired by her treaties of peace, with France and Spain. 2. To annex certain
additional territories to some of the governments, then existing. 3. To reward
the land and naval forces of Britain, which had served in America during the
war, by an allotment of land in the colonies. 4. To protect the Indians in the
safe and quiet possession of such lands as it was thought proper to reserve for
their use and: 5. To regulate trade between them and the colonists. There is no
hint of an intention to restrict the limits of the colonies by a line drawn
through the heads of the rivers, or in any other manner. Had that been the
intention of the British government, it would probably have been expressly
declared; it having always been its practice to make alterations in the
boundaries of its provinces in a very express and solemn manner, and usually in
consequence of representations from the board of trade and plantations. This
was the case in the extension of Georgia to the river St. Mary's, by this very
proclamation, and of West Florida, to the mouth of the Yazoo afterward; both
which took place in consequence of recommendations from the board of trade See
Act. genesis report 135, 133. And appendix No. 2. and 3.
. It being intended also to extend the governments of Novia Scotia, and
Newfoundland, the extensions were made by this proclamation in the most express
and formal manner. It does not therefore seem in the least degree probable,
that so important a measure as the cutting off one half of all the colonies,
those at least which were royal governments, if intended, should have been left
to mere implication; to expressions, which even taken singly, many bear a very
different import.

The clauses which contain those expressions, are confined to the fourth object
of the proclamation, which they appear to have had solely in view, viz. "To
protect the Indians, in the, safe and quiet possession of such lands as it was
thought proper to reserve for their use." They are introduced by a preamble,
which states, "That it was just and reasonable, and essential to the interests
and security of the British government and its colonies, that the several
nations or tribes of Indians with whom it was connected, and who lived under
its protection, should not be disturbed or molested in the possession of such
parts of its dominions and territories, as not having been ceded to, or
purchased by it, were reserved to them or any of them, as their hunting
grounds." In order to prevent this disturbance and molestation, various
measures, are adopted. First the governors of Quebec, East Florida, and West
Florida, the three new governments, are forbidden to grant any warrants of
survey, or patents for lands, beyond the bounds of their respective
governments." Secondly the governors of the other colonies are forbidden, "For
the present and until the further pleasure of the crown should be known, to
grant warrants of survey or pass patents for any lands beyond the heads or
sources of any of the rivers, which fall into the Atlantic ocean, from the
west, or north-west; or upon any lands, which not having been ceded to, or
purchased by the crown, were reserved to the Indians or any of them." Thirdly
all the lands not included within the limits of the three new governments, or
of the Hadsons Bay Company; and "all the lands and territories lying to the
westward of the sources of the rivers, which fall into the sea from the west
and north-west," were declared to be reserved, for the present, under the
sovereignty, protection, and dominion of the crown, for the use of the Indians.
And all persons were forbidden from making any purchases or settlements, or
taking possession of any lands within those reservations. Fourthly, all
persons, who, either wilfully or inadvertently, had seated themselves upon any
of the land so reserved, or upon any other land which, not having been ceded to
or purchased by the crown, were still reserved for the Indians, were ordered
immediately to remove. And fifthly, it was provided that in future "no private
person should presume to make any purchase from the Indians of any lands
reserved to them within those parts of the colonies where the crown had allowed
settlement, but that if the Indians should at any time be inclined to sell such
lands they should be purchased only for the crown and in its name, at some
public meeting of the Indians held for that purpose, by the governor of the
colony respectively within which they lay. And in case they should lie within
the limits of any proprietaries, then conformable to such instructions as the
crown or the proprietaries should give."

On these regulations it is observable, in the first place, that they are all
parts of a system the avowed object and scope of which was to protect the
Indians, not to alter or abridge the limits of colonies. To this object all of
them were important; nor was that which respected the lands west of the heads
of the rivers less so than any of the others. As those lands lay at a great
distance from the settled parts of the colonies, they were beyond the reach of
protection from the colonial governments; and it was therefore important that
they should, while reserved for the Indians, be taken under the immediate
protection of the crown, which possessing a military force upon the frontiers
could more readily and effectually repel those inroads and encroachments which
it was the object of this system to prevent. The lands below the sources of the
rivers on the contrary, being nearer to the seats of the colonial governments,
might derive the necessary protection from that source.

As to the terms "sovereignty and dominion of the crown" which are applied to
the lands above the heads of the rivers, they mean nothing; for all parts of
the colonies were equally under the sovreignty and dominion of the crown, the
proprietary governments excepted. Even they were so to many intents, and where
they were exempted from sovereignty by their charters, it was not in the power
of the crown to bring them under it again by a proclamation.

It is to be remarked, in the second place, that this "sovereignty, protection,
and dominion" were only to be "for the present" and while the lands were
"reserved for the use of the Indians." It was therefore a temporary regulation;
not a permanent change in the limits of a province, and was to cease as soon as
the Indians should think fit to relinquish the lands, and the crown to permit
the settlement of them. They were then to be under the government of that
colony within whose limits they lay; to form part of it as before.

The same remark is applicable to the prohibition against granting warrants or
patents for lands above the heads of the rivers. It was only for the present"
that they were prohibited: which shows that the prohibition was a temporary
regulation only, the lands still continuing a part of the colonies respectively
to which they belonged before, and the governors of which, when the prohibition
should be removed, would go on to grant the lands as formerly.

It is remarkable in the third place, that the proclamation speaks of "lands
reserved for the Indians within those parts of the colonies where the crown had
thought proper to allow settlement" and those lands whenever the Indians should
be disposed to sell them, were to be purchased by the governors in the name of
the crown and for its use. Settlements were therefore permitted in parts of the
colonies where the lands had been reserved for the Indians! This could apply
only to lands below the heads of the rivers which had not been purchased or
ceded; for above the heads of the rivers settlement was absolutely prohibited;
and it proves that "to reserve lands far the Indians," did not take them out of
the limits of the colony. There were also parts of the colonies where
settlement was forbidden. This could apply only to the lands above the heads of
the rivers; for below them, settlement was permitted, provided the land was
previously purchased from the Indians. Consequently the lands above the heads
of the rivers, though reserved for the Indians under the special protection of
the crown, and forbidden to be settled without its express license, were
nevertheless considered as "parts of the colonies," within whose former limits
they lay.

The difference made by the proclamation between the lands above, and those
below the heads of the rivers, seems to be this, that both continuing to be
part of the colonies, the latter might be settled whenever they could be
purchased from the Indians conformably the established regulations: whereas the
former, however willing the Indians might be, could not be settled or purchased
without the express permission of the crown: the reasons of which distinction
have been hinted at above, and indeed are sufficiently obvious.

It is to be observed in the last place, that these provisions extend to all
the colonies, both royal and proprietary: some of which last description,
particularly Pennsylvania, possessed extensive territories beyond the heads of
the rivers, which fall into the Atlantic from the west and north-west. Although
the crown might, and frequently did, execute a general superintending power
over the proprietary governments, as well as its other colonies might regulate
their trade, protect the Indians, and prescribe the manner in which lands
should be purchased or settled; it certainly neither had, or, claimed a right
to alter, much less curtail their limits. This is evident from the whole tenor
of its conduct, respecting the colonies, as well as from the nature of the
proprietary charters themselves; which being in the nature of grants invested
the proprietors with the right of soil. This right the crown could no more take
from them then it could deprive indiviuals of any other property which they
possessed and accordingly we have seen that it never meddled with the Virginia
territory until the company's charter had been legally vacated by a quo
warranto. Nor was it till after the council of Plymouth See Hazard's col. vol.
i. p. 390. also act p. 11, 12, 13.
, the lords proprietors of Carolina, and the trustees of Georgia, had
respectively surrendered their charters, that the crown proceeded to make any
disposition of their territories. It can hardly be presumed that it would so
suddenly have departed from its constant maxims of conduct, and from the known
principles of its laws, as to attempt regulations by which the proprietary
government of Pennsylvania would have been deprived at once of nearly half its
territories. Yet this must have been the effect of the clauses in question had
they been considered as a restriction of limits, rather than temporary
instruction to the governors.

It is moreover an invarible rule in the exposition of legal acts, that in case
of ambiguity any construction by which they can be rendered consistent with
right is to be preferred. But to consider these clauses as a restriction of
boundary, would render them directly repugnant to the plain and acknowledged
rights of the proprietary governments. Whereas to regard them merely as
instructions to the governors respecting the time and manner of making
settlements, will reconcile them equally to the rights of the proprietors and
of the crown: and this is the intention with which the proclamation, considered
in itself, and taken under all these points of view, appears to have been made

The construction thus obviously deducible from the words and tenor of the
instrument itself, is strongly supported by the conduct of the British
government, before the revolution. It must here be repeated and constantly keep
in view, that these provisions extended, not only to South Carolina, and
Georgia, but to all the colonies whose territories lay above and below the
heads of the rivers, falling in the Atlantic from the west and northwest of
this number, were New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and North Carolina; besides
South Carolina, and Georgia. It is perfectly well known that between the
proclamation of 1763, and the revolution, at a time when the British government
still subsisted in Virginia, she extended her settlements beyond the heads of
the rivers, falling into the Atlantic. Many of the settlements or Polston, New
River, Greenbriar, and other waters falling into the Ohio, were of this
description, and they were made not only with the permission, but under the
authority, of the British government. It is not known at what time the grants
of land were made under which these settlements took place but it is perfectly
certain that the settlements themselves were always considered, as well after
the proclamation as before, as being part of Virginia and that the laws were
administered in them, under the authority, and in the name of its colonial
government. This, it is most evident, could not have been the case, had the
proclamation of 1763, been considered as curtailing the colonies, and
restricting them to a line drawn through the heads of the rivers. In that case
these settlements, so far from going on and increasing under the government of
Virginia, must have been cut off from the colony; and the exercise of authority
there by its governor, would have been regarded as an act of usurpation. But
his we know was not the case. If Virginia was not curtailed neither were the
other colonies; for the clauses in question apply equally to them all. From
whence it is most evident that the crown considered, and intended these clauses
as no more then a temporary instriction to its governors about the time and
manner of making settlements; the extent and boundaries of the colonies, when
it should permit settlements, remaining still the same.

It is equally clear that the subject has always been viewed in the same light
by the states themselves since the revolution, and by the government of the
United States. Not to speak of Georgia, which, as we have already seen, passed
an act in 1783, to declare and establish her territorial limits, it is well
known, that South Carolina granted large grantees of land through all the country
from the mountains to the Mississippi, which grants she afterward vacated, not
because she had no right to make them, but because the land had not been
purchased from the Indians. She afterward ceded her claim to the United
States. North Carolina too opened a land-office in 1784, and granted several
millions of acres between the Mississippi, and the heads of the rivers which
fall into the Atlantic. She afterward ceded the territory to the United
States, subject to these grants; and subject to them it was accepted; nor was
the validity of the grants, except so far as related to the possessory right of
the Indians, ever been disputed. Indeed the whole state of Tenessee is held by
this very tenure. Before the cession this county was considered as part of
North Carolina, as such was governed, and as such had a representative in the
Congress of the United States. In the same manner, Virginia sold the whole
Kentucky country, and then erected it into a state; it having remained in the
mean time, under her laws, and a part of her state for many years; many and
extensive districts, which still constitute parts of Virginia, and as such send
members to Congress, lie beyond the heads of the rivers which fall into the
Atlantic. All these settlements, grants, and cessions, have proceeded upon the
principle that the western limits of the colonies were not altered by the
proclamation of 1763. Otherwise all the grants of North Carolina in Tenessee,
and of Virginia in Kentucky, would be illegal; and a very considerable part of
the territory still claimed and possessed by the latter state, must be lopt off
from her.

Until therefore it shall be shown that the clauses in question apply
exclusively to South Carolina, and Georgia, or that the same rules of
construction which have been universally adopted and admitted, with respect to
the other states, ought not to apply to them likewise, it seems perfectly clear
that whether we regard the proclamation of 1763, itself the acts of the British
governments under it, or the construction which has been given to it by own
governments since the revolution, it cannot be considered as having curtailed
the western boundary of those states.

From whence it results that the United Stares, can found no claim to the lands
in question, on this proclamation.

Their claim however, to these lands, or a part of them, is supported on
another principle which must be next examined. It is said that although Carolina,
originally extended as far south as Florida, yet when the proprietors
surrendered their charter, and these territories became re-vested in the crown,
the southern limits of that province were restricted by the establishment of
Georgia: that the rivers Savannah, and Alatamaha, having been fit as the limits
of Georgia, all the lands south o st were cut off from the government of
South Carolina, and continued to be waste territories of the crown, till part
of them were annexed to Georgia by the proclamation of sixty three: that this
proclamation however, extending only to the lands, "between the Alatamaha, and
the St. Mary's," could not include the territory which lay above the heads of
those rivers; and that this territory therefore continued to be waste land, not
annexed to any government, nor part of any colony, till the treaty of peace, by
which it was vested in the United states By this pretension, if established,
they would gain all the country, bounded by the Floridas, the Mississippi, and
a line drawn from the head of the St. Mary's, to that of the Alatamaha, and
from thence due west to the Mississippi.

Nothing can be more uncertain than the latitude of this last line. If the
position of the sources, of the Alatamaha were known, which is very far from
being the case, it would still be very difficult to ascertain what ought to be
considered as the head of the river: whether the place where it takes the name
of the Alatamaha, its nighest source from the sea, or its most southern source,
be intended by the charter as the place from where the west line is to be
drawn. It has been thought that the most Southern source is meant; but this is
far from being fully justified by the words of the charter, which evidently
refer to the most southern mouth of the river; it being known to enter the sea
by several channels. The words are, "From the most northern stream, of a river,
there commonly called the Savannah, all along the sea coast, to the southward,
to the most southern stream of a certain other great water or river, called the
Alatamaha, and westward, from the heads of of the said rivers respectively to
the South Sea." It: seems probable however, that the highest source from the
sea, was the point from whence the west line was intended to be drawn: and though
this source will remain for a long time uncertain, even should the claim be
established, yet it may be affirmed not to lie so far north, as to affect the
purchase of the upper Mississippi company, whose most southern extent is no
more than twenty-five miles south of the north boundary of Georgia.

The claim however, could certainly include a great, perhaps far the greater
part of the Georgia company's purchase.

This claim rests on two questions. 1. Whether the lands south of Georgia,
continued to be a part of South Carolina, after the former colony was erected?
2. Whether the whole of them were annexed to Georgia, by the proclamation of
1763, or that part only which lay below the heads of the Alatamaha, and St.
Mary's. If they continued to be part of South Carolina, the cession of that
state, by the convention of Beaufort, vested in Georgia such parts of them as
were not affected by the proclamation of 1763. If they were all affected by
that proclamation, then the right of Georgia was complete independantly of the
cession from South Carolina.

As to the first point, it is to be regretted that more satisfactory documents
for the investigation of it, cannot be resorted to. The papers most likely to
decide it with absolute certainty, are the commissions and instructions, given
to the governors of South Carolina, between the years 1732, when the colony of
Georgia, was erected and 1763, the date of the proclamation. Those documents no
doubt exist in the office of trade, and plantations in London. An official
enquiry was made from a gentleman having access to the records of that office,
and he furnished some extracts and copies; but others of a very important
nature were omitted. From such documents however, as can be recurred to the
following points seem to be satisfactorily established.

First that after the surrender of their charter by the Lords Proprietors, the
jurisdiction of the Royal governors of South Carolina extended over the whole
country which had been included in that charter

It appears by a representation from the board of trade and plantations to the
king, on the 1st of December 1727 that a fort was at that time kept up on the
Alatamaha river under the government of South Carolina, and had been for some
years; and the continuation of it under the same authority is advised At. genesis
rep ort, 30.
. And on the 10th of June, 1730; the governor of South Carolina was instructed
to lay out Townships and grant lands on the Alatameha Ibid. 70.
.

Secondly that when the Colony of Georgia was erected the country of which it
was composed was considered by the British government as part of South Carolina.

Lord Percival, Oglethorpe and others who first projected the Georgia scheme,
petitioned the crown for a grant of land in South Carolina, for that purpose
At. genesis rep. 84.
. In the reports of the board of trade on this petition, Georgia is called "the
colony to be established; in South Carolina Ibid. 87
." After the establishment of the colony the command of its militia was to
remain with the governor of South Carolina. Ibid. 912
Even in the charter, the lands to be included are described as "lying and being
in that part of South Carolina in America which lies etc." Ibid. 91.
. Lord Granville's part of South Carolina not having, at that time, been
separately allotted to him, his right in this country as one of the
proprietors, was admitted still to exist; and accordingly the charter granted
only seven eighths of the land to the trustees Ibid. 100.
, to whom Lord Grenville afterward conveyed his eighth. And in an instruction
to the Governor of South Carolina, of a date subsequent to the charter, Georgia
is mentioned as "a Colony settled within the bounds of the province of
South Carolina" and the governor of that province is instructed to register the
charter among its records Ibid. 95.
.

Thirdly, that after the establishment of Georgia the lands south of its
southern boundary still remained, and were considered by the crown as being,
under the jurisdiction of South Carolina, and of consequence a part of that
province.

It apperas by a representation from the governor of Georgia, dated October
17th 1761, that there was then, and long had been a military post kept up on
Cumberland Island, far south of the Alatamaha, "under the direction and
authority of the governor of South Carolina At. gen Rep. 111.
". The governor of South Carolina too, in a letter to the board of trade dated
August 17th 1763, affirms that there was then, and had been for many years, a
post to the southward of the Alatamaha garrisoned by detachments from that
province Ibid. 118.
. But this point is more strongly confirmed by the proceedings which took place
with respect to certain lands lying south of the Alatamaha and granted by the
governor of South Carolina in the year 1762. These grants being complained of
by the governor of Gorgia, the board of trade and plantations reproved the
governor of South Carolina for making them; not on the ground of his possessing
no jurisdiction, but because "the making of grants for lands in that country
was contrary to the intentions of the crown, and might not only embarrass the
execution of those arrangements which would probably become necessary from the
cession of Florida, but interfere also with the measures about to be taken for
the extension of Gorgia Ibid. 115.
. The governor justified his conduct by alleging that his province still
extended as far south as the limits fixed by the charter of Carolina to the
lords proprietors, except as to suchland as had been expressly included within
the charter of Georgia Ibid. 117.
. In a subsequent representation from the board of trade to the crown they seem
to admit that these grants were made "conformably to the governors instructions
Ibid. 144.
." And they expressly recommend that an act of the Georgia legislature, passed
after that province had been extended to the St. Marys and tending to subject
the grantees of those lands to improper conditions, should not receive the
royal assent At. genesis Rep. 141
. Transcripts of those grants were afterward ordered by the crown to be
registered in Georgia Ibid. 144.
. And the grants themselves thus virtually confirmed, have ever since been, and
still are, considered as valid.

All these proceedings must have been founded on the principle that the lands
south of the Southern boundary of Georgia, as first established by its charter,
continued to be a part of South Carolina till the proclamation of 1763, annexed
them or part of them at least, to the former province.

How indeed could they cease to be so? nothing is more clear then that all this
country was included within the province of South Carolina at and before the
establishment of Georgia. This has been abundantly proved Sapaa. p. 55, 56 57,
. But the charter of Georgia could affect those lands only which were included
within its limits; nor was that province ever understood, either by its own
governors or the crown, to extend further See At. genesis rep. 111,
105.115.135.140.
. All the rest of the country, of course, remained as it was before, until a
further desposition of it was made by some new act of the crown. It is not
pretended that any such acts took place till the proclamation of 1763 Ibid. 18
117.
. The circumstance of this country being separated from the rest of Carolina by
the intervening province of Georgia does not alter the case: for it is by no
means necessary, nor does it always happen, that all the territories of a
government should lie adjoining. The province of Maine we know, under the royal
government was, and at this day continues to be, a part of Massachussetts, though
New Hampshire lies between them; and Connecticut by virtue of her charter,
which extended west to the Mississippi, claims and actually holds, lands on
lake Erie, notwithstanding that New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania
intervene.

There are however two passages which might seem at first view to contradict
this opinion; but it is believed that on examination they will apppear in a
different light.

In a report to the crown by the board of trade and plantations, on which the
proclamation of 1763 was founded, it is stated "that a large tract of land
lying between the North boundary of East Florida and the river Alatamaha, which
had hiherto been unoccupied as to any permament settlement, remained to be put
under some proper establishment At. genesis rep. 135.
".

On this passage it is to be observed that occupation and right are distinct
things; so that the circumstance of this country's not having been occupied by
South Carolina, would by no means prove that it was not under the jurisdiction,
did not from part, of that province. It is not said, moreover, that this
country had not been occupied at all; that would have been contrary to the
fact; for as we have seen, a post had been kept up in it and garrisoned from
South Carolina; but that it had not been occupied as to permament settlement.
But it is a well known principle of law that a legal possession where
necessary, may be maintained without a permanent settlement. Had actual
possession in this case been necessary, which may well be doubted, the
continued occupation by a military post would have been sufficient.

The board of trade is said to have laid the abovementioned grants before the
crown lawyers, for an opinion on their validity, and to have alleged at the
same time "that the province of South Carolina did not appear, at any time,
either when under the government of the proprietors, or since it had been in
the hands of the crown, to have exercised any jurisdiction in the country south
of the Alatamaha, or taken any possession of it." At. genesis rep. 20.


It is to be remarked in the first place, that the crown lawyers did not give
an opinion, at least not an unfavourable one, on the subject of these grants:
from whence it may be inferred that after an examination of the subject, they
did not concur in the objections of the board. Secondly, that the assertion of
the board, even if true, amounts to nothing; the right to possess, and the
exercise of that right, being things altogether distinct. And thirdly, that the
assertion is not true; it being evident from the documents already adduced that
the province of South Carolina had always maintained possession of that
country, at least till the year 1762, by a military post.

It seems therefore clearly to result from all these considerations that the
country south of the Alatamaha not only was a part of South Carolina previously
to the establishment of Georgia, but continued to be so afterward until the
proclamation of 1763. The facts stated indeed relate wholly to the country near
the sea coast, because that alone having been settled by the English or even
known to them, the interior parts were never expressly contemplated by the acts
of their government. But the principles on which those acts were founded apply
equally to every part of the territory south of the ancient southern boundary
of Georgia. South Carolina could claim near the coast in virtue only of her
charter, and that charter gave an equal claim to all the land contained within
its limits and not included in those of Georgia. The right therefore which they
possessed on the shores of the Atlantic before the year 1763, extended equally
to the banks of the Mississippi, and by her cession at Beaufort in 1788, was
completely vested in the state of Georgia.

As to the second point, whether the proclamation of 1763, annexed to Georgia
all the land lying between her ancient southern boundary and the northern
limits of the Floridas, or such part only as actually lay between the Alatamaha
and St. Mary's below their sources? the dicision of it, if now necessary, might
be attended with some difficulty. The words of the proclamation are "We have
also, with the advice of our privy council aforesaid, annexed to our province
of Georgia, all the lands lying between the rivers Alatamaha and St. Mary's
At. gen rep. 38.
." Nothing else is said on the subject. From these expressions, and some others
used by the board of trade and plantations in different communications Ibid.
135.140.
to the crown on this matter, it would seem that those lands only which lay
below the heads of the rivers were contemplated. But this point seems to have
been decided, as far as relates to the United States, by the government itself.
In a report from the Secretary of State, intended as the basis of instructions
to our commissioners for treating with Spain, the latitude 31, is insisted on
as the southern boundary of Georgia "established between that province and
Florida by the proclamation of 1763 Appendix, No. 9. An extract from the
representation.
." And in the representation made by our commissioners December 17th 1793, the
same thing is repeated, and urged to the court of Spain as the foundation of
our right. The same principle is repeated, and urged on the court of Spain, by
Mr Pinckney, the American minister for negociating the last treaty with that
power, so lately as August 10th, 1795, several months after the sales in
question had been formally notify to the government. See app. No. 16. An
extract from Mr. (...) representation, of Aug. 10th, 9795, to the Spanish court.


It might perhaps be thought doubtful how far these declations would preclude
the government in a court of law; but we can hardly suppose that it would
contend for a principle formally and expressly contradicted by its own solemn
acts; which it must do were it to urge a claim against the state of Georgia for
any of these lands, founded on a supposition that the whole of them, down to
the Mississippi and the latitude 31, were not annexed to that state by the
proclamation in question.

The third and only remaining ground on which the United States can rest their
claim to a part of this territory, is the extension of West Florida after the
year 1763.

It is contended that the British crown having previously to the year 1770, and
while all the colonies were subject to its dominion, extended West Florida up
to the mouth of the Yazoo and a line drawn due left from thence to the
Apilachicola, by instructions and commissions to its governors, all the county
between that line and the latitude 31, ceasing to belong either to
South Carolina or Georgia, became a part of West Florida, and being thus placed
without the jurisdiction of any state in the Union, was ceded, by the treaty of
peace, to the United States.

Nothing can be more certain than the principle that all the lands ceded by
Great Britain in the treaty of peace, and not included within the limits of any
state, became vested in the United States. Nor can there be any doubt that as
both Carolina and Georgia were royal governments in the year 1770, the crown
had a right at that time to alter, abridge, or extend their limits at its
pleasure; to take parts of their territories and annex them to old governments
or erect them into new ones. It was by the exercise of this right that after
Virginia became a royal government in 1624, Supra, p. 9, 10.
part of its territory, all south of the latitude 36, 30, was included in the
grant of Carolina: that after the surrender by the lords proprietors, Carolina
itself was divided into two governments, and Georgia carved out of one of them;
and that the country south of the first boundary established for Georgia was
afterward annexed to that province.

As to the mode of exercising this right there may be more room for doubt. It
may be said that when the limits of a province had been fixed by a proclamation
or charter, which are public and solemn acts, they ought not to be altered, and
could not legally, by acts of a less solemn nature; such as commissions or
instructions. But this objection does not seem to have any weight; because though
commissions and instructions, especially the former, were not published in the
same manner with proclamations, they were nevertheless published, and with
circumstances of sufficient notority; being entered of record not only in the
office of trade and plantations, but also in the provinces; where they were
moreover publicly read. They received indeed a greater degree of publicity than
charters, which were recorded only, without being promulgated in any manner. As
to authenticity, these commissions were acts of the king in council, under the
great seal, as well as proclamations or letters patent, and therefore of equal
authority. As the crown, besides, possessed the right of altering boundaries it
might certainly exercise that right in whatever manner it thought fit: and
indeed the extent of the royal colonies depended, in many instances, on the
commissions to governors, and was regulated by them. Of this Virginia,
Carolina, and Georgia, are examples; which after they became royal governments,
were continued according to their ancient limits, not by new letters patent,
but merely by the commissions to their respective governors.

It therefore seems undeniable, that by this extension of Florida, the
territory which it affected was entirely cut off from Georgia, or
South Carolina, to which ever of them it belonged, and rendered completely a
part of Florida; from which it necessarily follows that this territory was
ceded by the treaty of peace to the United States, not to Georgia, and vested
in them.

As the mouth of the Yazoo, however, lies in latitude 32, 30 See the appendix,
No. 6. -- an extract from the representation of Purcell, who surveyed that
country, under the authority of the British government.
, or thereabout, it is clear that this claim of the United States does not
affect the upper Mississippi commpany's purchase, which cannot extend further
south than latitude 34, "30". But a very considerable part of the Georgia
company's purchase, will lie below a line to be drawn due east from the mouth
of the Yazoo. Its southern boundary between the Mississippi and Donbigby, is
higher up than that line; namely in latitude 32, 40, but between the Donbigby
and Alabama, it extends down nearly to latitude 31. In this quarter
consequently, a great part of its lands are included in the claim of the United
States.

How far is this claim still valid against the company? Admitting that these
lands belonged to the United States at the time of the sale, was it attended or
preceded by any conduct on their part which will render it valid against them,
in the eye of the law? This was the second point proposed for examination.

On this point two questions arise which ought to be distinctly considered:
first whether the conduct of the United States respecting this territory at the
sale, and previous to it, was such as, if persued by an individual under
similar circumstances, would have rendered the sale binding on him? and
secondly whether the same principles will apply to the government?

As to the first, there is no rule better established in the courts of equity
than this, that whoever, knowingly and without constraint, acquiesces in a
disposition of his property, for a valuable consideration, by a person who
pretended and appeared to have the right, shall be bound by the disposition: it
being a maxim of law, "That silence implies content; and that he who does'not
forbid an act when he has a right, and an opportunity to do so, orders it 1
Equi. ca. abr. 357. -- case of Hanning, v. Ferrets.
." This rule rule has been long admitted in the courts of equity, and is
abundantly supported by the authorities cited at the bottom Hudsden, v. Cheney,
2. Vern. 150. -- Raw, v. Pole, 2 Vern. 239. -- Ibbotson, v. Rhodes, 2. Vern.
554. -- Berrisford, v. Milward. -- Barpard, Chan. 101, 102. -- Peter, v.
Russel, 2. Vern. 726. -- Hobbs, v. Norton, 5 Equi. ca. 356. -- Hanning, v.
Ferrers, 1 Equi. la. 357. -- Arnot, v. Bisese, 1. Veze y, 96. -- Clare v. Earl
of Bedford, cited by Lord Hardwicke in Arnot, v. Bisese. -- Welford, v.
Beezley, 1. Vezey, 6. -- Mocatta, v. Murgatroyd, 1. P. W. 393 -- Head, v.
Eguton, 3. P. W. 280.
.

But he must acquiese "knowingly," that is he must understand the nature of the
act about to be done: for he is bound on the principle of having assented; and
a person cannot assent to what he did not know. He must also acquiese, "without
constraint," for there can be no assent where there is not freedom.

And the person who makes the disposition, must not only claim a right, but
appear to possess it; for whoever should make a purchase from one who neither
claimed, nor appeared to possess, a right to sell, could blame none but
himself, and must sustain the loss as a punishment for his own folly.

But if the owner should not only acquiese in the sale, but give color by his
conduct to the right of the seller, and in that or any other manner encourage
the purchasor to buy, he will by stronger reason, be bound to confirm the sale
See the cases cited above.
. This principle also is fully established by the authorities already cited.

Let these rules be applied to the acts of the state of Georgia and the conduct
of the United States respecting this territory, previously to the sale in
question. It will appear that the latter not only acquiesed, but encouraged:
that they not only saw in silence all the acts of ownership exercised by
Georgia over this land, all her acts preparatory to the sale, and the sale
itself, but by their own proceedings gave color and sanction to her title.

As early as the year 1783, Georgia began to assert her claim to these lands.
In that year she passed an act declaring them to lie within her charter-limits,
and holding out encouragement to persons to settle on them See the act, p. 19.
. To this proceeding the United States made no objection.

In 1795, knowing that the Indian claims had been extinguished in a tract of
land on the Mississippi, below the mouth of the Yazoo, and believing that
extinguishment, as it was within the limits she claimed, to have enured to her
benefit, she erected that tract into a county, and offered new encouragement to
settlers. She moreover, at the same time, declared her intention of opening a
land office for the sale of the lands Ibid p. 19, 20.
. To this proceeding the United States made no objection.

Sometime afterward a dispute arose between the two states, South Carolina,
and Georgia, about this territory, and it was referred to congress; which thus
received express notice of the claims of those states, but made no objection to
them, alleged no right in itself. This dispute was afterward settled, and
South Carolina ceded her claims to Georgia. The act of cession was communicated
to congress; and congress made no objection See act p. 23.
; so far indeed was she from objecting that on the 20th of October, 1787, after
this cession had been communicated to her, she made a public, and formal
requisition, on the state of Georgia; for a cession of her territory Ibid, p.
24. -- See also the President's proclamation against James, v. Fallon, in 1790.
. This act, done under a complete knowledge of all the circumstances, was a
very strong recognition of the right of that state.

In 1789, Georgia, passed an act for the sale of these lands to certain
companies; one of the companies attempted a settlement and sent an agent; all
this was known to the government of the United States, which issued a
proclamation against certain acts of the agent, but said not a word against the
sale, or about any right of the United States, to the land See Jour. of
Congress, vol, 12. p. 21. -- And appendix No. 15. the resolution itself.
.

Two years after this the government of the United States, being engaged in a
dispute with Spain about this country, expressly declared, in an official
representation, that it belonged to Georgia by virtue of her charters, and the
proclamation of 1763, and rested their claim to it as part of their
territories, entirely on her title.

What higher sanction to a title could an individual, or a government hold out?
What stronger acknowledgment than this long acquiescence, followed by this
express declaration, when the subject had been so often discussed, the claim so
often renewed? The government not only suffer Georgia repeatedly to say, "This
is my land," without contradicting her; to sell it once without interposing;
but, not content with this tacit acquiescence, joins in the assertion, and lays
in a solemn act, "This is the land of Georgia." The question may be repeated,
what stronger encouragement can be given to purchasers?

Even after the last sale had been made, of which the government was formally
notified by the governor of Georgia, no sufficient steps were taken to warn the
purchasers of their danger, and prevent them from completing the payment. When
the government received this notice only, fifty thousand dollars out of five
hundred thousand had been paid. The rest was not due till some months after.
Even then the government set up no claim, made no interference. It merely held
up the idea that it might possibly possess a right, by directing its law
officers to institute an enquiry into the title of Georgia. Even this idea they
did not plainly intimate, much less expressly declare. Their resolution directs
the Attorney general, "To collect, digest, and report, to the next congress,
the charters treaties, and other documents, relative to, and explanatory, of
the title to the lands situate in the southwestern parts of the United States,
and claimed by certain companies under a law of the state of Georgia." How was
it to be understood from this proceeding that the government claimed the land!
with what justice could purchasers, who contracted under the strong previous
assurances, which have been stated and after this last transaction paid their
money, be called upon for the purchased property, by that very party which had
thus led them into the contract?

But was the government apprized of their right? Was it unknown to the
purchasers themselves? These two questions deserve to be considered.

As to the first, it is to be observed that every person is presumed in law to
be acquainted with his own rights. This principle is founded on the best
reasons. If a person, having a right to land, should stand silently by, and see
it sold, and then be permited to reclaim it under pretense, that he was
ignorant of his title, a pretense which it would frequently be impossible to
disprove, the greatest frauds might be committed. It would therefore be
presumed by the courts that he knew his own title, unless he gave very good
proof to the contrary, and he would be bound by the sale. Most of the decisions
indeed have been in cases where the party was expressly stated to have been
acquainted with his own title; but there are some where this does not appear;
and in one See Hudsden, v. Cheney, 2. Vern. 150.
, the owner, who was a woman, declared on oath that she was ignorant of her
right: yet as she was present at the sale, and did not object, she was decreed
to be bound. This must have been on the principle that every one is presumed to
understand his own rights.

This principle however, could apply only in cases where the party had a
reasonable opportunity of knowing them; for if he were in circumstances which
rendered that knowledge impossible he could not, on any principle of justice,
be considered as having consented to their alienation. In the abovementioned
case the woman, though ignorant of her title, was in a situation which enabled
her to become acquainted with it by proper attention and enquiry See also the
case of Hobbs, v. Norton, 1. Equi. la. Abr. 356.
. And the United States also might easily have acquired the most complete
knowledge of their claim to the land in question.

In cases moreover, of mere silent acquiescence, a party might perhaps be
allowed to disprove his own knowledge. Even this would be very doubtful. But
where he had given positive and express confirmation to the right of the
seller, and had thus encouraged the purchaser to buy, he could never be allowed
to claim the property in contradiction to his own declarations. Silence about
his right might be occasioned, and therefore, perhaps, excused, by ignorance of
it; but that ignorance could never be a sufficient inducement, or a
justification, for his declaring the right to be in another. If he chose
ignorantly to make such a declaration, he himself, not the innocent purchaser,
must abide the consequence See the above acted case of Hobbs, v. Norton.
. In this predicament is the government of the United States; which not content
with silently acquiescing in the acts of Georgia, has made the strongest
declarations in favor of her right.

And lastly there is good reason to believe that the government was actually
apprized of its right to this land. The extension of Florida, took place in
1770. In 1777 the Indian claims in the Natehez district, which lies within the
limits of this extension, were extinguished by the British government. At the
treaty held at Hopewell, in 1786, between the United States and the Chacktaws,
the former, in order to preclude the Indians from the Natehez district, availed
themselves of this extinguishment: and as for obvious reasons, they could not
have supposed it to have been made for the benefit of any other government than
Florida, Georgia having then declared itself independent, it was notice to them
that the British had extended the jurisdiction of that province. Their claim is
founded on this extension; of which if they did not in this manner receive
complete notice, they had such intimation at least, as not only made it
incumbent on them to enquire fully into the business See the case of Hoobs, and
Norton.
, but pointed out the source from whence all necessary information might be
drawn.

But it may be asked, if the government was apprized of these circumstances,
why did it omit to urge them in its negociations with Spain? The reason is
obvious. To have urged them would have defeated its own claim. It could claim
this country as part of the United States, on the ground only that it was not a
part of Florida. To have shown that it had become a part of that province
before the treaty of peace, would have established the claim of Spain; for
Florida was ceded to her previously to the definitive treaty between
Great Britain, and us; and it is on the definitive treaty that our claim
rested. It was the business of our government therefore to keep this matter out
of view; and fortunately for us, it seems to have been unknown to the
Spaniards. Certainly it was much wiser to retain this country, as part of the
United States, even at the expense of giving it to Georgia, than to yield it to
Spain. If our government chose to pursue that course, and by its conduct and
assertions individuals have been induced, confiding in its authority, to regard
Georgia as the owner of these lands and to purchase from her, with what justice
could the United States now attempt to deprive them of the property? Is
government, contrary to every rule of law, to take advantage of its own acts in
order to injure others, and to punish them for having confided in its solemn
declarations?

But were not the purchasers themselves acquainted with this right, or at least
bound to take notice of it? And in that case did they not purchase at their own
risk? The answer to this also is obvious. Had the United States been
acquiescent, had they remained silent and passive only, the purchasers might
have been considered, perhaps, as taking at their own risk: but when Georgia
openly claimed and exercised the right, and the United States not only made no
objection but aided the claim by their positive declarations, the purchasers
were bound to look no further. Even had the claim of the government been matter
of record See the case of Arnot v. Biscoe, 1. Veg. 96.
, or had they been expressly informed of its existence Case of Hobbs, v. Norton
ante.
, yet would their purchase have been valid under these circumstances of
encouragement, by the government itself.

It seems clear therefore, that as the party selling not only claimed the
right, but had the appearance of possessing it, which appearance was confirmed
by the acquiescence, and even the express declaration of the true owners, this
sale, in the case of an individual, would be completely valid and binding in
law.

But will the same rules apply to a government? This is the point next to be
examined.

In the English law, from which most of our maxims of jurisprudence are
derived, it is a received principle that the king who represents the
government, and in whom the public property is legally vested, can be made
ameanable to no kind of process; that to him no fraud, no impropriety, no
negligence even, can be imputed. Yet if he should do a wrongful act, as making
an improper grant, for instance, the court of Chancery would give redress to
the party injured, and even set aside the grant, if necessary, on the ground
that the king had been deceived. This proves two things; first that the acts of
government are subject to the rules of law and justice, although the government
itself cannot be brought to answer in a Legal process: And secondly, that the
inability of the government to do wrong is a mere fiction, which the judicial
power explains a way in favor of justice, whenever it can. They will not say
that the act was done through negligence or an improper intention, but through
deception; yet if in fact wrongful, they will set it aside, whenever it is of
such a nature as to be subjected to their control.

This being the case even in England, whose monarchieal government is supposed
to require a sacred inviolability in the chief Magistrate, the same maxims
should obtain more readily and in greater extent among us, as being far more
congenial to the nature and principles of our government. Accordingly we find
that the idea of subjecting the acts of government to the rules of judicial
dicision is perfectly familiar in our constitutions. Our courts make no
difficulty of declaring Ligislative acts void, even those of the Union, where
they are contrary to the Constitution. This is founded on the principle that
the ligislatures in making such acts, have exceeded their authority. Why should
not the acts of government in other instances also, be subjected to the rules
of law and the maxims of justice? Why should not this salutary control of the
judicial power, be extended to all cases where the acts complained of can be
brought within its reach? There seems to exist, be good reason to the contrary.
Our government possesses land which it is in the practice of selling to
individuals; and it appoints agents for that purpose, with proper powers and
instructions. If after one of these agents had made a sale persuant to his
powers, the government should attempt to reclaim the land or sell it again,
would not the judicial power protect the title of the first purchaser? Would it
not enquire into the validity of the second sale whenever it became the subject
of litigation, and declare it void, even if made by an express law? There seems
no doubt on this head. If then the judicial power would enforce the rules of
law and justice as to one mode of disposing of property by the government, why
should it not equally enforce them as to other modes? And we know that a person
may as effectually dispose of his Land by standing by, while another sells it,
as by selling it himself.

Upon the whole, there does not seem to be any reason why the same rules which
have been established on this subject respecting individuals should not equally
apply to the acts of government. From whence it would result that the United
States, having not only acquiesced in all the acts of ownership exercised by
the State of Georgia over this Land, and in the ultimate sale of it, but also
supported and given color to the right of that State by express declarations
in its favor, will be bound by the sale. This opinion however cannot be
positively pronounced. The matter is attended by many difficulties; and the
dicision, in some of its most important parts, rests not on authority, but on
reasonings, the force of which must be judged of in the courts. There perhaps a
very different view of the subject may may be entertained.

The claims of the United States, which opened the first, and far the most
extensive field of enquiry, having been thus surveyed, the repealing act of
Georgia now presents itself for consideration.

This act it is to be observed in the first place does not profess to repeal
the act of January 7th 1795, but declares it void. The reasons for this mode of
proceeding are obvious. The act of January 7th had produced its whole effect.
The sales which it directed had been completely made, the money paid, and
grants passed. It could not therefore have been at all affected by a repeal:
for it is a well known principle that to repeal a law, far from undoing what
has already been done under it, can only prevent its future operation. In order
to destroy these sales therefore -- which was the object aimed at by the
legislature -- it was necessary to do something more than repeal the law it was
necessary to declare it originally void.

A single observation, which presents itself here, might decide the question on
this repealing law It is this; that the force, validity or meaning of a
legislative act is purely a judicial question, and altogether beyond the
province of the legislature It is the province of the legislative power to make
laws, to give them their existence; but to expound and enforce them belongs to
the judiciary. The judicial power is to declare what the law is; the
legislative, what it shall be. The legislature therefore may repeal one of its
own acts; that is, may declare that it shall not hereafter be law: but should
it go further, and declare that it is void, that it is not now law, it steps
beyond its powers; and its proceedings become null.

This is a fundamental principle of all our constitutions, which declare that
the judicial and legislative powers shall be distinct and separate. It results
also from the very existence of a written constitution; which, by its necessary
operation, prescribes limits to the legislative body, and confides the
protection and maintenance of those limits to the judicial power. As well
might the legislature try causes, or hear appeals, as attempt to expound,
enforce, or declare void one of its own acts; except so far as might relate to
the future operation of such act. Its validity, so far as might relate to its
former operation, to acts already done under its authority, is a question which
the courts of justice alone not the legislature are competent to decide.

These sales moreover were contracts, made with the utmost solemnity, for a
valuable consideration, and carried deliberately into complete execution. It is
an invariable maxim of law and of natural justice, that one of the parties to a
contract cannot by his own act, exempt himself, from its obligation. A contrary
principle would break down all the ramparts of right, disolve the bonds of
property, and render good faith, to enforce the observance of which is the
great object of civil institutions, subservient to the partiality, the
selfishness, and the unjust caprices of every individual. There is no reason
why governments, more than private persons, should be exempt from the operation
of this mixim; nor are they considered as exempt by our constitution or our
laws. The state of Georgia, being a party to this contract, could no more
relieve itself from the obligation, by any act of its own, than an individual
who had signed a bond could relieve himself from the necessity of payment there
were sufficient grounds for relief in either case, the state or the individual
must resort to the courts of justice, where it would be afforded: but the acts
of the one and the other for relieving themselves would be equally and
essentially negatory.

The act of Georgia therefore can have no legal effect. Is satisfactory to find
this opinion corroborated by that of a very eminent Lawer in Newyork who was
sometime ago consulted on this point -- See Col Hamilton's opinion; apendix No
17.
It can be regarded only as a declaration stating the grounds on which that
state conceives itself entitled to relief from the contract in question. As
such a declaration however, from so respectable a body as the legislature of a
state, cannot fail to make a strong impression, it will be not improper to
examine these grounds a little more minutely, in order that a better judgment
may be formed about their sufficiency.

The sales are declared void by this act, on two grounds. First that the
legislature had not constitutional power to make them. Secondly that in passing
the act for that purpose, it was influenced by fraudulent and corrupt motives.

As to the first, it is not improper to repeat that it is purely an object of
judicial enquiry. Had the state of Georgia, as it might have done, filed a bill
in the supreme federal court against the purchasers, to set aside the sales,
one object of enquiry in that court would have been whether they they were made
by sufficient authority: and if it had found that they were not, they must have
been set aside. But who ever heard till this act was passed, that the
legislatures under our constitutions have not power to sell the public
property, or give it away? This has always been considered as one of the most
essential branches of legislative authority. It has been exercised by every
legislature in the Union; and by that of Georgia, in numerous instances. If the
legislature has a right to dispose of the public lands, which cannot be denied,
it may dispose of them in what quantities and on what conditions it thinks fit:
for the right being unrestricted, so must be its exercise.

The second ground, the ground of fraud and corruption, was equally a subject
of judicial inquiry. There cannot be a doubt that if a legislative body in
making a contract, has been imposed on, it will, equally with an individual, be
entitled to relief; but, like an individual, it must seek this relief in a
court of justice. In a bill filed in this case for setting aside the sales, the
allegation of fraud would have been enquired into, and, if supported by proper
proof, would no doubt have been a sufficient ground for relief. This course the
state might have pursued. In this manner it might have obtained whatever remedy
it is entitled to in law and justice.

But what is the nature of the fraud complained of; and by what proof is the
charge supported?

The act does not pretend that the legislature which made these sales was
deceived, was imposed on; but that some individuals among them were corrupted.
Do the circumstances alleged amount to corruption? Can the motives of
individual members be enquired into, in order to invalidate the acts of a
legislative body?

It is alleged by the act "That a majority of those members of the legislature
who voted in favor of the sales, were engaged in the purchase." There are
various other vague and general charges, but this is the only specific fact
alleged. It is not even pretended that a majority of the legislature was
concerned, but only "A majority of those who voted for the sales." Admitting
this to be true, was it an act of corruption? It might be considered perhaps as
an impropriety; but on what ground can it be stigmatized as corrupt? It is not
stated that those persons were bribed; that they were to receive money for
their votes, or even to have part of the land without paying for it; but simply
that they were concerned in the purchase. But are there no other than corrupt
motives which could induce a member to vote for a sale of public property, in
which he himself was concerned? Might he not regard the sale, especially as it
was of lands, the benefit of which to the public depends on their being
cultivated, as advantageous to the state as well as to the purchasers? Might it
not in fact be so? It is a rule of law that if an act can be fairly accounted
for on proper motives, corrupt ones shall not be presumed.

But it is believed that a legislative act can never be invalidated on account
of the motives from which it may have been agreed to by individual members:
that those motives can never be brought into question. Could such enquiries be
instituted where could be the end of them? By what mode of proof should they be
conducted? What a door would be opened to fraud and uncertainty of every kind!
The very foundations of legislative authority would be shaken; and all its acts
might be nullified by the fraud or the artifices of individuals. If the
legislature, considered as an individual, have been imposed on, like an
individual it may be relieved: if it have exceeded the bounds of its authority,
its acts are null; but the motives of its members can never be questioned
without striking at the root of law, and introducing scenes of confusion a
thousand times more intolerable, then any evils which it could intended to
remedy.

The proofs of this corruption, which come next to be considered, are stated by
the act under four heads: affidavits; presentiments of grand juries; petitions
and remonstrances; and the circumstance of a larger sum having been rejected
for the same property.

It is well known that the presentiments of a grand jury are never admitted as
evidence in courts of justice. Even the testimony on which they are founded is,
for the most part, of such a nature that it could not be received there. They
serve as the foundations of enquiry, but never as proof of a fact. Such of the
presentiments in question as have been seen, even if they were admitted as
evidence, would prove nothing; for they either denounce the sales in general
terms, as injurious to the public and improperly obtained, or merely state the
fact of some members having been concerned, or requested to be so, in the
purchase.

Still less can remonstrances and petitions be relied on in the decision of
legal rights. The means by which they are frequently obtained, and the slight
grounds whereon they sometimes rest, are too well known to need any
observations.

As to the rejection of a larger offer, it may have been a very wise step. The
security may have been deemed insufficient. The offer may have been considered
as delusive. It is not known by the counsel much less insinuated, that this was
the case; but it is sufficient that it may have been so considered by the
legislature, and therefore may have furnished them with a very upright though
perhaps ill-judged motive, for their rejection. The fact is that the offer was
made by only four or five individuals; while the companies who purchased
consisted of a very considerable number. The latter also paid a large sum in
advance, which it is not understood that the former proposed. Under these
circumstances, surely it is not necessary to resort to corrupt motives for the
preference.

On the subject of the affidavits, all of which have been carefully examined,
several important observations occur.

In the first place they were ex part; taken in private, before a committee of
the house of representatives; the witnesses not confronted with those persons
against whom their testimony was to operate; not subjected to
cross-examination. The admission of testimony taken in this manner is no less
contradictory to the practice of every court known to the American
constitutions, than to the plain principles of natural justice. Had those
witnesses been cross-examined, it is impossible to tell what circumstances
might have appeared to give a different complexion to the whole case. In
testimony too not delivered from the mouth of the witness himself, but taken in
writing and taken by one side only, it is natural to presume that whatever
makes in favor of that side will be more particularly dwelt on, and more
strongly expressed; while such parts as seem opposed to it are apt to be either
omitted or stated imperfectly. This arises from the natural imperfection of the
human mind, from the effect of our passions on our understanding and our
conduct. Hence has resulted a rule which is invariably observed in all our
courts; that testimony is never admitted, unless both parties have had an
opportunity of joining in the examination.

In the case of these affidavits it is affirmed that the examining committee
refused to take down material parts of the testimony actually given by the
witnesses, and tending to exculpate the members accused of corruption. See
Affidavits of Flourney v. Clayton.
In the uncertainty that there is, whether this fact may not have been
misunderstood, the respect due to such a body as the committee of a legislative
assembly represses those remarks to which, of true, it must give rise.

But the evidence itself, if properly taken, is liable to many strong
objections.

In some instances it is contradictory Affidavits of James Tyroll, and Russel
Jones.
and conjectural De. and Philip Clayton and John Thomas.
? It depends in a great degree on hearsay See Affidavids throughout
, which the best known rules of law, and the dictates of common justice, concur
in rejecting. It consists almost wholly of the confessions of members made, not
to the legislature or the committee, but to the witnesses, about the
impropriety of their own conduct; and finally the whole scope of it is to prove
that certain members, who voted for the law, were actuated by corrupt motives;
a point which it has been shown, can never be enquired into for the purpose of
invalidating a legislative act.

It is worthy of remark also that the members who appear by these affidavits to
have been concerned in the contract, were to pay their portion of the purchase
money. See affidavits of van Allen, Rains, and Lucas.
There is indeed one instance of the contrary; but it is proved by the hearsay
confession, not of the member himself, but of a person who declared himself to
be one of the purchasers Do. of James M. Niel.
.

This testimony therefore, whether its substance be regarded or the manner of
its being taken, appears equally defective.

But if it were less so, if the proofs of corruption in the legislature were
not only admissible but strong, they would be greatly counter balanced by the
conduct of the governor. He has never been accused, or even suspected, of
corruption. It can hardly be conceived, that, pure himself, he would have aided
the corruption of others; would have sanctioned an act which he knew to have
originated in motives so flagitious. Had these practices existed, it is next to
impossible that they should have escaped his knowledge; for he was not only on
the spot, and well acquainted with all the actors in this business, but lived
in the closest connection and intimacy with some of its warmest opposers A
Leading member of the Senate, who was the governor's son-in-law and lived in
his house was one of the most strenuous in opposition.
.

It cannot be pretended that the governor countenanced this act through
deference of the Legislature; for the same motive would have led him to concur
in the first bill which however was rejected. He must therefore have assented
to the second, because he found it free from those objections which had
operated against the first; and considered it as conducive to the public good.
Why may not the legislature be concieved to have acted from the same motives?
Must corruption be resorted to in order to find a reason for their doing an
act, which the governor, equally enlightened with them, was led to by a sense
of duty?

Thus it seems clear that the legislature of Georgia was wholly incompetent to
set aside this act, even had there been sufficient grounds; because this is a
judicial, not a legislative function, and because the sale was a contract to
which the state itself was a party: that had the legislature been competent,
the evidence on which it proceeded was not only inconclusive, but altogether
inadmissible: And that, since to dispose of the public land is one of the most
undeniable powers of the legislature, and the motives of members, even if
corrupt, which in this case is far from being established, cannot be alleged
against the validity of a legislative act, there was no ground, either of
unconstitutionality or corruption, upon which, even in a competent tribunal,
this act could have been declared void.

It is proper to add that even if this contract could be set aside, an
essential condition of doing so must be the repayment of the purchase money. It
is one of the most obvious improprieties in the repealing act, that it attempts
to destroy the purchase without making the least provision, or even
stipulation, for their repayment See note page 31.
. If, as it has been asserted, the legislature which passed the repealing act
made an appropriation of part of this money, it was a complete confirmation, as
far as depended on them, of the contract which they avowed an intention of
annulling See the case of Cole v. Gibbons. P. W.
.

From this view of the two points submitted, taken under all those aspects
which were declared important, the undersigned counsel is led to the following
conclusion, which he certifies as his opinion: 1. That the United States never
had a right to any part of the lands in question, above a line drawn due east
from the mouth of the Yazoo: 2. That, under circumstances of the case, they
will probably be considered, in the courts of equity, as bound by the sales
which have been made by the state of Georgia below that line: And 3. That the
title of the purchasers, either above or below, can in no degree be affected by
the repealing act of that State.

Rob. G. Harper.
Considered at New York August 3d. 1796.
APPENDIX.
No. 1 An extract from the treaty of Paris in 1763. 2. British proclamation,
Oct. 7, 1763. 3. Report of the board of trade respecting the extension of
Florida. 4. Extract from the instructions to governor Chester. 5 Act of Georgia
for asserting her limits, February, 1783. 6. Answers of Joseph Purcell. 7. Act
of South Carolina, for confirming the convention of Beaufort. 8. Act of Georgia
for selling to several companies in 1789. 9. Representation by the
commissioners of the U. S. to Spain. 10. Report from secretary of state on
Spanish claims. 11. Act for the sales by Georgia in 1795. 12. Clause of the
repealing act. 13. Governors communication to the Georgia legislature at the
session of 1796. 14. The repealing act 15. Resolution of Congress Oct. 26,
1787. 16. Extract from major Picnkney's representation to the court of Spain.
17. Opinion of Col. Hamilton.
No. I. Extract from the treaty of peace in 1763, taken fram the 3d vol. of
Collection of treaties, page 188.
20th. In consequence of the restitution stipulated in the preceding article,
his Catholic Majesty, cedes and guarantees, in full right, to his Britannick
Majesty, Florida, with Fort St. Augustine and the bay of Pensacola, as well as
all that Spain possessed on the continent of North America, to the east or to
the south-east of the river Missippi. And in general, every thing that depends
on the said countries and lands, with the sovereignty, property, possession and
all rights, acquired by treaties or otherwise. which the Catholic King and the
crown of Spain have had till now over the said countries, lands, places, and
their inhabitants, so that the Catholic King cedes and makes over the whole to
the king and to the crown of Great Britain, and that in the most ample manner
and form.

A true copy. CHARLES LEE.

No. II. BY THE KING. A PROCLAMATION.
GEORGE R.

Whereas we have taken into our royal consideration the extensive and valuable
acquisitions in America, secured to our crown by the late difinitive treaty of
peace concluded at Paris the 10th day of February last; and being desirous that
all our loving subjects, as well of our kingdoms as of our colonies in America,
may avail themselves, with all convenient speed, of the great benefits and
advantages which must accrue therefrom to their commerce, manufactures, and
navigation; we have thought fit with the advice of our privy council, to issue
this royal proclamation, hereby to publish and declare to all our loving
subjects, that we have, with the advice of our said privy council, granted our
letters patent under our great seal of Great Britain, to erect within the
countries and islands, ceded and confirmed to us by the said treaty, four
distinct and separate governments, styled and called by the names of Quebec,
East Florida, and West Florida, and Grenada, and limited and bounded as
follows, viz.

First the government of Quebec, bounded on the Labrador coast by the river St.
John, and from thence by a line drawn from the head of that river, through the
lake St. John, to the south end of the lake Nipissim; from whence the said
line, crossing the river St. Lawrence and the lake Champlain in 45 degrees of
north latitude, passes along the highlands, which divide the rivers that empty
themselves into the said river St. Lawrence from those which fall into the sea;
and also along the north coast of the Bay des Chaleurs, and the coast of the
Gulf of St. Lawrence to Cape Rosieres, and from thence crossing the mouth of
the river St. Lawrence by the west end of the island of Anticosti, terminates
at the aforesaid river St. John.

Secondly, The government of East Florida, bounded to the westward by the Gulf
of Mexico and the Apalachicola river; to the northward, by a line drawn from
that part of the said river where the Chatahouchee and Flint rivers meet, to
the source of St. Mary's river, and by the course of the said river to the
Atlantic Ocean, and to the east and south by the Atlantic Ocean, and the Gulf
of Florida, including all islands within six leagues of the sea coast.

Thirdly, the government of West Florida, bounded to the southward by the Gulf
of Mexico, including all islands within six leagues of the coast from the river
Apalachicola to lake Pontchartrain; to the westward by the said lake, the lake
Maurepas, and the river Mississippi; to the northward, by a line drawn due east
from that part of the river Mississippi which lies in thirty-one degrees north
latitude, to the river Apalachicola, or Catahouchee; and to the eastward by the
said river.

Fourthly, The government of Grenada, comprehending the island of that name,
together with the Grenadines, and the islahds of Dominico, St. Vincent, and
Tobago.

And to the end that the open and free fishery of our subjects may be extended
to, and carried on upon the coast of Labrador and the adjacent islands, we have
thought fit, with the advice of our said privy council, to put all that coast
from the river St. John's to Hudson's Streights, together with the islands of
Anticosti and Madelaine, and all other smaller islands lying upon the said
coast, under the care and inspection of our governor of Newfoundland.

We have also, with the advice of our privy council, thought fit to annex the
islands of St. John, and Cape Breton, or Isle Royale, with the lesser islands
adjacent thereto to our government of Nova Scotia.

We have also, with the advice of our privy council aforesaid, annexed to our
province of Georgia, all the lands lying between the rivers Alatamaha and St.
Mary's.

And whereas it will greatly contribute to the speedy settling our said new
governments, that our loving subjects should be informed of our paternal care
for the security of the liberties and properties of those who are, and shall
become inhabitants thereof; we have thought fit to publish and declare, by this
our proclamation, that we have, in the letters patent under our great seal of
Great Britain, by which the said governments are constituted, given express
power and direction to our governors of our said colonies respectively, that so
soon as the state and circumstances of the said colonies will admit thereof,
they shall, with the advice and consent of the members of our council, summon
and call general assemblies within the said governments respectively, in such
manner and form as is used and directed in those colonies and provinces in
America, which are under our immediate government; and we have also given power
to the said governors, with the consent of our said councils, and the
representatives of people, so to be summoned as aforesaid, to make, constitute,
and ordain laws, statutes, and ordinances for the public peace, welfare, and
good government of our said colonies, and of the people and inhabitants
thereof, as near as may be agreeable to the laws of England, and under such
regulations and restrictions as are used in other colonies; and in the mean
time time, and until such assemblies can be called as aforesaid, all persons
inhabiting in, or resorting to our said colonies may confide in our royal
protection for the enjoyment of the benefit of the laws of our realm of
England; for which purpose we have given power under our great seal to the
governors of our sail colonies respectively, to erect and constitute, with the
advice of our said councils respectively, courts of judicature and public
justice within our said colonies, for the hearing and determining all causes,
as well criminal as civil, according to law and equity, and as near as may be,
agreeable to the laws of England, with liberty to all persons who may think
themselves aggrieved by the sentence of such courts, in all civil cases, to
appeal, under the usual limitations and restrictions, to us in our privy
council.

We have also thought fit with the advice of our privy council as aforesaid, to
give unto the governors and councils of our said three new colonies upon the
continent; full power and authority to settle and agree with the inhabitants of
our said new colonies, or to any other persons who shall resort thereto, for
such lands, tenements, and hereditaments, as are now, or hereafter shall be, in
our power to dispose of, and them to grant to any such person or persons, upon
such terms, and under such moderate quit-rents, services and acknowledgments,
as have been appointed and settled in other colonies, and under such other
conditions as shall appear to us to be necessary and expedient for the
advantage of the grantees, and the improvement and settlement of our said
colonies.

And whereas we are desirous, upon-all occasions, to testify our royal sense
and approbation of the conduct and bravery of the officers and soldiers of our
armies, and to reward the same, we do hereby command and empower our governors
of our said three new colonies, and other our governors of our several
provinces on the continent of North America, to grant without see or reward, to
such reduced officers as have served in North America during the late war, and
are actually residing there, and shall personally apply for the same, the
following quantities of land, subject, at the expiration of ten years, to the
same quit-rents as other land are subject to, in the province within which they
are granted, as also subject to the same conditions of cultivation and
improvements, viz.

To every person having the rank of a field officer, 5000 acres. To every
captain, 3000 acres. To every subaltern or staff officer, 2000 acres. To every
non-commission officer, 200 acres. To every private man, 50 acres.
We do likewise authorize and require the governors and commanders in chief of
all our said colonies upon the continent of North America, to grant the like
quantities of land, and upon the same conditions, to such reduced officers of
our navy of like rank, as served on board our ships of war in North America, at
the times of the reduction of Louisburg and Quebec, in the late war, and who
shall personally apply to our respective governors for such grants.

And whereas it just and reasonable, and essential to our interest, and the
security or our colonies, that the several nations or tribes of Indians, with
whom we are connected, and who live under our protection, should not be
molested or disturbed in the possession of such parts of our dominions and
territories as, not having been ceded to, or purchased by us, are reserved to
them, or any of them, as their hunting grounds; we do therefore, with the
advice of our privy council, declare it to be our royal will and pleasure, that
no governor or commander in chief, in any of our colonies of Quebec, East
Florida, or West Florida, do presume, upon any pretense whatever, to grant
warrants of survey, or pass any patents for lands beyond the bounds of their
respective governments, as discribed by their commissions; as also that no
governor or commander in chief of our other colonies or plantations in America,
do presume for the present, and until our further pleasure be known, to grant
warrants of survey, or pass patents for any lands beyond the heads or sources
of any of the rivers which fall into the Atlantic Ocean from the west or north
west; or upon any lands whatever, which not having been ceded to, or purchased
by us, as aforesaid, are reserved to the said Indians, or any of them.

And we do further declare it to be our royal will and pleasure for the
present, as aforesaid, to reserve under our sovereignty, protection and
dominion for the use of the said Indians, all the land and territories not
included within the limits of our said three new governments or within the
limits of the territory granted to the Hudson's Bay company; as also all the
land and territories lying to the westward of the sources of the rivers which
fall into the sea from the west and north-west as aforesaid; and we do hereby
strictly forbid, on pain of our displeasure, all our loving subjects from
making any purchasers or settlements whatever, or taking possession of any of
the lands above-reserved, without our especial leave and license for that
purpose first obtained.

And we do further strictly enjoin and require all persons whatever, who have
either wilfully or inadvertently seated themselves upon any lands within the
countries above described, or upon any other lands, which not having been ceded
to, or purchased by us, are still reserved to the said Indians as aforesaid,
forthwith to remove themselves from such settlements.

And whereas great frauds and abuses have been committed in the purchasing
lands of the Indians, to the great prejudice of our interests, and to the great
dissatisfaction of the said Indians; in order, therefore, to prevent such
interruption for the future, and to the end that the Indians may be convinced
of our justice and determined resolution to remove all reasonable cause of
discontent, we do, with the advice of our privy council, strictly enjoin and
equire that no private person do presume to make any purchase from the said
Indians, of any lands reserved to the said Indians, within those parts of our
colonies where we have thought proper to allow settlement; but that if at any
time any of the said Indians should be inclined to dispose of the said lands,
the same shall be purchased only for us, in our name, at some public meeting or
assembly of the said Indians, to be held for that purpose by the governor or
commander in chief of our colony respectively within which they shall lie: and
in case they shall lie within the limits of any proprietaries, conformable to
such directions and instructions as we or they shill think proper to give for
that purpose: and we do, by the advice of our privy council, declare and
enjoin, that the trade with the said Indians shall be free and open to all our
subjects whatever, provided that every person who may incline to trade with the
said Indians, do take out a license for carrying on such trade, from the
governor or commander in chief of any of our colonies respectively, where such
person shall reside, and also give security to observe such regulations as we
shall at any time think fit, by our selves or commissaries, to be appointed for
this purpose, to direct and appoint for the benefit of the said trade: and we
do hereby authorize, enjoin, and require the governors and commanders in chief
of all our colonies respectively, as well those under our immediate government,
as those under the government and direction of proprietaries, to grant such
licenses without see or reward. taking especial care to insert therein a
condition that such license shall be void, and the security forfeited, in case
the person to whom the same is granted, shall refuse or neglect to observe such
regulation as we shall think proper to prescribe as aforesaid.

And we do further expressly enjoin and require all officers whatever, as well
military as those employed in the management and direction of Indians affairs
within the territories reserved, as aforesaid, for the use of the said Indians'
to seize and apprehend all persons whatever, who standing charged with
treasons, misprisions of treason, murders, or other felonies or misdemeanors,
shall fly from justice and take refuge in the said territory, and to send them
under a proper guard to the colony where the crime was committed of which they
shall stand accused, in order to take their trial for the same,

Given at our court at St. James's, the 7th day of October 1763, in the third
year of our reign.
God save the King.
No. III. TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty,
BY your majesty's royal proclamation of the 7th of October last, and your
majesty's commission to your governor of West Florida, it is declared that the
said province shall be bounded to the north by a line drawn due east from that
part of the river Mississippi which lies in 31 degrees north latitude, to the
river Apalachicola; but it is our duty to represent to your majesty that we are
informed by your majesty's governor, that it appears from observations and
surveys made since the said province has been in your majesty's possession,
that there are not only very considerable settlements upon the east bank of the
Mississippi above that line, but also that the town and settlement of Mobile
itself is some miles to the north of it, and therefore we humbly beg leave to
propose that an instrment may pass under the great seal (in like manner as was
directed in the case of the extension of the south boundary of Georgia)
declaring that the province of West Florida shall be bounded to the north by a
line drawn from the mouth of the river Yasous, where it unites with the
Mississippi due east to the river Apalachicola, by which we humbly conceive
every material settlement depending upon West Florida will be comprehended
within the limits of that government.

Which is most humbly submitted HILSBOROUGH SOAME JENYNS ED. ELLIOTT GEO. RICE
ORWELL BAM. GASCOYNE.

Whitehall, March 23, 1764. Office for Trade, Whitehall, 25th Sept. 1795.
I hereby certify that the before written paper is a representation to the king
for enlarging the boundaries of West Florida, copied from the West Florida
entry A, page 165.

GEO: CHALMERS.



No IV. An extract from the instructions to the British governor of West
Florida, Peter Chester, taken from an authentic copy, now in the possession of
Philip Livingston, Esquire of New York, who was secretary of that province under
governor Chester, viz.
"G. R. INSTRUCTIONS to our trusty and well beloved Peter Chester, Esqr. our
captain general and governor in chief in and over our province of West Florida
in America, and all other our territories dependent thereon -- Given at our
court of St. James's, the second day of March, 1770, and in the tenth year of
our reign."

1. With these our instructions you will receive our commission, under our
great seal of Great Britain, constituting you our captain general and governor
in chief in and over our province of West Florida, in America. Bounded to the
southward by the Gulf of Mexico, including all islands within six leagues of
the coast, from the river Apilachicola to lake Pontehartrain; to the westward
by the said lake the lake Maurepas and the river Mississippi; to the northward
by a line drawn due east from the mouth of the Yasons river, where it unites
with the Mississippi, due east to the river Apalachicola."

No. V. A clause of an act, entitled, "An act for opening the land-office, and
for other purposes therein mentioned," passed at Savannah the 17th day of
February, 1783, viz.
AND whereas it may so happen that persons emigrating from elsewhere, disposed
to settle in this state, may not be sufficiently acquainted with the limits and
boundaries of the same, and surveyors may wilfully or ignorantly commit
mistakes in running of lines, unless the limits and boundaries be made known to
them; in order, therefore, to inform and encourage all persons disposed to
migrate, into this state, to prevent mistakes, and to remove every pretense for
fraud in surveyors and others entrusted with the execution of this law, be it
enacted, ordained, and declared by the authority aforesaid, that the limits,
boundarie jurisdiction, and authority of the state of Georgia, do and did, and
of right ought to extend from the mouth of the river Savannah, along the north
side thereof, and up the most northern stream or fork of the said river to its
head or source; from thence in a due west course to the river Mississippi, and
down the said stream of the Mississippi to the latitude thirty one degrees
north; from thence in a due east course to the river Apalachicola or
Chatahootchee, and form the fork of the said river Apalachicola where
Catahootchee and Flint rivers meet, in a direct line to the head or source of
the southernmost stream of the river St. Mary; and along the course of the said
river St. Mary to the Atlantic ocean, and from thence to the mouth or inlet of
the river Savannah; including and comprehending all the lands and waters within
the said limits, boundaries and jurisdictional right, and also all the islands
within twenty leagues of the sea coast; and all justices of the peace,
surveyors, militia and other officers, and persons of any description or
denomination whatsoever, are hereby enjoined and required, and fully authorized
and empowered, to hold and consider the said limits, boundaries, and
jurisdictional right abovementioned, expressed and described, as the the true
and just limits, boundaries and jurisdiction of the sovereign and independent
state of Georgia, as secured to the inhabitans and free citizens thereof by
their charter, guaranteed as well by the articles of confederation as by the
treaty of alliance with his most christian majesty: Provided, nevertheless,
that nothing herein before contained shall extend, or be construed to extend,
to authorize or empower any surveyor, or other person or persons whatever, to
survey, run, or make lines, upon the lands before described as being allowed to
the Indians for hunting ground, or any part or parcel thereof, before or until
permission for that purpose shall be granted by the legislature, and made known
by proclamation.

No. VI. Extract from a representation made on oath by Joseph Purcell of
Charleston, formerly surveyor for the British government in Florida, in answer
to certain queries.
"THE parallel of latitude 32 degrees and 40 minutes, intersects the
Mississippi 24 miles above the mouth of the Yazoo. -- The Natchey district is
bounded to the westward by the river Mississippi, and extends from Lostus's
Clist up the said river, to the mouth of the Yazoo, the distance being 110
miles. -- The said district was purchased for the Choctaw nation, by the
British superintendant from Indian affairs, at a treaty held at Mobile in May,
1777, and the lines as above described, were marked and surveyed by me me, in
1779.

No. VII. An Ordinance of the general assembly of the State of South Carolina,
entitled, "An Ordinance for ratifying and confirming a convention between the
States of South Carolina and Georgia, etc. passed February 29th, 1788, from
which it appears, that the State of South Carolina has ceded to Georgia, all
right and claim to the territory to be granted to the company, viz.
WHEREAS the state of South Carolina did heretofore present a petition to the
Uniten States in congress assembled, and did therein set forth, that a
difference had arisen and subsisted between the state of South Carolina and
Georgia, concerning boundaries, the said states claiming respectively the same
territories, and that the case and claim of the state of South Carolina was as
follows, that is to say, "Charles the II. king of Great Britain, by charter,
dated the 24th day of March, in the 16th year of his reign, granted to eight
persons therein named as lord proprietors thereof, all the lands lying and
being within his dominions of America, between thirty-one and thirty-six
degrees of north latitude, in a direct west line to the South-Seas, stiling the
lands so described, the province of Carolina: that on the 30th day of June, in
the 17th year of his reign, the said king granted to the said lords a second
charter, enlarging the bounds of Carolina, viz. from twenty-nine degrees of
north latitude to thirty-six degrees thirty minutes, and from those points on
the sea coast west in a direct line in the South-Seas: that seven of the said
proprietors of Carolina sold and surrendered to George the IId. late king of
Great Britain, all their title and interest in the said province, and the share
of the remaining proprietor was separated from the king's, and allotted to him
in the north part of North Carolina: that Carolina was afterward divided into
two provinces called North and South Carolina; that by a charter dated the 9th
of June, 1732, George the IId. king of Great Britain, granted to certain
persons therein named, all the lands lying between the rivers Savannah and
Altamaha, and between lines to be drawn from the heads of those rivers
respectively to the South Sea, and styled the said colony Georgia: that by the
treaty of peace concluded at Paris, on the 10th day of February, 1763, the
river Mississippi was declared to be the western boundary of the North American
colonies: that the governor of South Carolina, in the year 1762, conceiving
that the lands to the south of the Altamaha still belonged to South Carolina,
granted several tracts of the said land: that the government of Georgia
complained to the king of Great Britain respecting those grants, as being for
land within its limits, and thereupon his majesty, by proclamation dated the
7th day of October, 1793, annexed to Georgia, all the lands lying between the
rivers Alatamaha and St. Mary, the validity of the grants passed by the
governor of South Carolina as aforesaid, remaining however acknowledged and
uncontested, and the grantees of the said land or their representatives still
holding it as their legal estate: that South Carolina claims the land lying
between the North Carolina line and a line to run due west from the mouth of
Tugoloo river to the Mississippi, because as the said state contends the river
Savannah loses that name at the confluence of Tugoloo and Keowee rivers,
consequently that spot is the head of Savannah river, the state of Georgia on
the other hand contends, that the source of Keowee river is to be considered as
the head of Savannah river: that the state of South Carolina also claims all
the lands lying between a line to be drawn from the head of the river St. Mary,
the head of Altamaha, the Mississippi, and Florida, being, as the said state
contends, within the limits of its charter, and not annexed to Georgia by the
said proclamation of 1763: the state of Georgia on the other hand contends that
the tract of country last mentioned is a part of that state:" the state of
South Carolina did therefore by their said petition pray for an hearing and
determination of the difference and dispute subsisting as aforesaid between the
said state and Georgia, agreeable to the articles of confederation and
perpetual union between the United States of America: And whereas the state of
Georgia were duly notifyed of the said petition, and did by their lawful agents
appear in order to establish their right to the premises in manner directed by
the said articles of confederation, and proceedings were thereon had in
congress in order to the appointment of judges to constitute a court for
hearing and determining the said matter in question: And whereas it appeared to
be the sincere wish and desire of the said states of South Carolina and
Georgia, that all and singular the differences and claims subsisting between
the said states relative to boundary, should be amicably adjusted and
compromised: And whereas the legislature of the state of South Carolina did
elect Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Andrew Pickens and Pierce Butler, Esqrs
commissioners, and did invest them or a majority of them with full and absolute
power and authority in behalf of that state to to settle and compromise all and
singular the differences, controversies, disputes and claims which subsist
between the said state and the state of Georgia relative to boundary, and to
establish and permanently six a boundary between the two states; And the said
state of South Carolina did declare, that it would at all times thereafter
ratify and confirm all and whatsoever the said commissioners or a majority of
them should do in and touching the premises, and that the same should be
forever binding on the said state of South Carolina: And whereas the
legislature of the state of Georgia did appoint John Huston, John Habersham and
Lachlan M'Intosh, Esqr's, commissioners, and did invest them with full and
absolute power and authority in behalf of that state to settle and compromise
all and singular the differencies, controversies, disputes and claims which
subsist between the said state and the state of South Carolina relative to
boundary, and to establish and permanently six a boundary between the two
states; and the state of Georgia, did also declare, that it would at all times
thereafter ratify and confirm all and whatsoever the said lastmentioned
commissioners or a majority of them should do in and touching the premises, and
that the same should be forever binding on the said state of Georgia: And
whereas the said Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Andrew Pickens, Pierce Butler,
John Habersham, and Lachlan M'Intosh, Esqrs. commissioners on the part of the
states of South Carolina, and Georgia respectively, did by mutual consent
assemble at the town of Beaufort, in the state of South Carolina, on the 24th
day of April, 1787, in order to the execution of their respective trusts, and
did reciprocally exchange and consider their full powers, and did declare the
same legal and forever binding on both states, and on conferring on the most
effectual means of adjusting the differences subsisting between the said
states, and of establishing and permanently fixing a boundary between them, did
mutually agree for and in behalf of their respective states to the following
articles that is to say.

Article I. The most northern branch or stream of the river Savannah from the
sea or mouth of such stream in the fork or confluence of the rivers now called
Tugoloo and Keowee, and from thence to the most northern branch or stream of
the said river Tugoloo 'till it intersects the northern boundary line of
South Carolina, if the said branch or stream extends so far north, reserving
all the islands in the said rivers Tugoloo and Savannah or Georgia; but if the
head spring or source of any branch or stream of the said river Tugoloo does
not extend to the north boundary line of South Carolina, then a west line to
the Mississippi, to be drawn from the head spring or source of the said branch
or stream of Tugoloo river which extends to the highest northern latitude,
shall foerver hereafter from the separation, limit and boundary between the
states of South Carolina and Georgia.

Art. II The navigation of the river Savannah at and from the bar, and mouth
along the north-east side of Cockspur island, and up the direct course of the
main northern channel along the northern side of Hutchinson's island opposite
the town of Savannah to the upper end of the said island, and from thence up
the bed or principal stream of the said river to the confluence up the channel
of the most northern stream of Tugoloo river to its source, and back again by
the same channel to the Atlantic ocean, is hereby declared to be henceforth
equally free to the citizens of both states, and exempt from all duties, tolls,
hindrance, interruption or molestation whatsoever, attempted to be enforced by
one state on the citizens of the other; and all the rest of the river Savannah
to the southward of the foregoing description, is acknowledged to be the
exclusive right of the state of Georgia.

Art. III. The state of South Carolina shall not hereafter claim any lands to
the castward, southward, southwestward, or west of the boundary above
established, but hereby relinquishes and cedes to the state of Georgia all the
right, title and claim which the state of South Carolina has to the
government, sovereignty and jurisdiction, in and over the same, and also the
right and pre-emption of the soil from the native Indians, and all other the
estate, property and claim which the state of South Carolina has in or to
thesaid lands.

Art. IV. The state of Georgia shall not hereafter claim any lands to the
northward and north-eastward of the boundary above established, but here
relinquishes and codes to the state of South Carolina all the right, title and
claim which the said state of Georgia has to the government, sovereignty and
jurisdiction in and over the same, and also the right of pre-emption of the
soil from the native Indians, and all other the estate, property and claim
which the state of Georgia has in or to the said lands.

Art. V. The lands heretofore granted by either of the said states between the
forks of Tugoloo and Keowee, shall be the private property of the first
grantees and their respective heirs and assigns; and the grantees of any of the
lands under the state of Georgia shall within twelve months from the date
hereof cause such grants or authentic copies thereof, ratified under the seal
of the state of Georgia to be deposited in the office of the secretary of
state, of South Carolina, to the end that the same may be recorded there, and
after the same shall have been so recorded, the grantees shall be entitled to
receive again from the said seeretary their respective grants to the copies
thereof, whichsoever may have been so deposited, without any charge or fees of
office whatsoever, and every grant, of which the copy certified as
abovementioned, shall not be deposited, shall be adjudged void.

Art. VI. The commissioners on the part of the state of South Carolina do not
by any of the above articles mean to cede, relinquish or weaken the right,
title and claim of any individual citizens of the state of South Carolina to
any land situated in Georgia, particularly to the lands situated to the south
or south-west of the river Alatamaha, and granted during the administration of
governor Boon, in 1763, and they do hereby declare, that the right and title
of the said citizens to the same, is and ought to remain as full, strong and
effectual as if this convention had not been made. The commissioners on the
part of the state of Georgia do decline entering into any negotiation relative
to the lands mentioned in this article, as they conceive they are not
authorized so to do by the powers delegated to them.

Be it therefore ordained, That the said convention and all the articles
thereof shall be forever binding on the state of South Carolina, and that the
same is hereby fully and absolutely ratified and confirmed.

JOHN LLOYD. President of the Senate.
JOHN JULIUS PRINGLE, Speaker of the House of Representatives.

No. VIII. AN Act "for disposing of certain vacant lands ar territory within
this State." (Georgia)
WHEREAS diverse persons from the state of Virginia, North Carolina, and
South Carolina, have made application for the purchase of certain tracts and
parcels of land lying and bordering on the Tenessee, Tom or Donbigby, Yazoo,
and Mississippi rivers, within this state, and have offered to engage to settle
the same; a part of which territory has been already settled on behalf of some
of the applicants, under and by virtue of an act of the general assembly of
this state, bearing date 7th of February, 1785, at Savannah, entitled " An act
for laying out a district of land situated on the river Mississippi, within the
limits of this state into a county to be called Bourbon."

Now therefore, be it enacted, by the senate and house of representatives of
the state of Georgia in general assembly met, That all that tract or part of
territory of this state, within the following limits, to wit; beginning at the
mouth of Cole's creek on the Mississippi, continuing to the head spring or
source thereof, from thence a due east course to the Tombigby river, then
continuing along the middle of the said river up to the latitude thirty-three,
bounding on the territory of the Virginia Yazoo company, a due west course to
the middle of the Mississippi, thence down the middle of the Mississippi to the
mouth of Cole's-Creek aforesaid, and containing about five millions of acres,
shall he reserved as a pre-emption for the South Carolina Yazoo Company, for
two years from and after the passing of this act, and if the said South
Carolina Yazoo Company, shall, within the said term of two years, put into the
treasury of this state, the amount of 66,964 dollars, then it shall be lawful
for the governor, at the time being, and he is hereby empowered and directed to
sign and deliver a grant in the usual form, to Alexander Moultrie, Isaac Huger,
William Clay Snipes, and Thomas Washington, Esqrs. and the rest of their
associates, and to their heirs and assigns for ever in fee simple as tenants in
common, of all the tract of land included in the aforesaid boundaries,
Provided, That the said grantees shall forbear all hostile attacks on any of
the Indian herds, which may be found on or near the said territory, if any such
there be, and keep this state free from all charge and expenses which may
attend the preserving of peace between the said Indians, and extinguishing the
claims of the said Indians, under the authority of this state; And provided
further, and it is hereby expressly conditioned, that this state and the
government thereof, shall, at no time hereafter, be subject to any suit at law
or in equity, or claim or pretension whatever, for, or on account of any
deduction in the quantity of the said territory by any recovery, which may or
shall be had on any former claim or claims.

And for the better direction of the governor, Be it enacted, That the
treasurer of this state shall, on application of any agent of either of the
said companies, within the said term of two years, receive the sum or sums of
money, which they are hereby respectively directed to advance; a certificate of
which payment under the hand of the treasurer, shall be a sufficient voucher
for the governor to issue the grants to the respective companies as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, That all the remaining vacant territory belonging
to this state, shall be disposed of as this or any future general assembly
shall direct and in no other manner whatever.

SEABORN JONES, Speaker of the House of Representatives, N. BROWNSON, President
of the Senate. Concurred Dec. 21, 1789. EDWARD TELFAIR. GOVERNOR. GEORGIA.


No. IX. Extract from a representation made to the court of Spain on the
subject of Boundary etc. by the comissioners of the United States on the 7th of
Dec. 1793.
IN this stage of their government the several Boundaries were fixed, and
particularly the southern Boundary of Georgia, the one now brought into
question by Spain. This Boundary was fixed by the Proclamation of the king of
great Britain their chief magistrate, in the year 1763. at a time when no other
power pretended any claim whatever to any part of the country through which it
run -- The boundary of Georgia was thus established to begin in the Mississippi
in latitude 31. north, and running eastwardly to the Apilachicola etc. From what
it has been said it results. 1. That the boundary of Georgia, now forming the
southern limits of the United States, was lawfully established in the year
1763. 2. That it has since been confirmed by the only power who could at any
time have pretensions to contest it."

No. X. Extract fom the report of Mr. Jefferson Secretary of State, to serve as
the basis of instructions to our commissioners for settling the points in
dispute with Spain.
As to Boundary, that between Georgia and Florida is the only one which needs
any explanation. It sets up a claim to possessions within the state of Georgia,
founded on her having rescued them by force from the British during late war.
The following view of that subject seems to admit of no reply.

The several states now composing the United States of America, were, from
their first establishment, separate and distinct societies dependent on no
other society of men whatever. They continued at the head of their respective
Governments the executive magistrate who presided over the one they had left;
and thereby secured, in effect, a constant amity with the nation. In this stage
of their government their several boundaries were fixed, and particularly, the
southern boundary of Georgia, the only one now in question, was established at
the first degree of latitude from the Apilachicola westwardly -- The southern
limits of Georgia depend chiefly on. 1. The Charter of So. Carolina etc. 2. On
the Proclamation of the british King in 1763, establishing the boundary between
Georgia and Florida to begin on the Missisippi in 31. degrees north Latitude,
and running westwardly to the Apilachicola, etc.

No. XI. An ACT supplementary to an Act, entitled, 'an Act for appropriating a
part of the unlocated Territory of this State for they payment of the late
State Troops, and for other purposes therein mentioned, declaring the right of
this State to the unappropriated Territory thereof, for the protection and
support of the Frontiers of this State, and for other purposes.
WHEREAS in and by the articles of confederation entered into and finally
ratified on the first day of March, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-one,
by the then Thirteen United States of America, the territory within the limits
of each of the said states is to each of them respectively confirmed and
guaranteed, first by the second article to wit: "Each state retains its
sovereignty, freedom and independence, and every power jurisdiction and right,
which is not by the confederation expressly delegated to the United States in
Congress assembled; and secondly, by the last clause in the second section of
the ninth article: no state shall de deprived of territory, for the benefit of
the United States.

And whereas in and by the definitive treaty of peace, signed at Paris on the
third day of September, one thousand seven hundred and eighty three, the
boundaries of the United States are established, and those boundaries which
limit the westward and southwest ward parts of this state are therein thus
defined: Along the middle of the river Mississippi, until it shall intersect
the northen most part of the thirty first degree of north latitude, south by a
line drawn due east from this termination of the line last mentioned, in the
latitude of thirty-one degrees north of the equator, to the middle of the river
Apalachicolo or Chatahochee; thence along the middle thereof to its junction
with the Flint river; thence straight to the head of Saint Mary's river; and
thence down along the middle of Saint Mary's river to the Atlantic Ocean:'
Which boundaries coincide with the southwardly and westwardly boundaries
recited in the land act now in force, passed at Savannah on the seventeenth day
of September, one thousand seven hundred and eighty three; and by the
Convention held at Buford, on the twenty-eighth day of April, one thousand
seven hundred and eighty seven, between this state and the state of South
Carolina; the northern boundary of the state is established 'from the mouth of
the river Savannah, up the said river to the confluence of Tugola and Keowee;
thence up the Tugoloo, and from the source thereof a due west line to the
Mississippi, including islands. And whereas in and by the first clause of the
sixth article of the Federal Constitution of the United States of America, all
engagements entered into before the adoption of the said Constitution shall be
as valid against the United States, under the said Constitution as under the
confederation, by the third clause of the ninth section of the first article of
the said constitution, no expost facto law shall be passed, and by the second
clause of the third section of the fourth article, the Congress shall have
power to dispose of and make all necessary rules and regulations respecting the
territory or other property belonging to the United States, and nothing in this
Constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United
States, or of any particular state:

And whereas the cession made by the state of North Carolina to the United
States, by them accepted on the second day of April, one thousand seven hundred
and ninety, is a full acknowledgment and recognizal on their part that the
several states not only have the right of pre-emption, but are in the full
exercise of all territorial right within their respective limits. And whereas
notwithstanding the United States did, on the twenty second day of July, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety, by an act to regulate trade and intercourse
with the Indian tribes, enact and declare, that no sale of lands made by
Indians, or any tribe or nation of Indians within the United States, shall be
valid to any person or persons, or to any state, whether having the right of
pre-emption to such lands or not, unless the same shall be made and duly
executed at some public treaty, held under the authority of the United States,'
and did on the seventh day of August, one thousand seven hundred and ninety, by
a treaty held at New York with certain Creek Indians, stipulate by the fourth
article of the said treaty, that the boundary between the citizens of the
United States and the Creek nation, is and shall be 'from where the old line
strikes the Savannah, thence up the said river to a place on the most northern
branch of the same, commonly called the Keowee, where a northeast line, to be
drawn from the top of Ocunna mountain, shall intersect; thence along the said
line in a southwest direction to the Tugolo river; thence to the top of the
Currahee Mountain thence to the head or the source of the main south branch of
Oconee river, called the Appalachee river; thence down the middle of the main
south-branch and river Oconee to its confluence with the Oakmulgee, which form
the river Alatamaha; and thence down the middle of the said Alatamaha to the
old line on the said river; and thence along the said old line to the river St.
Mary's;' and by the fifth article, 'that the United States, solemnly guarantee
to the Creek Nation, all their lands within the limits of the United States to
the westward and southward of the boundary described in the preceding article:

And finally whereas the state of Georgia aforesaid, has by no act, or in any
manner whatever, transferred, alienated or conveyed her right of soil or
pre-emption in any part of the vacant territory within the limits of the said
state, to the United States, the cession dated the fifth day of February, one
thousand seven hundred and eighty eight, offered by the state of Georgia to the
United States, having been by the said United States in Congress assembled, on
the fifteenth day of July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-eight,
rejected, in which rejection territorial rights are declared to rest on the
spirit and meaning of the consideration: And whereas the said proposed cession
became void, and on the part of this state, is hereby declared to be null and
void to all intents, purposes and constructions:

Be it therefore enacted by the Senate and representatives of the freeman of
the State of Georgia, in General Assembly met, and it is hereby enacted by the
authority of the same. That the State of Georgia aforesaid is in full
possession and in the full exercise of the jurisdictional and territorial right
and the fee simple thereof; and that the right of pre-emption, to vacant and
unappropriated lands lying westwardly and southwestwardly of the present Indian
temporary line, and within the limits of the said state, and the fee simple
thereof, together with the right of disposing thereof, is, and are hereby
declared to be in the State of Georgia only: and for the purpose of raising a
fund for carrying this act fully unto effect,

Be it enacted, That all that tract or parcel of land including islands,
situate, lying and being within the following boundaries, that is to say:
Beginning on the Mobile bay, where the latitude thirty-one degrees north of the
equator intersects the same, running thence up the said bay, to the mouth of
lake Tensaw; thence up the said lake Tensaw to the Alabama river, including
Currey's and all other islands therein; thence up the said river Alabama to the
junction of the Coosa and Oakfuskee rivers; thence up the Coosa river, above
the Big Shoal, to where it intersects the lititude of thirty-four degrees north
of the equator; thence a due west course to the Mississippi river; thence down
the middle of the said river to the latitude of thirty two degrees, forty
minutes; thence a due east course to the mouth of Tombigby river; thence down
the middle of the said river to its junction with the Alabama river; thence
down the middle of the said river to the Mobile bay; thence down the said
Mobile bay to the place of beginning, shall be sold unto James Gunn Matthew
M'Allister, and George Walker, and their associates, called the GEORGIA
COMPANY, and their heirs and assigns forever in fee simple, as tenants in
common, and not as joint tenants, for the sum of two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars, to be paid in specie, bank bills of the United States, and warrants
for the years one thousand seven hundred and ninety-one, one thousand seven
hundred and ninety-two, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-three, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-four, and one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, drawn by the Governor, the President of the Senate, and Speaker of
the House of Representatives, in the following manner, that is to say: Fifty
thousand dollars to be deposited in the treasury previous to the passing of
this act, and the remaining two hundred thousand dollars are to be paid on or
before the first day of November next.

And be it further enacted, That whenever the said James Gunn, Matthew
M'Allister, and George Walker, and their associates, or their agent or agents,
shall produce to his Excellency the Governor a receipt signed by the treasurer,
that they have deposited the aforesaid sum of fifty thousand dollars, according
to the tenor and effect of this act, it shall then be the duty of his
Excellency the Governor, and he is hereby required to issue and sign to the
said James Gunn, Matthew M'Allister, and George Walker, and their associates,
their heirs and assigns, in fee simple, as tenants in common, and not as joint
tenants, a grant for the aforesaid tract of country, they securing the last
payment of two hundred thousand dollars to the state, by a mortgage to his
Excellency the Governor and his successors in office, on the whole of the land
so granted, which mortgage shall be immediately foreclosed, in case default
shall be made in the payment of the said sum of two hundred thousand dollars,
on or before the first day of November next, as aforesaid, in the Superior
court of any county within the State of Georgia, at the discretion of his
Excellency the governor any law or usage, regulating the mode of foreclosing
mortgages, to the contrary notwithstanding, and the whole sum of fifty thousand
dollars deposited shall become forfeited to and for the use of the state; and
the grant to be given to the said James Gunn, Matthew M'Allister, and George
Walker, and their associates, to be and the same in that case is hereby
declared to be null and void.

And be it further enacted, That the said Georgia Company shall reserve for and
to the use of the citizens of Georgia, exclusively, the quantity of one million
of acres of their purchase, in the following manner, to wit: At the expiration
of three months from and after the passing of this act, a subscription book
shall be opened at the treasury office of this state, and be kept open for the
term of four months thereafter, for the purpose of receiving subscriptions of
the citizens for the said reserved lands: Provided, That no person who shall
otherwise become a member or interested in either of the companies herein
contemplated, shall be allowed to subscribe for any part of said reserved land,
and no person shall be permitted to subscribe for more than five thousand acres
in his own name or in the name of any other citizen, unless duly authorized and
appointed by him for that purpose under a warrant of attorney executed in the
presence of two or more witnesses, one of whom at least shall be a justice
appointed for holding the inferior court of the county where the subscriber
resides, which said power of attorney shall be lodged with the treasurer, as
his voucher for entering such subscription; and Provided also, That the
citizens of the respective counties shall not, at any time within three months
from and after the opening of the books of subscription as aforesaid, be
allowed to subscribe for more or greater quantity of the said reserved lands,
than the proportion hereinafter particularly described and limited, to wit:
Chatham, one hundred and seventy thousand acres; Essingham, sixty two thousand
acres; Burke, one hundred and fifty-five thousand acres, Richmond, one hundred
and fifty-five thousand acres; Columbia, one hundred and fifty-five thousand
acres; Wilkes, two hundred and seventy-two thousand acres; Washington, one
hundred and thirty-one thousand acres; Elbert, one hundred and thirty-one
thousand acres; Green, one hundred and twenty-five thousand acres; Franklin,
seventy-eight thousand acres; Liberty, sixty-nine thousand acres; Glynn,
thirty-two thouthousand acres; Camden, thirty-two thousand acres; M'Intosh,
thirty-five thousand acres; Bryant, thirty-two thousand acres; Warren,
ninety-three thousand acres; Oglethorpe, one hundred and sixteen thousand
acres; Montgomery, twenty-three thousand acres; Scriven, thirty-eight thousand
acres; and Hancock, ninety six thousand acres. And it shall be the duty of the
treasurer, in all cases of application to subscribe, to require an affidavit,
in writing, in the following words: 'I do solemnly swear, or affirm, that I am
in no way interested directly or indirectly either as a member, or otherwise,
in any company's purchase of lands in the western part of this state, and that
the subscription which I propose to enter, is in my own proper right, and to my
use and benefit only.' And it shall be the duty of the justices of the inferior
courts before whom warrants of attorney authorizing subscriptions shall be
executed, to require a like affidavit on the back of such warrant of attorney,
before attesting the same; and the land so subscribed and paid for shall be
held by such subscribers, in fee simple, as tenants in common, and not as joint
tenants, on the same terms, and upon the same principles, with original
purchasers of the company in which they shall subscribe, and shall be entitled
to fair and equal representations in such company, in proportion to the
quantity of land so by them subscribed and paid for.

And be it further enacted, That upon entering any subscription as aforesaid,
it shall be the duty of the treasurer, and he is hereby required to receive of
the subscribers the purchase money, being the proportion of one fifth part of
such subscription in terms of this act, the remaining four fifths or balance of
the purchase money shall, within four months from and after the opening the
said book of subscriptions, be paid unto the treasurer in like manner as
aforesaid, and in case such balance shall not be paid on or before the
expiration of the said seven months from the passing of this act, that then and
in that case, the subscriber or subscribers so failing, shall be at liberty to
withdraw their said subscriptions, together with the money so paid by them, and
the lands so subscribed for by them shall revert to and be vested in the
company in which such subscription shall have been made or entered.

And be it further enacted, That all that tract of country including islands,
situate, lying and being, within the following boundaries, that is to say:
Beginning on the river Mississippi, at the place where the latitude of thirty
one degrees and eighteen minutes north of the equator intersects the same;
thence a due east course to the middle of Don or Tombigby river; thence up the
middle of the said river, to where it intersects the latitude of thirty-two
degrees and forty minutes north of the equat or; thence a due west course along
the Georgia Company line, to the river Mississippi, thence down the middle of
the same to the place of beginning, shall be sold to Nicholas Long, Thomas
Glascock, Ambrose Gordon, and Thomas Cumming, and their associates, called the
GEORGIA MISSISSIPPI COMPANY, to them and their heirs and assigns forever in fee
simple, as tenants in common, and not as joint tenants, for the sum of one
hundred and fifty five thousand dollars, to be paid in gold or silver coin,
bank bills of the United States, and such warrants as are made payable in the
Georgia Company's purchase, in the manner following, that is to say: Thirty one
thousand dollars to be deposited previous to the passing of this act, and the
remaining one hundred and twenty-four thousand dollars to be paid on or before
the first day of November next.

And be it further enacted, That whenever the said Nicholas Long, Thomas
Glascock, Ambrose Gordon, and Thomas Cumming, and their associates, or their
agent or agents, shall produce to his Excellency the Governor, a receipt signed
by the treasurer, that they have deposited the aforesaid sum of thirty-one
thousand dollars according to the tenor and effect of this act, it shall then
be the duty of his Excellency the governor, and he is hereby required to issue
and sign to the said Nicholas Long, Thomas Glascock, Ambrose Gordon, and Thomas
Cumming, and their associates, their heirs and assigns, in fee simple, as
tenants in common, and not as joint tenants, a grant for the aforesaid tract of
country, they securing the last payment of one hundred and twenty four thousand
dollars to the state by a mortgage to his Excellency the Governor and his
successor in office on the whole of the land so granted, which mortgage shall
be immediately foreclosed in case default shall be made in the payment of the
said sum of one hundred and twenty-four thousand dollars, on or before the
first day of November next, as aforesaid, in the Superior court of any county
within the state of Georgia, at the discretion of his Excellency the Governor,
any law or usage, regulating the mode of foreclosing mortgages, to the contrary
notwithstanding, and the whole sum of thirty-one thousand dollars deposited,
will become forfeited to and for the use of the state; and the grant to be
given to the said Nicholas Long, Thomas Glascock, Ambrose Gordon, and Thomas
Cumming, and their associates, as aforesaid, to be and the same is hereby
declared to be null and void.

And be it further enacted, That the said Georgia Mississippi Company, shall
reserve for the use of the citizens of Georgia exclusively, the quantity of six
hundred and twenty thousand acres of their purchase, to be subscribed or, held
and appropriated on the same terms, and to be represented in like manner, as
the land reserved by the Georgia Company as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, That all that tract of country including islands,
situate, lying and being within the following boundaries, that is to say:
Beginning at the Mississippi river, where the northern boundary line of this
state strikes the same; thence along the said northern boundary line, due east
to the Tenessee river; thence along the said Tenessee river, to the mouth of
Bear-Creek; thence up Bear-Creek, to where the parallel of latitude twenty-five
British statute miles, south of the northern boundary line of this state
intersects the same; thence along the said last mentioned parallel of latitude,
across Tombigby or Twenty Miles creek, due west to the Mississippi river;
thence up the middle of the said river to the beginning: shall be sold to John
B. Scott, John C. Nightingale, and Wade Hampton, called the UPPER MISSISSIPPI
COMPANY, and to their heirs and assigns forever, in fee simple, as tenants in
common, and not as joint tenants, for the sum of thirty-five thousand dollars,
to be paid in specie, bank bills of the United States, and such warrants as are
made payable in the Georgia Company's purchase in manner following, that is to
say: Five thousand dollars, part thereof to be deposited previous to the
passing of this act, and the remaining sum of thirty thousand dollars, to be
paid on or before the fist day of November next.

And be it further enacted, That whenever the said John B. Scott, John C.
Nightingale, and Wade Hampton, or their agent or agents, shall produce to his
Excellency the Governor, a receipt signed by the treasurer, that they have
deposited the aforesaid sum of five thousand dollars according to the tenor and
effect of this act, it shall then be the duty of his Excellency the Governor,
and he is hereby required to issue and sign to the said John B. Scott, John C.
Nightingale, and Wade Hampton, their heirs and assigns in fee simple, as
tenants in common, and not as joint tenants a grant for the foresaid land, they
securing the last payment of thirty thousand dollars to the state, by a
mortgage to his Excellency the governor and his successors in office, on the
whole of the land so granted, which mortgage shall be immediately forelcosed,
in case default shall be made in the payment of the said sum of thirty thousand
dollars, on or before the first day of November next, as aforesaid, in the
Superior court of any county within the state of Georgia, at the discretion of
his Excellency the Governor, any law or usage, regulating the mode of
foreclosing mortgages, to the contrary notwithstanding, and the whole sum of
five thousand dollars, deposited, shall become forfeited to and for the the use
of the state; and the grant to be given to the said John B. Scott, John C.
Nightingale, and Wade Hampton, as aforesaid, to be and the same in that case is
hereby declared to be null and void.

And be it further enacted, That the said Upper Mississippi Company shall
reserve to for and the use of the citizens of Georgia exclusively, the quantity
of one hundred and thirty-eight thousand acres of their purchase, to be
subscribed for, held appropriated, on the same terms, and to be represented in
like manner, as herein before pointed but in respect to the lands reserved for
the citizens in the Georgia company.

And be it further enacted, That all that tract of land including islands,
situate, lying and being within the following boundary lines: Beginning at the
mouth of Bear Creek, on the south side of the Tenessee river; thence up the
said Creek to the most southern source thereof; thence due south to the latiude
of thirty-four degrees ten minntes north of the equator; thence a due east
course one hundred and twenty miles; thence a due north course to the Great
Tenesee river; thence up the middle of the said river to the northern boundary
line of this state; thence a due west course along the said line to where it
intersects the Great Tenessee river, below the Mussel Shoals; thence up the
said river to the place of beginning, shall be sold unto Zachariah Cox,
Matthias Maher, and their associates, called the TENNESSEE Company, and to
their heirs and assigns forever in see simple, as tenants in common, and not as
joint tenants, for the sum of sixty thousand dollars, to be paid in specie,
bank bills of the United states, and such warrants as are made payable in
Georgia Company's purchase, that is to say: twelve thousand dollars to de
deposited as part thereof, previous to the passing of this act, and the
remaining forty eight thousand dollars to be paid on or before the first day of
November next.

And be it further enacted, That whenever the said Zachariah Cox, and Matthias
Maher, and their associates, or their agent or agents shall produce to his
Excellency the Governor, a receipt signed by the treasurer, that they have
deposited the said sum of twelve thousand dollars, according to the tenor and
effect of this act, it shall then be the duty of his Excellency the Governor,
and he is hereby required to sign and issue to the said Zachariah Cox, and
Matthias Maher, and their associates their heirs and assigns in fee simple, as
tenants in common, and not as joint tenants, a grant for the aforesaid tract of
country, they securing the last payment of the forty-eight thousand dollars to
the state, by a mortgage to his Excellency the Governor, and his successors in
office on the whole of the land so granted which mortgage shall be immediately
foreclosed in case default shall be made in the payment of the said sum of
forty eight thousand dollars, on or before the first day of November next, as
aforesaid, in the superior court of any county within the state of Georgia, at
the discretion of his Excellency the Governor, any law or usage, regulating the
mode of foreclosing mortgages to the contrary notwithstanding, and the whole
sum of twelve thousand dollars deposited, shall become forfeited to and for the
use of the state; and the grant to be given to the said Zachariah Cox, and
Matthias Maher, and their associates aforesaid, to be, and the same in that
case is hereby declared to be null and void.

And be it further enacted. That the said Tenessee Company shall reserve for
and to the use of the citizens of Georgia, exclusively, the quantity of two
hundred and forty-two thousand acres, to be subscribed for, held and
appropriated on the same terms and to be represented in like manner as the
lands reserved by the Georgia Company as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, That the said Tenessee Company shall reserve a
further quantity of fifty thousand acres, to be gratutiously divided share and
share alike, between the Commissioners appointed by this state for the purpose
of examining the quantity, quality and circumstances of the Great Bend of
Tennessee river which shall be held by them as tenants in common, and not as
joints tenants and be represented in like manner as the lands reserved by the
other companies, for the use of the citizens, as a compensation to the said
Commissioners for their services rendered the state in that capacity.

And be it further enacted, That all sums so paid by the citizens so lands
subscribed for by them, agreeably to the terms of the act, shall be received in
payment and as part of the purchase money of the said companies respectively.

And be it further enacted, That the grants to be issued to the respective
Companies in virtue ot this act, shall be free from all further or other
expense whatsoever, the fees of office accruing upon one grant to each company
excepted, which shall be to the Surveyor-General three dollars, to the Governor
of the state, three dollars, and to the Secretary of the state, three dollars;
and that the lands to be granted in pursuance of this act, shall be free from
taxation until the inhatitants thereof are represented in the Legislature.

And be it further enacted, That the said grantees and purchasers of the land
aforesaid, shall forbear all hostile and and wanton attacks on any of the
Indian tribes which may be found within the limits of this state, and keep this
state free from all charges and expenses which may attend the preserving of
peace between the said Indians and the grantees, and extinguishing the Indian
claims to the territory included within their respective purchases; And
provided further, that this state and the government thereof shall at no time
hereafter be subject to any suit at law or in equity, or claim or pretention
whatever, for or on account of any deduction in the quantity of the said
territory, or on account of the amount of the purchase money to be paid as
aforesaid, by any recovery which may or shall be had on any former or other
claim or claims whatever.

And be it further enacted, That the money arising from the sale of the said
territory, except what shall be appropriated to the extinguishment of Indians
claims as hereinafter expressed, shall be vested in six per cents, or such
other stock in the funds of the United States as may be directed by this or a
future Legislature, and the interest arising thereon, or so much thereof as may
be necessary shall be applied to the payment of the civil establishment and
contingent expenses of the government of this state.

And be it further enacted, That immediately after the Indian claims to the
land lying between the Oconee and Oakmulgeerivers, including that tract of
country lying east of a line to be drawn from the place called Fort Romulus, on
the Oakmulgee river, to the head of the St. Mary's river, or the northern
extremity of the Akinsonoka swamp may be extinguished, the grantees of the
several companies and their associates are hereby authorized to apply to the
government of the United States for their concurrence in extinguishing the
indian claims to the different tracts of country by them severally hereby
purchased, or as much thereof as to them may seem practicable, which
extinguishment of claims to the lands so purchased, shall be at the proper
expense of the respective companies, and within five years thereafter the said
companies shall severally form settlements on the lands where the claims may be
so extinguished, or forfeit the further sum of five thousand dollars for each
company so failing.

And be it further enacted, That the sum of ten thousand dollars, part of the
first payment to be made by the companies aforesaid, shall be, and the same is
hereby declared to be appropriated and set apart for the purpose of
extinguishing the Indian claim in addition to the twenty thousand dollors
appropriated by the act entitled, an act appropriating a part of the unlocated
territory of this state, for the payment of the late state troops and for other
purposes therein mentioned.

And be it further enacted, That the several grantees and their associates,
shall not be entitled to dispose of the said territory in part or in whole, in
any way or manner to any foreign king, prince, potentate or power whatever,
which condition shall be specially expressed in the face of the grant.

And be it further enacted, That all the lands lying westward and southward of
the eastern boundary of the several company purchasers and not included
therein, estimated at one fourth of the whole lands lying westward and
southward of the eastern boundary of the said purchasers, and supposed to
contain seven millions two hundred and fifty thousand acres, shall be and the
same is hereby declared to be reserved and set apart to, and for the use and
benefit of this state, to be granted out or otherwise disposed of as a future
Ligislature may direct.

THOMAS NAPIER, Speaker of the House Representatives. BENJAMIN TALIAFERRO,
President of the Senate. GEO. MATHEWS, Governor.

Concurred January 7, 1795,
Be it enacted, That any foreigner first becoming a resident of this state, may
by deed or will hereafter to be made, take and hold lands within this state, in
the same manner as if he was a citizen of this state, and the same lands may be
conveyed by him and transmitted to, and be inherited by his heirs or relations
as if he and they were citizens of this state: Provided, That no foreigner
shall in virtue hereof be entitled to any further or other privilege of a
citizen; and provided, That nothing herein contained shall extend, to authorize
the Governor to grant lands to any other than citizens of this or the United
States.'

Georgia, Secretary of State's Office, 10th January, 1795.
THE underwritten Secretary of the State aforesaid certifies the above to be a
true extract from the act entitled, 'An act for appropriating money for the
year one thousand seven hundred and ninety five,' passed the seventh day of
January, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five.

JOHN MILTON.

No. XII.
N. B. The clause here referred to is the 6th. of the 5th Paragraph of the
repealing act, for which see Appendix No. 14.

No. XIII. AUGUSTA, January 28. To the President and Fellow-Citizens of the
Senate.
The Senate and house of Representatives are now constitutionally convened for
legislative deliberations, and at a time too when the minds of our
fellow-Citizens are, and have been for some time past more engaged in
discussing the conduct of the last legislature on the subject of the act for
disposing of part of our Western Territory to certain companies, than perhaps
has ever been experienced since this State assumed rank with her sister States
-- it will, no doubt be amongst the most important matters that may engross
your attention to enquire on what ground this act was founded, and if a
constitutional and legal remedy can applied to calm the minds of our fellow
citizens on this interesting subject: in my opinion it requires and I flatter
myself will receive your most serious delibiration, whether a law can be
constitutionally made to repeal another that has been fully carried into
effect, as the one now in question, the companies having paid into the treasury
the whole of the purchase money, and cancelled their mortgages; and whether, if
repealed the remedy may not be even worse than the disease. But if a law can be
devised that will constitutionally repeal the one referred to, and guard
against future murmurs and well grounded complaints against the repeal, I have
no doubt but the man you may honor with the appointment of the chief
Magistrate, will readily deem it a duty cheerfully to coperate.

It is a matter much to be regretted (considering the unfavourable light the
act for disposing of our Western Territory has been viewed in) that the spirit
of party resentment and personal reflections should have ran so high in many
instances; the public mind has been inflamed by unfair representations, and our
newspapers have teemed with personal abuse and invective -- this I remark from
having experienced the public slander; endeavors have been made to calumniate
my character by false reports, such as that the motives which induced me to
give my assent to the second act, proceeded from private interest, regardless
of the sacred duty I owed to the station I filled, and the rights, and
interests, of my fellow-citizens -- conscious of the purity of my intentions,
and supported by the Justice and integrity of my actions, I have treated with
silent contempt those base and malicious reports, and I now defy the blackest
and the most persevering malice aided by disappointed avarice, to produce one
single evidence of my ever having been interested in the sale to the amount of
one single farthing: but whilst I treated with neglect those reports so
injurious to my character I feel it a respect due to you and a duty I owe to my
reputation to give you a candid and fair statement of the motives which
actuated me on a subject which has so much disturbed the citizens of Georgia.
On the 25th day of December, 1794, an act for disposing of part of our Western
Territory to four companies, was presented to me for my concurrence; after the
most mature reflection my judgment was capable of, I thought it my duty to
refuse my assent, and assigned my reasons, which I flattered myself would have
postponed any further legislative proceedings in the law, until the next
meeting of the house: but in that I was mistaken. The first idea that occurred
to some of the members when the bill was returned with remarks, was that I
should be impeached for an unconstitutional act -- yet the more cool reflection
of the house terminated in appointing a committee to confer with me on my
objections and to know if it was in the power of the legislature to frame a
bill for the sale of the land which would meet my concurrence. On the
conference I was led to believe that the committee was convinced, my reasons
for rejecting the law did not proceed from "Executive arrogance, or from a wish
to bring into action a power heretofore dormant in our proceedings, or from a
propensity in me to do an act of so great responsibility; but from a conviction
that it would tend to the real interest of the State -- the reflecting mind
will easily perceive how much the responsibility would be enhanced by rejecting
a bill that the legislature might pass for the sale of the lands; after being
in possession of my remarks, even supposing it to be similar to the first: but
when it appears that three of the most important objections I had made to the
first law were removed, I think there is no man of cool dispassionate
reflection that would have refused his assent to it for any reasons short of a
clear proof of corruption in its passage through the legislature, and no such
information ever came to my knowledge.

After all the popular clamor the law has occasioned, I should depart from my
usual candor to say I have ever blamed myself either for an error of the head
or a corruption of the heart, and on a similar occasion should feel myself
perfectly justified in pursuing a similar conduct: Much has been said about
unascertained millions of acres being sold and that more than fifty millions of
acres are disposed to the companies by that act: after having thought it my
duty to act on the second bill. I ordered the Surveyor General to furnish me
with as accurate a map of the country contemplated to be sold, as any documents
he had or could procure would afford -- this was done, and is now on the file
of the Executive, from which it will appear there was no more than twenty-nine
million 400,000 acres in the whole agregate the first law had in view, and one
fourth of that quantity is now reserved to the State and subject to her
disposition. This is a true state of facts, so far as they have come to my
knowledge, and if it may afford you any useful hints in your deliberations, it
will give me pleasure.

The sum of 500,000 dollars has been paid into your Treasury in terms of the
act, 50,000 of which has been realized in six per cent stock of the United
States, the interest arising therefrom since the purchase, amounting to 2201
dollars 29 cents has been paid into your Treasury as also the interest arising
from the balance due to this State on the final settlement with the United
States, amounting to 689 dollars 58 cents, and the Treasurer's receipts for the
original certificates, standing on the books of the loan office of the United
States, are filed in the office of the cheque or the Treasury -- the sum of
30,000 dollars stand appropriated for extinguishing the Indian claims to the
land between the Oconee and Oakmulgee rivers, and 20,000 dollars have been
applied to paying the members of the assembly, the members of the convention,
and other creditors of the state; 400,000 dollars remain now in your Treasury
subject to the appropriation of the present Legislature.

No. XIV. A BILL Declaring null and void a certain usurped act passed by the
last legislature of this state, at Augusta, the seventh day of January, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, under the pretended title of "An act
supplementary to an act entitled, an act for appropriating a part of the
unlocated Territory of this state, for the payment of the late state troops,
and for other purposes therein mentioned; declaring the right of this state to
the unappropriated territory thereof, for the protection of the frontiers, and
for other purposes:" And for expunging from the Face of the public records the
said usurped act and declaring the right of this state to all lands laying
within the boundaries therein mentioned.
WHEREAS the free citizens of this state, or in other words the community
thereof, are essentially the source of the sovereignty of the state, and no
individual or body of men can be entitled to, or vested with any authority
which is not expressly derived from that source, and the exercise or assumption
of powers not so derived, become of themselves oppression and usurpation; which
it is the right and duty of the people or their representatives to resist, and
to restore the rights of the community so usurped and infringed,

AND WHEREAS, the will or constitution of the good people of this state is the
only existing legal authority derived from the essential source of sovereignty,
and is the only foundation of the legislative power or government thereof, and
so far as that will or constitution expressly warrants, the legislature may go,
but no further; and all constructive powers not necessarily deduced from that
expressed will, are violations of that essential source of sovereignty, and the
rights of the citizens, and are therefore of no binding force or effect on the
state, or the good people thereof, but null and void.

AND WHEREAS the last legislature of this state (...) confining itself to the
powers with which that body was constitutionally invested, did usurp a power to
pass an act on the seventh day of January, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, entitled "An act suplementary to an act entitled, an act for
appropriating a part of the unlocated territory of this state, for the payment
of the late state troops and for other purposes therein mentioned, declaring
the right of the state to the unappropriated territory thereof, for the
protection and support of the frontiers, and for other purposes;" by which an
enormous tract of unascertained millions of acres of the vacant territory of
this state, was attempted to be disposed of to a few individuals, in fee
simple, and the same is not only unfounded as being without express
constitutional authority, but is repugnant to that authority, as well as to the
principles and form of the government, the good citizens of this state have
chosen for their rule, which is democratical, or a government founded on
equality of rights; and and which is totally opposed to all proprietary grants,
or monopolies, in favor of a few, which tend to build up that destructive
aristocracy, in the new, which is tumbling in the old world; and which, if
permitted, must end in the annihilation of democracy and equal rights; those
rights and principles of that government which our virtuous forefathers fought
for, and established with their blood.

AND WHEREAS the fourth section of the fourth article of the constitution of
the United States declares, "The United States shall guarantee to every state
in this Union a republican government," which could never have been intended to
be a republican aristocracy, and which such extravagant grants tend to
establish, the constitution of the United States expressly acknowledging a
republican democracy, or the foundation of the people: it receiving all it
force and power from their hands as their gist, which is manifest from its
context, "We the people of the United States."

AND WHEREAS as before mentioned the said usurped act is repugnant to the
constitutional authority, in as much as that by the sixteenth section of the
first article of the constitution of this state it is declared, "That the
general assembly shall have power to make all laws and ordinances which they
shall deem necessary and proper for the good of the state, which shall not be
repugnant to this constitution." And the said usurped act is opposed to the
good of the state, and it is selfevident that the legislature which assumed the
power did not deem it for the good of the state:

1st. Because self-preservation or the protecting itself is the greatest good
or first duty of every government and as has been shown, immense monopolies of
Land by a few individuals under the sanction of the government is opposed to
the principles of democracy, or the fundamental laws of the citizens of this
state have chosen for their rule, which so far from being for the good or
selfpreservation of the democratical, or equal government, is most manifestly
for its destruction and injury.

2d. Because the expression "good of the state" embraces the good of the
citizens composing the state, and the good of the citizens consists in the
peaceable pursuit of happiness, and the enjoyment of all rights natural, or
acquired, not expressly delegated for the purposes of government; and a sale of
such an enormous tract to a few speculators, which was and is the common right
of all the good citizens of this state, is contrary to those rights, and
therefore to their manifest injury, and of course to the injury of the state.

3d. Because even supposing constitutional authority to have been vested in the
legislature for the purpose of such disposal, the legislature was not vested
with power to transfer the sovereignty and jurisdiction of the state over the
territory attempted to be disposed of, which it has done by opening a door for
a sale to foreign powers, and a relinquishment of the powers, of taxation until
the proprietors choose to be represented, which is in fact dismembering the
state, and which transfer and relinquishment of taxation cannot be for the good
of the state.

4th. Because there was no necessity or pressing urgency for the sale of such
an immense tract of territory, equal to some European kingdoms, to carry into
execution, and operation, the extinguishment of the Indian claims to the lands
between the Oconee and Okmulgee, contemplated by the act entitled "An act for
appropriating a part of the unlocated territory of this state for payment of
the late state troops, and for other purposes therein mentioned;" the
subterfuge on which the said usurped act of the seventh of January, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five was founded, when the whole amount of
the appropriation for that purpose was but thirty thousand dollars, and funds
to a greater amount were then in the treasury unappropriated: And because no
state or nation is justified in wantonly dissipating its property or revenues,
and a legal alienation of which can only take place from the most pressing
necessity; and the territory attempted to be disposed of, was the said usurped
law valid, was wantonly dissipated, it being disposed of for the trifling sum
of five hundred thousand dollars, a sum not adequate to the anual quit rents
such lands were charged with previously to the revolution of the british King;
which wanton dissipation cannot be for the good of the state.

5th. Because exclusive of the immense loss of revenue to which the state is
exposed from the relinquishment of taxation, the sum of five hundred thousand
dollars was accepted as the consideration money for the sale, and the sum of
eight hundred thousand dollars offered by persons of as large a capital, and as
much respectability and credit, and on terms more advantageous to the state,
was refused; which as it was (should the said usurped act have been considered
valid) a clear loss of three hundred thousand dollars to the revenues of the
state, it is evident that the law authorizing the sale was not deemed by the
members of the legislature for "the good of the state," which must have
consisted in obtaining the highest price and the most advantageous terms.

6th. For the very excellent reasons given by his excellency the governor in
his dissent to the first bill for the disposal of the said territory, delivered
to the house of representatives on the twentyninth of December, one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-four, and which bill was not materially different from
the act in question; and which reasons prove, that his excellency as a negative
branch of the legislature, although he concurred in the law, did not deem it
for "the good of the state," and which dissent was in the words following.

1st. I doubt whether the proper time is arrived for disposing of the territory
in question.

2d. If it was the proper time, the sum offered is inadequate to the value of
the land.

3. The quantity reserved for the citizens is too small, in proportion to the
extent of the purchase.

4th. That greater advantages are secured to the purchasers than to the
citizens-

5th. That so large an extent of territory being disposed of to companies of
individuals, will operate as monopolies, which will prevent or retard
settlements, population and agricultuae.

6th. That should such disposition be made, at least one fourth of the lands
should be reserved for the future disposal of the state.

7th. That if public notice was given, that the land was for sale, the
rivalship in purchasers would most probably have increased the sums offered.

8th. The power given to the executive by the constitution, the duty I owe the
community, and the sacredness of my oath of office, I flatter myself, will
justify this dissent in the minds of the members of the legislature, and of my
other fellow citizens.

And whereas the said usurped law passed on the seventh day of January, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, is also repugnant to the before cited
sixteenth section, in as much as it is repugnant to the seventeenth or
subsequent section of the said first article, which declares: They (the
legislature) shall have power to alter the boundaries of the present counties,
and to lay off new ones, as well out of the counties already laid off, as out
of the other territory belonging to the state. When a new county or counties
shall be laid off out of any present county or counties, such new county or
counties shall have their representation apportioned out of the number of
representatives of the county or counties out of which it or they shall be laid
out, and when any new county shall be laid off in the vacant terrrity belonging
to the state, such county shall have a number of representatives not exceeding
three, to be regulated and determined by the general assembly:" And the
territory disposed of not laying within the limits of any county already laid
off, and a sale and grant thereof, should the said usurped law be deemed valid,
having been made, it could not be defined the vacant territory belonging to the
state, whereby the constitutional powers vested in the general assembly by the
seventeenth section would be barred and prevented, and consequentry the
settlers on the territory sold be deprived of the constitutional right of
representation, and is not only thus repugnant to the said sixteenth and
seventeenth sections, but thereby and by the relinquishment of the right of
taxation, until the settlers are represented, which they cannot
constitutionally be, is also repugnant to the whole letter and spirit of the
constitution, in operating as a dereliction of jurisdictional rights, and a
virtual dismemberment of the state.

And whereas in and by the articles of confederation entered into and finally
ratified on the first of March, one thousand seven hundred and eighty one, by
the then thirteen states of America, the territory within the limits of each of
the said states is to each of them respectively confirmed and guaranteed, first
by the second article, to wit, "Each state retains its sovereignty, freedom,
and independence, and power, jurisdiction and right, which is not by the
confederation expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled."
And secondly, by the last clause in the second section of the ninth article,
"No state shall be deprived of territory for the benefit of the United States,
"And in and by the first clause of the sixth article of the federal
constitution of the United States, All engagements entered into before the
adoption of the said constitution, shall be as valid against the United States
under the said constitution as under the confederation:" and by the twelfth
article of the amendments to the said constitution, ratified and adopted, The
powers not delegated to the United States by the constitution, nor prohibited
by it to the states are reserved to the states respectively or to the people."

And whereas in and by the definitive treaty of peace signed at Paris on the
third of September, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-three, the boundaries
of the United. States were established, and the United States fully recognized
and acknowledged by the first article thereof, in the words following: "His
Britannic majesty acknowledges the said United States, viz. New Hampshire,
Massachuseets-bay, Rhode Island and Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and
Georgia, to be free, sovereign and independent states, that he treats with them
as such, and for himself, his heirs and successors, relinquishes all claims, to
the government proprietary and territorial rights of the same;" and by the
second article it is declared; "And that all disputes which might arise in
future on the subject of the boundaries of the said United States may be
prevented it is hereby agreed that the following are and shall be their
boundaries." And those boundaries thereby declared, which limit the westwardly
and southwardly parts of this state, are thus defined: "Along the middle of the
Mississippi until it shall intersect the northernmost part of the thirty-first
degree of north latitude; south by a line drawn due east from the termination
of the line last mentioned in the latitude of thirty-one degrees north of the
equator, to the middle of the river Apalachicola or Chatahooche: thence along
the middle thereof to its junction with Flint river: thence straight to the
head of St. Mary's river; and thence along the middle of St. Mary's river to
the Atlantic ocean;" and the king of Great Britain did, by proclamation dated
the seventh day of October, in the year one thousand seven hundred and
sixty-three, annex to the then province of Georgia, all the lands laying
between the said river St. Mary's and the Alatamaha, its former boundary
claimed by South Carolina under her charters; and the state of South Carolina,
in and by a convention held and concluded between the commissioners of the said
states, at Beaufort, under the authority and articles of the confederation, on
the twenty-eighth of April one thousand seven hundred and eighty-seven, did
confirm to the state of Georgia the southward and westwardly boundaries
described in the said treaty of Paris, by cession and relinquishment of all
right, title and claim which the said state possessed from the original charter
thereof, to the government, sovereignty and jurisdiction in and over the same,
and also the right of pre-emption of the soil from the native Indians, and all
other the estate, property and claim, in or to the said land; and the
boundaries so described also coincide with the houndaries of this state
described by the land act of this state now in force, passed at Savannah, the
seventeenth of September, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-three, (except
as to the northern boundary of the state) which by the said convention is thus
established and ratified by the first article thereof: "The most northern
branch or stream of the river Savannah from the sea or mouth of such stream, to
the fork or confluence of the rivers now called Tugaloo or Keowee, and from
thence to the most northern branch or stream of the said river Tugaloo, till it
intersects the north boundary line of South Carolina, if the said branch or
stream of Tugaloo, extends so far north, reserving all the islands in the said
rivers Savannah and Tugaloo to Georgia; but if the head spring or source of any
branch or streams of the said river Tugaloo does not extend to the north
boundary of South Carolina, then a west line to the Mississippi."

And Whereas until the formation of the confederation there could possibly
belong no territorial rights to the United States, nor after such formation
within the chartered limits of any state, but such as were specially ceded and
relinquished by the respective states; and the people of the state of Geoagia
have by no act of theirs, or in any manner or shape whatever, transferred or
aliened or delegated a power to transfer or alien the territory attempted to be
disposed of by the said usurped act passed on the seventh of January in the
year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, and the same and every part
thereof is hereby declared to be vested in the state and people thereof, and
inalienable, but by a convention called by the people for that express purpose,
or by some clause of power expressed by the people delegating such express
power to the legislature in the constitution.

And whereas divested of all fundamental and constitutional authority which the
said usurped act might be declared by its advocates, and those who claim under
it, to be founded on, fraud has been practiced to obtain it, and the grant
under it. And it is a fundamental principle both of law and equity, that there
cannot be a wrong without a remedy, and the state and the citizens thereof have
suffered a most grievous injury in the barter of their rights by the said
usurped act and grants, and there is no court existing if the dignity of the
state would permit her entering one, for the trial of fraud and collusion of
individuals, or to contest her sovereignty with them, whereby the remedy for so
notorious an injury could be obtained: and it can no where better lay than with
the representatives of the people chosen by them, after due promulgation by the
grand juries of most of the counties of the state, of the means practiced, and
by the remonstrances of the people to the convention, held on the tenth day of
May, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, setting forth the atrocious
speculation, corruption and collusion, by which the said usurped act and grants
were obtained.

And whereas the said petitions and remonstrances of the good people composing
the state, to the said late convention held at Louisville on the said tenth day
of May, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, produced a resolution of
that body in the following words: " Resolved, That it is the opinion of this
convention, from the numbers, respectability, and ground of complaint stated in
the sundry petitions laid before them, that this is a subject of importance
meriting legislative deliberation. Ordered therefore, That such petitions be
preserved by the Secretary, and laid before the next legislature at their
ensuing session." Which resolution invests this legislature with conventional
powers, quo ad hoc, or in common terms, for the purpose of investigating the
same, and which gives additional validity to legislative authority, were the
powers of one legislature over the acts of another to be attempted to be
questioned.

And whereas it does appear from sundry affidavits and a variety of proofs
satisfactory to this Legislature, as well as from the presentiments of the grand
Juries on oath of a considerable majority of the counties of the state, and by
the afore-recited petitions and remenstrances of the good people thereof to the
Convention, and by numerous petitions to this present legislature to the same
purport, as also from the self evident proof of fraud, arising from the
rejection of eight hundred thousand dollars, and the acceptance of five hundred
thousand dollars, as the consideration money for which the said territory was
sold; that fraud and corruption were practiced to obtain the said act and
grants, and that a majority of those members of the Legislature who voted in
favor of the aforesaid act, were engaged in the purchase; and a majority of one
vote only appeared in favor of the said usurped act in the senate, and on which
majority in that branch the same was passed, and corruption appears against
more than one member of that body; which exclusive of the many deceptions used,
and the inadequacy of price for such an immense and valuable tract of country,
would be sufficient in equity, reason, and law, to invalidate the contract,
even supposing it to be constitutional, which this Legislature declares it is
not.

Be it therefore enacted, That the said usurped act, passed on the seventh day
of January in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, entitled,
"An act supplimentary to an act entitled, an act for appropriating a part of
the unlecated territory of this state, for the payment of the late state
troops, and for other purposes therein mentioned; declaring the right of this
state to the unappropriated territory thereof, for the protection of the
frontiers, and for other purposes," be and the same is hereby annulled,
rendered void, and of no effect: and as the same was made without
constitutional authority, and fraudulently obtained, it is declared of no
binding force or effect on this state or the people thereof; but is and are to
be considered both law and grant as they ought to be ipso sacto of themselves
void, and the territory therein mentioned is also hereby declared to be the
sole property of the state, subject only to the right of treaty of the United
States to enable the state to perchase under its preemption right the Indian
title to the same.

And be it further enacted, That within three days after the passing of this
act the different branches of the Legislature shall assemble together: at which
meeting the officers shall uttend with the several records, documents and deeds
in the Secretary's and Surveyor- General's and other public offices, and which
records and documents, shall then and there be expunged from the face and
indexes of the books of record of the state, and the enrolled law or usurped
act shall then be publicly burnt, in order that no trace of so
inconstitutional, vile and fraudulent a transaction, other than the infamy
attached to it by this law shall remain in the public officers thereof; and it
is hereby declared the duty of the county officers of record, where any
conveyance, bond or other (...) whatever, shall have been recorded, relating to
the sale of the said territory, under the said usurped act, to produce the book
wherein the said deed, bond or coveyance may be so recorded, to the Superior
Court at the next lesson of the court after the passing this law, and which
court is hereby directed to cause said clerk or keeper of the public records of
the court to obliterate the same in their presence; and if such clerk or keeper
of records, neglect or refuse so to do, he shall be and is hereby declared
incapable of holding any office of trust or confidence in this state, and the
Superior Court shall suspend him: And from and after the passing of this act,
if any clerk of a county, notary public, or other officer keeping record, shall
enter any transaction, agreement, conveyance grant, law or contract relative to
the said purchase under the said usurped act on their books of record, whereby
claims can be derived of authority or record, he or they shall be rendered
incapable of holding any office of trust or profit within this state, and be
liable to a penalty of one thousand dollars, to be recovered in any court
within and under the jurisdiction of this state; one half whereof to be given
for the benefit of the informer, and the other half to be lodged in the
treasury for the use of the commonwealth.

And be it further enacted, That the said usurped law passed on the seventh of
January, in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, shall not, nor
shall any grant or grants issued by virtue thereof; or any deed or conveyance,
agreement or contract, scrip or paper relative thereto, be received as evidence
in any court of law or equity of this state, so far as it establishes a right
to the said territory or to any part thereof: Provided. That nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent such deed or conveyance, agreement or
contract between individuals, scrip issued by the pretended purchasers, or
other paper, from being received as evidence in private actions for the
recovery of any moneys or other interest given, paid or exchanged, as the
consideration for pretended sales by the original pretended purchasers or
persons claiming and selling by and under them.

And be it further enacted, That his excellency the governor be, and he is
hereby empowered and required to issue warrants on the treasurer after the
expiration of sixty days in favor of such persons as may have bona fide
deposited moneys, bank bills or stock in the funds of the United States or
warrants, in part or in whole payment of pretended shares of the said pretended
purchased territory; Provided, the same shall be now therein and not otherwise:
And provided also, That the risque attending the keeping the sum or sums so
paid in, be deemed and is hereby declared to lay entirely with the persons who
deposited them, and that any charge of guards or other expenses for the safe
keeping thereof, be deducted; and in case of neglect of application to his
excellency therefore within eight months after the passing this act, the same
shall be and is hereby deemed pro-perty derelict, and escheated to and for the
use of this state.

And be it further enacted, That any pretended power assumed, or intended by
the said act, or any clause; or letter of the same, or which may or can be
construed to that purpose by the said usurped act, grants under it, or from the
journals of the house of senate or representatives, to apply to the government
of the United states for the extinguishment of the Indians claims to the lands
within the boundaries in the said usurped act mentioned so far as may affect
the rights of this state to the lands therein described, is and are hereby also
declared null and void, and the right of applying for, and the extinguishment
of Indian claims to any lands within the boundaries of this state, as herein
described, being a sovereign right, is hereby further declared to be vested in
the people of this state, to whom the right of pre-emption to the same belongs,
subject only to the controuling bower of the United states to authorize any
treaty or treaties for and to superintend the same.

And be it further enacted. That in order to prevent future frauds on
individuals as far as the nature of the case will admit, his excellency the
governor is hereby required, as soon as may be, after the passing of this law,
to promulgate the same throughout the United States.

Concurred 13, February, 1796. THOMAS STEPHENS. Speaker of the house of
Representatives. BEN. TALIAFERRO. President of the Senate. JARED IRVIN,
Governor of Georgia


Secretary's Office Louisville, 14, March, 1795.
I do certify the foregoing to be a true copy from the original laws deposited
in this Office.

J. MERIWHETHER, FOR JOHN MILTON. Sec.

No. XV.
Resolved that it be, and hereby is, represented to the states of
North Carolina and Georgia, that the lands which have been ceded by the other
states in compliance with the recommendations of this body, are now selling in
large quantities for public securities; that the deeds of cession from the
different states have been made without annexing an express condition that they
should not operate till the other states, under like circumstances made similar
cession; and that congress have such faith in the justice and magnanimity of
the states of North Carolina and Georgia, that they only think it necessary to
call their attention to these circumstances, not doubting but upon
consideration of the subject, they will feel those obligations which will
induce similar cessions, and justify that confidence which has been placed in
them.

October, 20th 1787. Jour. Congress, vol. 12. 210. No. XIX Extract of a
communication submitted by Mr. Pinckney, the American minister at Madrid to the
prince of peace, in the course of the negociations for the late treaty, dated
the 10th of August, 1795. viz.
THIRTY-TWO years have elapsed since all the country on the left, or eastern
bank of the Mississippi, being under the legitimate dominion of the then king
of England, that sovereign thought proper to regulate with precision the limits
between the provinces of Georgia and of the two Florida's, which was done by
his solemn proclamation, published in the usual form; by which he established
betweeen them precisely the same limits, which nearly twenty years after he
declared to be the southernly limits of the United States by the treaty which
this same king of England concluded with them in the month of November, 1762.
--

No. XVII. CASE.
The legislature of the state of Georgia by an act of the 7th January 1795,
directed a sale to be made of a certain tract of land, therein described to
James Gunn, and others, by the name of the Georgia company; upon certain
conditions therein specified. The sale was made pursuant to the act: the
conditions of sale were performed by the purchasers, and a regular grant made
to them accordingly of the said tract of land. Subsequent thereto, the said
legislature has passed an act, whereby on the suggestion of unconstitutionality
for various reasons (prout the act) and also of fraud and corruption in
application to the legislative body, the first act, and the grants thereupon;
are declared null and void.

On the foregoing case, the opinion of counsel is desired, whether the title of
the grantees and their assigns, the latter being bonafide, purchasers of them
for valuable considerations be valid; or whether the last mentioned act be of
force to annul the grant?

ANSWER.
Never having examined the title of the state of Georgia to the lands in
question, I have no knowledge whether that state was itself entitled to them
and in capacity to make a valid grant. I can therefore have no opinion on this
point. -- But assuming it in the argument as a fact, that the state of Georgia
had at the time of the grant a good title to the land, I hold that the
revocation of it is void, and that the grant is still in force.

Without pretending to judge of the original merits or demerits of the
purchasers, it may be safely said to be a contravention of the first principles
of natural justice and social policy, without any judicial decision of facts,
by a positive act of legislature, to revoke a grant of property regularly made
for valuable consideration, under legislative authority, to the prejudice even
of third persons on every supposition innocent of the alleged fraud or
corruption; and it may be added that the precedent is new of revoking a grant
on the suggestion of corruption of a legislative body. -- Nor do I perceive
sufficient ground for the suggestion of unconstitutionality in the first act.

In addition to these general considerations, placing the revocation in a very
unfavourable light, the constitution of the United States, article first,
section tenth declares that no state shall pass a law impairing the obligations
of contract. This must be equivalent to saying no state shall pass a law
revoking, invalidating, or altering a contract. Every grant from one to
another, whether the grantor be a state or an individual, is virtually a
contract that the grantee shall hold and enjoy the thing granted against the
grantor, and his representatives. It therefore appears to me that taking the
terms of the constitution, in their large sense, and giving them effect
according to the general spirit and policy of the provisions: the Revocation of
the grant by the act of the legislatiure of Georgia, may justly be considered
as contrary to the constitution of the United States, and therefore null. And
that the courts of the United States in cases within their jurisdiction will be
likely to pronounce it so.

(Signed) ALEX. HAMILTON.
March, 25, 1795.

