AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT WALPOLE, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE; JULY 4 th, 1799.

BY JOHN HUBBARD, ESQUIRE.

WALPOLE: Printed by DAVID CARLISLE, for THOMAS and THOMAS. 1799.

WALPOLE, July 4, 1799. At a meeting of a number of citizens of this town, to
celebrate the Anniversary of American Independence: --
Voted -- That Thomas Bellows, Roger Vose, Esqs. and Mr. Josiah Bellows, 2d, be
a Committee to wait on John Hubbard, Esquire. to thank him for the Oration he has
this day delivered, and request a copy for the Press.

The Committee accordingly waited on him, and received the following answer:
GENTLEMEN,
I thank you for the attention you have shown me. -- Nothing but a wish to
gratify the request of my friends, could ever have induced me to permit the
following Oration to be published. As it never was written for publication, I
hope an impartial public will view it with as favorable an eye, as the nature
of the work will possibly admit.

J. HUBBARD.

AN ORATION: PRONOUNCED AT WALPOLE, JULY 4 th, 1799.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
WITH the cheerful light of this day, the twenty third anniversary of American
independence revolves upon us. Various are the scenes, which have been unfolded
to our view, since we celebrated this jubilee, the last year, in this place.

THE glorious declaration of independence, announced to an admiring world, on
this memorable day; the encomiums bestowed on that illustrious band of
senators, who pronounced the solemn transaction; the enthusiastic praises
lavished on liberty and freedom, have been the themes of almost every speaker,
on this day, since the epoch of our national birth. Leaving then this beaten
path, so minutely explored by my predecessors, you will permit me to call your
attention to scenes, perhaps as important as those we have just mentioned.
Those events which led to the declaration of independence, and the various
struggles for securing that important object, are so recent in your mind, that
a recapitulation of them would be useless.

SCARCELY was the hostile sword unsheathed, scarcely had we reposed ourselves
under the peaceful shade, after a long and cruel war, when another encroaching
enemy arose. France, involved in endless revolutions, and tossed by the tempest
of parties, wished to draw these United States into her political vortex. To
accomplish this purpose, and control the councils of this country, have, for
several years past, been her favorite object. To effect this, she has, like a
deceitful courtezan, used every artifice, by flattering, soothing, threatening,
and appealing to the generous feelings of our countrymen. While she was
struggling for her natural rights, we were her advocates. But when she laid
aside the mask, when we saw her hands stained with the blood of her innocent
victims, when "with gigantic strides" she trampled on the dearest rights of
society, when rapine and disorganization marked her every step, we fled from
her embraces. From her treatment to other republics we were taught our destiny,
should we listen to her siren song. With the prostituted sounds of liberty and
equality, she has already enslaved the one half of Europe. Under the specious
names of reason and philosophy, she has prostrated all order, and introduced
that anarchy and confusion which would have abashed the savage Goths and
Vandals.

THE United Netherlands were the first who drank of her poisonous cup. That
enterprizing nation, from small beginnings, had risen to opulence and glory.
After having expelled the ocean from a considerable part of their country, they
had extended their colonies to the East and the West Indies. Their De Wits and
other heroes had nobly defended their flag, and they had become the second
maritime power in Europe. Agriculture, commerce, and manufactories, flourished
under the fostering hand of their government. The industrious and frugal
inhabitants were secure in their persons and property. They enjoyed as much
freedom as was consistent with the state of society in that country. Happy
nation, had they known their true interest!

THUS happily situated, many of those restless beings, who call themselves true
patriots, wished to change their national government. The party adhering to
these demagogues of sedition was considerable. Not finding that support in
their own country, which they had anticipated, they extended their imploring
hands to their loving sister, France. She, ever ready to promote such patriotic
efforts, granted them her aid, and Holland was completely revolutionized. From
that fatal day, she has been sunk in the depths of ruin and wretchedness, and
now exhibits to these United States a lively picture of French perfidy and
rapacity. Her ships, which whitened the ocean with their sails, and transported
her wealth from every part of the globe, are now no more. Her commerce is
annihilated, her numerous manufactories abandoned, her resources exhausted, and
her wretched inhabitants stripped of every rational enjoyment.

ALL these accumulated evils, my countrymen, have been inflicted by that nation
who call themselves the friends of the poor, and the defenders of the rights of
man.

BUT to fill up the black catalogue of her crimes, to exhibit to the universe
the perfection of depravity, she has laid her relentless hand on the innocent,
the happy, and the virtuous cantons of Switzerland. Before this her crimes
exceeded belief; they now exceed comprehension. At this consummation of vice
and cruelty, angels must weep. The Swiss were, undoubtedly, the most harmless,
industrious, free, and moral nation in Europe. Their minds, manners, and
diversions, were pure as the limpid rivulets, which rolled down from the Alps
they inhabited. France had early cast her basilisk eye on that happy country.
She had determined to subjugate the brave and hardy Swiss. To accomplish her
nefarious purpose, she had blinded them with her pretensions of friendship, and
constantly kept a minister at their councils. By thus lulling them into a fatal
security, she gained an opportunity of disseminating her baneful influence
among them. The Swiss councils were divided into factions. Many, whose minds
had been corrupted by French principles, used every artifice to retard all
measures of defense. They succeeded in persuading their country to negotiate.
France seized this favorable moment. While the deluded Swiss were thus
indecisive, reposing confidence in a nation calling herself their ally, they
were almost imperceptibly overpowered by a numerous army. Though cajoled by an
insidious foe, they resolved to make one glorious struggle for all that was
dear to them. Thousands perished in the noble attempt. From that unpropitious
day, this once free and happy country has experienced those scenes of horror
and cruelty, which it will be impossible for me to paint. Figure to yourselves
an army of undisciplined inhabitants, suddenly called together, disdaining to
survive the freedom of their country, and slaughtered to a man. View the
columns of smoke, arising from their villages on fire. View the wretched maids
and matrons flying to the inaccessible cliffs of the mountains for shelter from
a foe, whose "tender mercies are cruel." View the venerable gray headed father,
cheerfully yielding his bosom to the merciless stroke of a savage enemy, and
beholding his brave and innocent sons butchered before his eyes. He who
submits, and he who resists, equally falls a prey to an unfeeling assailant. At
a sight of cruelty like this every human heart must bleed, and even the
unrelenting Jacobin be constrained to say, "Alas, it was a piteous deed!"
These, these, my countrymen, are the blessings of French fraternity; these are
not the airy fictions of the speaker, but the sober truths of history.

COMPARE our situation with Switzerland. France did not attack that brave
nation with an armed force, till she had matured the seeds of discord which had
been sown in her councils. She then advanced with the sword in one hand, and
her professions of friendship in the other. To us she is now acting the same
treacherous part. While her privateers are committing universal depredations on
our commerce; while she is imprisoning, robbing, plundering, and maltreating
our countrymen; while she is exerting herself by every artifice to control our
councils, and extort contributions from us, she has the consummate impudence to
feign a wish to negotiate. Americans, beware of the traitoress. Switzerland had
her exclusive patriots, who opposed all measures of defense, as useless and
expensive. With regret we mention it, we have a Giles, a Livingstone, a
Gallatin, and others, who are now acting the same part in this country. "The
French nation will never attack us," say they. "They are our best friends."
"Let us appease their resentment by contributions, rather than break friendship
with them." Can this be the language of freemen? No. He must be a "servant of
servants" who can submit to such an indignity. Can an American be so fallen, so
depraved? Many are. Such was the language of those perfidious Swiss patriots.

TRUE it is, our citizens, who have been advocates for France, have uniformly
made high professions of love to their country. They are generally false. Can
that child, who unbars his father's doors to the midnight assassin, who can
coolly and deliberately see his father butchered, the chastity of his mother
and sisters violated, their peaceable habitation devoted to ruin and
devastation; can that child have the effrontery to plead his attachment to his
father's family, and that this was done merely because he was displeased with
some domestic regulation? Humanity shudders at the thought. To suppose our
constitution, or its administration perfect, would be the height of
presumption. But reform is not the wish of those exclusive patriots. Nothing
short of a total subversion of all order can satisfy their refined ideas*

THE opposition to our federal government and its measures, has mostly arisen
in the southern and middle states. The antifederalists have always pretended,
that our constitution was too aristocratic, both in its form, and operation.
But their opposition has generally arisen from another source, and they have
used this merely as a plausible and popular pretext. The fact is, it is too
democratic for many of those states. In Virginia, and some others of the
southern states, a few wealthy planters have the entire control of the counties
in which they reside. The distinction between these planters and the common
labourer is as great, as in Great Britain, between the nobility and the same
class of people. By the laws and usages of Virginia, no person's real estate
can be attached for the payment of his debts. Under this pernicious law, which
would disgrace the divan of Constantinople, those rich planters can practice
every species of knavery. By the influence of this law, and the effects of
slavery, this state, and some others, are as complete aristocracies as Venice,
or Genoa ever were. The federal constitution makes all kinds of property
attachable -- It likewise imposes a heavy tax on those southern Nabobs, who, in
their luxurious way of living, consume large quantities of imported articles,
on which a duty is paid. As the constitution gains energy, it lessens the
influence of those overgrown planters. Perceiving their importance on the
decline, they feel resentment, and immediately raise the cry of liberty and
freedom. But can we believe that man a friend to freedom, who holds numbers of
his fellow mortals in the most abject state of slavery? who treats all, whom he
supposes beneath his rank, with insolence and contempt? who wishes to rise in
his importance, by stripping one part of society of every privilege? Such are
most of our southern patriots, and such, I affirm, are the sources of their
opposition to our federal government.

FROM the fate of those European republics, now groaning under the oppression
and avarice of an unrelenting foe, let us learn wisdom. Holland, Venice, Genoa,
Geneva, and Switzerland, no longer exist. Over their ruins humanity drops the
"fast falling tear," and exclaims,

-- "Ye Gods!
"What havoc does ambition make among your works!"
THEY afford us "precept upon precept," and our blindness must be inexcusable,
should we fall into the same snare. We are not beyond danger, and should we
fall under the iron hand of the terrible republic, our situation will not be
more favorable than that of other subjugated nations.

WITH the olive branch of peace in one hand, and our weapons of defense in the
other, let us ever be ready for war or peace. As our preparations for defense
advance, France lowers her threatening tone. She knows the Americans to be
brave, hardy, and patient; invincible in their attachment to their country, and
their natural rights. She remembers that we have a WASHINGTON, to nerve every
arm which her poison has not paralized. She has beheld our forests, almost in a
moment, transformed into ships of war, our commerce extended, and her
plundering marauders swept from the face of the ocean. With such resources as
our country affords, we have nothing to fear, but discord and supineness. Let
that unconquerable love of freedom, which glowed in the bosoms of our venerable
ancestors, warm and animate every breast. Let us exhibit to the universe that
their descendants have not degenerated. Let us rally round our excellent
constitution, and devoutly protest "to Him that lives forever and ever," that
"while time with us shall last," we will never yield to any foreign influence.


