ACCOUNT OF THE MALIGNANT FEVER, LALELY PREVALENT IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK.

CONTAINING

I. A NARRATIVE of its RISE, PROGRESS and DECLINE, with the Opinions of some
Medical Gentlemen, with respect to its Origin, etc. II. The MANNER in which the
POOR were relieved during this awful Calamity. III. A LIST of the DONATIONS,
which have been presented to the Committee for the Relief of the Sick and
Indigent. IV. A LIST of the NAMES of the DEAD, arranged in alphabetical ORDER,
with their Professions or Occupations, and as far as was practicable to obtain
Information, the Names of the Countries of which they were Natives. V. A
COMPARATIVE VIEW of the FEVER of the YEAR 1798, with that of the YEAR 1795.
BY JAMES HARDY. A. M.

COPY-RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

NEW YORK: Printed by HURTIN and M'FARLANE, at the Literary Printing Office,
No. 29 Gold Street, AND SOLD BY THE AUTHOR, No. 1 RIDER-STREET -- BY JOHN LOW,
AT THE SHAKESPEARE's HEAD No. 332 WATER-STREET, THE OTHER BOOKSELLERS, AND THE
PRINTERS. 1799.

THE PREFACE.
SOON after the commencement of the late Malignant Fever in our city, a short
account of which is now laid before the Public, two of my particular friends
were seized with all its symptoms. On them, I thought it my duty to attend,
that I might render such assistance as lay in my power. A few days after the
disease began to spread its direful influence in the vicinity of my place of
residence, and I resolved to pay the same attention to my neighbors as I was
willing to do to my friends. For this resolution, however, I claim no merit;
For as the situation of my family was such as to render it improper, at least
inconvenient to move, and finding myself surrounded with pestilence, I firmly
believed, that I was equally safe, while performing the common duties of
humanity, to the afflicted, as sitting useless in my own appartment; nay more,
had I remained inactive, my mind might have become a prey to melancholy, and I
should, in all probability, have been oppressed with fear, than which there is
not a greater predisponent cause to disorder, nor perhaps an equal cause in
making its termination fatal. Reasoning in this manner, and trusting in Divine
Providence for protection, I therefore determined to make no hesitation in
visiting any sick person to whom I could be useful.

On the 1st September, the Health Commissioners having heard that I was not
afraid of seeing the infected, wished me to enter into their service. I agreed,
and from that day continued employed by them, and afterward by the Health
Committee, till the termination of the disease.

In this situation, I had daily opportunities of seeing the progress of the
fever, the treatment of the sick, the manner in which the poor were relieved,
etc. and as the Magistrates were so obliging as to permit me to have recourse
to their papers for information with respect to the donations, and the names of
the dead, I was induced to venture on the present publication.

My aim, in every page, has been truth and accuracy, without embellishment. How
far I have succeeded, I cannot at present determine; but of this I am certain,
I meant well, and have used my utmost endeavor to render the work as
satisfactory to the public, as possible.

JAMES HARDY.
NEW YORK, 15th January 1799.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE MALIGNANT FEVER, LATETY PREVALENT IN NEW YORK.
State of NEW YORK, previous to the commencement of the Malignant Fever.
WHEN, in the month of July last, the public prints announced, that a
pestilential fever had made its appearance in Philadelphia, the inhabitants of
this city, received the information with sorrow. They felt for the distresses
of their fellow creatures, whilst at the same time, they little thought, that a
calamity of a similar nature was impending over themselves. Our city was at
that time represented, and I believe, with truth, to be remarkably healthy. The
greatest attention was paid to cleaning our streets, and the Health Physician
was vigilant in the discharge of his duty. Hence as we apprehended no danger
from the importation of pestilence, much less did we think that it could be
engendered amongst ourselves. Our citizens in this state of supposed security,
were chiefly bent on making preparations to defend their liberty and
independence against the aggressions of a foreign foe.

For this purpose military associations were rapidly formed; companies of
infantry, cavalry and artillery, composed of citizens of every age and
situation in life, daily paraded to acquire the necessary knowledge of the art
of war; whilst others were personally engaged in erecting fortifications at the
battery, that we might be enabled to defend ourselves against the attacks of
any invaders. Subscriptions, likewise, were raised to a great amount, for the
purpose of building vessels of war, to guard our coast and protect our commerce.

But in the midst of these mighty preparations, an enemy more terrible than any
foreign nation, made its appearance and spread havoc and destruction in every
direction. I mean the Yellow Fever.

Upon the approach of this awful disorder, the bustle we were making for
self-defence was suddenly suspended; the warlike looks, which our citizens had
assumed, changed into those of dismay; the fortifications in a great measure
neglected; the military associations discontinued, and death, speedy death,
seemed to be the indiscriminate portion of the inhabitants of this wealthy
metropolis; for as it is well described in one of our public prints, "parents
and children, husbands and wives, brothers and sisters were suddenly torn from
the feeling bosoms of their relatives, while the mourning survivors were
themselves momentarily expecting the solemn call: The lisping infant calling
for its dead parents; and none but strangers to afford relief; houses totally
emptied of their inhabitants, and the citizens flying in every direction from
the infected places, as from a conflagrated town, or falling tower; the
constant hearse in sable melancholy, conveying the victims of this direful
calamity to their long home, and whole families in many instances cut off
without a single individual being Jest." Many women who enjoyed ease and
affluence, are bereft of their husbands, and left to struggle for the
maintenance of numerous families of children, a task for which they are but
little qualified, and many orphans deprived of their parents, must be brought
up at the public expense; Divine Providence thus affording us an awful lesson
of the instability of human affairs, and teaching us, if we are not
incorrigible, how ineffectual the exertions of men are, unless they be
forwarded by the Deity. By this remark, however, I would by no means be
understood as insinuating, that the measures we were adopting for the
protection of our lives and property, and of our wives and children, were
improper; on the contrary, I think it was the duty of every good citizen, to
exert himself to the utmost on such an emergency; but I shall certainly be
excused for making this observation, that when we are threatened with dangers
of whatever nature, whilst we endeavor by every means in our power to avert
them, we should depend for success not on our own exertions, but on the
blessing of Heaven.

Having made these prefatory remarks, I shall now proceed to the melancholy
subject I have undertaken, viz. the history of a pestilential disorder, which,
though it has at different times appeared in this city, particularly i^ the
year 1795, was never productive of half the calamity as in the months of
August, September, and October, in the year 1798.

First appearance of the disorder -- its progress and decline. Opinions
concerning it various and contradictory.
THE malignant Fever which committed so dreadful havoc amongst the inhabitants
of New York, made its appearance toward the end of July. Its first victim, in
all probability, was Mr. Melancton Smith, who died on the 28th or 29th of that
month, after an illness of a very few days. His case was said to be attended
with the most malignant symptoms; but such was the general opinion of the
inhabitants with respect to the healthiness of our city, that his death excited
little or no alarm. Mr. Smith is said to have been taken sick at his store, in
Front street near Coenties-slip, and a few days after his death, several
persons were attacked with sickness in that vicinity. The symptoms of their
disorder, however, in general appeared to be similar to that of a common cold:
they were, therefore, negligent in obtaining medical aid; hence the disease got
the ascendency before they were aware of their danger, and the assistance of
physicians was procured too late. From what has come under my own observation,
with respect to this disorder, I consider it to be highly proper for every
individual, upon its appearance, to send for a skillful physician the moment he
^ee^s himself taken with any sort of sickness; for the Yellow-Fever, in its
attacks, is peculiarly insidious; it assumes a variety of forms, and often that
of a common cold, or some slight distemper, for which most people would think
there was no necessity for seeking a remedy.

Indeed, according to Doctor Rush, of Philadelphia, when a particular epidemic
visits any spot, every other complaint is at once absorbed, or lost with the
then raging sickness. This, I apprehend, is now the general opinion of our most
eminent physicians; and had it been generally believed by the inhabitants of
New York, I am almost convinced that the havoc in our city would have by no
means been so great as it was; for I have little doubt that more than one half
of those to whom the disorder proved fatal, might in all probability have been
now in good health, had they, on the first attack, applied the proper remedies;
and should this, or any other city in the United States, be again afflicted by
a similar calamity, (which God forbid) as a friend to my fellow citizens, I
would use my utmost endeavors, in pressing this truth upon their ^inds, that
in such a situation, delays are peculiarly dangerous

But to return to the progress of the distemper. --

Whether any cases of pestilential fever existed in the earlier part of August,
remote from the place where it was believed to have originated, I have not been
able to ascertain: But of this I am certain, that about the 20th of the month,
cases of a highly malignant nature appeared in various parts of the city, and
in particular it began to range with great violence at the New Slip, in
Cliff-street and John-street, but more especially in Eden's-Alley and
Rider-street, where not a family escaped it, nor was there a house in which it
made its appearance, except two, viz. that of Mr. M'Masters and me, where it
did not terminate fatally to one or more individuals. About the same time it
likewise spread its ravages in Ann-street, Fair-street, Cherry-street,
Augustus-street, and also at the ship yards, and about the beginning of
September, I know of few places in the city where there were not some solitary
cases.

Our Health-Commissioners began to be somewhat apprehensive with regard to the
appearance of this pestilence so early as the 6th of August, as may be seen
from the following letter addressed to the Mayor: --

TO THE MAYOR.
Health-Office, August 6, 1798. SIR,
THE unfinished situation of the docks in Front-street, between Coenties and
the Old-slip, generally, was, in the opinion of the Commissioners of the
Health-Office, a source of disease in that neighborhood last year, and
occasioned the death of several valuable citizens. At that period it became a
subject of remonstrance to the Common Council.

The Commissioners cannot sufficiently regret, that they have reason to renew
their remonstrances on this subject, and that its present situation is likely
to be productive of still greater evils than those of last year.

Several persons have sickened in the neighborhood of these unfinished grounds
within a week, and with symptoms strikingly characteristic of Yellow-Fever.

If the Common Council think proper to appoint two of their members, the
Commissioners will meet them early to-morrow-morning, to concert measures
adapted to the exigency of the case.

I am respectfully, Sir, Your most obedient servant, RICHARD BAYLEY,
Health-Officer.


On the same day they issued an advertisement, notifying their determination to
put the laws in force with respect to those who should be delinquent in regard
to keeping the streets clean, before their respective doors, and in removing
dirt from their yards and cellars, adding that the street inspectors, whose
immediate duty it was to attend to that business, were directed to report all
offenses of this nature to the police, and that the penalty against offenders
would be rigidly exacted.

At the time of this advertisement, however, it was remarked both by citizens
and strangers, that our streets were kept uncommonly clean; but with respect to
yards and cellars, I have reason to believe that, to the disgrace of some
individuals, it was in some cases otherwise; -- and I may add, that where such
nuisances have existed, the inhabitants of that vicinity have generally been
the severest sufferers.

By some people our Commissioners have been censured for neglecting to notify
the citizens officially of the danger to which they were exposed, so soon as
they became acquainted with the existence of any malignant or pestilential
fever in the city. Such censure, however, appears, to me to be very unjust: for
the existence of some cases of fever was universally known toward the middle
of August, and became the subject of general conversation. The Commissioners
never denied it, nor did they attempt to conceal it: But as it was the opinion
of most people, that it was not probable the disorder would spread, and that it
would vanish after sacrificing a few individuals, as had happened in the years
1796 and 1797, such a publication, whilst it could have been of no use to the
inhabitants, who were well acquainted with their situation, might have been
highly prejudicial to our commerce, by deterring country people from coming
amongst them, at a time, when according to every appearance, they could pass
and repass to our city in perfect safety, and without running any risque of
receiving infection.

On the 12th, 13th, and 14th of August, there was heavy showers of rain; that
on the 14th, commenced at four in in the morning, and continued without the
least intermission, until nine with considerable thunder: The quantity which
fell during these five hours, was supposed to be greater than had at any time
fallen, during the same space of time for many years. The streets were covered
with water, in many places knee deep, and a vast number of cellars were filled
with it.

It was at the time, generally believed, that this excessive rain and thunder
would so purify the air, that our city would in a few days be totally exempt
from any cases of the disorder, but alas! our expectations in this respect,
were dreadfully disappointed: for from this day, it almost immediately began to
spread in every direction. But, however erroneous, the ideas of many have been
with respect to this circumstance, severals thought very differently; in
particular, a writer in the Commercial Advertiser, on the evening of the 14th,
the day on which this excessive rain fell, who seems to have foreseen what
would been the true consequences of it. His language is so remarkable that I
cannot forbear to quote it. "The immense bodies of water" says he, "which have
lately fallen, whilst it seems to cleanse the streets, should excite a degree
of serious alarm, when the effects of its remaining stagnant is considered.
Many cellars must no doubt have been the receptacle for much of the rain which
has fallen^* it therefore behooves every person, without delay, to examine their
cell^rs and other places, which are likely to become reservoirs of water, and
should any be found, immediate steps should be taken to remove it. Stagnant
water in confined places, during this hot weather, will, in two days, exhale a
pestilent water, which may generate the most dangerous infectious disorders, to
prevent which, after the removal of the water, a liberal use of lime should be
made by scattering it over the cellar. It is to be hoped that a regard to
self-preservation will produce the most prompt and active exertions toward
this alarming object; those who neglect it, will be amongst the first victims
of a ravaging disease, which a little timely attention might have kept from our
at present healthy city-"

A day or two after, in the same paper, a writer, after mentioning the late
floods of water, observes, that* "If immediate and vigorous measures are not
taken to oblige people to have their cellars emptied and well ventilated and
dried, one week will produce in this city, a more malignant sickness than
Philadelphia now experiences, or than New York has witnessed since its first
settlement."

My intention in quoting these extracts, is to put our citizens on guard
against an indolent security, should we be again attacked by the Yellow-Fever:
For heat and moisture combined will ever produce putrid vapors, and these,
from the earliest ages of physic, have been almost universally allowed to be
the source of pestilential disorders.

Our Health-Commissioners, on this occasion, certainly deserved well of the
public. Their u^most endeavors were exerted to have every nuisance removed,
and as far as lay in their power, to prevent the spreading of the disease, with
which we then began to be afflicted. Their endeavors, however, were
ineffectual, as the number of deaths from this time almost daily increased.

About the 24th numbers began to leave the city, and many of those who had
offices for the transaction of business in that part of the city which lies
toward the East River, moved to Broadway, which was deemed more healthy. The
Custom-House, likewise, in Mill-street, and the Insurance-Office in
Water-street, were fixed for the time in the Tontine-City-Tavern, in Broadway.
During the whole month of August, the number of deaths amounted to one hundred
and thirty three men, fifty five women, and one hundred and forty one children,
making in all three hundred and twenty nine. As particular attention had not
been hitherto paid by the sextons to distinguish those who fell victims to the
fever, from those who had died of any other disorder, it is difficult to
ascertain their p^ecise numbers. Perhaps, if it be fixed at one hundred, we
shall not be far from the truth, particularly as it is certain that by far the
greatest number of the children were cut off by the flux, a disorder which
generally proves fatal to infants at this season of the year. On the 15th
August the deaths were 14, from which day the number was still progressing, so
that on the 1st September, they amount-to 23. The daily average during August
was about 12.

On the 15th of Sept. the number of funerals were 38, on the awful 19th, they
were no less than 63, and on each of the two days following, they were reduced
to 40, from which circumstance we began to entertain hopes that our mortal foe
was about to leave us, but we were again disappointed, for the next four days
it kept fluctuating between 41 and 50, and on the 26th ^ose up to 60. The total
number of deaths, during this month, was eleven hundred and fifty two, of whom
nine hundred and fifty four died of ^ever. Six hundred and forty eight, were
men, three hundred and fifty four women, and and one hundred and fifty two
children. The daily average through the month was about 38. By the 15th of this
month, our situation was known at a distance, as on that day a proclamation was
issued by James Cahoun, esqr Mayor of Baltimore, prohibiting the entrance into
the city of Baltimore or within three miles thereof, of all persons whomsoever,
who had come from the cities of New York or Philadelphia, or from Wilmington in
the state of Delaware, and forbidding the citizens of Baltimore from having any
communication with them, until they could produce an approved certificate of
their absence from those places at least 15 days previous thereto.

Our number of dead on the 1st October was 43, and this was the greatest number
during the whole month. On the 18th it was reduced to 16, and on the 21st it
only amounted to 9. After this, the number of deaths on any one day during the
existence of the calamity, did not exceed 15, and it is certain that had our
absent citizens attended to the advice of the Health-Committee, as published in
the different newspapers about this time, dissuading them from a premature
return, the death warrant of the disorder might have been dated from about this
day; but it is greatly to be regretted, that numbers of our valuable citizens,
by not attending to this admonition, are now tenants of the grave, who, had
they only remained till after the frost, which took place in the latter end of
October and beginning of November, might have now, very probably, been in good
health. The whole number of funerals for October, was five hundred and twenty
two, two hundred and nine of whom were men, one hundred and fifty eight women,
and seventy four children. Of these four hundred and thirty one died of fever.
The average of the deaths, during this month, was about 17. On the 10th
November, the deaths were only (...), and on each of the preceding days, they
were only 4. The total number during these 10 days, were 83, of whom 41 were
men, twenty two women, and twenty children. Of these thirty nine died of the
fever; the daily average was about 8. The following address of the Committee
now made its appearance in all the newspapers: --

"The Health-Committee for the relief of the sick and indigent in the city of
New York, beg leave to congratulate their fellow-citizens, that under Divine
Providence, this long afflicted city is once more restored to its usual state
of general health, and with the most heartfelt pleasure inform those who yet
remain in exile, that although a few cases of the pestilential fever exists,
yet that by the late cold weather and frost, the contagion is so far destroyed
as to ^ender the return of their families to the city perfectly safe, provided
they take the necessary previous measures of cleansing and ventilating their
long unaired dwellings, and purifying the bedding and clothing which may have
been left therein during the prevalence of the fever.

It would have afforded the Committee much satisfaction could they have given
this invitation at an earlier period, but they did not conceive themselves
warranted by the then existing circumstances. There have, until the present
moment, been several new cases of fever, particularly among those citizens who
returned earlier than the Committee thought prudent; many of whom have fallen
victims ^o the devouring pestilence. This, among other circumstances, has
induced the Committee to withhold this invitation until the present time. The
Committee beg leave further to inform their fellow-citizens, that from the
numerous applications from the indigent for relief, they find it absolutely
necessary to continue their labors some time longer.

The result of the whole number of deaths, during this awful calamity, was two
thousand and eighty-six, viz. eleven hundred and ten men, five hundred and
eighty-nine women and eight hundred and eighty-five children. Of these, if we
admit that one hundred died of the fever in August, its victims would amount to
one thousand five hundred and twenty-four. A great many of our citizens too,
who ^led, were likewise cut off by it, hence it is probable, that the sum of
deaths would be between two thousand four hundred, and two thousand five
hundred: An awful number indeed! Particularly if we consider that more than one
third, some suppose that one half of the inhabitants, had le^t the city.

An opinion prevailed with many, that the progress of the disease varied
according to the state of the atmosphere. To this I have paid some attention;
but have not been able to ascertain that the opinion is correct. My readers,
however, by comparing the table of Meteorological Observations with that which
contains the daily returns of the dead, will be able to satisfy themselves in
this particular. But, however doubtful I may be with respect to the above
observations in general, I am certain, that cool mornings and evenings,
accompanied by hot days, contributed greatly to spread the infection; that in
case of a yellow fever, it is dangerous for those who have fled to return to
their homes till frost has set in; and that a keen frost undoubtedly puts an
almost instantaneous termination to the progress of the disorder.

Having thus given an account of the rise, progress, and decline of the late
fever, I shall next lay before my readers, two communications with which I have
been politely favored, with respect to its origin etc.

The first is from Doctor Samuel L. Mitchell, Professor of Natural History,
Agriculture, and Chemistry in Columbia College, a gentleman whose literary
talents are not only celebrated in America, but likewise in every part of
civilized Europe. His opinion is contained in a letter addressed to me, in
answer to one which I had written to him on the 23d of November last, and is as
follows. --

NEW YORK, November 24, 1798. SIR,
IN your letter of yesterday, you request me to furnish you with such hints as
may occur to me concerning the origin of the distemper, which, during the last
three months, has afflicted the city of New York. I with pleasure communicate
to you on this point, such general ideas, as instant recollection supplies me
with. The great dispute which divides the citizens of the United States,
whether this distemper is produced at home, or introduced from abroad, appears
to me to be more of a speculative than of a practical nature. The experience of
the inhabitants of ancient Rome, London, and indeed of most large and populous
cities in Europe and Asia, have in the progress of their settlement, suffered
excessively from mortal epedemics, Bassorah has more than once been nearly
depopulated, and other great cities of the eastern world, have from time to
time, experienced a similar disaster. It is sufficiently evident to me that the
production and continuance of these plagues are owing to an imperfect and
wretched police; and I judge so because in all situations naturally healthy,
where sickness of that kind has prevailed, it has been in all cases mitigated,
and in many almost entirely prevented, by the adoption of proper local
regulations. I think the experience of mankind is decisive on this point.

New York, and some other cities and towns of North America, are beginning to
suffer what other cities and town^ in ancient and modern times have undergone
before them. In this country we have as yet lost only our thousands, but in
Europe and Asia, they have lost their tens of thousands, and hundreds of
thousands. A fate as severe as theirs awaits us, if we refuse to profit their
experience. It is wiser and better to undertake reformation at once, than by
waiting fifty, or an hundred, or five hundred years, with such decay of
industry and destruction of life, as has been lately our lot, and after all be
compelled to execute at last, that which is both our interest and our duty to
perform without a moments delay.

I consider cleanliness in our persons, clothing and habitations, to be a
matter of moral obligation; and the punishment which providence has wisely
thought proper to inflict upon those who violate this law is sickness, not
unfrequently terminating in yellow-fever, pestilence and plague.

There is a vulgar saying which I have often heard "never mind it, one's one
nastiness is sweet." It is certain that individuals endure patiently or even
without adverting to it, more of their own dirt than of other peoples' Mankind
in almost all places appear to have acted for a long time under the influence
of this pernicious error; and accordingly when distempers have broken out in
consequence of their own carelessness and indiscretion, they have been fond of
laying the blame on others. Hence it has been asserted with the utmost
positiveness that the yellow-fever has been imported from the West Indies, and
plague from the Levant, while at the very time these assertions are so
confidently made by some among us, the fact of local origin in those very
places and countries is flatly denied by the people who dwell there. They like
our own countrymen "think their own nastiness sweet," and cannot be persuaded
it has any thing unhealthy or noxious in it.

But let us be candid and examine the subject fairly: If an army of ten
thousand or any other number of men is encamped long in one spot of ground, it
often happens that fevers and dysenteries break out among the soldiers; the
number of men fit for parade hourly diminishes, and the Hospitals are crowded
with the sick. There can be no question that in such cases the causes of those
distempers are engendered there. Every prudent general knows the way to stop
the ravages of the disease is to quit the infected spot, and encamp upon a new
and fresh piece of ground. And this ought always to be attended to in
campaigns, where the nature of the service will permit. In this case the men
move away and leave the nuisances behind.

What now is a modern city but a vast encampment? Are not the same causes of
disease, daily and hourly accumulating? Ought it to be a matter of surprise,
that during a moist and hot season venom should be produced, rise into the air,
and render it too foul and poisonous to support life? If it was possible to
abandon the contaminated place, and change our ground, as a general changes his
camp, the inhabitants of cities would escape diseases as well provided armies
do. But seats of commerce, trade and manufacture, are destined to be the
perpetual residence of persons engaged in certain kinds of business, who
cannot, without irreparable loss and ruin, quit their improvements and
occupations. There is a necessity, therefore, as they cannot move away from
their nuisances, THAT THEIR NUISANCES SHOULD BE MOVED AWAY FROM THEM. Both
common sense and common decency demand the performance of this.

To be a little more particular: If my information is correct, the exhalations
from privies and sinks in many parts of this city, have become not only
intolerably offensive, but actually pestilential, and the cause of disease. The
vapors issuing from barrels of putrefying beef have poisoned a number of our
citizens. Many stores, yards and cellars abound with substances equally
detrimental to health; and in addition to this, it deserves to be mentioned
that human carcases, buried and accumulated for a long series of years, have
poisoned the air in many parts of christendom, and that by the concurrence of
both municipal and spiritual authority, the practice of interring in cities and
churchyards, has been absolutely prohibited in many parts of Italy, on account
of the horrid mischie^s occasioned thereby. Although the evil has not grown to
such an alarming height among ourselves at this day, yet it is certainly worthy
of consideration, whether it would not be better at once for christians to
discard the superstition which leads to this practice, and imitate the Jews and
Mahometans in conveying their carrion entirely out of town and burying it in
places remote from the habitations of the living. A regard for the preservation
of posterity, as well as our own present and personal security, imposes on us
the adoption of some decisive measures upon this head.

So much for local origin in and about the habitations of men on shore. See
next how the question stands with respect to importation. It is acknowledged,
as has been observed, that cities, camps and houses, may become pestilential
and unsafe to dwell in, by reason of poisonous matter bred within them. Now,
what is a ship but a house a-float? Every sea-vessel is, properly speaking, a
human habitation. And in this house or habitation are frequently collected all
the materials which are known to produce pestilence on the land. Human beings,
too often neglectful of cleanliness during health, and in times of sickness
frequently wallowing in their own filthiness, are the tenants of these floating
houses; and they are sometimes surrouded by the sickening exhalations emitted
from damaged provisions, hides, coffee, and whatever else composes their cargo,
rendered active by moisture, quickened by heat, and multiplied by being kept
under hatches.

Of all the contrivances of art, a ship seems the most completely calculated to
concentre and work up to the highest degree of virulence, all manner of
plague-producing things. The history of expeditions both for war and commerce,
by sea, furnishes abundant evidence of this truth. Importation then stands
thus; the sickness of the crew may be caused by pestilential fluids, and these
fluids are extricated from foul and corrupt substances on board the vessel, and
is as much local in its origin THERE as in any place that can be pointed out in
this or any other city. Further, I have it on the information of respectable
masters of vessels, that in numberless instances the men fall sick ON BOARD,
not only at sea, but in foreign ports and harbors without ever having been on
shore, or having connection with any person or thing that had come from the
shore. And what adds to the conclusiveness of this statement is, that when the
men get sick on board, the custom in a number of the West India islands, is to
send them on shore to recover their health.

If then, by IMPORTATION, is meant the taking on board the seeds of
Yellow-Fever, and conveying them like grains of coffee or rice (for this is the
language) from one region to another, the whole doctrine is indisputably
fallacious, being grounded on nothing better than a supposed analogy between
things exceedingly different in nature from each other, and, on a
misrepresentation of facts which has, alas! too generally and too long been
countenanced by physicians and merchants of the highest character.

My other engagements prevent my adding any more. The contents of this letter
are written with my own hand; and if there was any body now with me to whom I
might dictate, I could easily add a few paragraphs on prevention. This,
however, must make a part of a public report on that subject, in which I am
engaged, with several gentlemen of learning, experience, and respectability. In
the mean time, be assured, that no person wishes greater success to your
labors, for the good of our fellow-citizens, than

SAMUEL L. MITCHILL.

To Mr. James Hardy.

The second communication I received in a letter from Mr. Richardson Underhill,
a respectable merchant of this city, on the 30th December, in answer to one
which I had written to him, on the 23d of the same month. This Gentleman is
indeed no regular bred physician; but as from motives of humanity, he had been
very attentive to the distresses of the sick, during the calamity of the year
1795, and being a person of observation, he soon became acquainted with that
mode of treatment; which was most conducive to their recovery. Upon the
commencement of the fever of 1798, being again actuated by the most
philanthropic principles, he embarked in the same hazardous business, and was
the happy means of mitigating the sorrows of many of the afflicted. To these he
not only prescribed; but also assisted in administering such medicines as were
deemed proper. He likewise took care, that all those whom he saw in want,
should by some means or other be relieved. A conduct like his, is above
eulogium. The poor and needy, whose wants were supplied and whose diseases were
cured by his means will no doubt think, as long as they live, of their
benefactor with gratitude.

The communication with which Mr. Underhill, has favored me, appears to me, to
be interesting and as I am convinced it will be considered in the same manner
by most of my readers, I shall lay it before them without further apology.

NEW YORK, 12th Mo. 30th 1798. ESTEEMED FRIEND, JAMES HARDY,
THY favor of the 23d. inst. I have the pleasure of acknowledging. In this thou
ask my opinion, respecting the origin of the disorder, to which so many of
our citizens have recently become victims; the method of cure pursued by me,
and my opinion, what should be done by the proper authority, to prevent a
return of this terrible pestilence.

In a mind, void of prejudice, it is more difficult, perhaps, to form an exact
opinion of the origin of this disorder, than most people, upon a transient view
of the subject, would suppose; for my own part, neither my education, nor my
inclination, will permit me to form any theories, concerning the first
engendering of pestilence, from combinations of gazes, or other causes. The
dens, in which it is bred, and in which it lurks, until it issues forth to
seize its prey, are more proper objects for persons in my sphere of life to
enquire out and explore. To this purpose I have frequently revolved in my mind,
whether it was an imported or homebred disorder, several circumstances
concurring to produce an opinion of its being the latter. The rapid progress of
it during one of the hotest summers we have ever experienced, just after a very
heavy fall of rain, which stagnated in almost an innumerable number of cellars
and back yards; the malignancy of it in the neighborhood of some of those
cellars, many of them stowed with large quantities of putrid beef; in the
neighborhood of filthy sewers, or other nuisances, and, also, from its
spreading on Golden-hill and Cliff-street, which are in a northerly direction
from some of those dens of pestilence I have just mentioned, and of course
liable to be acted upon by the prevailing south winds. But however well founded
this opinion may be, with respect to the agency of those things, in producing
the disease, yet with all these, other facts, which I will relate, has almost
induced me to believe, that all is not to be charged to them. They rendered the
neighborhood highly combustible, but perhaps a^ spark of contagion might be
necessary to produce so dreadful a conflagration. The first appearance of the
disorder was in Front-street, near Coenties-slip, where Melancton Smith died,
about the 28th, or 29th of July, and on the 30th Peter A. Schenk was taken
severely sick. The following week, one Wilson, M. Smith. jun. Peter Dustan and
wife, and A Adriance, had slight attacks, from whence it spread to other
families in a very short time. The people of this neighborhood laid the blame
of their sickness to the schooner Fox, which arrived from Jeremie between the
middle and latter part of July, and hawled to a wharf a little cast of
Coenties-slip, where she unloaded, and upon pumping her out, her bilge-water
was very offensive; but I think the filth to be observed in this part of the
^own, quite as likely to give them fever as bilge-water and molasses.


The next appearance of the fever was at the house of Henry Mead, at the lower
corner on the west side of the New-slip. Some time in July, the ship Fame, said
to have arrived from some one of the West India islands, came to the wharf next
below the New-slip, and lay there some time. About the 3d or 4th of August,
some people went to discharging the ballast and pumping her out; among the
ballast was a quantity of damaged coffee, extremely putrid, which, with the
water discharged from the pump, was so offensive to the smell, that the
neighbors were induced to shut their windows, especially while eating. About
the 6th of said month, the following persons spent a considerable part of the
day at Mead's house, John Tailor, Ebenezer Tailor, Sylvanus Seaman, Monmouth
Hubbs, Walter Davis, Augustus Peck, and a young man, clerk in a store near the
exchange: Most of these dined there, and during their dinner, they were under
the necessity of shutting up their doors and windows, though the weather was
very warm, so exceedingly were they annoyed by the stench from the ship. Of
this company, collected from several quarters, and who dispersed to their
respective homes, not a single one escaped severe sickness, which they were
taken with in from 4 to 5 days, and of which John and Ebenezer Tailor died. Two
persons belonging to the family were also sick. The next house above this,
(there being none below it) was at the same time visited, and of 5 persons,
three were taken dangerously ill and 2 died: In the second house above, 3 more
persons were sick at the same time, and 1 died; and the family of the house
next to this, shared a similar fate, 3 were sick, two of whom died in a very
short time. Many of the boatmen, whose vessels lay in the slip at this period,
fared no better, a number of them being victims to this stench, or the
contagion it produced. On the east side of the slip, the inhabitants at this
time were as healthy as usual for the season; but in the neighborhood
northerly, the disorder spread with great rapidity; scarcely a family escaped
severe sickness for some distance in that direction: it is to be observed that
the wind was wholly southerly. -- Nathaniel Clark, who lives in Cherry-street,
in this neighborhood, was on the wharf where this ship lay, and went home to
his family, complained much of the stench he had smelt there, and in 3 or 4
days was taken with the fever, which he had severely: Several of his family
sickened shortly after. From these facts it appears that the sickness in this
quarter was caused by the ship; whether it was created in her, or brought from
another country, I cannot undertake to determine; but be it as it may, the
fever was undoubtedly there contagious; and spread to distant parts of the town
by means of the sick; the bodies of the inhabitants having (as I suppose) been
rendered ripe for its reception. From here I can trace it to the neighborhood
of Golden-hill, where a man named Harper, died in Gold-street on the 11th of
August. One Fowler died the 18th of same month in John-street; and the 3d
victim was Solomon Carl, who died on the 20th, in Gold-street. Harper imputed
the origin of his sickness to his having crossed the deck of the ship
beforementioned three days before he was taken; a respectable merchant was with
him, who has since told me they were offended with a very disagreeable smell.
Solomon Carl was at the funeral of a woman named Jones, who had died in the
neighborhood of the New-Slip, about 3 days before he sickened himself.

The methods I pursued to cure the disorder were generally very simple, such as
were dictated by nature, and a small share of experience I had in the year
1795. I endeavored always to purge the patient, bring on a gentle perspiration
and continue it, which treatment of itself I may say cured hundreds; the
medicines I selected to bring about those ends, were such as I deemed mildest
and most efficacious in their operation: for the first purpose I used castor
oil, and for the other, warm teas of cat-nip or balm; In obstinate cases, or
cases attended with delirium, I used hot applications of ashes, bricks, etc.
wet with vinegar and spirits, and if I could raise a perspiration a cure
generally ensued, particularly among middle aged persons of good constitutions.
Those were the methods most used, though I found it necessary to var^ and use
other means at times, according to the constitution of the patient, or stage of
the disease, when I first began my prescriptions.

My opinion concerning what is necessary to prevent a return of this disorder
is formed from the facts I have before related. I think it necessary to
absolutely prohibit stagn^^^ waters and to compel those persons who have wet
cellars, to keep them constantly pumped out and cleaned; to fill up the docks
and slips, if not entirely, at least such parts of them as are too far from
running water, or are exposed to the sun at low water; to prevent provisions
from being stored at all in town, during certain seasons of the year. Although
this may be thought a great inconvenience, yet let it be remembered that the
health of the whole ought not to be risqued for the convenience of many, much
less (...) a few; at all events provisions ought to be kept out (...) damp
cellars in hot weather, for when they are not absolutely spoiled, their pickle
sometimes smells very offensive, and I judge all air to be noxious that offends
my n^se, at least, I know of no rule of judging which admits of fewer
exceptions; to fill up the common sewers where practicable and let the filth
which they are intended to hide appear to the eye in all its deformity, which
will insure a more speedy removal; where they cannot be filled ^p with
propriety from the particular situation of the ground (if any such situation
exist) let lime be frequently put in them; to prevent vessels which may arrive
from warm climates during certain months in the year from coming to the city at
all, until they have landed their cargoes at some convenie^t place, remote from
the center of population, I think at or near the Watering place, on
Staten-Island, would be a proper situation for this purpose.
where warehouses might be prepared for the reception of their goods and from
whence they might be transported at little expense to their respective
consignees, after having been duly examined by a proper officer appointed for
that purpose, whose duty it should also be to see that the ships were cleaned
by admitting clean water in them and pumping it out, and afterward properly
fumigating them, after which they might freely be admitted to load at the usual
wharves. I also think (from conversations I have had with several judicious
persons upon the subject) that it would be proper to introduce the use of coal
altogether as fuel in the low parts of the city, where the ground has been made
wholly, or in part by covering marshes and sloughs, with a few feet of harder
earth: The method to be fallen upon to cause coal to be generally used in those
situations, would perhaps require much consideration, by tho^^* whose province
it is to consider on it; but I am inclined to believe, if it should be found
upon due enquiry to be necessary, the general good sense of the people would
lead them to adopt it without compulsion. If to all these regulations, it were
possible to add the salubrious influence of a stream of fresh water, cleansing
the surface of our streets, I think this city may yet be blessed with a good
general state of health. I have been thus particular because thou requested it:
If, from what I have written, thou can glean any thing of service to thyself
or the public, it will give sincere pleasure to thy real friend.

RICHARDSON UNDERHILL.


The prevalence of the fever in New York, is accounted for as follows, in the
Philadelphia Gazette of the 4th inst. under the New York head:

"FEVER.
A very considerable alarm having taken place among the citizens, and the most
exaggerated reports circulated about the country, of the sickness with which
certain parts of the city are afflicted, we have thought it a duty to make such
enquiries as might enable us to place the matter in a point of view, as near
the truth as possible.

"About the beginning of August, in consequence of the foul, unfinished state
of ^everal water-lots, on the East river, between Coenties and the Old-slip,
upwards of 20 persons were attacked nearly about the same time, with what
appeared to be common colds, some slightly, others more severely; but the
general occurrence of the fact in that neighdourhood, led to a belief that it
arose from a local cause, and threatened something more serious. The foulness
of the lots, and especially two vacant ones, being receptacles of every kind of
filth, was considered as that cause; and in pursuance of official arrangements,
they were immediately covered with wholesome sand: The effect was, a general
restora^^on of the sick.

In the neighborhood of the New-slip, where the buildings for the most part
are small, and many of them inhabited by poor people, who live in a crowded
manner, and in situations incapable of proper ventilation, diseases occurred
about the 12th -- a number of persons died -- but at present there appears to
be no great cause of alarm in that quarter.

"About the same period, or a little later, two or three persons were seized at
Bruce's wharf, with suspicious symptoms, and some deaths have taken place there
and in its vicinity, owing, it is generally thought, to the extremely foul
condition of Bruce and Marston's unfilled lots, bounding on the East-river, at
the foot of Pine-street the effluvia issuing from them being highly putrid and
offensive. Measures have been taken, and are now in operation, to cover them
with wholesome earth, by which means it is hoped the evil in that quarter, if
it has arisen from this source, may be corrected.

"About the 20th, several persons were seized in Cliff-street, nearly in the
same manner as those between Coenties-slip and the Old-slip. At first they
generally considered their complaints to be mere colds taken by sleeping with
open windows in the violent hot weather which then prevailed -- Unfortunately,
it was a more serious case. The patients rapidly grew worse, and several died
as well there as in John, Gold and Rider-streets, and Eden's-Allies, all lying
within the vicinity of Burling-slip sewer. These complaints, on investigation,
were thought to proceed, in part, from the offensive state of that sewer; which
had, for some time, become a receptacle for various species of putrid matter,
and of which the mouth lies nearly opposite John-street, commonly called
Golden-hill street -- so that whenever a South or S. E. wind prevailed, it blew
through the sewer, and bore a column of effluvia up John-street, and through
that into Cliff and the adjacent streets, rendering the atmosphere intolerably
bad. The best informed physicians are of this opinion. The head of the sewer
has since been closed by a valve-door, and a considerable quantity of
quicklime thrown into it, with a view of neutralizing its contents. A similar
door, with the same intention, has been added to the Ferry-street sewer.

"Other causes are also alleged, and with great plausibility, at least, if not
certainty.

"It is well known that the cessation of our commercial intercourse with the
French islands, in consequence of their hostile violence, has greatly lessened
the demand for provisions; of course large quantities of bee^ remained in many
cellars, particularly among the merchants of Pearl-street. Much of this, from
what is now seen to be an improper mode of packing, as directed by a late law,
has lately become tainted, emitted a very putrid effluvium -- corrupting the
air and contributing its share as a cause of disease. We learn that the
commissioners of the health-office have taken measures to have it all
inspected, and the spoiled removed out of town. Much already has been sent
away, and the remainder is going as fast as possible.

"These causes, with the immense fall of rain, and violent heats, experienced
in the course of August, are supposed to have originated the disease which has
spread such panic as to drive many families into the country.

"On the most diligent enquiry, however, we cannot find out, that any great
subject of alarm exists, except in the neighborhood of the New-slip -- in the
vicinity of Burling-slip-sewer -- and at the foot of Pine-street, at which
places several persons have died.

"Individual cases have also occurred in other parts of the town, but, as in
1795, they remain insulated, and without communication to the attendants, as
far as we can discover. These, it is generally thought, were taken at one or
the other places before mentioned.

"An opinion has been avowed by some, that the disease has been imported, or
arose from damaged coffee, thrown out of a ship on Kelly's dock, west of the
New-slip. This, in the present instance, is utterly groundless, and can serve
no purpose but that of delusion. The quantity of refuse coffee, alluded to by
our advocates for imported contagion, did not exceed half a peck, and was the
mere sweepings of the hold.

"We are informed by a gentleman who has been at the pains to collect a list of
the persons interred in the several burial grounds, that during the last week
they averaged about 12 per day -- and that previous to Sunday last, there was
no very unusual mortality for the season.

"With respect to new cases, enquiry at the best sources, enables us to say
they have very much declined within the last 24 hours, and that the disease
yields more readily to medicine.

"How far this statement authorizes the extreme alarm which precipitates so
many citizens out of town, we do not know; but it would at least be advisable
that all who remove should leave their houses, cellars and yards in a cleanly
condition -- that such as remain may not be exposed to the bad effects of their
carelessness and indiscretion.

"The system of cleanliness adopted by the commissioners of the health office,
we are happy to observe, is pursued with increased vigor; and indefatigable
efforts are daily made by that board, to preclude every source of impure air in
the city.

"This statement may be depended on -- it is the result of enquiry of the first
authority."

To these opinions I shall add another, which my readers, will no doubt,
consider as being very respectable; I mean that of our Health-Officer, Doctor
Bayley. I have extracted what follows from a late very interesting publication
of his, entitled, "Letters from the Health Office to the Common Council."

To the Common Council of the City of New York.
HEALTH-OFFICE, December 4, 1798. GENTLEMEN,
IN addition to the facts which are contained in the correspondence between the
Health Commissioners and the Common Council for the year 1798, I shall offer to
your consideration a few remarks upon the origin and progress of the
pestilential disease which has lately prevailed in this city; and in order to
corroborate what I may advance, I shall, in the first place take a retrospect
of events which have annually taken place in this city, during the warm months
since the year 1795.

According to the records of the Health-Office, the yellow fever appeared in
1796 at White Hall, at the foot of Pine-street, at Burling-slip, and in the
neighborhood of Roosevelt-street sewer.

In 1797 between Coenties and the Old-slip, in Front-street, at the Fly-market
in several instances, in Fletcher-street, at Burling-slip, in Water-street,
adjoining Roosevelt-street sewer, in George-street, and at the foot of
Pine-street.

In 1798 the disease first appeared about midway between Coenties and the
Old-slip, in Front-street, between the 1st and 7th of August. On the 7th of
August about twenty-three were reported sick to the Health-Office. From that
period several others sickened, and of the whole number one died. By the 26th
of August, the complaint had disappeared in that quarter in consequence of the
measures taken to remove the cause, by covering the offensive lots with clean,
wholesome earth.

On the 12th of August, it appeared at No. 283, Water-street, in the case of
Mr. Tailor, in an old broken building, on an unfinished lot at the foot of
Dover-street, in which 11 persons died early in 1795, and which has since been
repeatedly represented as a nuisance.

August 12, also, the disease appeared in the case of John Henderson, corner of
James-street, and Batavia-lane. On all sides of his residence, which was a
small crowded building, there were sunken lots in an unfinished state.

Again, on August 12, the disease appeared in William Whitlock, Card-maker, No.
51, Cherry-street. In the rear and to the south of his residence, the lots are
very generally below the level of the streets, and without drains.

August 13. Murdock M'Lean, Bruce's wharf, was seized, where the disease has
regularly made its appearance every warm season since the year 1795.

The first arrival of sick in this harbor, (to the knowledge of the
Health-Office) from Philadelphia, was on the 13th of August, in the New York
and Philadelphia Packet. The Captain died on the passage -- the mate was sick
and was sent to Bellevue.

August 17. Tho. Collard sickened in Banker-street. 18. Nehemiah Fowler,
John-street. 20. Fletcher-street. 21. R. Whitmore, George-street. 22. A.
Sharpless, corner of John and Cliff-street
From the preceding statement, the yellow-fever made its appearance in
different parts of the city on the same day, and in the course of six or eight
days, in different streets, remote from one another.

On the 8th August the mercury in Farenheit's Thermometer, at an elevation of
40 feet above the ground, and in the shade, at two P. M. stood at 91 degrees.

On the 9th. 96 10th. 90 11th. 89 12th. 86 13th. 83 The highest to which the
mercury rose in July 1795, was 83 August, 93 July, 1796, 88 August, 89 July,
1797, 90 August, 82 July, 1798, 94 August, 96


On the morning of the 14th, the heaviest rain fell of any time during the
year. It began at 5 A. M. and continued without intermission till nine.
Numerous cellars, particularly those in the low parts of the city, were filled
with water. Lispenard's meadow, which may be considered as within the limits of
the city was entirely overflowed. In six days it had not subsided above ten
inches; and the water did not pass off, till a large drain was opened for that
purpose, by order of the Common Council.

After the immense fall of rain on the 14th, the Thermometer, which had fallen
on that day to 78 rose,

On the 15th, to 82 16th, 85 17th, 90 18th, 90
The sudden and great increase of heat immediately after the violent rain,
appeared to have a proportionately influence in producing fever. Between that
period and the 22d August, upwards of twenty persons in Cliff-street, were
seized with slight indispositions, which they attributed to sleeping with open
windows during the preceding hot and moist weather, but which appeared rather
as the forerunner of yellow fever, for, not only the persons thus indisposed,
but a number of others in the same street, had that disease in the course of a
few days.

From this period the disease became more general; but its fatality was
principally felt in Cliff-street and its neighborhood, at Catherine slip, in
Water-street and on the unfinished grounds in the southern part of the city.

Now having seen that the yellow fever had made its appearance in New York
every year, for several years past, but has prevailed in very different
degrees, it becomes a matter of great importance to determine, why the disease
was so generally prevalent on the low new-made grounds in 1795, whilst it was
scarcely felt in the more elevated situations; why, in 1796, and 1797, its
appearance was limited to particular spots; and why, in 1798 it not only
prevailed on all the new-made grounds, but also in parts of the city which had
before been exempted from the disease.

To answer these questions in such a manner, as to prove satisfactory to every
one, might be a very difficult task. I shall, however, offer some reasons which
may tend to show why the fever was more prevalent this year, than in the
preceding years.

It is well ascertained that in the year 1795, there was an unusual degree of
heat and moisture in the atmosphere during the warmer months -- that the
Thermometer was considerably higher than in 1796 and 1797, but that in 1798,
the heat greatly exceeded that of 1795.

Now, as heat and moisture are powerful agents in producing pestilential
diseases, so must the same causes necessarily promote the extension of those
diseases.

In the year ^98, there were besides, local causes of fever in this city, which
did not exist in the other seasons, and which, cooperating with the weather,
served to extend the disease beyond the limits, to which it would probably have
been otherwise confined. I have reference to the immense quantities of spoiled
beef, fish, and other articles of a perishable nature, which were stored in
different parts of this city. The noxious exhalations arising from these
sources, in my apprehension, was a great cause why the disease arose and raged
with great violence in particular situations: And when we consider the sudden
appearance of the ^ever at Golden-hill and in Cliff-street, and the great
number which sickened nearly at the same time, there is great reason to believe
this opinion well founded.

About the 20th of August, a report was made to the Health Office, that great
quantities of spoiled beef were stored in Pearl-street, between Burling and
Beekman-slips. The stench which issued from some of the cellars in this
situation, was so considerable, as to prove very offensive to those who passed
by, and became a subject of general observation. Letters, in consequence, from
the Health-Office, were addressed to owners of provisions in that quarter,
enjoining them to have the beef examined, and to have such as was spoiled, sent
out of the city. Instead, however, of adopting this plan, the beef was brought
from the cellars into the street, the barrels opened, and the putrid pickle
thrown into the gutters. In some instances the examination was made in the
cellars, and the pickle disposed of in the same manner. The gutters which
conveyed away this putrid pickle, led to Burling-^lip sewer.

The relative situation of this sewer, and Cliff-street is such that the
southerly and south-easterly winds, force a current of air through the sewer,
carrying with it the exhalations arising from the noxious matter collected
together in that place, and having a direction to pass more immediately up
Golden-hill, and into Cliff-street; and every person in that neighborhood with
whom I have conversed, agrees as to the offensive smell of the air, previous to
the appearance of the fever.

On the 20th of August, the wind, which had been blowing from the north and
west some days previous, shifted to the south-east, and continued to blow from
that quarter some time. In 48 hours after this, there was scarcely a house in
Pearl-street, near where the spoiled provisions were stored, in the lower end
of John-street, and in Cliff-street, which did not contain sick.

The sudden appearance of fever in this part of the city, and the great number
which were in so short a time affected, proves the local nature of the cause;
and to the one which I have just mentioned, I have no hesitation, in ascribing
all the effects which were experienced.

If what we have alleged, be admitted sufficient to explain the appearance of
fever which took place in Cliff-street, etc. we have made some advances toward
accounting for the general prevalence of the disease in 1798. V^de the H.
Office correspondenc on the subject of spoiled provisions.


But, gentlemen, we have further to remark a particular difference in the warm
seasons of 1798 and 1795.

In 1795 the weather was warm and moist, but there was but very little rain.

In 1798 the weather was not only much warmer, but was accompanied by sudden
and heavy rains.

Immediately after the rains the public papers teemed with addresses to the
citizens, entreating them to empty their cellars of the water which had
collected in them, or the most fatal effects would be felt from neglect, or
inattention to this circumstance. It is not my intention to dispute the opinion
advanced by these writers. But, if the production of disease, was to be
apprehended from the lodgment of water in places where the sun's rays never
enter, what effects were to be expected from the ponding of water in those
numerous lots and yards within this city, which are several feet below the
level of the streets, containing dead animal and vegetable matters, and to
which the rays of the sun have full access? I wish you, gentlemen, to reflect
seriously upon this comparison, and believe, that whilst those sunken,
undrained lots are suffered to remain in their present state, unless causes
cease to produce their effects, diseases must inevitably result.

On examining the records of the legislature of this state, it will be found,
that petitions have been preferred to that body, for permission to erect
mill-dams on certain streams of water in some of the northern counties, and the
prayer of the petitioners has been granted. The consequence was, that
considerable tracts of low grounds in the neigh-hood of the mill-dams, were
overflowed in the spring, and after the water had passed off, and the surface
of those grounds were exposed to the influence of the ^un, exhalations of so
baneful a nature arose, as to produce a fever of a bilious type, which attacked
almost every body within a certain distance from their source, and proved very
mortal in its effects. The cause of this sickness being so obvious, petitions
were presented to the legislature, praying for a redress of the grievances. To
correct the evil, it of course was necessary to destroy the mill-dams, and as
soon as the waters were unobstructed, and allowed to flow in their usual
channel, the country became as healthy as before.

Permit me, gentlemen, to ask the following questions: If the result of
exhalations arising from grounds which have been covered with water in an open
country, has been the production of bilious remitting fevers, attended with
considerable mortality, what result ought we to expect from those exhalations
which arise from the ponding of water on 150 acres of low grounds and sunken
yards and lots in a crowded city, and of a southern aspect?

Before I conclude, I shall take the liberty of noticing some of the public
measures that have been adopted for the removal of causes of disease in this
city. I shall confine myself to two principal objects:

First. The want of a sufficient descent on the low grounds along the
east-river, to carry off the waters from the streets, is generally admitted. A
considerable quantity of water must necessarily stagnate in the gutters of
these streets, and also in the sunken pavement. In dry weather this lodgement
consists principally of water which has been used for culinary and other family
purposes, and must therefore, be supposed to abound with matters to afford
noxious exhalations.

By an ordinance of the Corporation for cleaning the streets, the inhabitants
are directed to scrape out the dirt and filth collected in the gutters, and
heap them up in the streets, to be removed by the scavengers in the course of
the day.

Now, does this regulation in any degree subserve the purposes for which it was
ordained? Does not the spreading of this dirt and filth, and exposing new and
greater surfaces, increase the mischief which the measure was intended to
correct? I believe, gentlemen, there will be found no other means to rid the
low grounds of this city, from the baneful effects of stagnant waters, and an
accumulation of noxious matters, than their being freely washed by currents of
water flowing over them.

Second. In the same ordinance, the citizens are prohibited from throwing into
the streets, from their respective houses, cellars, or yards, any dirt, filth,
or o^^als whatever, except on certain days. How will this be found to operate
in removing the causes of disease? Should we not rather ask, how this will be
found to operate in increasing the causes of disease? One moment's reflection,
I presume, will convince us that some means ought to be adopted to remedy a
system so fraught with mischief, and for these means I take the liberty of
referring you to letter 70, addressed by the Commissioners of the Health Office
to the Common Council.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your most obedient and Humble servant, R.
BAYLEY, Health-Officer.


From the preceding statements, it will appear to my readers, that the cause of
the origin of this disorder, is still a matter of question amongst the learned;
and that it is not as yet fully decided, whether the calamity, with which the
cities of the United States have within these few years been repeatedly
afflicted, has been imported, or that it is engendered in our own country.
Several reasons, however, induce me to incline to the latter opinion.

First. We are situated in the same latitude with those places of the old
world, where pestilential disorders annually predominate. With those places we
are alike exposed during the summer months to the united effects of heat and
moisture, and from similar causes similar effects may be always expected.

Secondly. The fever with which we were lately afflicted, although its first
appearance was at one particular spot, viz. Co^^ties-^lip, yet it was soon
afterward seen in so many different parts of the city, and so far remote from
one another, that it is by no means probable that the contagion could be
communicated so speedily. Indeed, if the contagion was imported it would seem
to me, that there must have been at least seven or eight different sources of
infection, or it could not have appeared in every direction from the ship-yards
to the battery, almost about the same time.

Thirdly. As a proof that this fever may be engendered in our climate, it may
be added that it had at different times made its appearance in the vicinity of
low marshy grounds both in this and the neighboring states (See Webster's
Collection of Papers on the subject of Bilious Fevers prevalent in the United
States for a few years past) and that it appeared in the state of New Jersey
during the last autumn, is pretty evident from the two following extracts of
letters from two eminent physicians in that state.

Extract of a letter from Dr. Jonathan Elmer, of Bridge-town, New Jersey, to a
Physician in Philadelphia, dated December 6.
"From many facts I am induced to believe (though very reluctantly) that there
were cases of the yellow-fever in this place during the last autumn, which
originated on the spot, and that its propagation was occasioned, or at least
promoted, by local infection, or generated in the place of its origination."


Extract of a letter from Dr. Lummis, of Woodbury, dated Dec. 4 to a Physician
in Philadelphia.
"During the late autumn, in the months of September and October, I visited
several persons affected with the bilious yellow-fever, who had no possible
opportunity of deriving their disease from any foreign source. Knowing that
this disease might have been of domestic origin, and probably introduced among
them from the city of Philadelphia, I was exceedingly particular in my
enquiries on this point, and being satisfied from the testimony of the persons
attacked, and of the families in which they resided, of their not having any
communication with the city of Philadelphia for a long time previous to their
suffering with the disease; and of their having avoided, in the most careful
manner, all intercourse with families affected with the yellow-fever in their
own neighborhood, I have no hesitation in believing their disease to have been
the offspring of local causes. The Majority of these cases have occurred in
families living on farms situated on the Jersey shore of the Delaware. The most
valuable part of these farms consist of meadow; the proximity of these
situations to the Delaware, and large tracts of meadow land lead me to ascribe
their disease (aided by a peculiar state of the air) to the exhalations or
marsh effluvia, arising from the low grounds situated near the banks, and the
meadows in the vicinity of the Delaware. The peculiar disposition of these
exhalations to produce disease and death, was evinced early in the season by
the mortality which prevailed among the fowls and cats in this neighborhood. I
am not alone in having seen cases of yellow-fever which cannot be traced to
contagion. Similar facts have been witnessed this season by other Physicians,
in various parts of New Jersey."


I have already observed that our climate being the same with those places in
the old world, which are annually exposed to pestilential disorders, we cannot
expect to be entirely exempt from them. But at the same time I am fully
persuaded, that if we make use of those means, which Divine Providence has put
in our power, we have little to apprehend, on the score of their return or
spreading in this country. In Turkey where pestilential disorders are
exceedingly prevalent, such is the indolence of the inhabitants that little or
no attempts are made to prevent their return or to stop their ravages: for to
use the words of Mr. John Pain, in his excellent system of Geography, now
publishing in this city, by John Low, Bookseller, at the Shakespeare's Head,
No. 332 Water street, "The doctrine of predestination and still more the
barbarism of the government have hitherto prevented the Turks from attempting
to guard against this destructive disorder, (meaning the plague) (...) the
success however, of the precautions taken by the Franks, has of late began to
make some impressions upon many of them. The Christians of the country, who
trade with European nations, would be disposed to shut themselves up like them;
but this they cannot do without the authority of the Port. It seems indeed, as
if the Divan would at last pay some attention to this object, if it be true
that an edict was issued in 1783, for the establishment of a Lazaretto as
Constantinople and three others at Smyrna, Candia, and Alexandria. The
government of Tunis adopted this wise measure some years ago; but the Turkish
police is every where so wretched, that little success can be hoped from these
establishments notwithstanding their extreme importance and the safety of the
Mediterranean states."

The above is the state of pestilential disorders amongst them; but surely with
us it is widely different. Many of our citizens, indeed, believe in the
doctrine of predestination as well as the Turks; but at the same time, almost
every individual in case of any calamity, thinks it his duty to make use of
those means which Providence has put in his power, to avert it. Our police is
likewise, by no means, wretched. Our magistrates, to whom the health of our
citizens is confided, are men of intelligence, and when the sources from which
pestilence arise in our cities is better understood, which from the measures
lately taken, we may soon expect, there is little doubt, that our cities shall
in a short time be either wholly exempt from, or at least partially visited by
the direful calamity of the yellow-fever.

To prevent its return has not only been an object of desirous enquiry with the
magistrates of different cities, but also with our national government; for the
President of the United States, in his speech on the opening of the last
session of Congress, thus addressed himself to the S^nate and House of
Representatives: --

"While with reverence and resignation we contemplate the dispensations of
Divine Providence, in the alarming and destructive pestilence with which
several of our cities and towns have been visited, there is cause for gratitude
and mutual congratulations, that the malady has disappeared, and that we are
again permitted to assemble in safety, at the seat of government, for the
discharge of our important duties. But when we reflect, that this fatal
disorder has, within a few years made repeated ravages in some of our principal
(...) ports, and with increased malignancy, and when we consider the magnitude
of the evils arising from the interruption of public and private business,
whereby the national interests are deeply affected; I think it my duty to
invite the legislature of the union to examine the expediency of establishing
suitable regulations in aid of the health laws of the respective states; for
these being formed on the idea that contagious sickness may be communicated
throughout the channels of commerce, there seems to be a necessity, that
Congress who alone can regulate trade, should frame a system which, while it
may tend to preserve the general health, may be compatible with the interests
of commerce, and the safety of the revenue."

The Governor of Pennsylvania, likewise in his address to the legislature of
that state, recommends to their serious consideration, such measures as he
believed most likely to prevent a like visitation as that of the autumns of
1793, 1797, and 1798; and I am happy to add, that the business will no doubt be
taken up by the general government of the Union, as a committee was appointed
to report on that part of the president's speech, which respected this truly
important subject. To this I may add that the Common Council of New York,
anxious to guard our city against the return of pestilence, addressed the
Medical Society, soon after the decline of the disorder requesting them to give
their opinions with respect to its origin, best method of prevention, etc. and
that in consequence the society appointed a committee of their own body,
consisting of Doctors Samuel L. Mitchell, James Tillary, and John B. Rodgers,
to consider the matter, and to report accordingly. The literary talents of
these gentlemen are well known, and their seal and anxiety to prevent the
sufferings of the distressed, will never be called in question. We may,
therefore, speedily expect, from their united efforts, a publication, which
will be read by most of our citizens with the greatest avidity; and which I
have no doubt will be productive of the highest utility.

The situation of our fellow citizens in Philadelphia, was not very different
from those of New York. What, therefore, might be useful to prevent the return
of the fever in one place, may be of equal utility in another. I shall,
therefore, lay before my readers the opinion of the academy of medicine of
Philadelphia addressed to the governor.

On the Origin and Means of preventing the return of the Yellow Fever.
SIR,
IN order to comply with your request to the academy of medicine, communicated
by Dr. Samuel Duffield, the consulting physician of the port, respecting the
means, of preventing the return of the epidemic fever which has lately
afflicted our city, the academy have conceived the history of its origin
necessarily connected with their answer.

We believe it was derived from the following sources:

1. The exhalations of the alleys, gutters, docks, and common sewers of the
city; and from stagnating water in its neighborhood.

2. The foul air discharged with the ballast of the ship Deborah, and the cargo
of the brig Mary: the former of which arrived from Hispaniola on the 18th of
July, and the latter on the 29th of the same month. We reject the opinion of an
imported human contagion in either of the above vessels. It has not been
asserted that any person died of the yellow fever on board the Mary, during her
voyage; and if it be said, that several persons died on board the Deborah of
that disease, on her passage to this city, we cannot admit that they
contaminated the timbers or contents of the ship in such a manner, as to spread
the disease to persons at several hundred feet distance from the wharf at which
she was moored. The improbability of this opinion will appear from two
considerations.

First -- The disease is not contagious in the West Indies; and rarely, if ever
so, in the United States in hot weather, at which time only it makes its first
appearance in our country. So general is this opinion, that some physicians
have unfortunately refused to admit the existence of the fever in its
commencement in our city, only because it was not contagious.

Second -- The disease was in no instance propagated by those persons who were
supposed to have derived it from human contagion, adhering to the timbers and
contents of the Deborah and Mary, and who died with it in parts of the city
remote from the influence of the foul air of those vessels.

It is said that the contagion of the yellow fever is not uniform in its
effects, it ought, at least, to be admitted, that it acts with most certainty
where it exists with most force; but a reverse of this took place in the
supposed origin of our late fever, from imported contagion. We are the more
determined in our opinion of the ^oul air of the Deborah and Mary being the
cause of many cases of our fever, from similar cases of fever having been often
produced from similar causes, instances of which were mentioned in our letter
to you last year.

In support of our opinion of the disease being deprived from the exhalations
of our city before enumerated, we shall mention the names of the following
persons, who had the fever before the arrival of the Deborah or Mary in our
port, viz. Benjamin Jones, from Berger's court, June 2d Mary Wrigglesworth,
near the corner of Walnut and Tenth streets, June 6th; Rebecca Trested, in
Front between Spruce and Union streets, June 11th; Eliza Curran, Fourth below
South street, 27th June; Mark Miller, Callowhill street, and Molly Zeller, Ra^^
street, July 2d; Miss Byrne, Spruce, between Second and Third streets, July
11th; Mr. Vannost, Shannon street wharves, July 12th. We observed, moreover,
and heard of a considerable number of persons who (...) the disease in the
western parts of the city, and in Southwark and the Northern Liberties, who had
not been exposed to contagion, nor breathed the air in the neighborhood of
Water-street for many weeks, and in some instances for several months before
they were attacked by that fever.

In addition to the arguments in favor of the domestic sources of the fever
that have been mentioned in our former letter, we shall add four more that we
think cannot be refuted.

1. The atmosphere of our city, during the prevalence of the fever, produced
sensations of pain or sickness in many people who came into it from the
country; the same atmosphere became the cause of the disease and death in
others who visited the city, and who carefully avoided lodging, or any
intercourse with persons infected by the fever.

2. The disease prevailed in many inland towns of the United States, which had
(...) intercourse with seaport towns in which it was epidemic. Those towns
were, in every instance we have heard of, situated near to putrid substances,
or stagnating water.

3. The disease was rarely contagious, even when it terminated in death, when
carried into the country, or into towns not exposed to putrid exhalations.

4. The general extinction of the disease by frost* clearly proves that it
exists chiefly in the atmosphere; and that it is not derived, in the first
instance, from human contagion; for frost, it is well known, does not act in
the autumnal months upon the bodies of the sick, nor upon their beds,
clothing, or any other supposed receptacle of contagion.

We wish to direct the attention of our fellow citizens to the history of the
causes and remedies of pestilential diseases in foreign countries: In the ages
of medical superstition, when those diseases were believed to be imported, they
nearly depopulated cities for many successive years. Frequent and accumulated
suffering at last begat wisdom. The causes of pestilence were discovered to
exist in all countries, and domestic remedies were applied to remove them. The
effect of this change in the opinion and conduct of the nations of Europe, has
been the almost general extirpation of malignant fevers from their cities and
seaports. We have many documents to prove that the recurrence of the yellow
fever has been prevented in the cities of Europe by cleanliness. It formerly
prevailed in Italy, Spain, France, Germany, Holland, and occasionally, in
Britain and Ireland, under the names of putrid, malignant, and bilious fevers,
also of the gall-sickness and of the black-fever. The last name was derived
from the black vomiting, which is so often the symptom of approaching death in
billious fevers.

We are the more confirmed in the opinion we have delivered, that the yellow
fever is a native disease of our country, by discovering that the same opinion
is held by most of the physicians and citizens of our sister states. We lament
the prevalence of an opinion, that the admission of truth upon this subject,
will injure the credit of our city. Truth, upon all subjects, is ultimately
friendly to general interest and happiness, while the remedies of the evils of
error, are always of a partial and transitory nature. We conceive that the
report of the existence of a nature so subtle as to elude the utmost force of
the health-laws, and the greatest vigilance of health-officers, will be much
more injurious to our city, than a belief of its being derived from causes
which are obvious to our senses, and which by active exertions might be easily
and certainly removed, without oppressing or injuring our commerce.

We shall repeat, in this place, the means recommended by us in our former
letter, with the addition of some others for preventing a return of the disease.

1. "Removing all those matters from our streets, gutters, cellars, gardens,
yards, stores, ponds, vaults, etc. which, by putrefaction in warm weather,
afford the most frequent cause of the disease in this country. For this
purpose, we recommend the appointment of a certain number of physicians, whose
business it shall be to inspect all such places in the city, the
northern-liberties, and Southwark, as contain any matters capable by
putrefaction, of producing the disease, and to have them removed.

2. "We earnestly recommend the frequent washing of all impure parts of the
city in warm and dry weather, by means of the pumps, until the water of the
river Schuylkill can be made to wash all the streets of the city: a measure
which we conceive promises to our citizens the most durable exemption from
billious fevers of all kinds, of domestic origin.

3. "To guard against the frequent source of yellow fever from the noxious air
in the holds of vessels, we recommend the unlading such vessels as contain
cargoes liable to putrefaction, and the discharging the ballast of all vessels
at a distance from the city, during the months of June, July, August,
September, and October. To prevent the generation of noxious air in the holds
of vessels, we conceive every vessel should be obliged by law to carry and use
a ventilator, and we recommend, in a particular manner, the one lately invented
by Mr. Benjamin Wynkoop. We believe this invention to be one of the most
important and useful that has been made in modern times, and that it is
calculated to prevent not only the decay of ships and cargoes, but a very
frequent source of pestilential diseases of all kinds in commercial cities."

4. The filling up, or cleaning the docks in such a manner, that no matters
capable of putrefaction, shall be exposed to the rays of the sun at low water.

5. The closing the common sewers, so as to admit water only, and the daily
removal of the filth of the city, destined to flow into them, by means of
covered carts or wagons made for that purpose.

6. The prevention of the filth of the city from being accumulated, and
stagnating in its neighborhood.

7. The prohibition of allies and narrow streets in the future improvement of
the city.

8. An alteration of the present health law, which, by detaining vessels with
perishable cargoes for ten days at the hospital, in hot weather, is calculated
to increase the foul air in their holds; and we recommend also, that no vessel,
owned by a citizen of Philadelphia, be permitted to leave or to enter our
ports, that is not provided with a ventilator.

We shall conclude our letter by deprecating, in the most solemn manner* the
continuance of a belief in the supposed importation of our fever, an opinion
which has led to the total negligence of the means of preventing its return;
also by humbly hoping, that a merciful Providence may not correct our ignorance
and prejudices by frequent returns of a calamity, which i^, five years swept
away ten thousand of our inhabitants, and which in a few years may, if not
obviated by the only proper remedies, (under the influence of the present
inflammatory constitution of the atmosphere) annihilate our city.

Signed by order of The academy of medicine of Philadelphia, PHILIP SING
PHYSIC, President. JOHN C. OTTO, Secretary.


DESULTORY OBSERVATIONS and REFLECTIONS.
THE following observation made by Mr. Charles Holt, in his account of the
yellow fever as it appeared at New London, in the fall of 1798, is equally
applicable to this and to every other city attacked with pestilence: "What
striking instances of the transitoriness of life does such a disease afford! We
see men exulting in the bloom of youth and prime of health and strength, in
three or four short days numbered with the dead. Our gayest companions, our
loveliest friends, in less than a week, are laid in the dust. When we are daily
witnessing these scenes around us, who can avoid reflecting often, and
feelingly, that, his turn may be next! yet the mind, when habituated to the
most afflictive and extraordinary events, becomes hardened, and views them with
unconcern and indifference. Disease, and death, the most dreadful accidents
that can afflict the human frame, when made familiar to the sight, cease to
inspire dread, and are ranked with the most common occurrences.

Upon the first appearance of the fever, many of our inhabitants had recourse
to some sort of supposed preventatives against infection. Thus, some chewed
garlic, others smoaked tobacco, and others hoped to avoid the disorder by
having recourse to smelling-bottles, handkerchiefs dipped in vinegar, camphor
bags, etc. so that few individuals could be seen in the streets, without one or
other of these applied to his nostrils. At last, however, experience had
proved, that these were inefficaciou^. A reliance on divine Providence
succeeded, and in the most terrible stages of the disorder, the citizens
discovered the most decent fortitude, and the greatest resignation. These
imaginary preventatives were therefore thrown aside.

It has often been said, that temperance was the best preservative against
infection. The observation, in general, is certainly just; but it may, and,
during the late calamity has, been carried too far. For my part, from what has
come under my own knowledge, I have no hesitation in asserting, that to
persons, who had been accustomed to live freely, nothing could be more
dangerous, than to become remarkably abstemious upon the appearance of this
disorder. Persons of the above description, should in my opinion, have
continued to live in their usual manner; by which means, they would have been
more likely to repel infection, or if infected, they would have more strength
to resist the attack. But whilst I consider abstinence in such a situation, as
being highly improper, a state of intemperance is certainly more so, for were
it necessary, I could mention the names of several individuals, who, whilst in
a state of intoxication, were attacked with the fever, and in two days after,
were tenants of the grave. The fate of such people might be pronounced almost
with certainty: they were seized with symptoms of a peculiarly malignant
nature, and their death seemed unavoidable.

Mr. Carey, in his account of the Yellow Fever in Philadelphia, in the year
1793, mentions some distressing scenes which took place, in that city, in
consequence of some women in labor, being greatly at a loss for want of
assistance. Difficulties of the same sort, occurred in New York, during the
sickness of 1798, but by no means in the same degree. There were however
several instances of distress, in this particular, of which I shall only select
one. My wife was taken in labor on the 20th Sept. about 9 in the evening. I
applied to many Doctors and Midwives. Some were really sick; some pretended to
be so, and others heartily told me, that in consequence of the pestilence,
which prevailed in my vicinity, they would on no account attend. At five in the
ensuing morning, I applied to Mrs. Bunting, a midwife at Deans dock Greenwich
Street, who immediately came with me. I would not have mentioned this
circumstance; but that it afterward came to my knowledge, that Mrs. Bunting,
in cases where the disorder raged with the utmost malignity, never hesitated to
attend any persons in that situation, and that too in many cases where she must
have been convinced, she would never receive any emolument. Such instances of
disinterested philanthropy, ought not, in a publication of this sort to be
omitted. They do honor to human nature.

No disease has, perhaps, on any previous occasion been more fatal to
physicians, than that with which we were lately afflicted: for during its
prevalence, exclusive of medical students, no less than sixteen physicians have
been swept off, in discharging the perilous duties of their profession. These
are Doctors Andrews, Brooks, D. Chickering, Dingley, Peter Faugeres, John B.
Hicks, John B. Jones, Melchen Caldwell, Lamb, Millegan, J. B. Scandella, Elihu
H. Smith, Teller, Tredwell, Varick, and Young. As all these gentlemen fell
sacrifices to their endeavors to relieve the distressed, it might appear
invidious, were I to point out those, who in my opinion were most useful and
eminent in their profession. I shall therefore only mention the case of J. B.
Scandella, who, being a foreigner of distinguished literary abilities, and
possessed of the most philanthropic principles, along with the others, fell a
sacrifice to his humanity. This gentleman was a native of Venice, and descended
of one of the most noble families in that country. He was, however, more
distinguished by the spelndour of his talents, than by the nobility of his
birth. A liberal curiosity had led him to this country, when he had just
finished his researches, and was preparing to embark for Europe, when motives
of humanity led him back to Philadelphia, in the height of the late Epidemic.
From thence he returned in six days, having previously contracted that fatal
disease, of which he expired, after a short, though very painful illness, in
the bloom of his age, and the vigor of his faculties. The great attention
which was paid to this unfortunate stranger, by Dr. Elihu H. Smith, was
likewise in all probability, the immediate cause of his death.

It is very remarkable, that although, there were, during the time of this
pestilence, about 800 people in the Alms House, no more than 24 died in all,
and of these, only 7 of the disorder. It is likewise certain that these 7,
caught the pistemper in the city, and that, in no instance, contagion was
communicated from one to another in that building. This uncommon healthiness in
a place, where there were so many people together, may, in all probability be
attributed to its airy situation, the spaciousness of the rooms, the remarkable
cleanliness insisted upon by the manager Mr. Dodge, and the liberal use of lime.

It has been remarked, that during the several visitations of yellow fever,
with which different cities of the United States have been afflicted, that more
men than women have died of the disorder, in the proportion in general of about
four to three; but during the pestilence of last autumn, in this city, the
proportion of the men who were cut off was still greater; there being very
nearly about two men for one woman. This disproportion, however, of the
fatality to the two sexes, need not appear strange, when we consider that men,
by the nature of their employment, are more exposed to infection than women.
The man having occasion to bustle about from one place to another, whilst the
woman's particular province is the superintendance of the family concerns.

It has been formerly asserted by several physicians of eminence, that the
blacks were much less subject to the ravages of the Yellow Fever, than the
whites. This opinion was no doubt productive of considerable utility to the
citizens of Philadelphia, during their affliction of the year 1793, as the
people of color were almost exclusively the only persons, who would venture to
nurse the sick. The idea, however, that they ran no risque of receiving
infection appeared fallacious, as many of them died in that city* during the
time of that sickness. I may add, that during our late calamity, I have every
reason to believe that the fatality was fully as great amongst the blacks, as
the whites in proportion to their numbers. This, however, may not appear to a
number of my readers, when they find in my list containing the number of
persons interred in each of the burying grounds of this city, that I have only
mentioned 41 negroes. It ought therefore to be observed, that exclusive of
these 41 who were buried in what is called the Negroes Burying Ground, there
were no doubt, six times that number buried in the Potter's field, at Bellevue,
and in some of the grave yards of this city.

Some extracts of letters from Philadelphia, published in our newspapers in
this city, announce, that there are still several cases of yellow fever amongst
them. There are also reports to the same purpose with respect to its existence
amongst us, Jan. 16th; but upon the most particular enquiry of a number of
respectable Physicians, and others, I cannot find a single instance of its
having been seen here for these several weeks past: And I am almost convinced,
that the situation of the Philadelphians is as healthy at present as ours.

Many publications have been issued on the subject of the Yellow Fever, by
gentlemen of literary talents. I have it from good authority, that another will
soon make its appearance, written by Doctor Hitchcock.

The POOR, AND THE MANNER IN WHICH THEY WERE RELIEVED, In the City, at
Bellevue, and in the Debtors Appartment.
IN a calamity so terrible and unexpected, the distress of of the laboring
poor were unavoidably great. The general stagnation of business had deprived
them of their ordinary means of support and rendered them unable to remove
where employment and subsistence might be had. To add to their difficulties,
their employers, and more affluent acquaintances, who might have been disposed
to relieve their wants, had in general fled.

But these were not the only objects of commiseration. Many, who had supported
themselves and families in an easy, though not affluent manner, were from the
impossibility of earning any thing, the difficulty of recovering their little
debts and the heavy expenses incident to a state of sickness, reduced to the
most extreme distress, whilst others, in opulent circumstances, having remained
in the city, after their connexio^s had removed, being suddenly seized with the
prevailing disorder, were le^t helpless by themselves, without a friend to
console them, a physician to prescribe for them or a nurse to administer the
prescription.

The Health Commissioners, appointed by authority of the State Legislature, had
hitherto exerted their utmost endeavors to alleviate the various afflictions
of the distressed, but the Common Council being informed that the number of
sick had become so great and were still increasing, that the Commissioners
could not take care of them all, that the accommodations at Bellevue were
insufficient and that many of the poor sick were so circumstanced as to render
a removal there both inconvenient and improper, on the 10th September appointed
Gabriel Furman; John B. Coals, Theophilus Beekman, Jacob de la Montagnie and
Richard Furman, Esqrs. five of the Aldermen, together with John Bogert and
Philip I. Arcularius Esqrs. two Assistant Aldermen, a committee of their own
board denominated the Health Committee of the City of New York, "with full
powers to make such other buildings for the sick at Bellevue, as they, with the
advice of the Commissioners of the Health-Office might think necessary; and to
take into their charge and furnish with medical aid, and every necessary, all
such of the sick poor as could not be accommodated at Bellevue, or the
situation of whose persons or families were such as to render their removal to
Bellevue improper or inconvenient."

The gentlemen so appointed, totally disregarding their own preservation, and
only intent on arresting the progress of the disorder and relieving the
distressed, with a magnanimity and patriotism meriting the highest eulogiums,
readily stepped forth and by their generous, steadfast and benevolent exertions,
undoubtedly saved many of their fellow citizens from penury, disease and death.
As soon as they accepted the appointment to this arduous undertaking, they
immediately proceeded to business and appointed Alderman Gabriel Furman their
chairman, a gentleman, who together with Alderman Beekman had been on the
committee for the relief of the sick and indigent in the years 1793 and 1794,
and also during the pestilential disorder of 1795. I have already observed,
that one of the objects for which the committee was appointed was to make such
further buildings and accommodations for the sick at Bellevue as they with the
advice of the Commissioners of the Health-Office might think necessary. They
accordingly gave orders for the erection of two buildings, one of which should
be sixty feet in length by twenty in breadth, for the accommodation of the
sick, and another of the same extent, but two stories in height, for the
reception of the convalescents; and such was the dispatch of the workmen
employed in that business, that both were completed in about eight days.

Previous to this the sick, the convalescent and the dying were all crowded
together, and ^^e apartments were by no means sufficient for the number of the
diseased; but by this humane attention, the convalescents were separated from
the sick, and from that time the number of those who recovered at that hospital
was much greater in proportion than it had been before. There was likewise
other circumstances which no doubt greatly contributed to (...) happy change.
The attendants and nurses, at first appointed for the care of the sick, were in
general persons of rather indifferent character, and of course that attention
was not paid to the sick which the Commissioners could have wished. The truth
is that at the commencement of this melancholy business, fear pervaded the
stoutest heart and terror was depicted in the countenances of most people;
hence many persons of irreproachable character and humane dispositions, who in
other circumstances would have been very willing to assist their fellow
creatures, were deterred from entering on so perilous an undertaking. The
Health Commissioners, therefore, to whom the care of this Hospital was
committed, had no choice. Nurses and attendants must be had, and as they could
not procure the most proper persons, they were obliged to be contented with
such as they could obtain.

The case, however, was now changed. People began to recover from the panic
with which they had been struck, and notwithstanding every discouraging
circumstance, many were found whose humanity would not permit them to withhold
from their fellow creatures that assistance which they in a similar situation
had a right to expect; nurses of good character were accordingly found, and the
former improper persons were dismissed. Doctor Bayley, the Health-Officer,
whose character as a physician is too well known to require any panegyric,
aided by two assistants, viz. Doctor Douglass and Doctor Gregory, attended on
the spot, and in a short time the greatest order and regularity was introduced;
the patients were treated with the utmost care and tenderness; the nurses and
attendants discharged their respective duties with fidelity; and Bellevue
instead of being considered as the antichamber of the grave, began to be
viewed, by many of the afflicted as a place where they stood a greater chance
of recovery than any where else.

That cleanliness is not only very conducive to health, but that it contributes
greatly to the removal of disorder from those who are afflicted, and also very
much tends to prevent the spreading of infection amongst their attendants will
scarcely be denied. The experience of every one who has been conversant amongst
those afflicted with pestilential disorders, in every age and in every country
abundantly confirms this fact; and surely this excellent preservative and
remedy was never better observed than here.

Upon the commissioners taking possession of this place, the walls, timber, and
every part both inside and outside were whitewashed, and the practice of
whitewashing the inside every week, ten days or fortnight, according to the
season of the year, and number of sick, was steadily pursued since its first
establishment. Another practice never omitted was, that if at any time in the
course of a person's being confined with fever, his bed, shirt or linen were
stained or soiled by vomiting or otherwise, they were immediately removed and
replaced with clean ones; besides the linen and bed clothes of the sick were
usually changed every day or two, if even those extraordinary circumstances did
not occur. These means, as a system of cleanliness, were steadily adhered to by
the attendants at this Hospital.

The whole number of persons admitted from August 1st to 3d. November, since
which time none have been received, was three hundred and eighty-nine, of whom
two hundred and eighty-nine were from the city and one hundred seamen; of the
former one hundred and seventy two died and one hundred and seventeen were
discharged. The latter were more fortunate, for of them only thirty-three died
and the other sixty-seven were discharged.

From the above statement, which may be depended upon as correct, the following
question naturally occurs. How came it that a much greater proportion of seamen
recovered at this Hospital, than of those sent thither from the city? The
answer is this. The seamen were in general sent therein the first stage of the
disorder, whereas many of our citizens from the fears which they entertained of
that Hospital, could not be prevailed upon to be removed thither till they were
past recovery. In confirmation of this I may add that of a good many people
whom I myself have seen previous to their being carried thither, by far the
greater part of those who were removed on the first attack recovered, whereas
to those who remained till the disorder had acquired a greater degree of
malignancy little else was to be expected but death. Indeed several died within
a few hours after their entrance in the Hospital and more than a third in two
days. There is one thing very remarkable with respect to the attendants at this
Hospital, which ought not to be omitted. Their situation to most people must no
doubt have appeared peculiarly dangerous, as they were literally surrounded
with pestilence. It so happened, however, that neither nurses, nor washerwomen
caught the infection. The boatmen too belonging to the Health-Office, who
entered the Hospital at all times and were not only engaged in bringing the
sick from the city and shipping, but likewise in removing them from place to
place, enjoyed a state of perfect health; and of those persons who accompanied
their friends and relatives, stayed with them and nursed them, there is not a
single instance of an individual being infected. In short, Dr. Douglass was the
only person residing there who was seized with fever; but he had been in the
habit of occasionally visiting his friends in the city, and three days previous
to his being taken ill, had slept in a house the vicinity of which was highly
infected; and it is more than probable that his sickness was occasioned by that
cause.

From the above, and many other facts which might be mentioned, it amounts to a
certainty that this fever will not spread in a pure air. For this reason the
inhabitants of the country have little or no reason of being afraid to receive
the sick who remove from town, nor of those who are taken ill with fever after
leaving the city* for, as is observed by Mr. Noah Webster, junior, in his
concluding observations to a collection of papers on the subject of bilious
fevers, published in the year 1796. "The panic that seized the whole continent,
when the disease in Philadelphia, is now found to have been needless and
without just cause; and it is presumed, that such inhuman caution and barbarous
measures as were adopted on that occasion, will never again disgrace our
country."

Having thus given an account of the Hospital at Bellevue, and of the treatment
of the sick, I now proceed* to point out the manner of administering relief to
such sick persons as could not be accommodated there, or the situation of whose
persons or families rendered their removal improper or inconvenient.

With respect to accommodations there was no doubt a considerable difficulty
previous to the erection of the two additional buildings which I have already
mentioned; but these being completed, that difficulty was entirely removed.

When individuals, who had no families were seized with the disorder, and were
incapable of providing for themselves the necessary relief, it was the wish of
the committee that they should be removed to Bellevue as speedy as possible. By
which means the progress of the disorder might be arrested, whilst the chance
of their recovery was as great at least if not greater than if they had
remained in the city. But to separate children from their parents, husbands
from their wives, or wives from their husbands, or in short to have removed
contrary to their inclinations, a single individual from any family, where
perhaps they had resolved to remain by each other, so the last extremity, would
have been an act of the greatest inhumanity. For such, therefore, it was
necessary that provision should be made by the committee.

They accordingly being sensible of the miserable situation to which the poor
must be reduced by the suspension of all business and the distress they must
suffer when attacked by disease, devoted their sole and undivided attention to
their relief.

For this purpose they advertised in the public prints, that the more easily
and effectually to answer the end of their benevolent appointment, they would
daily attend at the Almshouse from 9 to 1 and from 3 to 6 afternoon, to
receive the applications of the sick, the widow and orphan, or their friends in
their behalf, and to grant such relief as the liberality of the Common Council
of the city had directed.

The Common Council, at an early period of the disorder, had borrowed a sum of
money to be appropriated toward the above benevolent purpose, and about the
latter end of September, Mr. John Murray, junior, a respectable merchant of
this city, generously offered to the Committee to guarantee a farther loan of
ten thousand dollars, if it should be wanted; but the charitable donations
received from different parts of this state, from New Jersey and Connecticut;
and also from many of our own wealthy citizens rendered this measure
unnecessary. By their beneficence and humanity the Committee were enabled to
afford to the necessitous a considerable degree of comfort, of which they would
otherwise have been deprived. Liberal donations of money, produce, etc. (a list
of which is annexed) were daily received and distributed as each particular
case seemed to require.

As during the ravages of this dreadful disorder, medical aid was an object of
the first concern, it may not be improper to mention the manner in which the
poor were accommodated in this respect. Early in the sickness many of our most
eminent physicians had le^t the city, and several of those who remained had
paid the last debt to nature. Hence the business of practitioners was greatly
increased, and the situation of the indigent became peculiarly distressing. The
committee, therefore, employed three physicians to administer to the relief of
such sick as unfortunately became objects of their appointment, viz. Doctors
Hugh M'Lean, Daniel M. Hitchcock, and Adolphus C. L^nt.

The extreme assiduity and humanity which these gentlemen displayed in the
discharge of their duty, is well known to the afflicted poor; and places their
conduct in such a point of view as to be far above any panegyric of mine. To no
person could their diligence be better known than to me, and in justice to them
I think it my duty to declare that notwithstanding the great fatigue and danger
to which they were continually exposed, they with the greatest alacrity daily
sustained the perilous task of visiting and administering the necessary
medicine to hundreds of their afflicted fellow creatures. From morning to night
they were incessantly engaged; nor did any of them, when called upon to see a
patient, even at the most unseasonable hours, hesitate a moment to wait upon
them, let the disorder be ever so malignant. Thanks to heaven their valuable
lives are spared, and long, very long, may they live in the grateful
remembrance of their fellow citizens. How many owe their safety to their skill
and attention it is not easy to determine; but this far may be safely asserted,
that there are many now in good health, who but for their skill and attention
would have been tenants of the grave. But had the attention of the committee
been confined to procuring physicians for the sick, it would have been
productive of little good, for I have known many cases where the husband and
wife with some others of the family were so grievously afflicted as to be
incapable of furnishing each other even with a cup of water.

For such persons nurses were therefore to be provided at the public expense;
and here the same difficulty at first occurred in procuring good ones as at
Bellevue. This, however, was soon got over, as the committee having advertised
that nurses of good character were wanted, to whom generous wages would be
paid, a sufficient number of decent people readily offered their service. Some
indeed were found to act improperly; but when the case was represented to the
Committee, they were dismissed and others substituted in their stead.

But besides procuring nurses for the relief of the poor, the committee were
frequently under the necessity of geting them for some of those in affluent
circumstances, whose friends had probably ^led, or who, if they remained, knew
not to whom they should apply for the necessary help. To these, likewise, the
committee directed their attention.

Before I quit this article, it may not be improper to lay before my readers
the situation of the City Dispensary during this time of general calamity. The
following is An exact return of patients admitted at that humane institution,
from the 1st of August to the 29th November, 1798.
Admitted 418 Cured 340 Died 23 Relieved 4 Removed to Bellevue 16 Removed to
New York Hospital 10 Removed to Almshouse 2 Eloped 3 Under cure November 20 20
Total 418 Of the above number 270 were ill with the Yellow Fever, of which the
following is an accurate return: --
Admitted 270 Cured 235 Died 17 Removed to Bellevue for want of convenience at
their own dwellings. 16 Eloped 2 Total 270

The trustees of the Dispensary in their report on this interesting subject,
make the following very judicious remark, "The great proportion of cases of the
Yellow Fever in this statement, whilst it affords the most undeniable evidence
of the utility of the institution, is also an honorable proof of the talents
and assiduity of their physician Doctor Hugh M'Lean, more especially when it is
considered that the objects consisted of the poorest and most destitute class
of citizens."

As the disorder continued to make farther progress, the committee found the
calls on their humanity daily increase.

The indigent sick were indeed supplied with medical aid and nurses; but it was
necessary that provision should be made for their maintenance, and also for a
number of families, the heads of which not being able to find any employment,
were in the greatest distress.

With a view to relieve such persons, the committee established three
repositories and cook shops, one at Cliff-street, another at No. 159
Chatham-street and the third ^t the head of Division-street, from whence such
indigent and distressed sick, as were deprived of the means of providing for
themselves, were liberally supplied with soups, boiled meat, bread, candles,
and other proper and necessary articles suitable to their situation.

Perhaps, in such a calamity, no establishments could have been devised of more
general utility than these cook houses; the situation of many of the sick being
such, as would not admit of their nurses leaving them to dress the necessary
provisions; to which it may be added, that if money had been given to some of
them for the purchase of necessaries, it would have very probably been expended
for articles, which, instead of contributing to the relief of the sick, might
have been highly detrimental, or it might have been appropriated to their own
use. I may likewise observe, that if pecuniary aid had been been afforded to
some of the more thoughtless and dissipated poor, they would very probably have
spent it, in procuring for themselves a temporary gratification, whilst their
starving families remained neglected.

In confirmation of this, I shall adduce one instance out of a few others, of a
similar nature which came under my own observation. The wi^e of a person whom I
had occasion to see, in the discharge of my duty, was dangerously ill of the
prevailing fever. She lay in a damp cellar and was destitute of every necessary
and comfort. Of money entrusted to me by the committee for the relief of the
distressed, I therefore left with the husband two dollars, one of which I
wished to be appropriated to the purchase of half a load of wood, and the other
for such little articles as might be immediately necessary for his wife and
child. I called again at the house a few hours after, but instead of finding
the money applied as I expected, I found the man in a state of intoxication,
and totally regardless and insensible of the situation of his afflicted wife,
who was then in the agonies of death. She died soon after; the funeral was
conducted by strangers, by whom likewise their child about six years of age,
was carried to the Almshouse, whilst the unhappy husband remained in a state
of insensibility, knowing or caring very little about what had happened.

I am happy, however, in observing, that such remarks must be understood as
applying to very few, for almost in every instance, parents and children;
husbands and wives, and in short all those living in the same family were
disposed to contribute to the very utmost in their power, toward the relief of
their afflicted relatives.

The number of those, who received their daily subsistence from these cook
houses, during the greatest part of the calamity, amounted to between 1600 and
2000 persons, of whom many were helpless sick, widows and orphans; whilst eight
hundred people were, at the same time, supported in the Almshouse, out of
funds provided by law.

But the ample donations and very liberal contributions, which as I have
already observed, were collected in many places, for our relief, whilst it
reflected the highest honor, on the donors, and demanded our warmest
gratitude, also enabled the committee to relieve many of the distressed in a
different manner.

The cook-houses were certainly highly useful; but there were many sick and
indigent, who lived at a considerable distance from either of them, to whom it
would have been very inconvenient to have procured from thence the necessary
provisions* and the circumstances of others seemed likewise to require
assistance of a different nature*

The produce which came from various parts of the country for the relief of the
indigent, except what was sent to the cook-houses by order of the committee,
was deposited in a store opposite the Almshouse; from whence upwards of five
hundred families were from time to time relieved by donations in necessaries,
such as beef, pork, mutton, flour, fowls, indian meal, potatoes, turnips, etc.
For the relief of these, the committee likewise expended a great deal of money,
by giving them occasionally such small sums as the situation of their families
seemed to require; and several widows, who upon the death of their husbands,
wished to remove to that place in the country where their relatives and friends
resided; being destitute of the means of carrying themselves and children
thither, were also assisted.

I have already mentioned, that the committee when first organized, had
advertised, that they would meet daily at the Almshouse, from 9 to 1, and 3 to
6, for the purpose of attending to the benevolent object of their appointment;
but, in a short time the applications* of the sick and indigent became so
exceedingly numerous, that they were not able, during these hours, to determine
on all their requests. They, therefore, assembled during the greatest part of
this awful visitation at about eight in the morning, and continued their
sitting, till seven, and sometimes eight, in the evening, allowing themselves
only a bare half hour for dinner. For my part, when I think of the extreme
fatigue and danger which these gentlemen encountered, and the constant risque
they ran of catching infection, many of those individuals who came thither to
solicit assistance, having ^ever upon them, I consider their preservation, if
not miraculous, at least highly providential. Two of them, indeed, viz.
Alderman Gabriel Furman and Alderman Theophilus Beekman, as also our worthy
Mayor, whose attention to the duties of his office during this distressing
period, is above all praise, were attacked by the pestilence, but, thanks to
the Almighty, they soon recovered, and regardless of danger, immediately
repaired to their post, and along with their colleagues went through the
fatiguing business of their appointment with alacrity to the last.

It need scarcely be observed, that the task of the committee in administering
relief, in such a situation, would in many cases be delicate, embarrassing and
disagreeable; for had they given indiscriminately to every person who solicited
aid, liberal as the contributions of our fellow citizens were, they would have
been productive of little utility to those who were really in need.

The donations were certainly given for the relief of the indigent sick, and
for widows and orphans of this description; but such was the meanness of some
possessed of considerable property, and even proprietors of houses, that they
too became applicants for part of a fund exclusively intended for the relief of
the helpless.

It was fortunate that every individual of the Committee were either natives of
this city, or at least had a long time resided in it. They were, of course,
generally qualified to judge how far the tales of woe related by many of the
applicants for charity were true. There were, however, numbers with whom they
could not ^e acquainted, particularly foreigners, who had only for a short time
resided in this country.

To ascertain the truth of their complaints, when they appeared doubtful, the
Committee had several attendants, part of whose business it was to repair to
the respective residences of such applicants, to enquire into their
circumstances and to report accordingly. It was, likewise, the duty of these
persons to visit the indigent sick, to examine into their situations, to
represent their cases, to relieve their immediate wants out of money entrusted
to them for that purpose, and in short to do every thing which they might be
directed by the Committee, or their own prudence might suggest, toward the
mitigation of the sufferings of individuals, or to stop the progress of the
deadly pestilence.

The situation of these men was, no doubt, perilous in the extreme; but such
was the goodness of Divine Providence, that out of eleven so employed by the
Health Committee and the Health Commissioners, one only lost his life, viz. Mr.
Wynant Mitchell, whose character can be summed up in a very few words. He was
an industrious, benevolent and honest man, and has left a wife and three
children to lament his loss. Mr. Munmouth Purdy, who volunteered in the same
service likewise fell a victim of his philanthropy.

Having thus described the manner in which ^he poor were relieved throughout
the city, it may not be improper to direct the attention of my readers to the
situation of the poor prisoners in the Debtor's Apartment, or what is commonly
called the New Gaol. The disorder, which prevailed more or less, in the city,
likewise made its appearance here: It, however, in a short time entirely
subsided, owing in a great measure to the indefatigable industry of Mr. William
W. Parker, the jailor, in cleaning and washing the different apartments, by
which means the farther spreading of the infection was prevented.

The situation of the debtors at the commencement of the general calamity
afforded a picture of distress and horror scarcely equalled by any thing we
have hitherto seen represented. Their number at first amounted to 163 and
whilst others were enjoying advantages resulting from the wholesome laws of the
state, these individuals were pent up in the midst of pestilence, deprived of
the privilege of seeking their self preservation, exposed to the unsatiated
revenge of individuals, and seemed in every respect delivered up as victims to
the malignancy of the common enemy.

But the danger of infection was not the only evil to which these unfortunate
men were exposed; for it is well known that though a person confined for crimes
is supported by the state, a poor debtor has no other dependence than on the
benevolence of his friends and the charity of the Humane Society: But upon the
approach of this general distress, many of their friends, who would have
willingly assisted them had fled, others were sick, and severals no doubt so
reduced by the general calamity as to be scarcely capable of supporting
themselves. In this situation, therefore, not only pestilence, with scarcely a
probable chance of escape, but also famine stared them in the face.

Their case was represented to the Committee by Mr. Parker, and they were
immediately supplied with plenty of provisions; and this was from time to time
repeated during the existence of the fever, as often as their necessities
seemed to require.

But the prisoners were indebted to Mr. Parker for exertions of a different
nature. By his personal assiduities -- by his feeling representations to humane
creditors, the number of the prisoners, which, as I have already mentioned,
amounted at first to 163, were toward the close of the disorder reduced to 39,
by which means their numbers were lessened and consequently the danger. Nor was
his benevolence confined to personal exertions; for he not only in most
instances sacrificed his own exertions to the general good, by relinquishing
his fees, which were his chief support, but in several instances he did the
duty of others by contributing himself toward the payment of lawyers fees,
where they only detained the poor.

Such render treatment, such humane care of indigent and afflicted prisoners
cannot be too highly applauded, and whilst it is the lot of unfortunate
individuals to be imprisoned for debt, it must be a great consolation to them
to be placed under the care of a man possessed of so much humanity as Mr.
Parker. Certainly such conduct ought to be mentioned not only as a tribute of
applause; but as a stimulus to others who may be similarly situated, to do the
same. In a word, Mr. Parker's treatment of his prisoners, when known, will ever
meet with the approbation of all good citizens. Part of this, with respect to
Mr. Parker's humanity, appeared in some of our public prints under a^^nonymous
signature; but from such a source nothing can be averred with certainty. It,
however, gives me pleasure to inform my readers, that from what I have learnt
from gentlemen of veracity, who, during part of this awful period were
prisoners, no man could have acted better than Mr. Parker in such a situation.


I shall now conclude this article, with respect to the poor, by a few general
observations. During the whole of this calamitous period, such was the
extraordinary liberality of our fellow citizens in granting donations; and such
the unremitting attention of the Committee in distributing them, that
notwithstanding the distressed were by far more numerous than at any previous
period in this city; yet there was no individual at a loss for the necessaries
of life, for medical aid, or for nurses, provided the case was made known to
the Committee, who not only fat with unwearied patience from morning to night
to listen to the incessant applications of hundreds; but as has been already
observed, had people employed to seek out for objects of distress.

There is one class of distressed objects, whom, as I omitted to mention in the
preceding pages it may not be improper to introduce here, viz. the children of
necessitous persons, whose parents were cut off by death. Mr. Matthew Carey, in
his history of the Malignant Fever prevalent in Philadelphia in the year 1793,
observes, that the Bettering-House (Almshouse) there, in which such helpless
objects had been usually placed, was barred against them; "Many of these little
innocents (says he) were actually suffering for want of even common
necessaries. The death of their parents and protectors, which should have been
the strongest recommendation to public charity, was the very reason of their
distress, and of their being shunned as a pestilence. The case, however, was
widely different with us; for no sooner had the parents of these little ones
expired, than if they were not taken care of by some of their friends or
relations, there was always some persons of humanity who would represent their
ca^e to the Committee, by whose orders they were immediately removed to a part
in the Almshouse appropriated to their reception.

By the above remark, however, I would by no means wish to be understood as
throwing any reflection against the citizens of Philadelphia for being
deficient in point of humanity. On the contrary, many of the inhabitants
displayed a benevolence and philanthropy which in so awful a period may be
equalled, but never can be surpassed. But the Yellow Fever was at that time a
new disorder, or at least little known in the United States: and terrific as it
really was, both in its appearance and effects, it still excited more terror
than was necessary or just. Hence in many cases humanity, friendship, parental
and filial affection were all swallowed up in a regard to self preservation;
and this will ever be the case in any country when an all devouring pestilence
makes its first appearance. But in the last autumn the disorder was better
known* as it had repeatedly visited some of our most populous cities, and
experience had sufficiently evinced, that such persons as confined themselves
to their houses, run little, if any greater risque of infection than those who
were constantly conversant amongst the sick. Hence, if it should be the Divine
pleasure, that we should again be visited either here or in any other place of
the United States, by this awful disorder, its horrors will, in all
probability, be greatly alleviated, as few will be found so timorous as to be
unwilling to discharge the duties of humanity to the distressed.

Before I conclude this article, I cannot help taking notice of the distress in
which some poor people were involved in consequence of the rigid manner in
which some unfeeling landlords have exacted their rents. Forgetful that their
poor tenants had been sick, that they had large families and that they had been
able to earn nothing during a calamitous season of three months, they
notwithstanding insisted on the immediate payment of the original stipulated
bargain: In consequence of which, the little property which these poor people
possessed were sold by the constable at vendu^, and they exposed in consequence
thereof to the utmost distress. It was natural in this time of general calamity
for every unfortunate individual to look up to the committee for relief; the
donations, were intended for the immediate exigence of the indigent and sick,
not for the payment of house-rent; for, liberal as they were, had the committee
thought proper to appropriate them in this manner, they would have speedily
been absorbed in such a manner as to fill the pockets of the rich, whilst the
poor would have remained in the same state of misery and distress.

But whilst some landlords acted with the utmost rapacity, the conduct of many
was such as reflects the greatest honor upon their characters. Of these some
forgave the rent for one quarter altogether; and others have considerably
indulged their tenants by procrastinating the payment till such time as they
should find it convenient. Men of this last description have the ineffable
satisfaction of having contributed to the relief of the distressed, whilst the
former being actuated by an insatiable desire of gain, seek only for happiness
in their gold, which, if they had not been determined to be blind, they could
have easily seen, would contribute very little toward relieving them from the
yellow fever or any other pestilential disorder.

DONATIONS.
Sept. 25. RECEIVED from Walter Bowne, dols. 10 28. A Friend at Albany by the
Mayor, 50 Bartholomew Cowan, 10 29. James Van Dyk, sen. 10 30. Mr. Henry
Vanvalin, (...) dols. 10 October 1. From Mr. G. G. Bo^ett, 12 bottles syrup of
vinegar, and 2 do. vinegar of four thieves. From Mr. Delaunier, 6 bottles syrup
of vinegar and 6 do. rasberry vinegar and 4 pots of West India sweet meats.
From Mr. Hendrick Maston, of Poughkeepsie, 1 lamb and 6 fowls. From a Gentleman
of this city, Cash dols. 50 2. Garret Vanhorn, 10 John Segar, 5 Boonen Graves,
by Ald. Coals, 100 Isaac Torboss, 1 barrel superfine ^lour. 3. John Jacob
Lansing, dols. 25 A Friend, directed to Ald. G. Furman, 30 Mr. John M'Vickar,
100 Mr. Thomas Lowndes, 40 loaves of bread. The Inhabitants of the town of
West-Chester, by Thomas Franklin and Doctor Seaman, a cart load of herbs and
roots. Captain Obadiah Cougar, dols. 10 A. B. by the hands of Mr. John Bogert,
20 Mr. Samuel Campbell, 4 large bag of potatoes, beets, etc. Mr. Joseph Rose, 1
hogshead of Molasses. 4 Messieurs M'Comb, by Ald. I. Bogart, dols. 20. The Rev.
J. H. Livingston, 50 bushels of potatoes, 1 ca^t load of turnips, cabbages and
other vegetables. October. 4. Capt. Thomas Smith, 51 heads of cabbages, 1 basket
of carrots, 2 bushels turnips, raddishes, thyme, etc. Mr. Isaac Kibbe, by R.
Underhill, 1 bbl. pork. 5. Mr. George Gosman, 90 fowls, 11 ducks, 20 lb. of
butter, and dols 30. A Citizen A. K. by M. B. to Alderman Beekman. dols. 20. A
widow, by Aldr. De la Montanye, dols. 5. Mr. George Lindsay. dols. 30. Mr. John
P. Room, by G. Furman, dols. 10. Isaac L. Kipp. by do. dols. 20. The
inhabitants of the town of Bergen by the Rev. John Cornelison 8 sheep, 921
cabbages, 28 bags and 1 cart load of potatoes, 9 bags and 1 cart load of
apples, 21 fowls, 2 hams, 4 pieces of pork, 4 bags of flour, 10 lb. of butter,
2 loads of pumpkins and dol. 1. A Lady by Mr. J. Bogert. dols. 8 6. Mr. Ephraim
Heart, by G. Furman, dols. 25. Messrs. Thomas Pearsall and Son. dols. 100. Mr.
Andrew Morris, by G. Furman. dols. 50. Mr. Alex^. M'Donald by I. Bogert, dols.
10. A Friend, by Ald. I. Bogert, dols. 10 Mr. Huybert Van Wagenen, dols. 50.
Messrs. David Hunt, and John Holdron, at Powles hook ferry, 80 fowls. Mr.
Dominick Lynch, 1 ox, 2 pigs, 2 lambs, and 16 bushels potatoes. J. K. B. sent
to the alms house, 44 fowls. The inhabitants of Bergen point by Mr. C.
Reuell^onmes 20 bushels of potatoes, about 50 cabbages, some carrots and
pumpkins. The inhabitants of the town of Rahway by Mr. William Shotwell 3
barrels, and 1 cwt. Indian meal, 3 do. rye meal, 23 sheep and lambs, 366 fowls,
58 and a half bushels of apples, 20 ducks, 20 pumpkins, 1 barrel of vinegar,
163 bushels potatoes, 2 barrels corn, some beets, straw and catnip. The
Inhabitants of the town of Flushing, by Messieurs Effingham Embree and Abraham
October. 6. Franklin, 26 sheep, 78 fowls, 37 bushels of potatoes, 16 bbls. Indian
meal, 5 do flour, a quantity of vegetables, straw, catnip and etc. also, the
following, directed to the Mayor, 45 sheep, 74 bush. potatoes, 87 fowls, 21
bls. Indian meal, 8 barrels rye meal, 4 barrels of flour, 4 barrels apples and
85 cabbages. 8. Flaman Ball, Esquire. by the Mayor, dols. 10 Mr. William Williams,
by G. Furman, 30 The Congregation and Inhabitants at the Scotch Plains, Essex
county, state of New Jersey, by the Rev. Mr. Vanhorn and Jedediah Swan, Esquire. 3
barrels of Indian meal, 43 bushels of potatoes, 6 sheep and lambs, 38 fowls, 18
cabbages* ^ cwt. rye meal, 7 lb. pork, and 10 pumpkins. The Inhabitants of the
city of Albany, part of a donation advised of before 7 doz. bottles of castor
oil, by Mr. Thomas Eddy. 84 barrels of flour, 1 do. rye, 1 bag super^ine do. 1
barrel of pork, 1 bag of beans, 3 casks potatoes, 2 cheeses, and 3 pair of
shoes, by Mr. Barrent Bleecker. The Inhabitants of the town of Troy, by Mr. E.
Morgan, 5 barrels prime pork, 1 do. mess beef, 14 do. ^^^ur, 1 do. middlings, 1
do. Indian meal, 1 do cheese, 1 do. shad, 5 firkins and a tubs of butter. The
Inhabitants of Pleasant Valley, town of Clinton, Duchess county, by Messieurs
John Wood, Jacob R. Duryee, and William Ely, 4 barrels Indian meal, 42 lb. of
butter, 8 cheeses, 138 fowls, 3 turkeys, 2 ducks, 3 sheep, 30 lb. of pork, 1
bag of corn and a parcel of potatoes. 9. The Inhabitants of the city of Hudson,
by Thomas Jenkins, Esquire. Mayor, directed to Mr. R. Underhill, 18 barrels rye
meal. 8 do. Indian meal, 1 do. beans, 3 do. wheat flour, 1 do. herbs, 26 sheep,
12 cheeses, 3 hams, 24 bushel of potatoes, 7 bottles castor oil, 2 cords of
wood and 8 fowls. October. 9 The Inhabitants of the town of Fishkill, by
Messieurs Joseph Jackson, W. B. Verplanck, and John Drake, Jun. 184 fowls, 83
bushels potatoes, 63 cabbages, 50 lb. of beef, 3 bushels of corn, 15 sheep and
lambs, 5 turkeys, 2 barrels Indian meal, 55 lb. of pork, 1 load of wood, 1
barrel of cider, 4 cheeses, 30 bushels of apples, 20 lb butter, 3 hams, 4 1-2
bushels wheat, 41 lb. of flour, 8 ducks and cash, 71 dols. 37 cents. The
Inhabitants of the town of Fishkill, by Messieurs Dan. C. Verplanck and Martin
Wiltz, 30 sheep, 2 pigs, 123 fowls, 1 turkey, 98 bushels potatoes, 3 bushels
and 2 barrels apples, 1 barrel rye-meal, 3 1-2 bushels Indian meal, 15 pound
butter, 3 cwt. flour, and 1 barrel do. with dols. 57 and 25 cents. The
Inhabitants of the town of Poughkeepsie, Washington and Standford, by Messieurs
Wm. ^mmot and James Bramble, 8 cheeses, 13 sheep and lambs, 40 1-2 bushels and
a parcel potatoes, 18 cabbages, 1-2 bushel beans, 1-2 do. beets, 6 lb. bacon,
42 fowls, 1 ham, 4 bush. wheat, 1 tub and 1 pot butter, 3 bbls. Indian meal, 1
do. rye, 5 do. flour, 2 do. apples, 1 load of wood, 2 turkeys, 1 bushel corn, 1
do. rye, with 50 cents cash. Mr. Jacob Sherred, by Alder. G. Furman, dols. 50.
Mr. Cuffy Cer^, by do. dols. 5. The inhabitants of the town of P^ughkep^e by
Capt. Abel Smith, 57 sheep, 1 ox, 1 heifer, 3 cheeses, 2 barrels Indian meal, 2
do. flower, 2 loads wood, 24 bushels potatoes, and a parcel of pork. The
Gentlemen Boarders at New Utrecht Mount, by Mr. J Pater, enclosed to Ald. G.
Furman, dols. 81. The inhabitants of the township of New Utrecht, by Messrs.
Simon Cortelyou, Aurt* Van Pelt, and William Cropsey, 6 sheep, October. 9. 159
bushels potatoes, 30 do. apples, 124 fowls, 140 cabbages, 350 eggs, 2 1-2 cwt.
rye meal, 4 bushels turnips, 1 barrel shad, 2 geese, with a parcel of pumkins.
10. Mr. A. B. at Norfolk by Mr. David Harriod, dols. 5 An afflicted widow, by
the Mayor, dols. 20 Mr. Archabald Gifford, Newark, an excellent side of beef
370 lbs. Messrs. J. and N. Remmey, 162 pieces of earthen-ware. The inhabitants
of the town of Schenactady 1 barrel of pork, 2 hhds, and 1 tierce with 2 loads
of potatoes, 38 bushels of pease, 1 bag of beans, 1 barrel of onions, 2 do.
flour, and 8 pumpkins. Mr. John Goodeve, 1 wagon load potatoes, turnips,
cabbages, beets, carrots and raddishes. The Inhabitants of New Baltimore,
county of Albany, 4 bags of flour, 2 do. rye meal, and 2 loads of wood. 11. Mr.
Joshua Waddington, by Mr. W. Bayard. dols. 150 Mr. Henry Waddington, 100 Mr.
Herman Le Roy, 100 Mr. William Bayard, 100 Mr. Henry Seaman, by Ald. Coals, 50
Charles Roach, Esquire. (of Newtown, L. I) 2 hams, a parcel of onions and parsley,
with cash, dols. 12 The Inhabitants of the western district of Newton, by
Charles Roach, Esquire. 60 bushels potatoes, 12 do. turnips, 12 do. apples, 2 do.
onions, 1 cwt. rye meal, 3 do. Indian, 2 baskets beans, 2 quarters of beef, 6
sheep, with a parcel of cabbage, pumkins, and beets. Mr. Joseph Fox, (Brooklyn,
L. I.) by Mr. (...) dols. 5 The Inhabitants of the town of Coxsakie, by Leonard
B^onk, and Robert Burrel, Esquire. October. 11. 24 sheep, 110 bushels of potatoes, 10
do. wheat, 10 do. rye, 34 fowls, 70 1-2 lb. of pork, 16 1-2 lb. of butter, 3
1-2 bushels corn, 3 1-2 do. beans, 1 barrel shad, 1 do. wheat, 114 lb wheat
flour, with a quantity of vegetables and cash, dols. 11 Mr. James Stuart, 20
doz. 6 d. loaves of bread. 12. Mr. John Town of Hobocken ferry, 100 very
excellent cabbages. Mr. Thomas Gautier of Bergen point, to Ald. I. Bogert, 50
cabbages, 2 bags wheat flour, and 5 bags potatoes. Mr. John Angus, of the city
of Perth Amboy, 1 cart load of potatoes, 2 doz. cabbages, with some raddishes
and herbs. dols. Mr. Pascal N. Smith, by Ald. G. Furman, 30 Mr. Jarvis's
porter-room, 80 13. The Gentleman Boarders at Mrs. Anthony's, at Col. Willet's
place, Coerlears hook, by Mr. Nathaniel Bloodgood, dols. 50 Mr. Daniel Babcock,
by Dr. Kissam, 100 Mr. George Remsen, 9 very good sheep. 14. Mr. Thomas
Buchannan, 2 bbls. oat meal, and cash, dols. 100 A. G. of Eliz. Town. by Ald.
G. Furman, 10 J. N. S. ditto by do. 10 The Society of Caldwell parish,
New Jersey, by Thadeus Russel, and John Corby, 135 fowls, 3 bags potatoes, 1
bag quinces, and 1 tub of butter. The Inhabitants of Elizabeth town, by
Jonathan Hampton, Esquire. 1 bbl. cider, 6 bushels apples, 4 bushels potatoes, 1
bushel beets, 1 bushel carrots, sukory, horse raddish, and some turnips, with
dols. 20 The Inhabitants of Newtown, L. I. by Dr. Richard Lawrance, directed to
Alderman G. Furman, 20 bushels Indian meal, 35 bushels potatoes, 8 cabbages, 1
basket beets, 10 pumpkins, 7 1-2 bush* of apples, and 1 cwt. fine flour.
Elizabeth town, N. J. by Elias Dayton, Esquire. 1 (...) rice, 4 cheeses, 2 bags
meal, 5 loads October. 14. (...) potatoes, 1 load of cabbages, 8 sheep, 1 load
apples, 1 load pumkins, 30 bunches onions, some loose beets, 3 quarters mutton,
1 piece of beef, 4 pieces of pork and 4 bundles herbs. 16. The Inhabitants of
Lansingburgh, by Mr. Ezra Hitchcock, and forwarded by Mr. Henry I. Wyckoff,
directed to the Mayor, dols. 175 The Gentlemen boarding at Mr. Tyler's,
presented by Wm. Robinson, dols. 100 Mr. Manassah Salter, by Ald. I. Bogert, 50
Mr. Sigisimund, Hugget, by Ald. Furman, 25 Mr. Alex. Peacock, 1 wagon load
potatoes, and dols. 10 John Watts, Esquire. 1 fat ox, 4 fat sheep, and 4 bbls.
Indian meal. The Inhabitants of the North-east part of the town of North-East,
and the South-east part of the town of Livingston, by James Winchel, Martin E.
Winchel, and Thomas Haywood, their committee, 196 fowls, 17 cheeses, 2 bushels
corn, 20 bush. potatoes, 1 tub butter, 1 lamb; also by Captain North, 46 fowls,
11 ducks, 5 turkies, 1 bushel dried apples* 1 piece of pork, 8 bushels of
potatoes, 1 bbl. do. 20 cabbages, 18 lb. butter, 1 ham. dols. 3 75 cents. The
town of Fishkill, by Wm. B. Verplank, Joseph Jackson, and John Drake, jun.
their committee, 12 sheep, 33 bushels potatoes, 2 do. apples, 70 fowls, 4
turkeys, 3 ducks, 2 lb. butter. The town of Beekman, 1 cwt. wheat flour, 1
cheese, 6 lb. butter, 38 fowls, 26 bushels potatoes, 45 lb. rye meal. Newton
(L. I.) by Siman Remsen, 14 bbls. indian meal, 1 fine do. 2 bbls wheat flour,
41 fowls, 95 bushels potatoes, 21 do. apples, 32 cabbages, 6 lb. butter, and a
quantity of pumkins, and dols. 15 Rh^^^beck and Clinton towns, Duchess county.
by Wm. Radcliff, Everardus Bogardus, October. 16. Hans Rienstend and Cyrus Heart,
their committee, 2 heads of cattle, 59 sheep, 356 fowls, 246 bushels potatoes,
16 1-2 bushels turnips, 29 pumkins, 21 cabbages, 15 barrels apples, 16 bushels
do. 1 bushel rye, 1 pig, 13 lb. butter, 2 bbls. middling, 5 pieces pork, 6
barrels flour, 2 turkeys, 19 bushels corn, 6 1-2 loads wood, 4 barrels rye
meal, 6 cheeses, 2 bushels flour, 2 do. buckwheat, 1 barrel indian meal, 2 1-4
cwt and 1-2 tierce rice, 1 tub butter, 2 bushels wheat, 2 geese, 27 dols. 84
cents, and an order on Thomas Maul, Esquire. from A Marwreller for dols. 10 17.
Frederic Guion, New Rochelle, directed to Nicholas Carmer, 2 bls. indian meal,
2 bls and 2 bags potatoes, 1 bbl. vinegar. Newark. directed to Nicholas Carmer,
potatoes, pumkins, apples, indian meal, fowls, 24 pairs of shoes, and dols. 3,
cents 56 Mr. Abraham Labagh, by Mr. Samuel Burrow, dols. 15 David Hunt, of
Powles Hook, 8 bushels potatoes, 300 carrots, 50 cabbages. 15 pumkins- South
part of Newton, forwarded by Garret H. Van Waggenan, 73 bushels potatoes, 16
bushels apples, 11 1-2 cwt. indian meal, 2 barrels do. 27 cabbages, 14 pumkins,
3 quarters beef, 1 sheep, 33 lb. salt beef, 3 fowls, dols. 10 Mr. John Turner
jun. dols. 50 19. Mr. John Dennis jun. of N. Brunswick, dols. 5 The inhabitants
of Bergen, by the Rev. John Cornelison, 17 bags meal, dols. 93, cents 62 Staten
Island, a collection made by the Rev. Richard Moore, rector of St. Andrews
church, Richmond, by Mr. John M'Vickar, directed to alderman G. Furman, dols.
100 Capt. Leonard Davis, Poughkeepfie, 24 bush. potatoes, 4 cheeses, 2 sheep, 1
bag flour, 9 fowls, and 11 cabbages. October. 19. A small number of the
inhabitants of Phillip's town, Duchess county, by their committee, John
Leckley, and Joshua Horton, 3 tubs butter, 8 or 10 bushels sauce, 8 fowls, and
1 bag indian meal. The inhabitants of the town of Claverack, and Hudson.
forwarded by S. Edwards, Esquire. 4 barrels rye flour, 1 1-2 barrels wheat flour, 3
1-2 barrels indian meal, 47 bushels potatoes, 1 bushel carrots, 3 sheep, 15
fowls, 30 pumkins, 1 barrel beans, 1 ham, some cabbages, etc. The Mechanic
society of Hudson, forwarded by Samuel Wigton, their secretary, 20 sheep. Peter
Remsen, 1 lamb. The inhabitants of the town of Kinderhook, forwarded by
Nicholas Kettle, Hendrick A Van Dy^k, John J. Van Al^^yne, Isaac Vanderpelt,
and Cornelius Silvester, their committee, 84 bushels potatoes, 8 sheep, 30
fowls, 13 barrels meal, 1 ^^ear, and dols. 39 An unknown person, dols. 20 The
inhabitants of Connecticut farms, by Mr. Jonas Wade, a quantity of vegetables
and 15 fowls. A gentleman of New York, who during the sickness, resided in
New Jersey, by Ald. G. Furman, dols. 100 Captain Brown, of the sloop Maria,
from Peekskill, 1 load potatoes, 3 tubs butter, 2 cabbages* 8 fowls, 1 bag
indian meal. Messrs. John and Joseph Stevenson, and Dr. White, from the ship
Sarah, captain Cowper, 4 sheep, and 4 pigs. Sir John Temple, by Mr. Salter,
dols. 50 Mr. John Wills, dols. 2 Mr. Jedediah Olcott, dols. 3 Mr. Bryan
Little, dols. 5 Mr. John M'Leod, dols.10 Mr. Collin Gillespie, dols. 50 October.
19. The inhabitants of Shenectady, directed to the mayor, dols. 43^ The
inhabitants of the upper part of the town of Rhinebeck, Duchess county,
forwarded by captain Isaac Stoutenburgh, junr. 3 barrels rye flour, 16 sheep,
161 bushels potatoes, 3 hogs, 123 fowls, 36 bushels of apples, 4^ cabbages* 7
1-2 bushels turnips, 7, geese, 1 hhd. vinegar, 1 fat cow, 4 load wood, 5^ 1b.
bacon, and dols. 121, cts. 70 A few of the inhabitants of Beekman town,
Duchess county, 42 fowls, 1 sheep, 3 turkeys, 6lb. butter, 7 cabbages, 22
bushels potatoes, and 2 cheeses. Capt. Abihu Pinkham of Hudson, 1 barrel ^lour.
The town of Charleston, county of Saratoga, forwarded by Thomas Brown,
Alexander Gilchrist, Henry Cael, jun. Asher Cook, and John Tailor, their
committee, 11 barrels flour, and 5 firkins butter. A number of the inhabitants
of Jamaica, (L. I.) by Eliphalet Wicke, Esquire. directed to the mayor, dols. 400,
cts. 17 22 An absent citizen on Long Island, G. F. dols. 20. Dirck Ten Brock,
Esquire. 20 fat sheep. The town of Franklin, Duchess county, by Messrs. Matthew
Paterson, Samuel Towner, George Burtch, Joshua Nicherson, and Samuel Cornwell,
their committee, 34 fat sheep. Michael Price, by Alderman G. Furman, dols. 50
Mr. James Arden, by do. dols. 20 The towns of Pawling and Beekman, Duchess
county, 17, bushels potatoes, 19 1-4 do. rye and corn, 2 do onions, 8 cheeses,
28 fowls, 4 1-2 lb. butter, 1 bag flour, 2 pieces pork, and 10 cabbages. A part
of the inhabitants of the town of Beekman, Duchess county, by Messrs. Jesse
October. 22. Oakley, Hezekiah Collin, Martinus Overocker, Samuel Austin Barker,
and Joseph Porter their committee, 4 barrels wheat flour, 2 do. indian meal, 1
do. rye do. 11 sheep, 72 bushels potatoes, 6 do. wheat, 12 do. corn, (...) 1-2
do. buckwheat, 3 do. rye, 17 cheeses, 38 fowls, 1 turkey, 2 pigs, 2lb. butter,
1-2 bushel turnips, 72lb. buckwheat meal, 20lb. salt pork, with dols 3, cts. 50
The parish of Springfield, New Jersey, by Wm. Steel, Esquire. Mr. Denman, Major
Woolley, and Mr. Smith, their committee, 1 fat cow, 4 fat sheep, 106 fowls, 4
ducks, 1 bag buckwheat meal, 75 bushels potatoes, 2 do. turnips, 2 do. corn, 2
do. apples, 31 pumkins, 30 cabbages* and some beets. A lady, by Ald. Beekman,
dols. 25 Mr. Thomas Tom, by Mr. Nathaniel Blood-good dols. 30 An unknown
friend, 2 doz. bottles castor oil, and dols. 40 John's Town, Montgomery county,
by Richard Dodge, Wm. Egan and James M'Donald, dols. 66, cts. 5^ The city of
Albany, by the Rev. John Basstos to the mayor, balance of their donatios,,
dols. 417, cts. 5^ 24 Part of the inhabitants of the town of Clinton, Duchess
county, 11 sheep, 140 fowls, 2 turkeys, 28 loads of wood, 8 bushels of corn, 50
do. potatoes, 3 do. Apples, 4 do. rye, 2 do. buckwheat, 2 barrels flour, 1 do.
rye meal, 1 1-2 do. indian meal, 11 pieces pork, with 3 cheeses. The
inhabitants of Bushwick, (L. I.) by Peter I. Schenk, and John Skillman, Esqrs.
42 bushels indian meal, 143 do. potatoes, 44 do. turnips, 149 1-2 do. apples,
120 cabbages, 36 pumkins, 16 fowls, 2lb. butter, 20lb. pork, 100 do rye meal, 1
small bundle of tea, and dols. 38, cts. 75 A friend, by T. B. 25 cents. October.
24. The inhabitants of Fishkill, 1 load potatoes, 6 fowls, 8 cabbages, and 1
roll of butter. The inhabitants of Union village, in Armeni^ town, Duchess
county, by Mr. Solomon Hitchcock, 2 barrels wheat flour. 2 do. rye, 17 cheeses,
1 bushel wheat, 2 do. corn, 2 do. potatoes, and dols. 6, cts. 25 Enos Nathrop,
Esquire. of Washington town, 5 bushels potatoes, and 2 do. corn. A Lady of
Rhinebeck by Capt. Peter I. B. Meyers, one fat cow, 8 barrels flour and dols.
53. Mr. James Thompson of this city 16 blankets and 16 green rugs. 27 The
inhabitants of Kingston Ulster county by Peter Mauris Given, Peter Vander Lyn,
Tarch De Wit, Jeremiah Dubois and Samuel Free^s, on board of capt. William
Swart, who generously gave the freight of all the donations sent by him, 107
1-2 bushels turnips and potatoes, 3 barrels apples, 2 do. flour, 5 do.
buckwheat meal, 9 do. rye meal, 7 1-2 bushels indian corn, 10 1-4 do.
buckwheat, 2 1-2 do. rye, 5 1-2 do. wheat, 8 sheep, 29 loads of wood, and 36
fowls. The inhabitants of Marble Town by capt William Swart 40 1-2 bushels
potatoes, 2 1-2 do. wheat, 2 barrels rye meal, 3 barrels flour, 5 do. buckwheat
Meal, 1 do. indian meal, and 1 bag buckwheat. The Town of Rochester by the same
convey, ance 1 bbl. middlings, and 2 bushels apples. The Town of Hurley, by the
same forwarded* by Messrs. Cornelius Elting, Richard Ten Eyck, and Cornelius
Newkirk 3 bushels wheat, 3 do. rye, 16 do. corn, 45 do. potatoes, 16 do.
turnips, 5 barrels flour, 1 sheep and 1 cask apples. The inhabitants of
Schenectady 20 barrels flour, 1-2 barrel beef, 1 hogshead and 2 barrels
patatoes, 22 cheeses. General Gordon, near Albany 2 barrels flour. October. 27.
Flatbush (L. I.) by Judge Lot and John Vanderbilt Esquire. 3 bags indian meal, 3
do. rye. 1 peck of beans, 1 pig of 70 pound, 41 bushels turnips, 140 do.
potatoes, 13 do. apples, 12 fowls, 36 cabbages, and 100 pumpkins. From Col.
Aquilla Ciles, at Flatbush, 101 dols. collected from the following persons. --
Aquilla Giles, dols. 25 Charles Clarkson, 10 Peter Stryker, 10 R. Martisen, 10
John Naget, 5 John Cortelyou, 5 Samuel Garreston, 5 Adrian Martisen, 5 Michael
Striker, 5 A Lady, 5 Phebe Lefferts, 4 Wm. B. Gifford, 2 Adrian Mortisen, jun.
2 Adrian Mortisen, 1 John Bennum 1 Frederic Cleveland, 2 Doctor Beek, 2 Jacob
Lefferts. 2 General Horatio Gates, by Ald. Coals, 50 Capt. Henry Tredwell, by
Mr. J. Provost 25 Mr. Archibald Gracie by Ald. Coals. 50 Mr. Hugh Zindon, by
Ald. Bogert, 2 Sundry inhabitants of Frederictown, Duchess county, by
Messieurs Consider Cushmon, and Rowland Bailey, 2 bbls. flour, 1 do. rye meal,
72 fowls, 1 tub butter, 1 cheese, bushel, corn, and 12 cabbages. Robert R.
Livingston, of Clermont, Duchess county, 2 very excellent fat cattle, 5 sheep,
and dols. 20 Mrs. Stevens. Clermont, 20 Sundry inhabitants of Clermont, 8
bushels potatoes, 2 1-2 do. corn, 1 1-2 do. wheat, 19 1-2 do potatoes, 3 do.
turnips, 1 do. wheat, 4 do. buckwheat, 8 do. corn, 1 ham, 22 1-2 bushel,
buckwheat, 13 do rye, 17 1-2 do. October. 27. corn, 23 1-2 do. potatoes, 14
fowls, 18 lb. of pork, and dols. 20, 50 cents. The village of Pleasant Valley,
by Mr. Henry Walters, 1 bbl. rye meal, 14 1-2 bushels potatoes, 1-2 do.
turnips, 14 fowls, 12 cabbages, 1-2 bushel dried apples, and 1-2 do. buckwheat.
The town of Florida, Montgomery county, by Messieurs Stephen Reynolds, D. Cady,
Daniel M'Master and Christian Service, to the Mayor, on board of Capt. James
Moore, 54 dollars, with the farther sum of 52 dollars and 32 cents, being the
nett proceeds of 54 bushels of wheat, sold by capt. Moore. -- Also. from
several citizens of Albany, by the same conveyance, being the nett proceeds of
10 bushels wheat, dols. 9, 68 cents. 4 bushels of rye, 2 do. corn, 6 do.
potatoes, and 1 do. turnips. Mr. Moses Rogers, by Ald. Coals, dols. 50 Those.
Macanass, Esquire. by the Mayor, 50 Sundry inhabitant, of Throgneck, Westchester
county, forwarded by Mr. Robert Heaton, 35 bushels potatoes, (...) do. turnips,
9 do. apples, 59 cabbages, 1 bbl. vinegar, 2 pieces of pork, (...) sheep and 1
quarter of beef. The consistory of the Reformed Dutch Church in Albany, being
the amount of a collection made in said church, transmitted by the Rev. Mr.
Bassett, to the Mayor, dols. 246 A Citizen of New York at Albany, by the Mayor,
dols. 25 Gozen Ryerss, Esquire. Staten Island, 2 sheep, 10 bushels potatoes, 6 do.
turnips, and 25 pumkins, addressed to Alderman Coals. The inhabitants of
Duchess county, by Messrs. 30 William Emmot, John Mott, James Bramble,
Zephaniah Platt, and Solomon Sutherland. Esq^. of the town of Stanford, 5 bbls.
rye meal, 1 do. Indian meal, 150lb. of pork, 12 bushels potatoes 3 1-2 do.
corn, 1 tierce potatoes, 1 tub butter, (...) cheeses, and Zephaniah Platt and
Solomon Sutherland. Esqs. each 4 quarters of beef. October. ^0 Pawlings town.
Duchess county, 12 bushels potatoes, 3 1-2 do. corn. Poughkeepsie, Duchess
county, 61 bushels wheat, 6 1-2 do. corn, 3 do. rye, 49 cheeses, 1 bbl. rye
meal, 1 pot and 1 sirkin butter, 1 do. pork, 8 fowls, 10 bushels potatoes, 2
sheep and some beets. The towns of Flatlands and Gravesend, Kings county, L. I.
by Henry I. Lot, and John Garritson, Esquire. 180 bushels, potatoes, turnips and
apples, 35 fowls, 4 bags Indian meal, 11 1b. of butter and 50 cabbages. Mr.
Benj. Strong, by Ald. G. Furman, dols. 25 Mr. John Post, by T. B. 30 Jeremiah
Vanderbilt, Esquire. of Brooklyn, L. I. one fat shoat, 6 bushels, potatoes, 6 do.
turnips, 1 bag of apples and 20 cabbages. The consistory of the church of
Orange town, in Rockland county, 11 1-2 cwt. rye meal, 77 bushels potatoes, 6
do. apples, 1000 with. Indian meal, 300 with. buckwheat meal, 16 loads of wood, 107
pumkins, 12 cabbages, and dols. 100, 72 cents. Mr. Lemuel Wells, by Ald. G.
Furman, dols. 50 Nov. 2. German town, Columbia county, by Mr. Philip
Rock^eller, and James Kent, their committee, 30 bushels potatoes, 12 do.
buckwheat, 8 do. corn, 4 do. rye and 12 cabbages. Carmel town, Duchess county,
by Messieurs John Crane, Devou Bailey and Michael Vandevoort, their committee,
1 bbl. flour, 44 fowls, 4 bbls. rye meal, 9 do. buckwheat meal, 3 cheeses, 34
bushels potatoes, 2 sheep, 28 fowls, 2 bbls. Indian meal, 1 do. buckwheat meal,
1 cwt. do. 1cwt. flour, 1 cwt. of rye-meal, and 1 dol. The inhabitants of
Ryeneck by Messrs. Samuel Deal, and Theophilus Marselis, 1 fat steer, 1 side of
beef, 2 bbls. of flour, 10 do. indian meal, 2 do. vinegar, 30 bushels potatoes,
1 Nov. 2 fat sheep, 14 fowls, a load of wood, some cabbages and dolls. 18 Henry
Cruger, Esquire. by Ald. G. Furman, 50 The inhabitants of Shelter island, Suffolk
County, by Col. Sylvester Dering, transmitted to the mayor, dolls. 50 A man by
J. Coals, 50 Mr. John Stapples, of New Rochelle, by Mr. Carmer, dolls. 20 The
inhabitants of the town of Mamaonick, by Mr. John Delancey, 54 bushels
potatoes, 24 do. indian meal, 20 do. apples, 2 do. buckwheat, 26 fowls, 1bbl.
of flour, 1-2 do ryemeal, 2 do. vinegar, 5 sheep, 65 cabbages, and 15 pumkins.
5 Joseph Carpenter, Esquire. of Harrison's purchase West Chester county, by Mr.
John Norman, dolls. 6 Mr. Johnson Tuttle, of Newark, N. Jersey, directed to Mr.
Ezekiel Robins, dolls. 50 A friend to the poor, 7 jacketts, 11 pairs of
trowsers, 6 women's petticoats, 2 short gowns, and 1 child's frock. Several
parishes in Suffolk county, by Henry Dering, Esquire. of Sagg Harbor: -- The
parish of Bridgehampton, dolls. 18 75 cents. The parish of East-Hampton, dolls.
40 59 cents. The parish of the port of Sag Harbor, dols. 60 66 cents. The
parish of West-Hampton, by Capt. Josiah Howel, transmitted to the mayor, dolls.
11 68 cents. A Lady enclosed to Ald. G. Furman, dolls. 10 6 Mr. John Davenport,
jun. 50 bushels potatoes. Rev. Mr. Moherring, of Staten Island, by the Rev. Mr.
James Birkby, dolls. 23 37 cents. The gentlemen composing the fire company No.
14, by Messrs. Abraham Brower, John P. Rooms, Uriah Coddington, jun. and
William P. Room, their committee, dolls. 46 73 cnts. Nov. 6. A friend to the
poor, by Ald. Furman, dolls. 100 Mr. Wm. A. Hardenbrook, by do. dolls. 15 Mr.
John Mills, by Mr. Arcularius, dolls. 20 Capt. Lucas Van Allen, from
Kinderhook, 1 bbl. of rye-meal, and 2 dols. 50 cents. The inhabitants of
Smith-town, Suffolk county, by Mr. Benjamin B. Blidenburgh delivered to Ald. G.
Furman, 78 dolls. 37 cents Messrs. John Cantine, and Gerardus Hardenburgh, of
Marbletown, each one bbl. of buckwheat meal. A friend to the poor, 34 loads of
wood. The inhabitants of Schenectady 5 barrels of flour. The city of Albany, 3
bbls. onions, 1 do. hard bread, 1 do. beans. 1-2 do. indian meal, 8 do.
potatoes. with 2 tierces of carrots and beats. The inhabitants of Duchess
County 2 sheep, 4 fowls, 5 1-2 bushels buckwheat. The Presbyterian Church in
Albany, being their collection made on Sunday 28th Oct. transmitted to the
mayor, by Messrs. H. Woodruff, and W. Bloodgood, dolls. 202 6 cents The
inhabitants of Rahway, and its neighborhood, by Mr. William Shotwell, to the
mayor, 45 bushels potatoes, 4 bushels of apples, 21 bbls. indian and rye meal,
4 sheep, 42 fowls 4 bushels corn, 13 1-2 do. turnips, a parcel of pumkins and
straw with dolls. 20 The inhabitants of the town of Southhold (L. I.) by Mr. E.
Robbins, dolls. 13 81 cents A friend to the poor, by Mr. John Outhout, dolls.
75 The inhabitants of Johns'town, Montgomery county, a balance of their
donation, by Mr. Richard Dodge, dolls. 4 58 cents Mr. William Shedden, by Ald.
G. Furman, dolls. 50 Mr. Frederick Van Cortlandt, of Yonkers, West Chester
county, by Mr. Henry White, dolls. 50 Nov. 12. Capt. Wm. Leg, from Saugertie,
Ulster County, one load of wood, from Benjamin Snider. John Brink, 1 barrel of
potatoes. James Remsen, 1 bushel do. 13. The church and community called
Shakers, at New Lebanon, by Mr. David Meachom, their overseer, 21 bbls. prime
beef, 1 large cask, and 6 bbls. wheat flour containing 1576 1bs. 8 large casks,
and 7 bbls. rye flour, containing 5247 1bs. 3 casks of white beans, containing
21 bushels, 1 bbl. containing 3 bushels 67 do. onions, 21 1-2 bushels carrots,
104 do. potatoes, 1 bbl, containing 122 lbs. cheese 2 bbls. indian meal, with
40 dollars, 23 of which was paid for freight. 14. Mr. Marine Le Brun, by Ald.
J. Post, dolls. 25 Mr. Robinson Thomas, of Elizabeth town, by Mr. Joel Davis,
45 loads of wood. The Corporation of New-Brunswick, in New Jersey, forwarded by
Abraham Schuyler, President of the Corporation, by Mr. Staates Van Deusen, 2
barrels buckwheat meal, 1 bag Indian do. 1 roll of butter and 11 loads of wood,
and cash, dols. 189 dols. 70 cents. A few of the inhabitants of the parish of
South Hampton, (L. I.) by Messrs. Uriah Rogers, Benjamin Hunting, and David
Roze, their committee, to the mayor, dolls. 23 50 cent Uriah Rogers, Esquire. of
South Hampton, by Mr. Jacob Concklin, 2 bbls. beef. 16. Mr. Peter Fenton, by
Mr. J. Marshall, dolls. 10 Mr. Jeremiah Marshall, dolls. 10. The inhabitants of
Albany, by Captain Moore 2 barrels of flour, and 4 cheeses. The inhabitants of
the town of Brooklyn, King's county, collected by Mr. Tunis Bergan, Fernandus
Suydam, John Wicks, Peter Wyckoff John Cornell, John Dougherty, and Martin
Schenck, dolls. 581 cents 78 Nov. 16. The congregation of Clarks-Town, Rockland
county, by Isaac Blanch, Esquire. 23 bags of flour, 1 1-2 bags of Indian meal, 11
bags of potatoes, of a load of wood, and dols. 5 17. A gentleman at Newtown, by
Mr. C. Van Waganen, dolls. 8 From the town of Mindon in Albany county, by
Messieurs Robert M'Farlane and Conrad Gansevoort, dols. 56 The vestry of St.
Peter's church at Albany, forwarded by the Rev. T. Ellison, by Mr. Philip Ten
Eyck, a collection made in that church the 28th October, for the relief of
their distressed fellow citizens in this city, 107 dols. 87 cents. The
congregation of Clarkstown, by Captain Abraham Talman, 7 bags of rye flour, 5
bags of buckwheat, 1 do. of Indian meal, 13 do. of potatoes, 4 baskets, of do.
3 bushels of do. 4 loads of wood, 3 lb. of butter, and 3 dols. 12 cents. W. C.
addressed to Ald. Furman, dols. 100 The Presbyterian congregation, at
Huntington. L. I. forwarded by Ebenezer Platt, Esquire. on board of Captain James
Long, 30 loads of wood, 3 fat sheep, 20, fowls, 22 bushels of apples, 7 do. of
turnips, 1 do. of potatoes 1 do. of Indian meal, cwt. of rye meal, and 13 dols.
75 cents. 20. Mr. Peter Corn, West Chester, by George Douglas Jun. 30 dols.
22. The town of Livingston, Duchess County by the hands of Baily Hathaway, 8
Bushels containing Rye, Buckwheat and Potatoes, for the poor. 23. From the town
of New-Rochelle, a collection made by Newbury Devenport Esquire. and brought by
Messrs. James P^^e, and John Palmer who gave the freight, 62 Bushels of
Potatoes, 15 do. of Turnips 33 do. of Indian Corn ground, and delivered in 10
Barrels of Indian Meal, one sheep, also 10 Bushels of Turnips by another
conveyance, and 49 dols. 50 cents. 24. From the Presbyterian Congregation at
Huntington L. I. forwarded by Ebenezer Platt Esquire. on board of Capt. Jacob
Johnson, 18 loads of wood, a pair of shoes, 1 Bushels of Turnips and 1 do. of
Potatoes. A friend to the poor, one Barrel of Buckwheat Meal, sent to the Alms
House. 26. From Mr. Miller, one load of Cabbages. 27. The Presbyterian
congregation, at Huntington L. I. by Capt. James Long, 7 and loads of wood. 28.
The Fire Company No. 11 by their committee Nicholas V. Antwerp, Stephen Smith
and Theunis Quick, 40 dols. 51 cents. Charles L. Camman by I. B. Coals 100
dols. The Presbyterian church at Stratford in the State of Connecticut by the
hands of A. Mc. Ewen, Esquire. 33 dols. 11 cents. 30. From a part of the
inhabitants of Yonkers, 7 barrels of indian meal, 2 do. of buckwheat, 2 do. of
indian corn, about 22 bushels of turnips and potatoes and 2 fat sheep, and 193
dols. Mr. Richard Ward of East Chester, by Mr. James Hunt, one barrel of beef.
A few of the people of Cambridge Washington County, by James Ervin, from
Jonathan Door, Esquire. 100 dols. Dec. 1. Mr. Isaac Van Wart of Mountpleasant, 1
bag of rye meal, 2 do. of indian meal, 2 do. of potatoes 1 do. turnips, by Capt
Riqua. By the Hon. Selah Strong Esquire. from the inhabitants of Southhold River
Head and Brookhaven in Suffolk County, 130 dols. 36 cents. The inhabitants of
the town of Fishkill, from William B. Verplanck, Joseph Jackson and John Drake
Jun. their committee, by the Dec. 3. hands of John Drake Jun. for part of a
load of wood 5s. and 20 dols. 5. The Presbyterian Church in Morris town in
Morris County New Jersey by Mr. Matthew Crane to the Mayor, 57 dols. From I. L.
by T. B. dols. 5 8. From the Jurors at Mr. Bardin's on a cause of lunacy, by
Mr. James Tylee, dols. 10 From Mr. Thomas Williams, by T. B. 10 10. From Mr.
William Thorn, of Washington, Duchess county, by Capt. Hoyt, 2 quarters of
beef.
A LIST OF THE NAMES OF THE PERSONS INTERRED IN THE SEVERAL BURYING GROUNDS IN
THE CITY OF NEW YORK, AND AT BELLEVUE, AND POTTERS-FIELD,
FROM AUGUST 1 -- TO NOVEMBER 14, 1798.
BEFORE the Reader begins to peruse the following list, I would wish to apprize
him of the materials from which it is composed. They are the books of the
different sextons and other persons having the charge of burying grounds in
this city, at Potter-Field and Bellevue. It has however unfortunately happened
that the sextons of two of the smallest congregations were absent during a
great part of the calamity, and in these the names of the dead were only given
by memory, and in other instances, the books have not been kept with that
accuracy which could have been wished. To ascertain with precision the names of
all the deceased, their occupations, etc. I have used my utmost exertions. With
this view I have compared the books of the sextons with the list kept by the
Health-Committee, and wherever there was a difference, I have, by personal
application to the friends of the deceased, endeavored as far as possible to
rectify the mistake, and also where the orthography appeared erroneous, to
correct it as well as I could* and by annexing to the names, the trade,
occupation, age, place of nativity o^ some other circumstance to point out the
particular person intended and thus to remove the doubts of people at a
distance. But whatever pains may be taken in a thing of this sort, it cannot be
expected that it will be entirely free from errors or defects: but I trust it
will be found as complete, as considering the difficulties attending it, could
be expected and that in almost every instance it will be found satisfactory.

C. Annexed to some Names denotes that the Person died in the Country. The
words printed in Italic after any name, denotes the native country of that
person.

A
ABERNETHEY George, Shoemaker and his Son George AEt, 12 -- 33 Barclay-Street,
Scotland. Abespie Joanna, 10 Fair-Street, France. Abrams John, Mariner,
Bellvue. Ackerman Abraham, Bayard Lane. Ackerman David, the wife of,
Lumber-Street. Ackerman William, 249 Greenwich-Street. Ackle Mary, widow AEt,
69. Ackley Mr. Clerk, Wall-Street, AEt, 22. Adams Robert, mason 63
Murray-Street, AEt. 40. Adams Mr. a child of. Adams Mr. his black woman. Adams
John, Bellevue. Adams Mr. AEt, 30. Aer Michael, Baker, Skinner Street. Affleck
Robert, Merchant, corner of William and John Streets, AEt, 50 Scotland. Affleck
John, Bellevue. Agar Joseph, Bellevue. Agnel Hyacinth, French teacher, the wife
and daughter of, 137 William-Street. Agnew Dorothy, Alms house, consumption
Allen John, AEt, 40, Scotland. Allen John, keeper of a lumber yard, near the
ship yards. Allen Mr. a child of AEt, 5 months. Allen William, Bellevue. Allen
Hugh, do. Allen Margaret, do. Allen James, from the hospital. Allen Abraham,
Bellevue. Allison James, Baker, Bellevue, Scotland Al^tyne Jeronymus, Hannah
the slave of, 15 Liberty-St. Al^tyne Mary, 47 White-Hall-Street. Altgilt John,
93 Read-Street. Always John, Chairmaker, 38 James-Street. Ames John, Butcher,
the wi^e of, 25 Robinson-Street. Amory John, Lumber-Street. Anderson Mrs. a
child of, AEt, 1 Year. Anderson James, the child of, 63 Cherry-street. Anderson
Hilton, teacher, 47 Whitehall, street, Ireland. Anderson John, the wife of, 50
Beekman-street. Anderson Miss, decay. Anderson John, junior, Attorney at Law,
1^9 Front-street, Anderson John, auctioneer, 77 Wall-street, AEt. 68, and wife,
AEt. 51 Anderson Samuel, son of Samuel, merchant, Philadelphia Anderson
Alexander, physician, the wife of, Liberty-St. Andrews C. surgeon, 208,
Water-street, England. Angus James, grocer, opposite the hospital. Scotland,
Anthony Nicholas, N. Anthony the son of, 34 Frankfort street. Apple John,
Almshouse. Archer Joshua, cartman, Division street. Archer Moses, shoemaker,
the child of, 345 Broadway. Archibald Wm. corner of Cedar and Greenwich
streets. Arden Mr. -- aet 17. Argyle Sally, Bellevue. Arhart Mrs. at Mrs.
Bruces, 125 Water street. Arheron Mrs. Arland Mr. Arley Mary, 66 James street.
Artey Mr. aet 38, consumption. Asgill Mrs. aet 68. Ashley Mary, Maiden Lane.
Ashmore John, distiller of cordials, Bowery Lane. Asmus Jacob, 66 E. George
street, Sweden. Atkins Isaac, baker, 13 E. George street. Avery John,
shipwright, the child of, 73 Division street. Avery Joseph, watchman, Broadway.
Airs Camp, the child of, 50 Beekman street.
B
Babcock captain, of the schooner Cornelia, bellevue. Bach Henry, tailor, wife
and two children, 55 Pine street, Germany. Bach Harman, Bellevue. Bailey
Abraham, Front street. Bailey Catharine, 159 Front street. Bainor John, corner
of Church and Warren streets. Baker Susan, 13 Barclay street. Baker Miss, aet
20. Baker Mrs. a child of. Baker Gardner, proprietor of the Museum, died at
Boston* Baldridge John, apprentice to Jacob Smith, turner, 94 Beekman street.
Ball John, Bellevue. Ban Mr. the child of, E. Rutger street. Banes Josiah,
Lombard street. Banks Wm. E. Washington-street. Banta John, apprentice to Mr.
Bayley, carpenter. Greenwich street. Barber Silas, the son of, 39 Robinson
street. Barber Thomas, the child of, Gold street. Barber Mr. a child of,
Bellevue. Barclay Thomas, Bellevue. Bare John, and child, Bowery Lane. Barnet
Mrs. Lumber street. Barnet Hannah, Oliver street. Barns Lucretia, wife of John.
18 Cherry street. Bar John, butcher, Grand street. Barter Venus, a black
woman, Cheapside. Basely Mrs. aet 52, consumption. Basset Frederic, the wife
of, 218 Pearl street. Basset, widow Frances, old age. Bates Mr. Pearl street.
Bayley Pierce, 13 Moore street. Bayley Thomas, Bellevue. Bayley Edward,
Bellevue. Bayley Simeon, watchmaker, 56 Stone street. Beach Mr. the child of
Beaumont Mrs. mother of Michael Parker, carpenter, 28 Rutger street. Bearshine
Jacob, 13 Rutger street. Beaty Mr. Beck Martin, from widow Stevenson's, 45
Pearl street. Be^quet Lewis, tailor, the wise of, 11 Rutger street. Bedlow,
William, formerly postmaster, Broadway. Bedlow William, the child of, Charlotte
street. Bedlow Catharine, wife of William, Cherry street. Beef Joseph,
Bellevue. Beekman Elizabeth, wife of Henry, Charlotte near Harman street.
Beekman George, cartman, the daughter of, 9 Reed st. Beekman, Richard, 31 Front
street. Beekman, widow of James, I. child Mary, and a negro slave Pompey, 57
Maiden Lane. Beekman Eliza, daughter of Henry, wood inspector, 13 Oliver
street. Beese Neptune, black man, the child of. Bell Mrs. a child of, aet 12.
Bell Mary, the wife of Thomas, 8 Moore street. Bell Mr. aet 26. Bell Mr. aet
52. Bell Robert Carter, 16 Pearl street, aet 22. Belvidere Mrs. 43 Water
street. Benson Samuel, a black man, Bellevue. Bentley Elizabeth, Almshouse,
not fever. Bemmer John, grave digger of the Catholic Church, and Mary his wife.
Bern Nicholas, Upper Hague street. Berry Ann, black woman, aet 55. Berry Master
John, Bellevue. Berry Mr. the wife of and two children, Bedlow street. Berry
John, Nassau street. Berwick, widow, of the late John, D. sheriff 262
Greenwich-street. Bessinger John, the child of, Bowery Lane. Bethune David, an
infant of, 11 Liberty street. Betts William, aet 19. Bevois Charles, the son
of, 91 Read street. Bevolet Mrs. aet 80. Billop John W. New-Brunswick. Bingham
James, gauger, 390 Pearl street. Bingham John, a child of. Birch Mr. a child
of, aet 9. Bird Joseph, a child of. Bifent Michael, mariner, 79 Fair street,
Italy. Black Mr. aet 30. Blackbear Benjamin, a child of, Bowery Lane. Blackman
Thomas, muffin baker, 3 Ferry street. Blair Andrew, 76 E. George street. Blake
Mary, Bellevue. Blakes Mr. a child of, flux. Blanchard Mr. a child of, aet 4
years, flux. Bland Deborah, at Abraham Staggs, E. George street* Blank Thomas,
marshall, a child of, 13 Skinner street. Blank William, butcher, Bowery Lane.
Blaney Jane, Bellevue. Blauvelt Daniel, cartman, the child of. Bloom Frederic,
corner of William and Thomas streets. Bogardus Catharine, wife of Cornelius,
corner of Cheapside and E. George streets. Bogardus Thomas, 56 Warren street.
Bogart Mrs. widow of Peter. Bogart widow Mary, 71 William street. Boggs John,
from Mr. Bach's, 55 Pine street. Boggs Henry. Bohanna George, 9 Augustus
street. Bokee William, house carpenter, and wi^e, 31 John street. Bolmer Jacob
aet 84, 94 Chatham street. Bolton Mr. mariner, Bellevue. Bond Joseph, a black,
mariner. Bonum mr. Mulberry street. Botton mrs. Bellevue. Boudovine Susannah,
corner of Pump and Orchard streets: Bourne John, the wife and daughter of, 84
Fair street. Bowne Samuel S. merchant, 252 Pearl street. Boyd George, teacher,
174 William street, Ireland. Boil Elizabeth, John street. Boyles William, a
child of, sixth ward. Boys Susannah, a black, Cross-street. Brack Herman,
mariner, Bellevue. Braat, Mr. Bradley John, New York hospital. Bradford Mrs. 57
Ann street. Braden Joseph, Bedlow street. Bradley William, cork cutter, 100
Maiden Lane. Bradshaw Betsey, Bellevue, Brady William, cartman,
Charlotte-street. Brady Thomas, labourer, 32 Ferry-street. Brady Mrs. aet 52.
Brailsford Samuel, merchant, 7 Murray-street, decay. Brasher Widow Rachel, 45
William street. Broom John, mariner, of the schooner Cornelia, Bellevue
Bra^er Dederic Conradt, merchant, 55 Stone-street. Bremen. Bray John, labourer,
the wife of, 21 Rutger-street. Bremner Colins, tailor, 342 Pearl-street,
Brenton Catharine, 28 Cedar-street. Brevoort Nicholas, 28 Dey-street, C.
Brevoort Mrs. wife of Elias, AEt 80. Brewerton Henry, a child of, 1
Oliver-street. Brichdill John, Bellevue. Bright Sophia, mantuamaker, 66
Ann-street. Bright Mrs. 15 Gold-street. Bright Mr. a child of, AEt. 1 year.
Briggs Mary, from Westchester, Briggs Mr. the black girl of, Partition-street.
Briskoa John, brushmaker, and his sister Susannah, 84 Maiden-lane. Bristol, a
black man from the Hospital. Brett John, from the sloop Herkemer, Bellevue,
Brett Miss William-street. Brett, George, carter, 3 Moore's-street. Brooks Mr.
a child of, AEt. 1 year. Brooks widow, 23 Banker-street. Brooks John Wallis,
surgeon 44 Dey-street, aet. 44, England. Browers Mr. a child of, aet. 18
months. Brower Mrs. wife of William, 53 Broad-street, AEt. 40. Brown Ebenezer,
labourer. Brown Jannet widow, AEt. 60, 23 Cliff-St. Dalkieth, Scot. Brown Mr.
Crane-wharf. Brown Mrs. Division-street. Brown Thomas, brewer, 5 Lumber-street.
Brown widow Deborah, do. Brown Joseph, tailor, 42 Chamber-street. Brown John,
mariner, 7 Magazine-street. Brown Wm. tanner, 20 Skinner-street. Brown John,
Bellevue. Brown Mrs. Magazine-street. Bruce William, grocer, 129 Front-street.
Aberdeen, (S.) Brunn Jacob, Catharine-street. Brush, carpenter, a young man,
Brush, Mr. a child of, E Rutger-street. Brush John, baker, a child of,
Broadway. Bryant, widow of the late doctor, 36 Chamber-street, AEt. 67,
consumption. Bryson James, merchant, 289 Pearl-street, Scotland. Buchan Peter,
7 Pine-street, clerk of John and A. M'Gregor, Scotland. Buck Francis, a child
of, Eden's Alley. Buchanan William. Ireland, Buckle, Wm. merchant, and wife,
145 Chatham-street, C. Buckley James, mason, 3 Ferry-street. Buckle John B.
Budden William, of the sloop Bridget of New York. Bull Mr. a child of, AEt. 2
years. Burdon Dominick, Bellevue. Burch Mr. aet 52. Burchell Mrs. aet 44.
Burges David, son of Uriah, grocer, corner of Gold and Fair streets, drowned in
the N. River, aet 8 years. Burger widow Jane, 75 John street. Burger Cato, a
black, Bellevue. Burger Daniel, block-maker, the son of, 33 Frankfort-stt.
Burges Rev. Mr. of the Protestant Episcopal Church, West Indies. Burgoo Mrs. 19
Fair-street, aet 78. Burges Catharine, a black, the child of. Burney Francis,
from the Almshouse. Burns Hugh, Bancker street. Burns Simon, do. Burns James,
hospital. Burns Patrick, the wife of, Charlotte street. Burns William, a child
of. Burns John, of the ship Patriarch, Bellevue. Burnsted Mary, Peck slip.
Burton William, livery stabler, 53 Maiden Lane. Burras Caty, an infant, 17
Vesey street. Burras John, chair maker, 2 Nassau street, 48 years. Burras, the
child of, John, aet 2 years. Burrow Doctor, the negro of. Burrows Miss,
daughter of Capt. John, Philadelphia. Bush Charles, tavern keeper, 19 Chatham
Row, dropsy. Bushfield Thomas, the wife and child of, 18 Stone street. Butler
Nicholas Harry, block maker, Rose street. Butler George, tailor, 10 Harman
street. Butler Robert, a black, mariner, 94 Cherry street. Butterworth Isaac,
infant of James, Division street.
C
Calbraith John, 24 Bancker street. Calder James, child of Andrew, 23
Murray-St. Scotland. Caldwell Milcken, physician, 142 Water street, Scotland.
Callahan Martin, grocer. Camerdiner Joseph, shipwright, Harman street. Cameron
Jane, 18 Fletcher street, Scotland. Campbell Elizabeth, Almshouse. Campbell
Samuel, bookseller, wife of, 124 Pearl street. Campbell Mrs. aged 82. Canada
Mrs. a child of, aet. 5. Canbie Margaret, Bancker street. Cannon Mr. aet. 74.
Carle Solomon, merchant, 53 Gold street. Carman Abraham, Catharine street.
Carman Wm. carpenter and inspector of lumber, 90 James street. Carnes John,
Bellevue. Carpenter Isaac, consumption. Carr Joshua, grocer, the wife of, 1
Ferry street. Carr Bridget, 30 E. George street. Carr Conrad. cartman, 21
Bancker street. Carr Mr. a child of. Carsin John, Bellevue. Carson Mrs. Bayard
street. Carrol mr. aet 30. Caruthers James. Carver Morris, mariner, Water
street. Case Abraham. Casey George, 68 Ann street. Casey James, 30 Rutger
street. Cassady Bridget, Cross street, aged 16. Cashin Patrick, 230 Water
street. Cas^in mrs. midwife, Bayard street. Casterline David, blacksmith, the
wife of, 46 Gold street. Casterline Silas, grocer, 60 Gold street. Castile
Elizabeth, Bayard street. Catharine, infant of a black woman, Catharine street.
Cation Archibald, grocer, 281 Water street, Scotland. Cation Susannah, wife of
David, 90 William street, aet 40, and Ann Eliza, his daughter, aet 16. Cave
Mrs. aet 34, child bed. Cavin John, grocer, aet 26 years, 189 Washington
street. Cavin John, a child of, near the Bear market. Ce David, Princess
street. Cellas Alexander, an infant, Alms house. Cerren mr. painter, Ferry
street. Champlin Seabury, artificer, 49 Beekman street, Connectticut. Chandler
Vincent, a child of. Chapman Henry, aet 52, merchant. Chappin Tarretta, Powles
Hook. Charles, a mulatto, Bellevue. Charles, a Swede, Bellevue. Charters John,
student of medicine, Barclay street. Chason John, Bellevue. Chatfield Arnold,
at Doctor Lord's, 159 Front street. Cheeseman Samuel, of the ship America.
Cheeseman Samuel, carpenter, and his son William, Gibbs Alley. Cheeseman
William, 39 Catherine Street. Cherdevoine John, son of Isaac, Beekman Street.
Cherpentea Philip, 39 James Street, France. Chickering D. physician, 44 Ferry
Street. Christie Alexander, bookbinder, the wife and daughter of 3 Rider
Street, Scotland. Christopher Hester. Church John B. a negro boy of, 52
Broadway. Clansey Michael, bellevue, from the sloop Herkimer. Clark Lindsay, on
board the schooner Polly. Clark Henry 49 Pearl Street. Clark Benjamin, son of
John Bowery Lane. Clark Mrs. milliner 332 Water Street, Ireland. Clark Hannah,
the daughter of Simeon, George Street. Clark William, William Street. Clear
James bellevue. Clement William, grocer, 50 E. George Street, Scotland. Climson
Martha, wife of William tea-waterman, Bayard Street. Cline Godlieb bellevue.
Clohosey John, Gold Street. aet. 40. Cobisher Elenor, a child from the ship
Nancy, Capt. Forest, Ireland. Cobbie John, carpenter, 31 James street, England.
Cobbet Timothy, Bellevue. Cochran Richard, 41 Liberty street. Cockran Mrs. a
child of. Coburn Edward, Fisher street, aged 8 years. Codman Wm merchannt, a
child of, 30 William Street. Codwise George, the wench of 341 Pearl Street. Coe
widow, and Son, 39 Liberty Street. Coil Polly, an infant, alms house. Cole
Benjamin, from Jacob Jones's 15 Front Street. Cole Peter, keeper of bridewell,
a child of. Coen Deborah, wife of, Daniel, silversmith, 95 Maiden lane. Coleman
Bethuel, mariner of the brig Felicity, bellevue. Collard John, tailor, 52
(...). George Street. Colic Wm. daughter of, AEt. 11 months. Colic Mr.
shipwright, the child of, Lumber Street. Collier Matthew, a child of, Division
Street. AEt. 1 year. Collier Mr. labourer Division Street. AEt. 28. Collins
Seth, from Dr. Wainright's 152 Pearl Street. Collins Mary, aet. 21. Collins
William, junr. cartman, 37 Chapel Street. Collins John, an infant, sixth ward.
Collins Mrs. of the old American company. Collins Lawrence, a child of, 124
Chatham Street. Colter Mr. a child of. Comret James, accidental death.
Commerdinger Jacob, ship carpenter, Harman Street. Concklin John C. grocer, the
wife and child of, New Slip. Concklin Hannah, bellevue. Condren Margaret, aet.
27. Conick Richard, 25 Peck Slip Coning James, city marshal, 25 Chapel Street,
Scotland. Conner Mrs. aet. 75. Conolly Elizabeth, bellevue. Connoly Lawrence,
Ireland. C. Connolly Thomas, shipwright, 29, Cheapside. Connolly John ship
builder Harman Street. Connor Daniel, Charlotte near Henry Street. Cooley John,
hospital. Cooper Isabella, alms house. Cooper Nancy, Dey Street. Cook William
Lumber Street. Cook Betsey bellevue. Cook John, do. Copland Margaret, widow
Ireland. Cope Anne, Dye Street. Copp Wm. bellevue, late one of the editors of
the Gazette published at Kingston, Ulster county. Corrin Rebecca, 48 Catharine
Street. Corey Abraham, Joiner AEt. 20 Reed Street. Cote Anthony, a lad from 106
Maiden Lane. Cottle Thomas, from the hospital. Cotton Elenor bellevue. Cou^ee
Abigail, a black woman. Coutant Daniel, shoemaker, 79 Chatham Street. Coutant
John grocer, Bowery Lane. Covenhoven widow, and daughter, 59 William Street.
Convert Abraham, tea-waterman, and two sons, Third Street. Cowan John,
labourer, the wife of, E. George Street. Cowan Richard. Cowley George, sexton
of the methodist church 32 John Street. Cox John, a hired servant at Doctor
Romaine's corner of John and Nassau Streets. Cox John W. hair dresser, 62 John
Street, England. Cozine John, judge of the supreme court, 42 Beekman Street,
AEt. 56. Craig William, labourer, the child of, Batavia Lane. Craig Ann, a
young woman. Craton Mrs. AEt. 44 decay. Crawford James, hospital. Cree Joseph,
printer, C. Crepes Conrad grocer, E. Rutger Street. Germany. Crindle Samuel,
bellevue. Crolius John, a child of Chatham Street. Crook Sally, an infant, from
Mr. Buskirk's, Read street. Croker Mr. a child of, AEt. 1 month, fitts. Crooker
Mrs. Division street, AEt. 40, child bed. Crookshank James, son of Benjamin,
cabinet maker, 131 William street, AEt. 22, Aberdeen. Crosbie Wm. grocer, 61 E.
George street. Crosier mr. AEt. 28. Crowley Florence, accountant, a child of,
59 Cherry street. Crowley Rebecca, John street. Crowley Catharine, Bellevue.
Crowley Betsey, an infant, Mulberry street. Crowley Mrs. Pearl street. Crum
Ann, Bellevue. Culph Jacob, labourer, Bellevue. Culbertson William, Bellevue.
Cummings Mr. a child of, AEt. 1 year. Cummings Ag^^ss, wife of Wm. marshall, 45
Rutger street. Cummings Mr. a child of, AEt. 4. Curles James, Whitehall street.
Currie Francis, the wife of, E. Rutger street. Currie John, carpenter, 8 Pine
street, AEt. 40. Currie Arch. nephew of, John, merchan^, 41 Stone-sreet. Currie
Michael, copper plate printer, Barclay near Church street, Ireland. Curtenius
Peter, merchant, the wife and child of, 122 Liberty street. Curtley Chas. an
infant, 47 Chatham street. Cutler Benjamin, the wife of, 162 Fly market. Cutler
Henry, Harman street. Cyphert George, and wife, labourer, 115 Chatham strt.
D
Dailey Joseph, shipwright, the wife of, 95 Harman street. Dally mrs. Harman
street. Dally Catharine, wife of Philip, smith, 45 Chatham strt. Dally John,
Bellevue. Dalziel John, clock maker, 72 Broad street. Daniel Francis, 328 Water
street. Daniel mr. a child of, AEt. 7 months, fits. Daniel mrs. AEt. 36, child
bed. Darling James, printer, at Peter Graham's, cabinet maker, 19 Robinson
street, Scotland. Darling Elizabeth, Bellevue. Darney Thomas, Bellevue. Darrow
Wm. 83 Warren street. Davenport Rufus, hatter, a child of, 327 Pearl street.
Davenport Mr. a child of, Fayette-street. Davis Brooks, Henry near
Charlotte-street. Davis Mr. a child of, AEt. 2 months, ^its. Davis Samuel,
Bellevue. Day John, carpenter, daughter of, 18 Roosevelt-street. Day Mrs. wife
of William Dean Isaac, daughter of, Barclay-street. Dean Susan,
school-mistress, Barclay street. Debart Ann, daughter of Francis Urban, aged. 6
years, France. Debaugh John, Bellevue. Debow Robert, aged 20, son of Garrit,
and his daughter Mary, aged 16, and a wench. Debrosses Mr. aged 18, decay. De
Buen Mary, Bellevue. Degrote Pompey, a black, labourer. Degrove Harman, Little
Catharine-street. Delanoy Mr. a child of, aged 12. Delarue Baudwin, blacksmith,
3 Murray street. Delanoy Wm. 319 Pearl street. Delanoy John, aged 12 years and
6 months, do. Delotbinier Charity, Albany coffee-house. De la Roach Franklin,
clerk to colonel E. Stevens. Demarest David, grocer, a child of, corner of
Chapel and Thomas-streets. Denning Jacob, old age. Denton Joanna, at John
Richey's, 95 John-street, aged 30. Denton, house-carpenter, from Boston. Depew
Aaron, corner of Chamber and Church-streets. De Riemer John, son of Richard,
George streets. De Ruyter Cornelius, Batavia-Lane. Devou John, cartman,
Mott-street. Dewie Benjamin, Bellevue. Dewitt Mary, an infant. Dibble Phillis,
a black, Bellevue. Dickinson, widow Ann. Dickinson Abraham, shipwright, a child
of, Bedlow-street. Dickson widow, Bowery-road. Dickson Mr. ship carpenter, a
child of. Dingly Amasa, physician, 20 Nassau-street. Dinwoodie James, teacher,
2 Cedar-street, Scotland. C. Dobson Mr. gunsmith, aged. 38, and his wife,
Ireland. Dobbs Benjamin, tobacconist, a child of, 54 Warren-street. Dodds
Robert, silk dyer, the son of, 178 Broadway aged 14. Do Susannah, 195
Water-street Dodge Jeremiah, a daughter of, Bedlow-street. Dolbeer Ely,
carpenter, a son of, Henry street. Domenget Francis, 57 Pearl street. Donagan
Hugh, between New Slip and Catharine-street-market. Donagan Betsey, a young
woman, Cherry-street. Donaldson George, near the North River Furnace. Donaldson
Daniel, Bellevue. Donavan Jerome, aged 22. Donavan Richard, 69 Cherry street,
aged 68. Donavan Timothy, tobaconist, 61 Catharine-street. Doolet George,
architect, 37 Beaver street, Ireland. Doolet Ann and Catharine, daughters of,
do. Doring Mr. a child of, aged 18 months. Dorman Mr. a child of, aged 3
months. Doty Jacob, merchant, 304 Pearl-street. Doughty Mrs. aged 65. Douglass
John, servant at the old coffee-house. Douglass William, Bellevue. Douglass Mr.
a child of, aged 10 months. Douglass Samuel, 13 Moors buildings aged 40. Doyle
Robert George-street. Doyle John Bedlow-street. Drummond James, Henry-street,
and his wife Mary. Dubois Joseph, goldsmiths, 81 John-street, and child.
Dudleston Ralph, corner of Lumber and E. Rutger-street. Duff Daniel 59
Ann-street. Duffie Ross, cooper, the wife and child of, Fly-market. Duffie
Patrick, 3 Moore-street. Duffield Caesar, 3 Upper Hague-street. Dugan Richard,
shipwright, and wife, Birmingham-street. Dufee Margaret, Bellevue. Dunlap widow
Margaret, the son of, 8 Lumber-street. Dunlap Robert, shipwright, 8
Lumber-street. Dunlap James, 31 Cherry-street. Dunn Margaret, Fly-market, aged
73. Dunn Mrs. 10 Maiden-Lane. Dunscomb Daniel, ironmonger, 301 Pearl-street,
and wife. Dunscomb Samuel, clerk in the bank, 52 Fair-street, and daughter.
Duyer Benjamin, Bellevue. Dyne Martin, mariner, Bellevue. Dyson Elizabeth,
Catharine-^lip.
E
Eden Medcef, gentleman, 38 Gold-street, at his country seat Bloomingdale, aged
56, England. Eddy Nancy, 34 Lumber-street. Edwards John, Sixth-street Bowery.
Edwards Betty Catharine-street. Egbert Benjamin, grocer a child of, 54
Fair-street. Eichell Henry, blacksmith, 28 Fair-street, Germany. Ellis Mr. --
aged 79. Ellis Josiah, merchant, 24 New-street. Ellis William, Lumber-street.
Ellis Mr. a child of, aged 9 months, flux. Elmore John, from a boarding house,
in John-street. Elsworth John, the wife of, 23 Broad-street. Elsworth widow,
Hester, 14 Beekman-street. Elsworth Verdine, the slave of, 24 Vesey-street.
Emmerson, Mr. a mulatto man, a child of. Engle Garrit, 10 Rosevelt street.
English widow, the son of, 16 Pine-street. Ernings John Jacob, 120
William-street* an apprentice. Evans Catharine, servant of Patrick H. Merry, 88
Roosevelt-street. Evans John, apprentice to Henry Aertly, Frankfort-street.
Evans Thomas, Bellevue. Everson Ann, Bedlow-street, near E. George-street. Ewen
Benjamin, shipwright, Third-street, aged 30.
F
Fagan Barney, 159 Front-street. Fagenham John, rigger, 7 Lumber-street.
Falconier Benjamin, a lad, 97 Cliff-street. Fanning Richard, shipmaster, New
Orleans. Farrel John, 73 Cherry-street. Farrel Thomas, aged 21. Faugeres Peter,
physician and surgeon, 19 Rose-street. Faugeres John, son of Dr. Lewis
Faugeres, John-street, C. Fenton John, hair dresser, 68 Gold-street, aged 38.
Fenton Mary. Ferguson Ebenezer, a son of, 44 George-street, Scotland. Ferguson
John, from John Martin's, near Iver's Rope-Walk. Fernhaven George, the child
of. Ferringhoven George, a child, Wm. street. Ferris Mr. a child of. Ferris
Samuel sen. Susan and Phebe, daughters of, Greenwich-street, C. Fifer Mrs. aged
84. Filton Alexander, 101 Water street. Fink Barney, 42 Rutger-street, and
child Mary. Fincher Mr. aged 42. Finlear Polly, 45 Cliff-street. Fish Edward,
160 Fly-market. Fisher Mrs. Fitton Alexander, 101 Water-street. Fitzgerald
Elizabeth, 98 Pearl-street. Flading Frederic, Wm. the wife of, First-street.
Flanaghan Judah, from on board a ship from Newry, Ireland. Fleming Carn,
Bellevue. Fletcher Mary and Elizabeth, 98 Catharine-street. Fletcher Thomas,
Bellevue. Flinn Miss, aged 31. Flinn Patrick, grocer, Water-street, near
Peck-^lip. Flinn Nancy, wife of James. Flinn Sarah, wife of Lewis, D. fruiterer
Water-street. Flint Abigail, wife of William, 48 Roosevelt-street. Flood James,
mariner, Bellevue. Folks John, mariner, of the ship Jean, Bellevue. Folkinson
Adolph, mariner, Bellevue, Sweden. Foot George, the infant of Cecelia,
Barclay-street. Force Mrs. 146 Pearl-street. Force Henry, a Dutch lad, from 102
Front-street. Ford Mr. a child of, aged two years. Forman George, printer the
wife of, 145, Water-street. Foster Rev. Benjamin D. D. of the first Baptist
church, 37 Gold-street. Foster Isaac, 3 Front-street. Foucaud Charity,
Cheapside. Fowler Mr. the child of, Robinson-street. Fowler Mr. James-street.
Fowler Mr. aged 45. Fox Seth, from Seth Kneland's new Albany basin. Fox Arthur,
hospital. Frances Catharine, 66 Wall-street. Francis Jacob, cabinet maker, S.
George-street. Franks William, minature painter, London. Fraser John Broadway,
near the Union Furnace. Fraser Alexander, the wife of, Lumber-street. Freck
Jacob, the child of, Mulberry-street. Fre^bust Matthew, cooper, Stone-street.
Freeman Thomas, 91 Division-street. Freelon Sarah, a black at Thomas Ogelvies.
Freely Charles, 21 Skinner-street. Freeman Nancy, Eden's Ally. French Edward,
mariner of the brig Sally Bellevue. French Henry E. Bellevue. Fritz Elias, the
child of, Division-street. Fritz John, cartman, the child of, Pearl-street.
Fritz John, labourer, 3 Reed-street. Fritz Elizabeth, a child of. Fry Mr. a
child of. Fulham John, grocer, 239 William-street, Ireland. Furch Melchor,
musician, Church-street. Futer Pompey, a black man, Partition-street.
G
Gallalee Matthew, baker, wife of, 3 Cliff-street, childbed. Gale Mrs. aged ^7.
Gantz Otho, carpenter, Potter's-hill. Ganser Cloe, a black, Charlotte-street.
Gant Thomas, aged 8 years, hospital. Gardner Phebe, 20 Ferry-street. Gardner
Rachel, a black, Alms house. Gardner Archibald, son of Thomas, merchant, 212
William-street. Gardner Jacob, Lumber-street. Garland Clara, 100 Lumber-street.
Garlic Mrs. Water-street, by the New market. Garrison Peter, labourer, the
child of, Henry-street. Garrit Mary, the wife of David, Winne-street. Gashem
Mr. the wife and child of, William-street. Gathin Mrs. Frankfort street. Gaul
Matthew, the child of. Gaunt Elizabeth, widow, 55 John-street. Gentle Elenor,
wife of Robert, labourer, Magazine-street, Scotland. Genyard Mr. 75
James-street, France. German Jacob, joiner, the wife of, 19 Dutch-street.
Getfield Mr. aged 25, decay. Getfield Mr. a child of, aged 9 months. Getham
Ann, wife of Thomas, 34 Frankfort-street. Ghraw Frederic, Pump-street, Holland.
Gibbs Isaac, grocer, a child of, 37 James-street. Gibson Elizabeth, Bellevue.
Gibson James, Bellevue, a mariner. Gibson Lewis, grocer, a child of,
Augustus-street. Gibson Margaret, mother of James, broker, 193 William-street.
Gilett Master. son of Mrs. Gilett. Gill Mrs. white-washer, 23
Marketfield-street. Glen, widow, and her son John, carpenter, Ireland.
Glentworth captain, aged 40, 60 Gold-street. Glentworth mrs. aged 65, do.
Goerch Cassimere T. city surveyor, 76 Gold-street, Germany. Goles, Mr. the
child of, Pump-street. Golden William, an apprentice to John Tiebout printer,
C. Goodhin Benjamin, Bellevue. Goodman Mr. aged 29. Gordon Ann, 30 Ann-street.
Gordon Mary, widow, near the Union Furnace, aged 58, Scotland. Gordon Hannah,
wife of John, a black labourer. Gore Richard, Cheapside. Gosman Jacob,
carpenter 4 Vesey-street, a child of. Gothard Mrs. Gough James, wife, and
daughter Eliza, 56 Beaver-street. Graham William a child of, aged 18 months.
Graham Francis, Warren-street. Graham James Bellenue. Gowan Alexander Bellevue.
Grandine Mr. -- aged 36. Grant John, a lad at Robert Wiley's baker 89 Catherine
Street. Grant Alexander James-street Grant Catharine, 59 Chatham-street. Grant
Martin 47 Rosevelt street. Grant Godfrey, a child of, almshouse. Green George,
aged 45. Green Robert, M. Catharine street. Green Mrs. aged 25, decay. Green
Mr. aged 21, accident. Greenleaf Thomas, editor of the Argus, 54 Wall-street.
Grendelmier Mrs. Princess-street. Grendelmier Margaret, do. Grendelmier Jacob,
Skinner-street. Griffith James, and wife, 369 Broadway. Grigg Mrs.
Partition-street. Griswold captain, a child of, 3 Front-street. Groatfield Mr.
a child of. Grove Dorcas, a black, the child of. Gunn lames, 61 Reed-street.
H
Hagadorn Francis, cartman, second-street. Haight John, corner of Read and
Church-streets. Haight William, Bellevue. Hall widow Mary, 96 Catharine-street.
Hall Richard, mariner, Bellevue. Hallet Mr. a child of, aged 9. Hallet Mrs.
aged 22. Halliday Wm. grocer, Frankfort-street, Scotland. Halligan Samuel, 72
William-street, Ireland. Halsey John, Christian, the servant of, 35
Pearl-street. Ham Wandle, the wi^e of, 45 Broad-street. Ham Hannah,
James-street. Hamilton Alexander, major general, the black man of, 26 Broadway.
Hamilton Jane, a young woman, Scotland. Hamilton James, 4 Bancker-street.
Hamilton John, drayman, 12 Lumber-street, C. Hamilton Mrs. aged 48, pleurisy.
Hammel Nancy, the infant of, Hammersly Polly, at Wynant Van Zandts, 35 William*
Hammond Mrs. at Mr. Chas. Swans, 16 Cliff-st. aged 85. Hand Bartholomew, 31
Cherry-street. Hand Matthew, 28 Cherry-street. Handy Phebe, Bellevue. Handy
Francis, a boy, Almshouse. Hannah, a black, South George-street. Hanover
Edward, corner of Eagle and Norfolk-streets. Hardcope William, Orange-street.
Hardenbrook Peter, paver, the wife of, 37 Lumber-str. Harding Richard, carver
and gilder, 1 Cross-street. Harding John, the wife and child of, 116
Cherry-street. Hardy Nicholas, merchant, aged 23. Hardgrave Mr. a child of,
aged a years, flux. Hardlow Elizabeth, 72 Murray-street. Harper Gideon, cooper
and culler, No. 50 Gold-street. Harper Thomas, son of James, grocer, 154
Fly-market. Harper Mrs. hospital. Harrington John, hair dresser, 10
Wall-street. Harris William, cartman, 72 Read-street. Harris Samuel. Harris
Thomas, from Those. Maule's, mercht. Bellevue. Harris Betsy, Lumber-street.
Harrison Edward, Bedlow-street. Harrison Mary, widow, 57 Ann-street. Harry, a
mulatto boy, found dead in Mr. Styveson's barn, out ward. Harsin Garrit, member
of the common council, 36 Wm. st. Heart Mr. at William Mathews, corner of
Roosevelt and Bancker-street. Heart George, blacksmith, and wife, each aged 45
years, Henry-street, Scotland. Hartwich John, pump-maker, 27 Cherry-street.
Harvey Thomas, merchant* the wife of, 134 Front-str. Hary Nicholas, at John
Butler's, block maker, Charlotte-street, aged 18. Hassall Mr. Cherry-street,
aged 46. Hatch Thomas, tin-plate worker, Cherry-street. Hatcoff, child of, a
German. Hatfield Jane, the child of, 60 Dey-street. Hatfield John, a child of,
29 Reed-street. Hathaway Edmund, apothecary, 140 Front-street, Eng. Haviland
Caleb, wine and porter merchant, 77 John-str. Haviland John, tobacconist, 130
Front-street. Haviland Horatio Gates, 39 Pine-street. Hawes Mr.
Charlotte-street. Hay David, mason, 38 Lombard Street, Scotland. Haydock Henry,
merchant* and his daughters Jane and Elizabeth, 251 Pearl-street. Haydock John
W. merchant, 276 Pearl-street. Hayney Arthur, hospital. Hays Jacob,
conveyancer, a child of, 63 Chappel-street. Hays Thomas, shoemaker, and child,
5 William-street. Hearsey Mr. the wife of, 72 Wall-street. Heath Mrs. aged 42.
Heberton John, tailor, wife of, 6 George-street. Hegith William, Bellevue.
Henderson Alexander, Bellevue. Henderson John, grocer, 89 James-street, aged
24, Ireland. Henderson Alexander, aged 16 and Mary aged 21, the son and
daughter of Hugh, late merchant William-street. Hendricks Uriah, merchant 112
Pearl-street, London. Henigan John labourer 28 Cherry-street. Henigan Samuel,
clerk to Mr. Ingraham, merchant Pearl-street. Henniston John, 10 Wall-street.
Henry Francis, mariner, Bellevue. Henson Alexander, Bellevue. Herbert Mary,
wife of Felix, Tailor, 49 Cliff-sttreet. Herbert Mr. -- aged 30. Herring
Nicholas, seventh ward. Herring Mrs. daughter of widow Bogert. Heron Nicholas,
the wife of 41, William-street. Hewitt Edward, labourer 306 Broadway. Heyer
Alexander, son of Lawrence, baker, 49 Chatham-street. Heyer Hannah, wife of
Walter, news carrier, Lumber st. Heyser John and wife, opposite the bull's head
Bowery. Heyser Mr. -- a schoolmaster the wife of. Hicky John, Bellevue. Hickey
Sarah, 72 Murray-street. Hicks John B. M. D. physician, and surgeon, 69
Beekman-street. Hicks George, tailor, wi^e and two children, 341 Water-street.
Higgins Catharine, Henry-street. Higgins Thomas, Bellevue. Hill Catharine,
daughter of John, cartman, Church-street. Hill Catharine 6 Reed-street.
Hillegan David, mason, a child of, Mott-street. Hind Margaret, Cherry-street,
aged 44. Hinton Phebe, at D. R. Durning's, 96 Water-street. Hodge Elizabeth,
303 Water-street. Hodge Mr. aged 18. Hoffman Tobias, baker, a child of,
Magazine-street. Hoffman widow, Christian, son of, 19 Pine-str. drowned.
Hoffman Mr. Ann, a child of, aged 6 weeks. Holmes Jacob, Bellevue. Holmes Mrs.
Hone Philip, cabinet maker, and wife, 62 Ann-street. Honson Peter, inspector of
beef and pork, 31 Front-str. Hopkins Mr. of the house of Bogart and Hopkins.
Hopkins Samuel, 69 Catharine-street. Hopkins Mr. S. from Middleton,
Connecticut. Hornsby George, Bellevue. Horton Miss, daughter Horton,
shipmaster, aged 20. Hosier John, the son of, Mott-street. Houston Magnus, mate
of a vessel, from Rob. Kennedy's, 19 Cherry-street. How Wm. organ builder, 320
Pearl-st. aged 45. England. How William, a boy, Henry-street. How Hannah,
wife of capt. Bazalleel, 50 Cherry-street. Howell widow Mary, Broad-street.
Howland Arnold, Garden-street. Hubard Mr. aged 34. Hubble Phito, Bellevue,
mariner of the ship Citizen. Hugget Jacob, a black, a child of, Oliver-street.
Hughes Matthew, aged 90. Hughes John, tavern-keeper, E. George-street: Hughes
Mr. a child of. Hull Joseph, son of John, apothecary, 146 Pearl-street. Hund
Mr. aged 26. Hunt widow Jane, aged 75. Hunt Leak, corner of Catharine and
Rutger-streets. Hunt Mr. a child of, aged 2 years. Hunt George, 89
Catharine-street. Hunt Isaac, labourer. Hunt Roger, merchant, 262 Pearl-street.
Hunt Thomas, found in the E. River, shipwright, Lumber-street. Hunter Joseph,
mariner, Birmingham-street. Hunter George, house carpenter, and his son Wm. 24
George-street, Scotland. Hunter Walter, 26 Catharine-street. Hunter William, a
black man, a child of. Hyde John, shoemaker, 291 Water-street. Hyslop
Alexander, merchant, Scotland. Hyslop Herbert, b^ker, Scotland. Hyslop Robert,
merchant, 62 Dey-street, do.
I
Ibbertson Thomas, carpenter, Bedlow-street. Igo Francis, Bellevue. Inman
Oliver, cooper, 76 Warren-street. Ireland William, Clerk. Irving Samuel,
carpenter, 42 E. George-street, aged 50. Isaac Solomon, storekeeper 17
Chatham-street, Germany. Isaac Moses, broker, 32 Barclay-street. Israel
Michael, trader in furs, from Hesse Cassel, Germany. Itman Charles, and Mary,
children of John, blacksmith, 119 Bowery Lane.
J
Jackson Allen, merchant, 277 Pearl-street. Jackson Sophia, 21 Rosevelt-street.
Jackson Mr. a child of aged 1 year, flux. Jackson Elizabeth, 172
Division-street. Jackson widow, 55 John-street. Jackson Mr. a child of, aged 1
month. Jacobs Herbert, Bellevue. Jaffray Thomas, grocer, 324 Water-street,
Scotland. James Levi. James a black, Bellevue. Jarvis Frederick 11 E.
George-street. Jay Jenny, a black, 136 Water-street. Jay Mrs. -- old age.
Jeannett Mrs. Bellevue. Jeffrey Mr. fisherman, Block-Island. Jenkins William,
the daughter of, aged 18. Jenkins James, grocer, a child of. Jenkins Edward,
shipmaster, 7 Hague-street. Jervis Fanny, child of, Charlotte-street. Johnson
Ann, young man from 158, Broadway, Staten Island. Johnson James, mariner, 111
Cherry-street. Johnson Hannah, 125 Fly market. Johnson Sally, found dead in
Read-street. Johnson Jacob, mulatto, Eden's Alley. Johnson, 3 Beaver Lane,
consumption. Johnson James, son of James, 14 Rose-street, aged 18. Johnson
Andrew, infant son of John, Scotland. Johnson Mr. a child of, at the 3
mile-stone. Johnson Richard, shoemaker, Ireland. Johnson Charles, a black man,
Eden's Alley. Johnson Wm. a black infant. Eden's Alley. Johnson Mr. a child of,
aged 1 year. Johnson Betty, Bellevue. Johnson John, Bellevue. Johnson Francis,
his black boy Thomas. Johnson Nancy, a black washerwoman. Johnson William, a
black man, the child of. Jones Mary, Bedlow-street. Jones Hugh, labourer, a
child of, 34 E. George-street. Jones Daniel, 37 Chappel-street. Jones William,
the wife of, New-slip. Jones John B. physician, 82 William-street, aged 36.
Jones captain John, a child of. Jones Mr. a black man, a child of. Jones Jane
and Mary, daughters of Louis, printer, 67 Pine street. Jones Mr. the wise of,
aged 25, 352 Water-street. Jones Benjamin, a black man. Jones Peter, a child
of, Corlear's-hook. Jordan Robert, 73 Wall-street. Joseph John, a child of,
First-street. Joseph John, Almshouse. Josias, a black man, Orange-street.
Joyce Robt. clock and watch maker, 145 Pearl-st. Ireland. Judah Walter S.
student of physic.
K
Kant Godfrey, upholsterer, 58 Beekman-street. Karns Elizabeth, wife of John,
chair maker 2 Cliff-street. Katy mulatto, Bellvue, from the sloop Herkimer.
Kean Elenore, spinster, John-street. Kedore George, joiner. Keersey Abraham, a
child of near the almshouse. Keese Mr. -- aged 74. Keith Matthew, at Mr.
Cowan's. Henry-street. Keller Abm. baker near the methodist church Bowery.
Kelly Edward, Bellevue. Kelly John, a child of. Kelly widow, 83 Murray-street.
Kelly Wm. James, Cheapside-street. Kelly Patrick, labourer, Ireland. Kendle
Charles, silver smith, daughter Mary and wife Elizabeth, 43 Cliff-street. Kenly
John, clerk in the custom-house. Kinnan Thomas, Liberty-street. Kennard Henry,
a black, drowned the fifteenth of August, Kennard Elizabeth, Orange-street aged
23. Kennard Nancy, Bellevue. Kent Clarissa, wife of John, a black. Kent
Catherine, the wife of Jacob. 10 Chamber-street. Kent Jacob, an infant of,
Winne-street, flux. Kent Mary, a black woman, Cedar-street. Kerby William. Kerr
Michael, Skinner-street. Kerr Elizabeth, Orange-street. Keyser George, a child
of, 29 Cheapside. Keyser John, shoemaker, the wife of, Reed-street. Kibbe
Isaac, merchant, a child of, 214 Pearl-street. Kidd John, 328 Water-street.
Kinder John Church St. back of the hospital. Kindle widow Mary, a daughter of,
14 Beekman-street. King Elizabeth, the wife of Edward, 11 Chappel-street. King
John, the chi^d of, Mulberry-street. King Isaac, from Mr. Askin's, 56
Barclay-street. King Rebecca, 19 Lumber-street. King Thomas, 100 Maiden-Lane.
King, a watchman, a child of, near the Union-Furnace. King Edward, 6
Oswego-market. King Mrs. aged 65, small pox. King Jane, Bellevue. Kingsland
Abigail, Pump-street. Kinnard Ann, Bellevue. Kinsay Joseph, a black, Bellevue.
Kip Henry H. inspector of pot and pearl ashes, and wife, Pine-street. Kip Isaac
A. merchant, a child, of 34 Stone-street. Kip Mr. a daughter of, Ru^ger-street.
Kip John H. 105 Greenwich-street, aged 26. Kinsley Simon, a child of. Kirby Mr.
aged 29. Kitty, a wench, 18 Roosevelt-street. Klapper Henry, the wife of,
Moore's buildings. Knapp Mary, the wife of Ebenezar, house-carpenter, 87
Harman-street. Knapp David do. Knapp Marian, Thomas-street, consumption, Knapp
Elenor, a young woman from 122 Cherry-street. Knapp Gilbert, butcher, 87
Harman-street. Knapp Stephen, tailor, 4 New-Slip. Knapp Charles, do. Kneeland
Seth R. grocer, New Albany basin. Knight Elizabeth, 44 Lumber-street. Knight
Hannah, wife of Mr. mariner Lumber-street. Knox Mr. a child of, aged 1 year.
Knox Thomas, merchant, the wife of, C. Kraniel John W. clerk to the late Mr.
Brauver, 53 Stone-street. Krindle Samuel, Bellevue. Kritz Conrad, grocer, E.
Rutger-street. Kroneholm Christian, shoemaker, near Crane-wharf. Kulp Jacob,
Bellevue. Kyle Richard, a child, Almshouse. Kyle John, a boy, 87 Front-street.
L
Laburan Bartholomew, gardner, the son of, Third-street. Lacey Lawrence, from
the almshouse. Lackey Robert, shipwright, the wife of, Lumber-street. Lackey
James and John, sons of, do. do. Lackey Robert, junr. the wife and son of,
Lumber-street. Lake Thomas, Clerk, aged 40, England. Lake Constantia, wife of
William, trader, 98 Gold-street. Ireland. Lamb John, M. D. son of general Lamb,
34 Wall-street. Lamb William, tailor, 11 Rutger-street. Lane Elizabeth, from
the hospital. Lane Thomas, 37 Chatham-street. Lane Timothy, a child of,
Gold-street, aged 11 days. Lardner James, grocer, 282 Water-street, Limerick.
Larkin Charlotte, Bellevue. Larkin William, Bellevue. Larey Abijah. -- aged 17.
Lathum Simon, shipwright, Lumber-street, Lavander Joseph, painter, a child of.
Lavere Mr. -- aged 82. Lawrence Joseph, Bellevue. Lawrence George, shipmaster,
Nantucket. Lawrence Richard, merchant, son of Caleb, 80 John-str. Lawrence
William, Bellevue. Lawrence widow, mother in law of Dr. John B. Hicks, 69
Beekman-street. Lawson John, blacksmith, 59 William-street. Lawson Israel, 30
E. Rutger-street. Lazarus Samuel, shopkeeper, 19 William-street. Leach John,
Church-street, between Barley and Thomas streets. Leach Thomas, baker 217
William-street. Leach Robert, apprentice to Oswald and Hartung, 83 Maiden-Lane.
Leary widow, Sarah, her black woman, 303 Pearl-street. Leary Mr. aged 78,
cancer. Lee Mrs. aged 39. Lee Su^annah at Mr. Caldwell's 138 Pearl-street. Lee
Mr. a child of, aged 1 year. Leechman John. cabinet maker, 60 Cedar-street.
Le^urge Amos, boarding house, a child of, 82 Warren-str. Leitch Samuel, from
John Murray's, 27 Harman-street. Lemon Mary, 111 Division-street. Lemprier
Michael, 34 Church-street. Lenox Joseph, porter bottler, 48 Catherine-street.
Lenox Joseph, labourer, Ireland. Lentz Jacob, and wife, Eagle-street Leonard
Mrs. Division-street. Leonard Mrs. -- aged 48. Leonard Master -- aged 14.
Leonard Mr. mason, the wife and child of, Pump-street. Leper Mr. Bellevue.
Lewiston George, corner of Lumber and Bedlow-streets. Leslie Alexander,
teacher, Broadway. Lent John, brush-manufacturer, a child of, 2 Beekman-s^.
Letts Elijah, and daughter Susan, 22 Cooper-street. Leuthouser William, grocer,
Division-street, Germany. Levi Joseph, a soldier, hospital. Levier Jacob and
his son Joseph, 172 Division-street. Levy Mary, Bellevue. Lewis Betty, a
black, Eden's alley. Lewis Joseph, a black. Lewis --, attorney at law,
Cherry-street. C. Lumbert Henry, tailor, the child of. Lincoln Francis, from
Robert Thomas's, 15 Lumber str. Lincoln Hosea, house carpenter and daughter, 86
Fair-str. Lining Nathaniel, carpenter, Liberty-street. Lint Jacob and his wife
Mary, Eagle-street. Lispenard Oliver, mariner, James-street. Lispenall William,
mariner. Little Mr. -- coachman, Beaver-lane. Little John, cartman, a daughter
of. Little William, 272 Broadway. Littlely Frederick, Hospital. Liver Mary,
Bellevue. Liver Michael and child, tailor, 57 Ann-street. Livinston Elenor,
Bellevue. Lockwood --, drover from the Plough and Harrow, Bowery-lane. Lloyd
Benjamin, a child of, 57 James-street. Lloyd Mr. -- aged 16. Lloyd Mr. -- aged
46. Logan John and wife, Lumber-street. Lot William, the wife of, 111
Division-street. Long Michael, the wife of, mariner, 70 E. George-street. Long
Peter, back of Corlear's-hook. Loosie Andrew, Bayard-lane. Lord Dorcas, aged
19, William-street. Lorias Nicholas, Bellevue. Low William, a child of,
Greenwich street. Low Peter, Bellevue. Lowdon Thomas 25 Warren-street. Lowdon
Richard, Bellevue. Lowellin Hannah, Charlotte-street. Lowan Richard, Bellevue.
Lowrie Mr. Greenwich-street. Ludlam David, Bellevue. Ludlam Cornelius, aged 22,
son of widow Phebe, Rider-st. Ludlam Nancy, aged 32, wife of Stuart, painter,
56 John-st. Ludlow Mr. a child of. Ludlow Mr. Bellevue. Ludlow William, grocer,
the wife of, Fayette-street. Lydig Clara, a wench, 4 Ferry-street. Lion Mr. a
child of. Lion Harris, Ann-street. Lion James, mariner, Bellevue.
M
M'Adams Mr. shoemaker, George-street. M'Adder Daniel, Bellevue. M'Baine Mr. a
child of, aged 1 year. M'Baine Jane, Bellevue. M'Caffel James, corner of Bedlow
and East Rutger-str. M'Carran John, grocer, aged 32, 36 Catharine-street.
M'Carter John, bag piper, Rider-street. M'Carty Chas. son of Jeremiah, 97
James-street. M'Carty Chas. carpenter, Rider-street. M'Carty James, child of
widow Catherine, 5 James street. M'Carty Mr. aged 34, pleurisy. M'Carty James,
Bellevue. M'Call John, 22 E. Rutger-street. M'Call John, carpenter, aged 24,
Scotland. M'Cammon Mrs, wife of Mark, mason, 45 Catharine-str. M'Cauly Patrick.
M'Clay William, carpenter, 115 Liberty-street. M'Clay Thomas, mariner, aged 21,
Bedlow-street. M'Cloud Mr. a child of, near the Air Furnace. M'Cobb Mr.
Beekman-street. M'Colgin James, mason, Catharine-street. M'Collister William,
corner of Broadway and Barley-str. M'Cone Jacob, aged 12 years. M'Connel --, a
ferryman at the Fly-market. M'Coy James, apprentice to Joseph Hitchcock,
sailmaker, 31 Roosevelt-street. M'Crea widow, the daughter of. M'Cready
William, aged 17, son of Mr. E. M'Cready, North Castle. M'Cubbin Robert,
Barclay-street. M'Cue Bridget, 15 Moore's buildings. M'Daniel Peggy, Bellevue.
M'Daniel Hugh, do. M'Donald James, (the noted sportsman) 78 Vesey-street,
Scotland. M'Donald Jannet, widow, at 65, near the Air Furnace, Scotland.
M'Donald Jane, wife of Alexander, carpenter, near the old Furnace. M'Donald
Nelly, from Mr. William Mooney's, 75 Wall-st. M'Donald Donald, 64 John-street,
Scotland. M'Donald Joseph, a lad from the Almshouse. M'Donell Christiana, wife
of Donald, Bellevue. M'Dougal Peter, merchant, 191 Pearl-street, Scotland.
M'Elwaine Mrs. Bedlow-street. M'Elwaine John, grocer, Bedlow-street. M'Elwaine
Margaret, from the ship Nancy, Capt. Forest, Ireland. M'Ewen Daniel, from the
hospital, dropsy. M'Ewing Mr. aged 25. M'Ewen John, aged 36, an officer in the
late revolutionary war. M'Ewen Keturah and her son Henry, Bellevue. M'Fall Mrs.
aged 38. M'Furney Francis, Almshouse. M'Gaeston John, a child of about 14
months. M'Gibbon Garret, Bellevue. M'Gie James, the in^ant of John, Ireland.
M'Gill John, child of, Jacob-street. M'Gowan Ann, wife of Daniel, corner of Dey
and Greenwich-streets. M'Graw Mr. a child of -- aged 1 year. M'Innis Hugh,
Eagle-street. M'Intire Ann, infant of Peter, Warren-street. M'Fall --, a child
of, Mulberry-street. M'Farlane Mrs. the child of. M'Farlane John, clerk, 190
Pearl-street. Scotland. M'Fier John, Norfolk-street. M'Garrah Mrs. aged 47.
M'Gibbon Garret, Bellevue. M'Ginnis widow, Broadway. M'Ginnis John,
Eagle-street. M'Ginlay David, aged 25. M'Green Robert, Charlotte, near Cherry
street. M'Gregor Alexander, Margaret wife of. M'Guire Matthew, cartman,
Chamber-street. M'Gowan John, Church-street. M'Intire Sarah, Bellevue. M'Kay
Henry L. aged 17, Old-^lip, Ireland. M'Kesson John, clerk of the assembly of
this state, 67 Pearl-street. M'Kinlay Peter, china store, the wife and two
children of, 119 Fly-market, Scotland. M'Kinlay Mr. Eagle-street. M'Kenzie
miss. M'Knight William, Bellevue. M'Laren Daniel, shopkeeper, the wife and
child of, 163 Broadway. M'Laren Catharine, at Mr. Buckley's Front, near Peck
Slip. M'Laren John, merchant, 8 Gold-street. M'Laugheray, James, labourer.
M'Laughlin Morris, aged 12, Pearl-street. M'Laughlin Patrick, a child of, aged
9, Pearl-street. M'Laughlin, Charlotte-street. M'Laughlin James a child of.
M'Lean Archibald, one of the editors of the New York Gazette, 116 Pearl-street,
Glasgow. M'Lean Niel, rigger and grocer, the wife of, 62 John-st. Scotland
M'Leod Donald, a child of, Greenwich-streets. M'Masters William, hospital.
M'Michael Mr. aged 39. M'Millan John, porter bottler, Burling-Slip, aged 20,
Ireland. M'Mullan Mrs. Bridget and child, hospital. M'Mullen Patrick, Bellevue.
M'Nair Charles, Blacksmith, 22 Church-street. M'Nichol, Margaret, corner of
Bedlow and Charlotte-st^s. M'Nichol Patrick, do. do. and two children.
M'Pherson Andrew, labourer, 1 Pearl-street, Scotland. M'Quin Edward, Bellevue.
Macon John, the boy of, 25 Cheapside. Mackin Niel, grocer, 24, E. George
street, and child. Madden Michael, Bellevue. Madden John, from the 4
mile-stone. Maers William, gun smith, Ireland. Magie -- Ireland. Maghan
Charles, from Mr. Gies, corner of Bridge and Broad-streets. Magraw Miles,
labourer, Roosevelt-street. Mahan Jerry, the wife of, Charlotte-street. Major
Sally, wife of Samuel, printer, 37 Rutger-street. Malcomb Susan, sister of Mrs.
Malcomb, midwife, (...) Fletcher-street, Scotland. Maney Margaret, Bellevue.
Manley Mrs. Jews-Alley. Maniel George, a child of, William street. Man Captain
William, aged 36. Marian, a hired woman at Mr. Clandenings, 209 Pearl-st.
Martin Peter, James-street. Martin Peter merchant, from Peter Irwin's boarding
house, 59 John-street, Scotland Martin John found dead near the ship yards.
Marsheld Mr. Marville Betty, a black, Bellevue. Mason Robert, a child, 12
Moore's buildings. Mason Thomas, Bellevue. Mastin Charles, cartman, 20
Chesnut-street. Mathews Anthony, a black, the son of, Mathews Charles,
Birmingham-street. Mathewson Ebenezer, 316 Water-street. Maxwell William,
distiller, an infant of, 225 Greenwich-street. Mayune Frances, widow, at Mr.
Bassets, 218 Pearl-street. old age. Mead Margaret, a young woman, sister of
Nicholas, 59 Nassau-street. Mead Solomon, clerk of Mr. Joseph Eden, C. Mead
John, a child of. Mears Peter. Meinell George, 227 William-street. Meldrum
Robert, grocer, aged 26, 87 Greenwich-sttreet, Scotland. Melvin Thomas, mariner
Catherine-street. Merit Ezekiel, mason, the wife of, Murray-street. Merit
John, corner of Henry and Birmingham-^treet. Middlemast Peter, 21
Beekman-street, aged 28. Middleton Moses, a black, Catherine-st. near the
market. Middleton Walter. Mierckel Mr. found near the corner of Liberty-street
and Broadway. Miles Samuel, and wife, E. George-street. Millat Peter, mason, 51
Bowery Lane. Millegan Gilbert, apothecary, aged 23, 43 Water-street. Miller
Adolphus, teacher, 32 Nassau-street. Miller, widow, Catherine, a child of, 21
E. George-street. Miller John silver smith, Dutch-street. Miller Montgomery,
carpenter, Reed-street. Miller William, fisherman, Pump-street. Miller Zebulon,
3 New Slip. Miller Andrew, merchant, Maiden Lane. Miller John, Bellevue. Mills
Jane, daughter of Robert, bookbinder, Mills James grocer, a child of. Minery
Captain, Patrick, a child of, Rutger-street. Minto Christian, consumption.
Misplee Nancy, aged 18, daughter of Thomas, coffee seller, 5 Rider-street.
Misserve George, butcher, Bowery lane. Mitchell Mr. a child of, near the tea
water pump. Mitchell Bridget, Bellevue. Mitchell William, cartman, 94
Gold-street. Mitchell Jane, Bellevue. Mitchell Wynant, marshall, 15
Water-street. Mitchell Mr. tanner and wife. Mix John, a black, Bellevue. Moffit
Polly, Oliver-street. Monikee Mr. a child of. Moody William Thomas, apprentice
to Mr. Hithcock, Roosevelt-street. Moon Mrs. aged 62. Mooney Elizabeth, the
wife of Michael, 39 Rutger-street. Mooney Mr. aged 36, sudden. Mooney William,
butcher, 75 Wall-street. Moore Mrs. aged 30, child bed. Moore Abigail, a child
of. Moore Richard, a black man, alms house. Moore Nicholas, 32 Ferry-street.
Moore James, the wife of, Henry-street. Morehouse Joshua, from the boarding
house of Mrs. Rodgers. Morarius major Ludwig, Roosevelt-street, Germany. Morell
Betsy, Bellevue. Morgan Mr. a child of, aged 6 months. Morris Jacob, cartman,
and wife, 11 Barclay-street. Morris Abraham, a black man, almshouse. Morris
Samuel, slave to Mr. Ebbet, 71 Pearl-street. Morris John, jeweller,
Dutch-street. Morris Mr. the child of. Morrison James, and Thomas, back of the
balloon house. Morrison Jane, an infant, almshouse. Morrison John, cabinet
maker, Fair-street. Morrison Mrs. aged 54. Morrison William, mariner, Bellevue.
Morrison Mr. a child of, E. Rutger-street. Morton Thomas corner of Dey and
Greenwich-streets. Scotland Morewood Thomas, merchant, 128 Pearl street, aged
41. Moses Isaac, Broker. Mount George, a child of, Chatham-street. Mougeone
Peter, at the four mile stone, France. Mountain Bridget, wife and child of
James, corner of Bedlow and George streets. Mullen Barney, Bellevue. Mullan
Robert, Bellevue. Munley Timothy, carpenter, and wife, 147 William-street.
Munson Amos, shoemaker, 82 John-street. Murphy William, apprentice to James
S^^^on, cedar* cooper, 80 Fair-street. Murphy Edward, grocer, E. George-street.
Murphy Richard James, 7th ward. Murphy William, Bellevue. Murray Ceasar, black,
white washer, 49 Cedar-street. Murray Mr. a child of, aged 1 month. Murray
John, Bellevue. Murrel Thomas, 23 George-street. Myers Jacob, from Mr. Van
Tuyl's country house. Myers Ephraim, mariner, 2^, E. George-street. Myers John
R. merchant, the wife of, 17 Dey-street. Myers John, the child of, Read-street.
Myers Samson A. coppersmith, 71 John-street. Myers Rudolph, shoemaker, 11
Chappel-street. Myers Henry, a lad from Dr. Borrows, 77 Water-street. Myers
John, a black belonging to Mrs. Dixon. Myers Mrs. aged 78, consumption. Myers
Susannah, a black, the child of. Mylander Nicholas, tavern and clothier, aged
45, 336 Water-street.
N
Nancy, a black woman, at John Murray's 27 Beekman-st. Nash Mary, wife of
Samuel, mate of a vessel, 69 Cliff-str. Nathan Joseph, trader,
White-hall-street, Germany. Nation Mr. a child of, aged 10 months. Neck
Solomon, from the Hospital, consumption. Nedham Mrs. wife of John, aged 73, 10
Cherry-street. Nevil John, grocer, 78 Wall-street. Newall Andrew, cooper, aged
49, and son Joseph, aged 18, Front-street, at the Crane wharf. Newall Thomas,
son of Andrew, Crane-whar^. Nichols William, aged 25* Nicholas John, a black,
labourer, Orange-street. Nicholson Mrs. James-street. Nickels John, labourer, a
black man, Orange-street. Nightingale Elenor, 44, Lumber-street. Nesbit Betsey,
Bellevue. Netus Philip, Almshouse. Newkirk John, baker, a child of, 49
Liberty-street. Newton Thomas, printer. Nichols William, mason, aged 18. Noble
Mark, 222 Pearl-street. Nocus Stephen, broker, 196 Broadway. Norris Elizabeth,
the wife of Mr. 306 Water-street. Norwood Richard, custom house measurer, the
wi^e of, 52 Gold-street. Nostrand James, printer. Nostrand Epinetus,
ironmonger, C. Noyll Mr. a child of, aged 1 year.
O
O'Brian Richard, Bellevue. O'Brian Timothy, tallow chandler, the son of, aged
16, Cherry-street. O'Brian John, Bellevue. O'Conally Patrick, baker, Ireland.
O'Daniel Hugh, Bellevue. O'Driscal Mary, wife of Jeremiah, schoolmaster, aged
36. Ogden Gilbert, labourer. Ogden widow, Ann-street. Ogden Lewis, aged 48,
Pearl-street. Ogden David, merchant, 123, Pearl-street. Ogden Mr. a child of,
Frankfort street. Ogden John, bricklayer, the wife of, 54 Ann-street. Ogg
James, E. George-street. Ogilvie Alexander, 2 Gold-street. Oliver Mr. a child
of, aged 1 year. O'Neal Chas. Gordon, a lad, son of Henry, Lumber-str. O'Neal
James, Hospital. Orr Alexander, 143 Fly-market. Orr John, Bellevue. Osburn
Henry, mason, E. George-street. Osburn Nathaniel, from the schooner Nancy,
C^p^^i^ Wilson. Oshiel Peter, Bellevue. Oswald Charles, furrier, 83
Maiden-lane, C. Overing Mr. a child of, aged 18 months, flux. Owen Richard, the
son of, 14 Jacob-street.
P.
Pain Captain Joseph, Greenwich-road near the Old Furnace. Palmer Mr. aged 21.
Palmer Mr. Pump-street. Panton Francis, merchant, aged 56, 59 Wall-street,
Aberdeen. Parker Elizabeth, wife of Peter, shipmaster, Division-str. Parker
Sidney, hatter, 207 Water-street. Parsonarius John, F. Hospital. Parsons Aaron,
Bellevue. Parsons John, merchant, 257 Pearl-street. Partell Henry, 4
Jacob-street. Patterson Jonas, Cheapside. Pain Mary, 46 E. George-street.
Peacock Richard, at Mr. Robbins' grocer, sixth ward. Peale Kitian, son of
Charles W. proprietor of the museum, Philadelphia, C. Pearse Robert, pewterer,
82 Nassau-street. Pearson Catharine, Henry near E. George-street. Peck George,
2 children of, Mulberry-street. Peffer Isaac, 38 Harman-street. Pell Elijah,
merchant, Pearl-street. Pendleton James. Penny Mr. aged 18. Pennycook William,
coachmaker, the wife of, 8 Fair-str. Perrold Mrs. aged 29. Perss William, mason
and builder, aged 47, and a child, 34 Gold-street. Peter --, an Italian, aged
33. Peter's John, tailor, a child of, 16 William-street. Peter's Polly, at Nancy
Johnson's Bedlow-street. Peterson Cornelius, blacksmith, the child of,
Division-str. Peterson Goester, 66 E. George-street. Sweden. Peterson Pompey, a
black, belonging to Mrs. Beekman. Petre George, sugar baker, wife and child,
Bayard-street. Petty John, from Garrit de Bow's 132 Front-street. Pettit
Thomas, 46 Cedar-street. Pettit Joseph B. Almshouse, consumption. Phebe, a
black woman, Bellevue. Philips Hannah, 60 William-street. Philips Stephen,
gentleman, Wall-street. Philips Marcus Portius, Bellevue. Pilkins James, 59
Cheapside. Pinkleton James, corner of Lumber and E. George-street. Piper
Julian, widow, and grand daughter Catharine, Bowery. Pit Nicholas, cartman,
the wife of, 44 Roosevelt-street. Place James, butcher, First-street. Player
Peter, the child of, James-street. Plunket widow, Mary, 178 Division-street.
Polhelmus Jacob, old age, Second-street. Porter William, Bellevue. Porter
Peter, labourer, the child of. 80, Read-street. Porterfield Mr. corner
Augustus-street and Tryon Row. Postlethwaite John, 1 Cherry street. Potley
Josiah, corner of Division and Orange-street. Powers John, 7 Charlotte-street.
Preston Catharine, 327 Pearl-street. Price Ruben, the wife of, 9 Barley-street.
Pride Peter, house-carpenter, the infant of, Little Ann-st. Pride Robert,
carpenter, 15 Beaver-street. Prigent Peter, Bellevue. Pritchard William,
Pump-street. Pritts John, mariner, Bellevue. Provoost, widow of James. Prow
John, Bellevue. Prun Jacob, Second-street, and child. Pudney John, Grand, near
Suffolk-stteet. Punches John C. tailor, 27 George-street. Purdy Munmouth,
tailor, 395 Pearl-street. Purdy John, cartman, Little Catharine-street. Purdy
Thomas, Catharine-street, aged 22. Purdy John, at Nostrand's tavern, 52
Bowery-lane. Purvis Robert, 290 Greenwich-street. Purvis Walter, cabinet-maker,
Orange-street, Scotland. Purvis Thomas, do.
Q.
Queran Philip, near Bunker's-Hill. Quick Abraham, a child of, Broad-street.
Quick James, baker, 57 Broad-street. Quin Patrick, aged 27. Quin John, mariner,
Water-street.
R.
Ramage Miss, daughter of Mr. Ramage, miniature painter, aged 16. Randall Mr.
aged 25. Raney Mr. tailor, the wife of, Fairstreet. Raney William, 87
Front-street. Range Mary, Bellevue. Rankin Mrs. aged 28. Rankins Mr. a child
of, aged 3 years, and another aged 6 months. Rankens, Francis, a black, the
child of. Ray Mr. a child of, aged 1 year. Read William, chief Surgeon of the
U. S. frigate Constitution. Readen Henry, baker, and Mary his wife, 93
Gold-street. Readen Mr. a black, child belonging to. Reef Martha, Henry-street.
Reid Mr. aged 70, died on Long Island. Reid Elizabeth, Partition-street. Reid
Mrs. a son of. Reid Elizabeth, widow. Reid Robert, aged 23. Remmy John, potter,
the child of, Potters-hill. Remsen Elizabeth, at Silas Totten's, 115,
William-street. Remsen Dorothea, 32 Water-street. Remsen John H. jun. attorney
at law, 92 Pearl-st. aged 28 Remsen Elizabeth, Bellevue. Renwick William,
merchant, a child of, 67, Maiden-lane. Reside Hannah, 13 Rutger's-street.
Reviere Thomas, son of Jacob, 172 Division-street. Reyley Captain, the child
of, 14 Rutger-street. Reyley Henry, Batavia-lane, and wife. Reynolds Daniel,
Dye-street* Rhinelander Sophia, daughter of Frederick, Greenwich-street, aged
24, decay. Robbins John, apprentice to Mr. Ackley, 108 Gold-street. Rice Mary,
corner of August^s and Magazine-street. Rice Sally, from John Bissett's, ^9
East George-street. Rice Henry, Bellevue. Rich James, tailor, an infant of, 166
Pearl-street. Rich Abraham, carpenter, 18 Thames Street. Richardson Mrs.
Bellevue. Richard William, Pump-street. Richey John I. upholsterer, Sarah the
wife of, 93 John-street, aged 28. Ridley Eleanor, wife of George, merchant
tailor, 130 Front-street, Scotland. Riehl Jacob, baker, Pearl-street. Riker
Matilda, a black woman, a child of. Rinsey Joseph, a black, Bellevue. Rivens
Mr. aged 22. Rivier Nancy, 52 Cheapside-street. Roberts James, East
George-street. Roberts Enos, 21 Rose-street. Roberts Elizabeth, 35
Chappel-street. Roberts Solomon, of the schooner Betsey, Bellevue. Robertson
Mr. the child of, Pearl-street, near the Fly-Market. Robertson Ann, the child
of, Roosevelt-street. Robertson Ann, daughter of Alexander, merchant, 191
Pearl-street. Robertson Robert, nephew of do. do. Robertson Mrs. aged 25.
Robertson Mr. aged 32. Robins Grace, Bellevue. Robins Thomas, clerk to Samuel
Campbell, bookseller, Salisbury, England. Robins Ezekiel, a black man, from the
house of 174 Water-street. Robins Mary, a child, Almshouse. Robins Sarah, wife
of Ezekiel, 174 Water-street. Robins Sarah, 49 Cliff-street. Robins Thomas,
from George Bernents, 50 Water-street. Robins Mrs. Fair-street. Robinson James,
Bellevue. Robinson George, 38 Roosevelt-street. Robinson William, Winne-street.
Robinson Rosannah, a black, near Moore's buildings. Robinson Miss, aged 25, 311
Water-street. Robinson Mr. a child of, aged 3 years. Robinson Benjamin,
mariner, Bellevue. Rodman William, cartman. Rodgers Edward, tavern-keeper,
Ireland. Rodney John, a black, Bellevue. Rogers William, Bellevue. Rogers John,
Bellevue. Romayne Casparas, ca^^^an, the son of, Elizebeth-str. Rook William, a
child of, Banker street. Roole Christian, mariner, Bellevue. Rooreback John F.
Notary Public, ^7 Maiden-lane, C. Roosevelt Helena, consumption, from the
Mayor's, 108 Broadway. Rosanna, a wench belonging to Daniel Nivens, Newburgh.
Rosetta Madam, a child of, Broadway. Rose Maria, aged 20. Rose James, old age,
377 Pearl-street. Ross Ephraim, Catharine-street. Ross Samuel, Bedlow-street.
Roy Alexander, grocer, aged 34, 33 Cliff-street, Scotland. Roy John, Bellevue.
Ruckell widow, consumption, Murray-street. Ruckell Mrs. Chamber-street. Rump
Jacob, a child of, Cross-street. Rump Jacob, Bellevue. Rump Mrs. do. Russel
Catharine, 94 William-street. Russel Francis, tailor, aged 25, 40
Partition-street, Scotland. Russel Timothy, house carpenter, 56 James-street.
Russel Mr. cartman, Warren street. Rustey John, shoemaker, 10 Robinson-street,
Germany. Ruthman John, 20 John-street. Ruthven John, son of John, turner, 30
John-street, Scotland. Ryan Charles, from the sloop Herkimer, Bellevue. Ryans
James, Bellevue. Ryans Cornelius, a child of, aged 6 months. Ryar Henry,
painter, Winne-street, Germany. Ryley Nancy, wife of Charles, Getfield's Alley
Mulberry Street. Ryley Frederic, tailor, Front-street. Ryersdeck Polly,
daughter of late Rev. Mr. Ryersdeck, of Hackensack, at the Rev. Mr. Kuyper's,
27 Fair-st.
S
Saidler James, aged 15, son of James, merchant, 131, Water-street, C.
Sailmaker Elizabeth 41 H^rman-street. Sague widow, 54 Rutger-street.
Saltonstall Richard R. merchant, 1 Gold-street. Sarah, a black, at William
Tilford's grocer, E. George-st. Sarah, do. Bellevue. Saul Mr. p^inter, 330
Water-street, Ireland. Saunders Richard, a child of. Saunderson Mr. 330
Pearl-street. Sargeant Winthrop, from 36 Moore-street. Savoy Tom, a black,
chimney-sweep, Moore's buildings. Scandella, J. B. M. D. aged 28, Venice.
Schneedon John, Bellevue. Schofield James, Orange-street. Schott Mr. Bellevue.
Schroeder John, porter, Read-street, Germany. Schuder William, Inspector of the
revenue, Bridge-street. Schultz George, aged 86 Moore's buildings. Schultz
Henry, and his wife Elizabeth, from Adam Rutland's, 3 mile stone. Schultz
Daniel, physician, from Waterford, New York. Scolar William, Bellevue: Scott
Charles, labourer, Third-street. Scott Robert, and his wife Elizabeth, 332
Water-street, Ireland. Scott William, apprentice to Messrs. Swords, printers,
99 Pearl-street. Scott Mr. Bellevue. Scroggie George, Pearl-street, near the
exchange. Scudder William, custom house officer. Seabury John, Bellevue. Seaman
Henry, merchant, Pearl-street. Seaman Robert, Bellevue. Seaman Mrs. do. Secoy
Jane, mantua-maker. Seygang Mr. Sergeant John, aged 5 months, son of James,
Rector-str* Sergeant William, cartman, 47 Greenwich-street. Servant Mr. a child
of, aged 1 year, flux. Shaddack Jacob, mariner, 31 Lumber-street. Shaffer
Christian, tailor, First-street. Shandy Mary, Almshouse, consumption. Sharer
Mrs. Bellevue. Shareshine Jacob, 13 Rutger-street. Sharpless Aaron, grocer, 1
Cliff-street. Shannon Andrew, labourer, the wife of, 75 James-street. Shaw
Martin, at John Paine's Union Furnace. Shaw Susannah, Henry-street. Shaw James,
130 Front-street. Shaw Andrew and wife, Pump-street. Shearer Mary, 138
Broad-street. Shedden William, merchant, consumption, 99 Water-str. Shenkof^t
John, 78 Roosevelt street. Shepherd Mrs. wife of Thomas, hair-dresser, 47
John-str. Shepherd Hannah, wife of John, Rider-street. Sharer William. Sharer
Mary, 128 Broad-street. Shiel Peter, Bellevue. Shilmerdine John, 135
William-street. Shimmel --, tea water man, Fayette-street. Shet^ell Michael,
shoemaker, the wife of, near New-slip. Shields Catharine, a child of. Shields
James, house carpenter and wife, 50 E. George st. Shineback Henry, 45
Pearl-street. Shoal Mr. a child of, aged 3 years. Shobar Dorcas, 7th Ward.
Shoemaker Mrs. a child of. Shonnard John, tavern-keeper, Bowery. Shotwell
Widow, 102 Chamber-street. Shotwell Isaac, and his son Joseph, blacksmiths.
Shrady John, shoemaker, a child of, 86 Chatham-street. Shuller Ludwig, cartman,
a child of, Vesey-street. Shure Mrs. Shurtz Mr. aged 37. Shute Henry, a grand
child of, corner of Magazine and Little Ann-street. Shute Hannah, aged 26. C.
Sibley Mrs. Camilla, the servant of. Sickles Elias blacksmith, a child of,
Bedlow-street. Sickles John, clothier, the child of, Maiden-lane. Sickles
Catharine, Almshouse. Sickles Zachariah, a child of, aged 18 months,
Gibbs-Alley. Sickles Miss, daughter of widow, 70 Liberty-street. Siemon John,
furrier, 103 William-street, and his wife Susannah. Silkworth Thomas, at
William Hunter's, corner of Lumber and East Rutger-street. Silva Joze Roiz,
merchant, 28 William-street. Simley Mr. carpenter, aged 40, William-street,
Simmons Bath^heba, Henry-street. Simmons Mr. aged 21. Simonson Susan, Bellevue.
Simmonson Lucy, wife of Cornelius, a black physician, Pearl near
Frankfort-street. Simpson Susannah, a black, from 4 New-slip. Simpson Robert,
Bellevue. Sinclair Archibald, grocer and carpenter, aged 32, 227 Water-street,
Scotland. Sinclair John, Greenwich-Road, near the saw-pits. Sinclair Captain,
the wife of, Cherry-street. Sinclair Polly, 45 Cliff-street. Skinner John,
shoemaker, aged 40, No. 50 Banker-street, Scotland. Slidell Michael, aged 60.
Slidell Michael, the wife of, 56 Ann street. Slidell Isaac, do Sloan Mr. aged
29. Smith Albert, musical instrument maker, the wife, daughter and son of, 86
John-street. Smith Adolph, Bowery-lane, consumption. Smith Alexander, merchant,
177 Pearl-street, Scotland. Smith Bernardus, tailor, the wife of, 36
Gold-street. Smith Charles, bookseller, the wife of, 51 Maiden-lane. Smith
Charles, merchant, a child of, Pearl-street. Smith Elihu H. physician, 45
Pine-street. Smith George, physician, Henry-street, from Newburg. Smith Hester,
the wench of, 3 Dover-street. Smith James, on his return to his native country,
England. Smith James, son of Jacob, turner, 94 Beekman-street, aged 31. Smith
James, mariner, of the ship Jean, Bellevue. Smith Mr. aged 27. Smith John,
Bellevue. Smith Jesse, 32 Bancker-street. Smith Melancton, merchant, 52
Greenwich-street. Smith Morris, a child of, Little-Catharine-street. Smith
Nathan, Judge of Ulster County, Bellevue. Smith Phebe, Bellevue. Smith Robert,
cartman, 41 Oliver-street. Smith Mr. aged 42 palsy. Smith Solomon, son of
Solomon, 52 Rose-street. Smith Sarah, Lumber-street. Smith William, aged 16,
apprentice to Archibald M'^^an, printer. Pearl-street. Smout George, the child
of, 157 Chatham-street, (...). Sneden Ann, Bellevue. Snegs Mary, 11
Cliff-street* Snodgrass Catharine, wife of James, Lumber-street. Snodgrass
William, do. Sniffin William, a child of, Rutger's ground. Snowden George,
ship-chandler, 56 Gold-street. Snyder Mr. 66 Dey-street. Sayre David, aged 9
years, France. Spann Juliana, Bellevue. Spangle Philip, a free black, from Mr.
Zunt's, 62 Pearl-street. Specie Henry, apprentice to William G. Miller, baker,
60 John-street. Spicer Joseph, son of Francis, Augustus-street. Spouse William,
at the Old Coffee-house. Springer Richmond, shipwright, and wife,
Lumber-street. Springsteen Elizabeth. Sprung Mr. Broad-street, near the
Exchange, aged 27. Stagg Deborah, 52 East George-street, aged 18. Stagg
Cynthia, wife of Nicholas, 99 Catharine-street. Stagg Eliza, Washington street.
Stanbury William, aged 19, died of a locked jaw. Stanford, wife of the Rev.
John, 81 Fair-street, aged 33. Stanton Mr. the wife of, near the New-slip.
Staples William, merchant, London. Steghi^er John, 18 Nassau-street. Stephens
George, bookbinder, 28 Cliff-street. Stephens Mrs. aged 42. Stevens William, 3
Front-street. Stevens Thomas, and wife Elizabeth, lower end of
Charlotte-street. Stevens Captain, aged 55, consumption. Stevenson --, widow,
housekeeper, Water-street. Stevenson Sally, 34 Ferry-street. Stewart James,
grocer, Crugar's-wharf. Stewart James, 73 Wall-street. Steyner Godlip, 48
Nassau-street. Stickler Adam, Pump near Second-street. Stickler John, an
in^ant, 7th ward. Sti^^^y Catharine, 56 Cherry-street. St^^^house John, grocer,
Nassau-street. Sto^^well, wife of Samuel, constable, 1 Rider-str. aged 46.
Stokes Joseph, of the schooner Hunter, Bellevue. Stone John, 55 Lumber-street.
Stone John, 47 Catharine-street. Stone James, Bellevue. Stonehouse widow
Catharine, the two daughters of, 19 Cliff-street. Story William, labourer, 1
Cheapside-street. Stoutenburgh Thomas, merchant, the mother of, and Sally the
sister of 118 William-street. Strachan William, guager, 83 Pearl-street. Strong
Thomas, Water-street, aged 18. Straubling Henry, Bellevue. Stuart Hannah, 55
Wall-street, aged 54. Sturk Mr. 11 Moore's buildings, Sudderland Mr. a child
of, aged 3 months. Sullivan Martin, Fair-street. Summers Nathaniel, 26
Stone-street. Sunter Elizabeth, wife of Alexander, 114 Chatham-street. Susan, a
black, from the house of Joze R. Silva, 28 William-street. Swain Uriah,
printer, aged 28. Swan James, shoemaker, 84 Harman-street. Swartz Christopher,
baker, near the Methodist church, Bowery. Sweet Mrs. Sweeny Mrs. Cherry-street,
near the ship-yards. Swords Mary, relict of Thomas, of the British 55th regt.
T.
Tared Mr. Philip, hospital. Tar Gee Daniel, saddler, 24 Gold-street. Tarley
Daniel, East Rutger-street, Ireland. Tailor Edward, a lad from George near Gold
street. Tailor George, 249 Water-street. Tailor William, shoemaker, 104,
Maiden-lane. Tailor John, grocer. Teller Doctor, Eagle-street. Telford James,
Read-street. Ten Eyck, Mrs. aged 64. Terleven John, mariner, of the British
packet, Bellevue. Thomas Evan, teacher, 29 Gold-street, C. England. Thomas
Chloe, a black, Birmingham-street. Thomas John, from Thomas Oakes' 90
Warren-street. Thomas Ann, Bellevue. Thomas Sarah, Bellevue. Thompson Mrs.
Bedlow-street. Thompson James, Coffee Manufacturer, 23 Thames-st. Thompson Mr.
a Child of, aged 6 months. Thompsom Alexander, Bellevue. Thompson Mary, wife of
James, Merchant, Scotland. Thompson Thomas, a child of. Thompson, Son of
William Thompson, 34 Ann-Sreet. Thompson Captain, wife of, 169 William-street.
Thompson James, Merchant, wife of, Gold-street. Thompson Mrs. Judith. Thompson,
a black child belonging to Mr. Heyer. Thorn Susannah, First-street. Thrash
William, mariner, Bellevue. Thorn Elizabeth, First-street. Thornton Mrs. wife
of John, Grocer, 163 Fly-market. Thorp Benjamin, 29 Cliff-street. Thurston
Woods, Grocer, a child of, Pump-street. Thurston Samuel, 301 Water-street.
Thurston John, son of John, Merchant, aged 17 Country. Teddeman William,
Charlotte-street. Tinney Lawrence, a child of. Tinker Denny, a black woman, 21
Fair-street. Tielder Thomas, Bellevue. Tilton Alexander, 101 Water-street.
Timpson Mr. aged 28. Tinker Denny, a black, 21 Fair-street. Tinton Mary,
Bellevue. Tingly M. a child of. Titus John, Bellevue. Todd David, Merchant, the
wife and daughter of, 192 Water-street. Todd William, Cross-street. Tolfree Mr.
the child of, Magazine-street. Tom Nathan, Merchant. Tompkins William,
Blacksmith, the wife and son of, 34 Ann-street, England. T^^^en Catharine,
Bellevue, Torrence William, Bellevue. Travis Mr. a child of, aged 8. Tredwell
James, Physician, 130 Fly-market, aged 30. Tremble James, Porter, Henry-street.
Trembly Daniel, Grocer, the wife of, 68 Corlandt-street. Trembly Daniel,
Blacksmith, No. 1 White-Hall-street. Trulight Frederick, Cartman, 71
Chatham-Street. Truman Mr. Master of the African school, a child of. Tucker
John, Bellevue. Tucker Timothy, Henry* near E. Rutger-street. Turley John,
Hospital. Turnbull Richard, merchant, aged 26, William-street. Turner John,
cartman, the wife of, Lumber-street. Turner Mary, Bellevue. Tuttle Elizabeth,
do. Tweed John, 29 Cheapside. Twitchings Elizabeth, wife of Henry, grocer, 74
Front-st. Tylee Mr. the wife and child of, Chatham-street. Tyler --, a man from
the Hospital.
U
Ugo Mr. from J. Warner's, grocer, 58 Frankfort-street. Ulrick Sebastian,
Bellevue. Underhill Jane, 21 Cliff-street. Ustick Charles, 8 Lumber-street.
V
Vache John, artificial florist, a child of, 28 Liberty-str. Vacter Mr. baker,
E. George-street. Van Bremer James, 77 Nassau-street. Vandell Mr. a child of,
aged 1 year. Vandelbeck Conrad, a child of, 19 Barley-street. Vanderbilt John,
of Long I^land, the slave of, from the corner of Ann and George-street.
Vanderbilt Oliver, shoemaker, a son of, 124 Broadway. Vanderburgh Mr. butcher,
a child of, Eagle-street. Vanderright Jeremiah, near the exchange. Van Dyke
Isaac, cabinet maker, and wife, 43 Maiden-Lane. Van Gezen Hector, a slave of
John Quackenboss. Van Heynige Dierk, Orange-street. Van Hook Aarondt,
proprieter of the reading room, 149 Water-street. Van Horn Andrew Smith, a
child of, Fisher-street. Van Every Jacob, 69 Cliff-street. Van Houten John,
carpenter, a child of, Thomas-street. Van Houten Garret, baker, 41
Barclay-street. Van Hover Jacob, 69 Cliff-street. Vanlor John, nailor, 84
Harman-street. Vanmelick Henry, mariner, Bellevue. Van Pelt Mr. a child of,
aged 1 year. Van Vleck Mary, daughter of Isaac, aged 16, Reed-street. Van Vleck
Mrs. wife of do. aged 40. Van Norden John, a child of, Bear-market. Van
Nostrand James, an apprentice, 141 Chatham-street. Van Nostrand Mrs. Van Seyl
Abraham, a child of, Bayard's-lane. Van Wick William. Van Zandt Peter and
Thomas, sons of Peter Pra, merchants, 180 Water-street. Varian Margaret, child
of Isaac, butcher, Bowery-lane. Varet John, Lumber near Catharine-street.
Varick John, physician, 6 Cortland-street Varick Mr. cartman, the wife of,
Lumber-street. Veitch James, the wife and child of, 28, Harman-street. Veitch
Robert, the wife of, 38 do. Verss Mr. Schoolmaster, aged 25. Vielle John, 56
Warren-street. Violet, a black woman, slave to John Jones, Wall-street. Voorhis
John, cartman, a child of, 50 Chappel-street. Vos John P. 60 Broadway.
Vredenburgh William, the wife of, Stone-street. Waddell Isaac, tailor,
Skinner-street, a child of. Wadon John, Bellevue. Wagener John, baker, a child
of, 90 Beekman-street. Walden Jacob, caulker, and wife, near the New market.
Waldron John, and daughter, 3 William-street. Waldron widow, and daughter,
Eagle-street. Waldron Alexander Phoenix, clerk in the bank of New York, 30
Frankfort-street. Walgreen Daniel, Almshouse, Sweden. Walker John, shipmaster,
consumption. Walker George, Almshouse. Walker Mrs. Jews-Alley. Wallace
Alexander, First-street. Wallace Charles, Pine-street. Wallace William, from
Thomas Maule's, 137 Pearl-st. Walser Andrew, carpenter. Roosevelt-street. Walsh
William, tallow chandler, 95 Gold-street. Walsh John, a son of,
Magazine-street. Wanless Mr. 14 Cliff-street. Wandell James, measurer, a son
of, 80 Be^kman-street. Ward Charles, aged 24. Ward Samuel, C. Goldsmith and
jeweller, England. Ward Samuel, merchant, 325 Pearl street, the son of. Warden
Thomas, apprentice, below the hospital. Waring Abraham, New-Albany basin.
Warner Michael, rigger, 18 Mulberry-street. Warner widow Catharine, from Mr.
Wilkes's, 32 Wall-st. Warren Miss. Greenwich Road, near the State Prison.
Washburn Mr. a child of, aged 6 months. Waters James, a lad from Water near
Dover-street. Waters John, Lumber-street. Waters John, Surveyor, the wife of,
Lumber-street. Waters Thomas, oysterman, the wife and daughter of,
Rider-street. Waters Francis, aged 11 days, Cherry-street. Waters William, son
of John, Magazine-street. Watkins William, merchant, Maiden Land, England.
Watkins Richard, aged 22 Do. Watts Captain, Water-street, consumption. Watson
Charles, a young lad from Conrad Shultz's near the state prison. Watson Mrs.
Orange-street. Watson Ja^net, aged 21 from 23 Cliff-street, Dalkeith Scotland.
Watson James, a lad from Water-street. Watson Jane, Chesnut-street. Watson
John, 3^ Lombard Street. Watt Hannah, Bellevue. Way John, baker, a child of, 7
Harman-street. Weathershine Nicholas, cartman, a child of, 8 Augustus-street.
Wedon Abigail, and child, 106 Maiden lane. Wedon John, Bellevue. Weeks
Benjamin. shipwright, the wife of, upper end of Lumber-street. Weeks Widow,
Germany. Weeks Simeon, Lumber street. Weisen^els George, R. conveyancer 63
Church-street. Weldon Mrs. New Market. Welsh Mr. and wife, 18 Ferry-street.
Welsh William, Bellevue. Welsh George, Shoemaker, 61 Cliff-street. Welsh
Nicholas, Oliver-street. Welsh Mr. clerk to Mr. Robert Cocks, 100 Water-street.
Wenman Mr. aged 32 Dropsy. Wentworth William, Attorney at law, 119
Water-street, aged 23. West John, mason, 17 Chery-street. West Mary, a nurse at
Mr. Bassets, 218 Pearl-street. West Mr. aged 33. Wetherby Ann, wife of James,
7th ward. Wheeler Amelia. Division-street. Wheeler Richard, cartman, a child of
Division-street. Wheeler Nancy, 33 William-street. Whitacre Mr. Ship carpenter.
White Aaron, House-carpenter, Vandewater-street. White Richard, Almshouse.
White James, cartman, 25 E. George-street. White Charles, Shipmaster. the wife
of, 73 Roosevelt-street. White Mr. Silversmith, at Mr. Newmans. White
Elizabeth, wife of Charles, Shipmaster, 73 Roosevelt-street. White Mary, a
black woman, Pearl-street. Whiteman Henry, shoemaker, a child of, 65 Cherry-st.
Wick Mr. aged 27. Wilcocks Mrs. 296 Water-street. Wilkes Thomas, mariner
Bowery-lane. Wilkes Matthew, cartman, Musqueto Cove, L. I. Will Laurence,
labourer, the wife of, Mott street. Wilkinson Mrs. from David Ackermans,
Lumber-street. Willet Charles, 121 Harman-street. William, a black child at the
Mayors. Williams James, a black man, the wife and child of Hospital. Williams
Margaret, 65 Division-street, Williams William, mariner, 336 Water-street,
flux. Williams William, 25 E. George-street. William Thomas, a child of, 29
Thames Street. Williams, a child from the hospital. William Jane, confectioner,
William-street. Williamson Mr. Harman-street. Wilmot John J. Water-street, aged
28, Clock and watch maker. Wilson John, baker, a child of, Fair-street. Wilson
Mrs. washerwoman, a child of, E. Rutger-street. Wilson James, Chatham-street.
Wilson Isaac, weaver, and wife, 31 Cherry-street. Wilson Betsey, Bellevue.
Wilson James, from the Hospital. Wilson Elizabeth, 41, Cliff-street. Winney
Joseph, Bellevue. Winship Mary, Liberty-street. Winter Augustus, fur merchant,
120 William-street, Winthrop Tamar, a black. Wishart George, Dean. 319
Pearl-street. Witmore Mr. Fletcher-street. Wolf John, Barclay-street. Wolf
Widow, at Mr. Winters, 120 William-street. Wood Ebenezer. Wood Joshua, 50
Frankfort-street. Wood Mr. Oliver-street. Wood Andrew, shoemaker, and wife, 31
Cliff-street, Scotland. Wood George, aged 45. Wood Mr. Bellevue. Woodruff
Rachel, aged 19 Second-street, flux. Woodruff Joseph, a child of, aged 2 years,
flux. Woolsey Henry, labourer, Harman-street. Worcy William. Worthy John,
Bellevue. Wright Andrew, child of, Walter, mason, Scotland. Wright Mary, widow,
27 E. George-street, aged 59.
Y.
Yauger Frederic, at Robert Hearts, Grocer, 8 Charlotte-street. Young James,
butcher, Third-street, Bowery. Young James, Teacher, 10 Gold-street, Scotland.
Young John, labourer, Edens-alley. Young Margaret, Charlotte-street. Young
John, Saddler, 14 Gold-Street, aged 56. Young Mr, Hester-street aged 41.
Z.
Zellers Casper, gardner, a child of, Bowery-lane.
List of the Burials, in the different grave yards in the city of New York, at
Potter's Fields, and Bellevue, from 1st, August to 12th, November, 1798.
AUGUST.
DAYS. Men. Women. Children. Fever. Total. Trinity. St. Paul's. St. Peter's.
Christ church. United Presbyterians. Dutch churches. German Lutherans. English
Lutherans. Friends. Moravians. Methodists. Baptists. Scotch Presbyterians.
Associate Presbyterians. German reformed. French Protestants. Negroes. Jews.
Potter's Field. Bellevue. 1 Fever cases not ascertained. 2 Returned in gross. 1
Returned in gross. Returned in gross. Returned in gross. 2 1 1 2 1 3 1 1 1 1 2
4 1 2 1 5 1 1 2 1 6 1 2 1 1 1 7 1 1 8 1 3 1 1 9 2 1 1 2 10 2 1 1 2 1 3 1 (...)
2 11 2 1 1 1 (...) 1 12 3 1 1 1 13 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 14 1 1 1 1 1 1 15 2 2 3 3 2
2 16 2 1 3 2 3 17 3 2 1 1 1 2 18 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 19 1 2 1 1 2 1 20 2 4 1 21 4 1 2
2 1 3 22 2 1 2 23 2 (...) 1 1 24 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 25 3 2 1 1 3 26 2 (...) 2 2 1 1
1 4 1 27 133 55 111 5^^ 3 (...) (...) 1 2 1 1 3 2 28 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 29 2 3 3 2 1
1 7 30 4 1 1 3 1 1 1 2 7 1 31 2 3 (...) 11 2 2 2 7 1 (...) (...) 1 4 4
SEPTEMBER.
DAYS. Men. Women. Children. Fever. Total. Trinity. St. Paul. St. Peter. Christ
Church. United Presbyterians. Dutch Churches. German Lutherans. English
Lutherans. Friends. Moravians. Methodists. Baptists. Scotch Presbyterians.
Associate Presbyterians. German Reformed. French Protestants. Negroes. Jews.
Potters-field. Bellevue. 1 12 4 7 16 23 2 2 5 5 1 5 3 2 6 5 1 10 12 1 2 1 1 2 2
2 1 3 13 4 2 14 19 3 2 3 (...) (...) 4 10 8 3 13 21 4 1 4 2 2 7 (...) 5 6 4
(...) 10 18 2 4 5 2 1 1 2 1 6 9 3 5 10 17 3 3 1 2 1 1 5 1 7 8 2 (...) 9 18 4 3
1 1 1 2 1 4 2 8 19 6 9 25 34 4 6 1 3 4 1 3 1 1^ 9 17 8 7 23 32 4 2 2 3 3 3 1 1
2 11 10 17 13 4 30 35 4 3 4 4 3 1 2 1 1 7 5 11 16 13 8 2^ 37 1 5 2 2 4 4 1 1 1
2 10 4 12 26 18 6 42 50 4 10 3 1 1 3 1 1 2 11 13 13 23 (...) 8 28 39 6 7 1 1 6
1 1 3 1 1 7 5 14 27 9 3 33 39 4 3 1 4 2 1 1 4 1 7 9 15 ^3 16 1 38 40 3 3 1 4 3
2 1 1 2 15 5 16 30 (...) 8 42 50 6 4 1 (...) 3 3 1 1 3 1 1 11 7 17 24 16 5 36
45 4 1 (...) 2 1 3 3 1 1 2 (...) (...) 15 5 18 26 10 6 36 4^ 8 2 4 2 2 4 2
(...) 14 6 19 33 21 9 52 63 6 9 5 1 (...) 3 1 1 (...) 6 20 ^1 16 3 34 40 1 2
(...) 4 2 1 3 (...) (...) 20 3 21 21 16 3 38 40 2 4 3 (...) 3 (...) 1 16 7 22
29 14 2 39 45 4 2 2 (...) 2 (...) 1 2 16 5 23 30 16 4 45 50 4 6 2 4 1 1 1 (...)
1 25 3 24 35 10 3 45 48 2 8 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 (...) ^0 8 25 ^6 13 2 40 41 9 2 2 4
1 2 (...) 1 15 4 26 30 27 3 58 60 6 2 2 2 1 5 (...) 1 1 6 (...) (...) 2 (...)
17 9 27 ^9 21 9 48 ^9 6 2 4 3 2 1 1 (...) 2 29 6 28 19 15 4 35 38 1 3 3 5 (...)
1 1 1 1 13 7 29 38 8 3 43 49 4 4 6 (...) 1 2 (...) (...) 2 17 7 30 25 14 4 35
13 3 6 3 1 1 3 2 2 1 17 4 OCTOBER.
DAYS. Men. Women. Children. Fever. Total. Trinity. St. Paul's St. Peter's
Christ's church. United Presbyterian. Dutch churches. German Lutherans. English
Lutherans. Friends. Moravians. Methodists. Baptists. Scotch Presbyterian.
Associate Presbyterian. German reformed. French Protestant. Negroes. Jews.
Potters Fields. Bellevue. 1 27 13 3 38 43 2 5 2 3 2 2 1 2 1 2 1 17 3 2 27 7
(...) 33 36 2 4 2 2 3 1 1 (...) 1 17 1^ 3 20 9 8 ^8 ^7 2 2 1 2 3 3 1 1 1 1 1 14
5 4 17 6 3 ^5 26 2 2 2 1 1 1 4 1 1 ^0 1 5 18 8 4 22 25 1 2 6 1 14 1 6 16 7
(...) 22 23 2 1 1 1 3 2 2 1 1 7 2 7 4 5 1 9 10 2 1 1 1 1 3 1 8 6 11 (...) 14 18
3 2 1 1 1 10 9 7 2 2 9 11 1 2 1 1 1 1 3 1 10 4 5 3 11 12 2 2 1 6 1 11 (...) 3 3
15 22 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 9 6 12 1^ 4 (...) 20 22 1 1 2 1 3 2 1 1 7 3 13 10 4 2 12 16
(...) 1 1 1 1 10 14 10 6 (...) ^6 18 3 1 1 2 1 1 6 3 15 13 9 2 19 24 2 3 3
(...) 1 1 1 1 8 2 16 8 7 4 17 19 3 1 1 1 1 8 2 17 9 6 6 13 21 2 1 1 1 1 1 (...)
2 1 7 1 18 10 3 3 12 16 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 19 6 4 3 10 13 2 1 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 20 7
4 4 10 15 3 5 6 1 21 4 3 (...) 8 9 1 1 1 1 5 22 3 2 4 5 1 1 3 23 5 4 2 9 11 1 1
1 1 1 1 5 24 2 3 1 6 6 1 2 1 2 25 5 1 1 6 7 1 1 4 (...) 26 6 4 3 9 13 (...) 1 1
1 1 1 (...) 6 27 4 6 3 11 13 1 3 1 7 1 28 6 2 8 8 1 2 (...) 3 (...) 29 6 2 1 5
9 2 1 1 1 2 2 30 4 3 1 6 8 2 1 1 4 31 5 2 3 7 2 1 4 NOVEMBER.
DAYS. Men. Women. Children. Fever. Total. Trinity. St. Paul's. St. Peter's.
Christ Church. United Presbyterians. Dutch Churches. German Lutherans. English
Lutherans. Friends. Moravians. Methodists. Baptists. Scotch Presbyterians.
Associate Presbyterians. German Reformed. French Protestants. Negroes. Jews.
Potters-field. Bellevue. 1 8 4 3 11 15 1 2 5 1 1 1 (...) (...) 2 6 6 2 7 14 2 3
1 1 6 1 3 2 1 1 3 1 1 1 4 8 3 1 7 12 1 2 1 6 2 5 4 1 5 4 10 2 1 1 1 5 6 3 1 1 2
5 1 1 3 7 2 3 6 2 11 3 2 2 1 1 2 8 3 1 2 4 1 1 1 1 9 2 2 1 4 1 1 (...) 10 (...)
1 1 3 5 1 1 (...) (...) Months. Men. Women. Children. Fever. Total. August, 133
55 141 329 September, 648 354 150 954 1152 October, 288 158 74 431 52^
November, 41 22 20 39 83 Total 1110 589 ^^5 1424 203^

The number of persons interred in each of the burying grounds of this city,
from 1st August, to 10th November 1798.
Trinity, 214 St. Paul's, 211 St. Peter's, 86 Christ Church, 23 United
Presbyterians, 186 Dutch Churches, 129 German Lutherans, 50 English do. 26
Friends, 42 Moravians, 3 Methodists, 79 Baptists, 28 Scotch Presbyterians, 34
Associate Presbyterians, 10 German Reformed, 29 French Protestants, 10 Negroes,
41 Jews, 11 Potters-field, 667 Bellevue, 207 2086 METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS
MADE IN THE CUPOLA OF THE MUSEUM, AT NEW YORK. AUGUST, 1798.
Days. Barometer. Thermometer. Winds. Weather. Sunrise. 2 P.M. Sunrise, 2 P.M.
Sunrise, 2 P.M. 1 29.70 29.73. 70. 82. N.W. N.W. 2 29.80 29.83. 68. 80. E. S.
Foggy. 3 29.93. 29.91 72. 80. W. S.E. 4 29.67. 29.59 74. 80. S.E. S. 5 29.67.
29.59 76. 84. S.W. do. 6 29.59. 29.63. 74. 84. W. N.W. 7 29.74 29.77 70. 84.
S.W. N.W. 8 29.75. 29.69. 72. 91. W. S.W. 9 29.60. 29.5^ 76. 96. S.W. do.
Distant lightnings in the evening. constant lightning and thunder for 3h. heavy
rains with thunder. 10 29.47. 29.40 7^. 90. S.W. S. 11 29.40. 29.47. 78. 89. S.
S.S.E. 12 29.63. 29.71. 74. 86. Variable. 13 29.80. 29.84. 74. 83. N.E. S. 14
29.82. 29.80. 74. 78. E. S. 15 29.80. 29.84. 74. 82. Variable. heavy show. and
thun small showers. 16 29.81. 29.80. 75. 85. S.W. 17 29.71. 29.70. 75. 90. S.W.
S. do. with thunder. calms. 18 29.66. 29.66. 7^. 90. S. 19 29.70. 29.80. 72.
84. N.E. S.W. 20. 29.80. 29.79. 74. 83. E. S S E 21 29.7^. 29.67. 77. 87. S.W.
S. 22. 29.63. 29.71. 76. 84. N. N.E. a fine shower with lightning and thund. 23
29.92. 29 92. 65. 76. N.E. E. 24 29.82 29.71. 66. 80. S.W. S.W. 25 29.63.
29.63. 76. 91. S.W. S.W. distant lightning a^ evening. 26. 29.62. 29.59. 79.
93. do. do. 27 29.75. 29.70. 77. 85. W. W. 28. 29.61. 29.60. 69. 76. W. S.W. 29
29.61. 29.55. 67. 76. W. N.W. 30 29.62. 29.58. 67. 80. S. S.W. 31 29.61. 29.65.
68. 81. Variable. W. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. NEW YORK, SEPTEMBER, 1798.
Days. Barometer. Thermometer. Winds. Weather Sunrise 2 P.M. Sunrise 2 P.M. S.
rise 2 P.M. 1 29.76. 29.80 68. 80. E. S.E. Sunrise (...) P.M. 2 29.81. 29.87.
67. 77. E. E. 3 29.80. 29.75. 61. 71. E. S.E. 4 29.62. 29.58. 63. 74. E. S.E.
Some rain, with heavy thunder. 5 29.39. 29.39. 69. 74. S.W. S.W. Distant
lightnings. 6 29.43. 29.43. 66. 71. E. E. Some rain. 7 29.58. 29.60. 64. 7^. E.
S.E. Foggy. 8 29.60. 29.60. 63. 70. S.W. do. A small shower. 9 29.66. 29.66.
60. 70 E. E. 10 29.67. 29.67. 63. 77. N. E. 11 29.76. 29.76. 66. 77. W. N. 12
29.97. 30.0. 63. 71. E. S.E. 13 29.90. 29.83. 61. 78. E. S 14 29.77. 29.73. 63.
76. S. S Foggy. 15 29.75. 29.75. 68. 79. S.W. S. 16 29.75. 29.72. 70. ^0. S.W.
SW. 17 29.72. 29.74. 69. (...). Variable. 18 29.78. 29.78. 70. 76. E. S.E.
Foggy. 19 29.78. 29.78. 73. 79. S. S. Fine shower in the evening. 20 29.78.
29.78. 70. 79. E. S.E. Foggy. 21 29.60. 29.67 74. 76. S. S.W. Heavy shower. 22
29.68. 29.68 59. 72. N.W. N.W. 23 29.63. 29.62 62. 74. calm, S. 24 29.62.
29.62. 62. 74. N. N.W. 25 29.51. 29.45 55. 64. N. N.W. A gale. 26 29.70. 29.68.
50. 64. N.W. N.W. 27 29.60. 29.47. 61. 71. S.W. S.E. Small shower at night. 28
29.61. 29.50 50. 59. W. N.W. 29 29.75. 29.77. 40. 52. N.W. N.W. 30 29.82.
29.77. 42. 64. W. S.W. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. NEW YORK, OCTOBER, 1798.
Days. Barometer. Thermometer. Winds. Weather. Sunrise 2 P.M. Sunrise. 2 P.M.
S. rise. 2 P.M. 1 29.90. 29.91. 51. 67. S.W. S. 2 29.98. 30.3. 63. 69. Calm S.
Foggy. 3 30.0. 29.92. 68. 74. Calm S. Do. 4 29.97. 29.89. ^8. 72. Calm S. Do. 5
29.70 29.69. 5^. 71 N. N.E. 6 29.66 29.58 ^1. 71. N.E. N.E Clear. 7 29.50
29.40. 60. 59. N.E. N.E. Plentiful rain. 8 29.37. 29.31. 55. 59 N.E. N. 9
29.61. 29.69. 54. 70. N.W. N.W. Clear. 10 29.78. 29.80. 59. 71. Calm N.W.
Foggy. 11 29.80. 29.87. 59. 68. N.E. N.W. 12 30.2. 30.5 57. 62. E. E. Foggy 13
30.12. 30.12 47. 58. E. E. Do. 14 30.10. 30.4. 50. 59. N.E. N.E. Do. 15 29.95.
29.90. 48. 64. N.E. N.E. Clear. 16 29.84. 29.80 50. 66. N.W. S.W Do. 17 29.67.
29.75 56. 71. N. E. Do. 18 29.71. 29.81. 56. 76. E. E. Do. 19 29.90. 29.88. 51.
56. N.E. N.E. Foggy. 20 29.80. 29.71. 50. 57. N.E. N.E. Do. small rain. 21
29.50. 29.45. 53. 70. N.W N. 22 29.59. 29.43 55. 70. Calm S. Smo^ky air. 23
29.20. 29.13 64. 64. S.W. N.W Foggy, small rain. 24 29.48. 29.60. ^0. ^9. N.W.
N.W. 25 29.61. 29.60. ^0. 65. N.W. Calm 26 29.^8. 29.50 ^0. 72. N.W S.W. Clear.
27 29.^5. 29.54 60. 60. S. N.W. Foggy. plenty of rain. 28 29.40. 29.53 50. 56.
Calm S.W. Do. small rain. 29 29.5^. 29.55 ^6. 44. W. W. Clear. 30 29.50. 29.34
29. 38. W. W. Do. frost. 31 29.20. 29.34 34. 40. W. N.W. Do. NOVEMBER.
Days. Barometer. Thermometer. Winds. Weather. Sunrise 2 P.M. Sunrise 2 P.M. S.
rise 2 P.M. 1 29.61 29.^9 (...). 35. W. S.W. 2 29.35 29.40 32. 42. N. N.E.
Cloudy. 3 29.44 29.39. 37. 40. N. N.W. Do. small rain. 4 29.52. 29.51. 31. 42.
W. N.W. Clear. 5 29.59. 29.70. 30. 37. W. N.W. Clear. 6 29.81. 29.81. 32. 48.
W. W. Do. 7 ^0.0. 30.0. (...) 50. N. variable Do. 8 29.98. 29.88. 36. 52. W. W.
9 29.72. 29.66. 38. 53. S.W. S.W. Clear. 10 29.87. 29.96. 36. 36. N.W. N.W. Do.

COMPARATIVE STATEMENT, etc.
Comparative Statement of Deaths, during the Pestilential Fever of 1798 in
Philadelphia, 1795 in New York, and 1798 in New York and Philadelphia.
IN Philadelphia, in the year 1793, 4041 New York, 1795, 732 New York, 1798,
2086 Philadelphia, in the same year, 3506

DONATIONS. The following Donations have been received by the Health-Committee,
since the general List was printed.
1798 Dec. 11 RECEIVED from the Inhabitants of Poughkeepsie, by William Emott,
to the Mayor of this city, dols. 94 cents 57

A Society of Friends in Beekman Town, Duchess county, by Mr. Joseph
Lancaster, 3 casks and 2 bags meal, and 75 cents.

New-Rochelle, by Capt. Daniel Pelton, 4 sheep.

12 The Presbyterian congregation of West-Hempstead, Rockland county, by Capt.
Daniel Wandle, 18 bags of meal and cash, dols. 9 cents 19

Col. Clift, of Duchess county, one large cheese.

17 A jury of enquiry, held at Mr. Bardin's their fees by Mr. John Nitchie, in
a cause of Lunacy, dols. 10

The Corporation of New-Brunswick, transmitted by Abraham Schuyler, Esquire, their
president, by Mr. Staats Van Deurs^n, dols. 32

New-Rochelle, by Newbury Davenport, Esquire. 1 barrel of meal.

20 The Inhabitants of the town of Newark, a collection made by their
Committee, the Rev. Uzal Ogden, John Burnet, David D. Crane, Jonathan Baldwin,
Joseph Brown, Nathaniel Beach, Nathaniel Camp, and Daniel Johnson, by Mr. John
Burnet, 160 pair of shoes, with cash, dols. 465

21 New-Rochelle by Capt. Daniel Pelton, 2 bags of Indian meal.

24 Mr. Frederick Ransier, by Mr. Philip I. Ar^ularius, 5 dls. 10 cts.

The Gentlemen composing the Fire Company, No. 12 by Messieurs Thomas Franklin
and Miles Hitchcock, dols. 53 cents 62

1799 Jan. 4 Mr. Israel Pearsal, of Hempstead harbor, (Q. C.) dols. 10

The Consistories of the Dutch reformed Congregations of Hackinsack and
Schraulenburgh, forwarded by the Rev. Solomon Freeleigh, president of said
Congregations, and received from Albert C. Zabriskie, Esquire. Schraulenburgh, 2
bags meal, 2 pieces pork, and cash, dols. 22

Hackinsack, 25 bags meal, 1 pair shoes and cash, dols. 73

A Jury of which Joseph Blackwell was Foreman, by Samuel B^yd, Esquire, their ^ees
dols. 9 cents 50

FINIS.

