Mr. Daben's ORATION, JULY 4, 1799.

AN ORATION, SPOKEN AT DEDHAM, ON THE Fourth of July, 1799, AT THE REQUEST OF A
NUMBER OF THE INHABITANTS OF THAT TOWN, AND ITS VICINITY, WHO ASSEMBLED TO
COMMEMORATE American Independence.

BY SAMUEL HAVEN.

PRINTED AT THE MINERVA PRESS IN DEDHAM, BY Herman Mann.

1799.

Dedham, JULY 4, 1799.
THE company composed of a number of the inhabitants of Dedham, and its
vicinity, for the purpose of celebrating the Anniversary of American
Indendence, on the Fourth of July, 1799, appoint John Ellis, Isaac Davenport,
Willard Gay, John Lathrop, and George Wakefield, a committee to wait upon
SAMUEL HAVEN, Esquire. and request a copy of his elegant and spirited Oration, this
day delivered at their request, for the press.

THE author of the following Oration presents it to his friends, by whose
desire it was made, and is published. He thought the mode he adopted of
treating the subject, best calculated for the meridian in which it was
exhibited. The shortness of the time allowed him to prepare it, must be one
apology for its imperfections.

ORATION.
IN many countries and ages of the world, it has been a custom, annually to
commemorate great events, and celebrate the birthdays of great men. This
practice has so much antiquity to sanction it, and is so congenial with our
propensities, that the only discretion, which seems now to be left us, is in
the choice of the objects. -- What event more worthy of commemoration, than the
birth of a nation? What birthday more deserves to be celebrated, than a
nation's birthday? -- This day, these United States are twenty-three years
old. The Fourth of July has been a day of rejoicing, in the chief places in our
country, ever since the year Seventeen hundred and seventy-six. It is pleasing
to observe, that, as this town and its vicinity grow in population and wealth,
the inhabitants manifest a desire to join in the general joy of the day, and
testify that they love INDEPENDENCE. May we not only show, that we love it,
but, that we understand what it is, that we remember how it was acquired, and
know how to preserve it.

POLITICAL Independence consists in the right of a nation to govern itself,
excluding the interference of every foreign authority. This differs from civil
liberty; that being the security of person and property, which individuals
enjoy, under the government of the nation. A nation may be independent, and the
citizens not free. The citizens may enjoy a good degree of freedom, while the
nation is not wholly independent. The latter was the situation of the people of
this country, before the difficulties arose, which caused us to separate from
Great Britain. We can say, we were never in bondage to any man. Our ancestors,
the settlers of America, had an unconquerable love of liberty. Having never
submitted to oppression, in their native country, they brought with them a
spirit, which, the wilderness, and the beasts and men, its inhabitants, could
not intimidate. They preferred such an abode, with such companions, to a land
of pleasantness and plenty, without freedom. While they enjoyed the rights of
citizens and christians, tho poverty laid its hard hand upon them, they were
not depressed, and tho death stared them in the face, they were not driven to
despair. The commotions which existed at the time of their emigration,
produced, in the parent country, the miseries of civil war, and the horrors of
revolution. This had a tendency, no doubt, to reconcile them to their new
situation, and to animate them to encounter the difficulties attending it: For,
compared with revolutionary scenes, a wilderness is a garden; howling beasts,
musical performers; and savage men, agreeable companions.

AFTER many years of alternate resistance and submission, the government of
England was settled in a form, which secured the rights of the people, in the
enjoyment of these rights, the inhabitants of the American colonies
participated, and also had many privileges granted them by charter. They, in a
great measure, governed themselves; especially, in the important points of
granting, assessing, and collecting, their own taxes. They, and the parent
country, mutually assisted each other against their common enemies, and
congratulated one the other in the strength of the empire, which arose from the
union of all its parts. This union might have lasted many years longer, perhaps
to the common satisfaction, had not Britain forgot herself. Who can tell, but
we should have been her colonists still, had she not, with a short-sighted
policy, preferred a trifling present emolument, to the lasting glory and power
of her kingdom? Had she allowed us to raise and apply our revenues, in our own
way, they would probably been used, as much to her advantage, as if drawn into
her chest. But, being avaricious, and conceiving she had the power, she could
not resist the temptation, of laying her hands on our money. She did not well
consider the kind of connection, in which we stood to each other. That, tho we
were of one family, and had a common interest, yet, that we had separate
rights. She even exhibited proofs of the worst kind of avarice and selfishness,
a desire to ease herself, by burdening her children. Disregarding our
respectful and dispassionate endeavors to convince her of her error, and urged
on by her love of gain and of power, she made one attempt after another to tax
us, and finally declared, that her parliament had a right to bind us in all
cases. However unintentionally in the makers, this was the knife, which cut the
cord of union, between the two countries. The spirit of our nation was roused,
never more to sleep, till satisfaction should be obtained. Such a power, in a
government, in which we were not represented, we had discernment enough to see,
was complete despotism. Possessing minds, which had never been subdued, and a
degree of virtue and information, unknown to the body of the people of other
countries, we felt that we stood on the firm ground of right. With such a
conviction, the weak are enabled to defend themselves against the strong, and
feel bold to encounter every danger, and patient to bear every evil. Thus
animated, the American people took their resolution. It was, to live in freedom
-- or not live at all.

ALTHOUGH this resolution was taken with a firmness, which nothing could overcome,
yet the Americans ardently hoped, that an accommodation might be effected,
without a resort to arms. They did not, indeed, neglect to prepare for the
worst, knowing, that the surest way to preserve any object, is, to be ready to
repel an attempt to take it away. While they rejected the idea of unconditional
submission, they were slow to renounce that of a connection with the parent
country. Religiously scrupulous not to be the first to shed blood in the
contest, they presented one petition after another, seeking a restoration of
their former privileges, and exemption from future usurpations. Britain
probably regarded these attempts as marks of weakness. She knew that the
Americans were young, and little accustomed to war, and thought them illy
prepared to contend with her mighty power, and veteran experience. She
considered them her subjects, and hoped that her declaring them rebels, would
intimidate them to submission. She knew also, that many of them still adhered
to her, and might give her important aid in reducing the rest. She presumed
further, that those who opposed her, having no common head, could not act in
concert, and must soon yield to her requisitions. Thus influenced, she
proceeded from one aggression to another, from hostile declarations to acts of
bloodshed, till America, tired of forbearance, and despairing of justice,
unsheathed the sword, appealed to Heaven, and declared herself independent.

HAVING abandoned forever the idea of an accommodation, our whole force was
directed to securing what we had asserted. Seven years longer, we maintained
the contest with an unbroken spirit. In this period, several of the nations of
Europe acknowledged our Independence, and some of them, particularly France,
rendered us assistance. At length, our enemy, wholly disappointed in her
expectation of subduing us, finding great numbers of her troops slain and
captured, her debt immensely increased, and her cause unpopular every where,
submitted to the humiliating measure of acknowledging us independent, and
confirming to us, by treaty, the rights of sovereignty, and the blessings of an
honorable peace.

INDEPENDENT, both by our own declaration, and by the acknowledgment of all the
world, our next object was, to secure to the citizens the enjoyment of Civil
Liberty, as well as to guard against future encroachments on the rights of the
nation. During the war with Britain, most of the States had either constructed
for themselves new constitutions of government, or adapted their former
colonial ones to their new situation. It was not so well with the nation. An
association of the States had been formed to carry on the contest with the
common enemy, and for other national purposes. It tolerably well answered its
design, while that contest lasted; but, this external pressure being taken off,
the edifice sell to pieces. The people, however, loved even the ruins of what
had served them so well, in time of danger. Not till four years after the war
ended, did they engage in earnest, in preparing something, which would protect
them, in all seasons and circumstances. During this interval, the public
happiness was disturbed, and the national Independence put in jeopardy, by
insurrection in more than one of the states, by disunion among the members of
the consederation, and want of power in the head. Upon examination, the old
edifice was found incapable of repair, and a new one was erected. Formed of
materials which had been ages in collecting, constructed by builders well
skilled in the theory and judicious observers of the practice of their art,
exquisitely designed and faithfully executed, having its parts well
proportioned and firmly connected, it rose majestic and beautiful. It was
calculated to protect us from all assaults without, and to make us comfortable
and happy within. Commanding the admiration of all other nations, it ought to
rivet, unalterably, the attachment of every individual, who has the good
fortune to live under it.

WE have now briefly seen, how our Independence was acquired and established.
But it will be of little consequence to have known this, or even to have
acquired it at all, unless we know also how to preserve it. In order to this,
it is necessary to perceive clearly the dangers to which it is liable, and
particularly those, with which it is at present threatened.

THERE are certain dangers peculiar to the very nature of our government, as a
republican government, and perhaps as a federal one. I am much inclined to be
of the opinion, that the more free a government is, the more constantly is it
opposed, by the citizens who live under it. Oppressive governments, it is true,
will, in time, so far overbear the patience of the people, as to rouse them to
violent opposition, and even to produce revolution. Yet, if we cast a reflection
on governments of that kind, which have existed, and do exist, we shall find,
that they have enjoyed much longer periods of tranquillity, than those of a
popular constitution. The latter have generally been seats of faction and
disorder. By this, I shall not be understood to intimate, that an arbitrary
government is preferable to a liberal one; especially, after what I have said
in praise of our own. The difference in the conduct of the citizens, under the
one and the other, arises from the nature of man. We have in us, originally, a
strong aversion from all restraint. This, when not under the direction of
reason, like all the propensities, is irregular and excessive. Reason teaches
us, that civil society is necessary to our improvement and happiness; and that
civil society cannot exist without laws; and that laws, in order to answer
their design, must operate a restraint on the vices of men. They must, indeed,
oftentimes, be so constructed as to produce present inconvenience to the good.
The good, however, will readily submit, in such cases, knowing that their
ultimate advantage will be promoted. Unfortunately, all civil societies have in
them a great many people, who are not good; and many, well disposed, who are
not well informed. These are ever ready to resist whatever counteracts their
erroneous opinions, or corrupt desires. In free governments the danger of
resistance is less, and the prospect of success greater, than in others. The
press is open to the communication of erroneous opinions, as well as just ones.
By means of this, the whole body of the wicked and ignorant may be brought into
action at once. There are always men vicious enough to carry on the work of
misrepresentation and deception. Their short-sighted views lead them to
imagine, that a change will bring them some advantage. They are willing to put
every thing at hazard, under the possibility of gaining something. Not content
with the proceeds of honest industry, secured by the present state of things,
they wish to set at loose all property, and all power, hoping, in the general
confusion, to grasp more than they now possess; not considering, that, as soon
as this is the case with them, others will arise, from the same situation in
which they were, and, by the same means, dispossess them of their new
acquirements. Thus, revolution will succeed revolution, till the people are
prepared for the tranquil despotism of the most fortunate individual. -- It is
also easily perceived that external danger is increased in proportion to
internal division.

IF the position be just, that the freest governments are most exposed to
opposition, and it seems to be proved by all history, we may fairly draw this
conclusion from it, That our own government is a very liberal one: For, from
its first formation to the present day, there has existed a determined
opposition to it. There was a set of men, who exerted every faculty, and
practiced every art to prevent its adoption. From this, we have a right to
infer, as they suggested nothing in its stead, that they were enemies to
government in general, and friends to that disunion and disorder, which had
previously prevailed. Although they were defeated in their attempts against the
constitution, they immediately set themselves to oppose its administration. Not
willing, like true republicans, to submit to the decision of the majority, they
suffered no act of the government to pass uncensured, and scarcely any
character in the administration to go undefamed. They early enlisted several
printing presses into their service, through which, they spread abroad their
misrepresentations and falsehoods, deceiving and misleading many good people, in
all parts of the country. The constitution, which was formed and adopted by the
people themselves, they declared tended to despotism. The administration,
consisting of men chosen by the people, and from the people, continuing but a
short time in office, and sharing in all the burdens they lay on others, they
represented as aiming at the destruction of liberty. Lately, these
oppositionists have had the impudence to call themselves the friends of the
constitution, when, every one may know, they are the very men who strove to
strangle it in its birth. They have been arrogant enough exclusively to assume
to themselves the title of republicans, when all their measures have the most
direct tendency to destroy republicanism.

THIS spirit of opposition is one danger, which constantly besets us. But, at
present, this is not all. We have enemies without, as well as within. Soon
after the federal government came into operation, the revolution began in
France. Interested in the cause of liberty every where, and particularly
attached to France, on account of her assistance in the war with Britain, we
rejoiced in the hope, that her political situation would be benefited, by the
change which was taking place in her government. This hope we were loath to
relinquish, till her excesses and cruelties forced us to see it was wholly
delusive. It was not long before it became evident, that the liberty of the
people was not the object of the leaders of the revolution. Whatever party has
been uppermost, and they have revolved almost as often as the earth on its
axis, the views of France appear to have been the same, both at home and
abroad. At home, with the words, liberty and equality constantly in her mouth,
she has exercised the most unexampled despotism. Abroad, although she declared she
would never make war for conquest, she appears to have formed the project of
universal empire. To accomplish her purposes, she has set in motion all her
acts of intrigue, as well as her implements of fighting. Knowing the interest
the Americans took in her cause, knowing also, that there was a party here in
opposition to the government, which wanted only her encouragement to make it
outrageous, she early sent among us her agents, to help forward the good work
of disorganization, which she was carrying on so successfully in Europe. These
agents entered into the views of their employers, with a zeal natural to their
nation, and with a success, tho not equal to their wishes, yet too great for
our tranquillity. They assumed the rights of sovereignty on our territory. They
issued commissions and raised troops to fight against nations at peace with us.
They openly insulted the government, and appealed to the people. They
instituted societies, in various parts of the country, for the purpose of
making an organized opposition to the government. Through these instruments, so
powerful in their own country, they attacked the government, with all the
virulence of malice, and impudence of falsehood. As if we groaned under the
severest despotism, they addressed the passions of the people, to rouse them to
resistance. In one district, they even caused to be performed, what they style
"the holy duty of insurrection." When, about the same time, our resentment was
justly enkindled against GreatBritain, for her abominable orders for the
capture of neutral property, they seized the moment of irritation, in order, if
possible, to drive us into war. This was conformable to instructions which they
bore in their pockets, while they officially declared, that they wished us to
remain at peace.

THOUGH our government entered freely into discussions of all difficulties, and
was ever ready to grant compensation, if injury had been done, France showed
her enmity more and more openly. She did it, by the capture and condemnation of
our property, by the cruel treatment of our seamen, by the insulting manifestos
of her ministers, and the recall of the last of them from the country. By
refusing to receive our minister, specially sent to adjust existing
differences, and above all, by her treatment of the embassy of three, which was
formed in a manner calculated to gratify her vanity, and clothed with
instructions, perhaps the most liberal ever given. The denial of the rights due
them by the law of nations, the ignominy and degradation heaped upon them, the
intrigues practiced with them, the demand of bribes and tribute made of them,
the selection of one from the three and the endeavors to warp his integrity,
the patience of the envoys in remaining many months under these circumstances,
soliciting an audience, and exhausting the last drop of humiliation, have all
been disclosed by the publication of their dispatches.

HERE let me ask, is there any other nation on earth, from which we should have
borne so much? We will answer this, by the feelings of our hearts, and by an
appeal to our former conduct. When we were colonies, destitute of a national
government, and much inferior to our present state, in numbers and resources,
we resisted the most powerful nation in Europe. What did Britain do, worse than
France has done? We cannot, indeed, well draw a comparison between them, our
situation in relation to the two, being so widely different. We were colonies
of Britain, and acknowledged her right to govern us, disputing only about the
mode of doing it. In the circumstances in which we were, it was to be expected
she would be strenuous in asserting her authority over us. The beginnings of
her usurpations were probably made, without much consideration, but when made,
she was too proud to retract. This accounts for the origin of the contest, but
by no means justifies her conduct in it. She was unjust, she was cruel, she was
abominable, in all her proceedings. She deserved all the hatred we bestowed on
her, and all the loss she sustained by our opposition. We, this day,
congratulate ourselves, that we are independent of her.

WITH respect to France, we are, and always have been, independent. It is true,
she assisted us in our war with Britain; but it was a war for the common
benefit of the two countries, and she acknowledged our Independence, before we
formed any connection with her. From the friendship she pretended to us, from
the real good will we bore to her, and from the advantage she derived from the
connection, we thought we might expect from her, at least justice, if not
generosity. But how reversed (...) event!

IF Britain, by her arts, endeavored to subject us to her will; France has
reduced intrigue to a system, and adopted it as her professional employment. If
Britain reproached us with want of gratitude for her parental protection;
France makes us deaf with her duns for a debt, which, if ever due, was long ago
paid. If Britain conspired with our internal enemies to effect our ruin; France
has enlisted into her service every child of disorder, every foe to our
government. If Britain sought to take our money without our consent; France has
actually taken millions by force. If Britain disgraced us by the appellation of
rebels, and strove by violence to reduce us to subjection; France has
dishonored us by a demand of tribute, and threatened to make us slaves if we
refused.

CAN we, my fellow citizens, any longer doubt the truth of this one important
political proposition, That there is no such thing as national friendship? From
the nature of man, it cannot be; nay, it ought not to be. A nation should be
just to all the world, generous only to itself. -- We have stood in the
relation of children to Great Britain, but when she thought it for her
interest, she oppressed us. We have stood in the relation of allies to France;
but when she thought it for her interest, she robbed and abused us. Britain was
willing to cherish us, while we promoted her views. France was willing to
assist us against Britain, because Britain was her greatest enemy.

OUR reliance must be only on Heaven and America for protection. With proper
care that our cause be just, and a due exertion of our own energies, we need
not fear. Heaven has heretofore favored us, and we have honored ourselves, by
the spirit we have shown. Let us not now disgrace ourselves, and I am persuaded
we shall not be deserted. Peace has been sought with unremitted exertion, and
the smallest gleam of hope that it may be preserved, is fastened on with
pleasure. But it must be such a peace, as is not bought with money, nor with
the sacrafice of honor. It must be one, which shall restore to us our violated
rights, and give us assurance of exemption from future insult and injury. If,
after all we have done, and all we have borne, France will not grant us this,
we can appeal to arms and to God, with the confidence of integrity. We shall be
encouraged by the reflection, that we fight not only our own enemy, but that of
the world; the enemy of justice, of virtue, of religion, of man in all his
interests, of God. She has filled her own country with misery, and all others,
which she has entered, with confusion and every evil work. She has laid all the
republics of Europe at her feet, the victims of her intrigue, and their own
irresolution. Under the strongest protestations of friendship and protection,
she has robbed them of all their property and privileges, leaving them, as one
of her generals expressed it, only the right of complaining. She has thrown
down the altars of the Lord, and converted his temples into play houses and
horse stables. She has abolished the Christian Sabbath, and murdered or
banished the ministers of religion. It was one time declared in her national
assembly, that there was no God, and the declaration received with applause.
She afterward voted to have one, and named him reason. Such injustice and
impiety, it were almost a duty to fight against, tho we were not immediately
affected by them. But their baneful influence has reached even unto us. France
has attacked our principles, as well as our rights. Her disorganizing, immoral,
and atheistical, doctrines, have been spread with zeal, among our citizens,
and, it is to be feared, with some effect. She has, indeed, left no means
untried, to banish from the whole face of the earth, all which is good and
amiable, all which tends to make us tranquil and happy in this life, or give us
hope of another.

OUR government, ever watchful for the security and prosperity of the people,
are taking the necessary measures for defense. Already the military ardor has
spread through every part of the nation. Already our navy has assumed its rank
among the tenants of the ocean, and gives protection to millions of property,
of which France would otherwise plunder us. This bulwark of commerce is fast
rising in respectability. Our resources are ample. We have many of the same
counselors and warriors, who directed and defended us before; especially, the
two unrivalled characters, who are at the heads of the civil and military
departments. The energetic measures we have hitherto taken, have had an effect
on the enemy, and made us respected in the eyes of all the world. Let us
persevere unto the end. Tho our independence is at stake, if we possess the
same firmness of mind, the same union of sentiment, the same confidence in our
rulers, and trust in Heaven, which we exerted in acquiring it, it will be
preserved. Nor shall we stand alone in the contest. All the nations of Europe
appear awake to a sense of their injuries, and determined to set bounds to the
rapacity of France. They seem resolved to drive her within her ancient limits,
and take vengeance for the outrages she has committed on the general laws of
society. We are told that the current of events is turning against her; that
her armies have experienced defeat after defeat, and are retreating before the
combined forces of her enemies. From what we know of God and of man, and of the
connection between causes and effects, we may reasonably anticipate, that we
shall soon have occasion to rejoice, that her power to hurt is at an end. We
shall then congratulate ourselves, that we have exerted our endeavors to arrest
the destructive progress of her arms, and the still more pernicious effects of
her principles; that we have kept our integrity unshaken, our firmness
unimpaired, and thereby preserved our INDEPENDENCE.


