AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN ST. PAUL'S CHURCH, AUGUSTA, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY,
ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-NINE, BEING THE TWENTY-THIRD ANNIVERSARY
OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY WILLIAM J. HOBBY, ESQUIRE.

AUGUSTA: PRINTED BY RANDOLPH and BUNCE.

1799.

THE following Oration was delivered in St. Paul's Church on the 4th July, at
the special request of the Volunteer Artillery and Infantry Companies of
Augusta, by WILLIAM J. HOBBY, who at the particular request of a Joint
Committee of those Companies, delivered them a copy for publication.

EDITORS.
Augusta, July 20, 1799.
AN ORATION, etc.
Friends and Fellow Citizens,
AMONG the great events which have attracted the attention of the world, and
engaged the admiration of mankind, none in the exertions of human power ever
perhaps occured, more worthy of commemoration and general approbation than the
Revolution we are this day assembled to celebrate -- a revolution which in the
justice of its commencement -- the moderation of its progress -- the magnitude
of its object -- in its successful termination and the happy consequences
resulting from it, stands unequalled in the dignified transactions of men.

The various circumstances which led to the Independence of our country -- the
causes which called forth the energies of the American character, and hastened
the growth of these States to political consequence, have been so often the
subjects of conversation, and are so familiar to the minds of this respectable
audience, that it would require more than common novelty and elegance of
language to render a detail thereof entertaining. -- Without decending to
minuteness therefore at the present time, we will barely observe -- That our
ancestors who seeking an asylum here, from the rod of oppression, whose
industry converted a desert into fruitful fields, and a howling wilderness into
smiling gardens, were men of piety -- of pure morals and independent spirits;
who next to their religious duties impressed upon the minds of their children a
just sense of the rights of human nature, and an avertion to tyranny, which
prepared them as they grew up to take the station of freemen in society, and
enabled them to discriminate with accuracy between the legal exercise of
authority, and the injust encroachments of arbitrary power. Taught by precept
and by example to revere the acknowledged laws of the country, they risqued
their lives in their support as the chief pillar of private security: And
believing a mutual and general good to result from a European connection, they
were at all times ready to aid with their utmost power the cause of that
country from which they originated, and to whose decrees they had usually
yielded voluntary obedience. But when that country jealous of the growing
greatness, and the liberal sentiments of a people who owed them no obligation,
assumed the haughty tone of the master, instead of the affectionate voice of
the parent or the mild language of the friend, attempted to reduce to vassalage
men born in the soil of freedom and nursed in the lap of independence, the
genius of the western hemisphere raised his amiable form, looked with
complaicent countenance on the inhabitants of this extensive continent, and
with a voice sweet and engaging -- but firm and determined proclaimed, that
protection and allegiance were terms of reciprocity -- and that when protection
was denied allegiance ought to be withdrawn. This sentiment was not lost by the
people to whom it was addressed -- they saw that the government with which they
then wished to continue on terms of friendship was making continual
encroachments and endeavoring to deprive them of their most valuable
priviledes. The discerning mind readily saw that the imposition of taxes on us
by a legislature in which we were not represented -- our own legislative bodies
restricted and frequently dissolved by foreign individual will -- the officers
of our governments appointed -- the tenures and salaries of their offices
established by foreign authority -- an army of foreign mercenaries quartered
upon us in times of peace -- and finally a legislative declaration that the
parliament of Great Britain had a right by law to bind the Americans in all
cases whatsoever, were measures calculated to reduce to the slavery they
merited those who would submit to such ignominious conditions: But among such
were not to be found the inhabitants of this enlightened country.

The whole American family viewing with contempt the plans formed for their
subjugation, and spurning the chains prepared for binding them in perpetual
bondage; arose as if impelled by supernatural influence almost at the same
instant, and with the commanding voice of the people declared their rights and
unitedly resolved to maintain them to the last extremity. Sophistry could not
persuade, nor threats intimidate them into a compliance with measures evidently
calculated to render them the servants of a foreign master, and to rob them of
the unquestionable rights of men. Force was exerted with as little success.
Those who had duly considered the blessings of Liberty, and deliberately
resolved to enjoy them, were not to be diverted from their purpose, by singular
dangers or uncommon occurrences; and from one end of the continent to the other
the sentiment adopted was -- that life and liberty were inseperably connected,
that we would enjoy or be deprived of both together, but that in no event would
we resign the one without sacrificing the other.

This resolution was not suddenly adopted -- and the battle of Bunkers Hill
afforded an early opportunity of proving its sincerity and influence. Those who
were engaged in the seven years following war can recollect better than
language can describe, not only the feelings by which they were personally
influenced, but the sentiments which then appeared to actuate every American
mind -- the ardour evinced by almost every individual, to expose himself to
hardship -- to toil and to death, for the service of his beloved country and
the defense of his dearest rights. Not only in the populous towns were found
armed citizens feelingly alive to their country's wrongs -- but every village
poured forth its soldiers -- every farm produced its warriors -- almost every
house could boast a hero, who held the preservation of life a secondary
consideration compared with their country's good. All fortuitous differences of
situation was forgotten -- and the merchant -- the mechanic, and the daily
labourer, were equally ready to risque their lives in preserving those
principles and rights in which all are equally interested; and the destruction
of which would reduce all to equal wretchedness. The man of learning forsook
his study, the venerable priest was ready to lay aside his sarcerdotal habit
and assume the sword of vengeance -- the peaceful plowman to forsake his
agricultural pursuit and shoulder his musket -- to leave the possessions in
which he delighted, and the friends nearest his heart, to secure and defend
those rights without the enjoyment of which, all other possessions are of no
avail. Neither the solicitude of the partner of his bosom dearer to him than
life itself whose affectionate tears moistened his parting cheek -- nor the
helpless condition of his tender offspring who with innocent prattle took a
thoughtless farewell, could divert from his steady purpose and determined
resolution, the brave American who entered the hostile field with a pure heart,
and who could appeal to the god of nature for the justice of the cause in which
he engaged. From one end of this continent to the other the same general and
individual resolutions obtained of securing to ourselves and posterity that
liberty without which life is but a cumbrous load -- the same determination of
not giving occasion to future generations to say, that the weakness
pusillanimity or cowardice of their ancestors, entailed upon them lasting
slavery and misery.

Our united exertions produced as might have been expected the most happy
consequences -- the nation by whom our liberty had been threatened acknowledged
our Independence, and America assumed a conspicuous station in the political
system of the universe, daily increasing in brilliancy till by the organization
and establishment of the Federal Constitution, it shone with superior luster
and became a planet of primary magnitude. From that time to the present day
have the United States progressed in consequence and increased in wealth, with
a rapidity which baffles description, and has far out striped the most sanguine
calculations.

Were any one after reflecting on the many difficulties which presented
themselves to the Americans in the commencement of their Revolution to enquire,
how our liberties were preserved and that Independence secured which we
annually celebrate with so much joy -- the answer is obvious, and carries with
it an important lesson. -- The nation spoke with one voice -- the confederated
states had the same views -- the people were united. The wisdom of American
councils -- the exertions of individuals -- the bravery of the soldiery
co-operated and were directed to the same object: Confidence was reposed in
those selected for their wisdom to administer the public concerns, and few of
those jealousies existed, of which designing men lay hold, to exite discontent
and promote disorder. Had we been a divided instead of a united people, we
should not have had an anniversary of Independence to celebrate -- no
privileges to enjoy -- and no other liberty than that of obeying implicitly the
commands of some imperious despot. From union therefore (under the benificent
smiles of the great author of nature) has resulted the station we now occupy in
the political world, and on the same principle must and will depend our
continual prosperity or final degredation. This truth obvious and
incontrovertible ought by us to be at all times seriously and religiously
believed -- but more particularly so at the present day when our very existence
as a nation is threatened by an insidious foreign power who having admitted the
maxim "divide and conquer" into their political creed, are endeavoring to
introduce into this country all the evils this villainous principle is capable
of producing.

In turning our attention to the situation of our country in its foreign
relations, it becomes a subject of congratulation that those political
connections with France from which the most serious evils were to be
apprehended, are happily at an end. On this subject it becomes our duty to make
a few observations, and to notice some of those circumstances which cannot too
frequently be brought to the recollection of every American mind.

When the contest commenced which has of late years called forth the exertions
of the belligerent powers of Europe, justice and policy required, that the
United States should take a neutral situation, and from that situation the
government of our country determined not to depart: But the efforts of the
French nation were in continual exercise to counteract this determination and
to induce us to make a common cause with them. Naturally open and unsuspicious,
and enthusiastic admirers of rational liberty, the American citizens discovered
an early prepossession in favor of the cause in which they imagined France to
be engaged, and without reflecting on the tendency of their proceedings, or
looking to the real object of their pursuit, they excused their errors,
pardoned -- nay justified their crimes, and weakly and inconsiderately
celebrated their victories. Presuming on the sentiments which this conduct
indicated, the French government resolved to turn them to her own benefit, and
therefore dispatched to this country a minister whose diplomatic intrigue had
been but too successfully exerted in one of the little republics of Europe, to
oppose his talents and influence to the American administration, and without
regard to the will of the government to precipitate the people into a
destructive contest. No sooner was this minister belched forth in the city of
Charleston than with an audacity which nothing but the thoughtlessness of the
day could have overlooked, he commissioned privateers to commit robberies on
nations with whom we were at peace, and proceeded to raise and organize troops
for French expeditions. The Executive of the United States whose mind
comprehended the dark designs formed in the gloomy recesses of corrupt hearts
for our ruin, interposed his paternal authority, and by requiring a strict
adherence to the principles of neutrality, saved us from that destructive
whirlpool into which we were rushing with impetuous rapidity.

Baffled in the outset we find this pontiff of disorder, soon after founding
political clubs, and organizing Jacobinical societies at the seat of
government, commissioning his disciples to preach sedition throughout the
United States and attempting to stamp on their infamy the sanction of his
government, by the magical terms of, liberty, equality, fraternity -- words of
facinating sound, but which in the French vocabulary remain without definite
ideas annexed to them. -- From him did we hear of our injustice and ingratitude
toward France, and in his insolence he even proceeded to insinuate that to the
disinterested friendship of his nation we owed our liberty. False as this idea
was, by his persuasive influence it was assented to by some of our citizens,
who in their reasonings on the subject deduced conclusions as false as the
proposition on which they were founded. That we received assistance from France
during our revolutionary war no one denies -- but few we hope are so weak as to
imagine this assistance was disinterested, or afforded merely with a view of
serving us. Between Great Britain and France there has for ages subsisted a
national jealousy, a deep rooted enmity which never failed to discover itself
when opportunity offered. -- To check the power and humble the pride of Great
Britain was always a primary object with France, and the same disposition was
amply reciprocated by the former nation. -- When the American war commenced the
eyes of all Europe were turned to the mighty event, and when it had been so
long continued as to convince the world we were not to be subdued; France threw
her weight into our scale hoping thereby to assist in humbling the pride of her
ancient rival, and at the conclusion of the contest to attach us exclusively to
themselves. Even this they were cautious of doing till the capture of Burgoyne
and his army left the eventual success of our cause no longer problematical.
But so far were they from having our good only in view, even at the treaty of
peace the French minister would willingly have abandoned our independence, had
he been able to procure a relinquishment thereof on our part, and when that
could not be effected, the terms of accommodation proposed on the part of
France, and actually acceded to by Doctor Franklin were calculated to deprive
us of the principle advantages we expected to derive from the contest, and to
render us dependent on that nation, and these terms would have been agreed to,
had not the intrigue of the French minister and the pliable disposition of Dr.
Franklin been opposed by the virtue and uprightness of Mr. Jay -- the integrity
and unshaken firmness of Mr. Adams the now illustrious President of the United
States.

But absurd as the idea is, admitting the principle of disinterestedness in its
utmost latitude, from whom was the assistance received, and to whom the debt of
gratitude due? No man will surely pretend that the present French nation or a
single individual in it, had any voice or influence in this business. The then
king of France had the power of making war and peace -- the absolute control
of the whole force of the nation; and had his policy so directed, the French
troops which came to this country would have opposed, instead of aiding our
cause. Neither officers or soldiers had any more voluntary agency in this
transaction than the ships that transported them or the drums they followed --
the actors were mere machines, the impelling principle was the royal command,
and the spring which produced this command was self interest; I mention not
this case as singular, it is like all other contracts of nations -- for we may
rest assured that in the whole system of politics there never did exist such a
principle, as national disinterested friendship -- no nation under the sun ever
yet undertook to assist another in any political struggle without being
influenced thereto by views of its own; but I barely mention it to show that
the present French government in charging us with ingratitude are not founded
in fact -- they never intended us any good -- and if they had, they were not in
a situation to have afforded it. And to the monarch himself from whom the
assistance was received, the gratitude due, is like the gratitude which the
tender lamb owes to the man, who takes him from the fold, guards him from the
wolf and supplies him with the necessaries of life, that his carcass may the
sooner grace the butchers stall, or afford him a more delicious morsel. So much
for this debt of gratitude which has so often been the text of political
absurdities.

Mr. Genet having by his precipitancy discovered the plot of the piece he was
acting, before all the performers were perfectly instructed in the parts they
were to play, was followed by ministers more slow and cautious, but whose
avowed object it was to bring the representation to the same fatal catastrophe,
and to terminate the performance with a death wound to our independence.
Unceasing were the efforts of the French ministers and agents to withdraw the
confidence of our citizens from the constituted authorities of their country,
to create between our people and our government a breach which time itself
should not be able to close: Not content with attempting to supercede the
Executive authority in commissioning privateers and raising troops contrary to
law -- they attempted to control our elections -- to secure an influence in
our public councils, and finally proceeded with unparalleled effrontery to
dictate to us the choice of the chief magistrate of the United States. Finding
their efforts ineffectual, and that the American people were not to be deceived
by hurried villainy, or the artful hypocrisy of designing knavery, they raise
the curtain behind which they had attempted to conceal their dark designs, and
proclaim to the world their determination to obtain by force what fraud could
not effect; or rather by uniting force with fraud, to secure if possible, what
neither was alone able to accomplish. Regardless therefore of the eternal
principles of justice, and in violation of their own engagements they
transgress the laws of nations -- rob us of our property on the high seas -- in
sight of our own shores capture our vessels -- abuse, enslave, and murder our
valuable citizens. Having rejected with disdain a respectable envoy
extraordinary -- Three commissioners specially delegated, and furnished with
full powers to hear and adjuct all causes of difference between the United
States and France, repair to Paris, where month after month they are treated
with insolence and contempt, and are at length told, that the United States
becoming tributary vassals, is a necessary preliminary to their admission to an
audience -- that further tribute will be required in the negotiation, that the
depredations on our commerce will still be continued, and that the amount of
the captures they make must be paid by our government. Or in other words, that
we must pay largely, very largely, for being told how much more will certainly
be demanded -- and that thereto we must add a sum equal to the amount they are
enabled to steal. When these propositions are rejected with becoming dignity,
and a suggestion made that the corruption of the nation would be communicated
to our government, our Envoys are told in a style of menace, that the French
party here is too strong for their representations to gain belief. But little
did citizen Talleyrand understand the American character -- the people of these
states had confidence in the men who represented them, their statement has
gained implicit belief, and the baseness and depravity of the French government
stands incontrovertibly established.

The publication of the documents of the French negotiation produced the most
beneficial effects -- the eyes of the people were opened -- all but those
wilfully blind, or immediately under French influence were convinced that the
cup of reconciliation was exhausted -- that instead of the humiliating posture
we had observed, our security depended on the energy of our government, on our
assuming the manly attitude of independent men. The radience of truth dispelled
the mists with which fraud and falsehood had attempted to obscure the public
mind -- the proceedings of the American administration received general
approbation, and the imposing voice of the people with national dignity
pronounced aloud -- "millions for defense -- not a cent for tribute."

I am far however from insinuating that this sentiment though general is
perfectly unanimous -- unfortunately French influence has founded a party here
who totally reverse the sentiment, and who by their conduct cry out millions
for tribute but not a cent for defense -- a party whose exertions have been
continually directed to oppose the interest of our country and the will of our
government. Had this party convinced us of their attachment to the general good
by long and uniform exertions in the public service, -- did they evince the
honesty of their intentions by endeavoring to guard the people from error, or
by setting an example of submission and obedience to the laws worthy of
imitation, they would merit consideration and respect: But we find them in
their declamatory speeches and inflammatory writings, continually making those
distinctions between the government and the people -- between the
administration and the friends of liberty, from which the most destructive
consequences may result. Not considering that by the very first principles of
republican government the will of the majority must rule, these exclusive
patriots are continually opposing their individual, or party views, to the
general will of the nation expressed by the majority of those, whom the free
suffrages of the people have delegated to the legislative body of the union.
From them do we hear the most wise and constitutional laws censured as
oppressive -- taxes necessary for the support of government represented as
burdensome, and a provisional army, and a navy establishment so necessary to
our security condemned as dangerous and expensive.

But these paragons of republican virtue can hear of tribute demanded from our
country -- can see our commercial intercourse interrupted, our citizens robbed,
imprisoned and abused, -- our country insulted in the persons of our Envoys,
and our states threatened with invasion, without an emotion of resentment or
indignation.

Gladly we would have it in our power to say, that a party so abundantly
prolific in inconsistencies was made up wholly of designing foreigners and the
most ignorant of our own citizens. But unfortunately incontrovertible facts
established beyond possibility of doubt, that amongst our citizens men of
talents and high in office belong to this disgraceful association; and the
views as well as the head of the party is sufficiently designated by the famous
letter to Mazzei. What American can read this letter with moderate feelings,
what friend to his country can see a man conspicuously elevated in the
legislature of the union, deliberately reducing to writing this shameful
sentiment, that "we" (himself and the party he represents) "must break the
lilliputian ties by which they" -- (the government) "have bound us, and arrest
-- the progress of a system of injustice and ingratitude toward France" --
that "we have against us, (or rather that we are against") the Executive power,
the judicial authority, all the officers of government" etc. The writer of this
letter makes an evident and intentional difference between the government and
the party of whom he speaks -- in the latter of which by the term we he
includes himself and the person he was addressing, and insinuates that they
must and will arrest the progress of the measures of our government toward the
French republic. At the time of writing this letter, Mr. Jefferson was under
solemn oath to support the constitution of the United States: -- But this oath
his heterogenious philosophy, and new fangled morality could consider a
lilliputian tie to his conscience, with which he could dispense with the same
ease that an ordinary man can lay aside a garment that is irksome to him. At
this time too the Executive power was in the hands of a man dear to every
American -- in the hands of the great, the good -- the virtuous Washington,
toward whom this lettter writer behaved with unpardonable duplicity; for while
he was thus slandering his character and deliberately declaring himself his
opposer, he was personally solicitous with him to continue in office.

But what are the means by which he proposes to arrest the measures of
government? not by any legal and constitutional application for a repeal of
laws deemed unnecessary, but by endeavoring to render those laws unpopular --
by misrepresentations deceiving the people, and by laying hold of the passions
of the multitude and leading them to insurrection and civil war. The western
counties of Pennsylvania can witness how effectually they have been the
miserable dupes of this kind of policy. There under pretense of their being
oppressed by one of the most equal and equitable taxes ever required from a
free people -- a tax the payment of which would not have been felt, and no part
of which many of those citizens would have had to pay, they were seduced into
an insurrection, the suppression of which has cost the United States more money
than the taxes of that whole district will probably amount to in one hundred
years. This instance added to the whiskey business a year or two past, shows
how effectual have been the exertions of men of talents to lead a deluded
people to ruin; it exhibits too an incontestible proof, that in the western
counties of Pennsylvania, may be found more ignorance and folly than in any
other part of the United States. In such neighbourhoods the agents of France
delight to work -- not because themselves belong to this class, for they have
usually more wickedness than ignorance, are more destitute of principle than
knowledge, but because those who have not capacity to discern their views are
more easily converted to their purposes.

The reasonings against a naval armament, are usually founded on the expense of
the measure and the consequent increase of taxes, because these objections
applying directly to the selfishness of individuals are apt to engage the
attention of the weak and unreflecting -- while the real objection to a navy is
kept out of view, which is, the security it affords us, and the insuperable
barrier it interposes to the views of France against this country. However well
calculated the smooth sophistry of artful politicians may be to mislead the
understanding, we may rest assured that among all the measures of defense
adopted by our government the naval establishment is the most wise and
important. We all well know that one of the natural boundaries of the United
States is the Atlantic ocean, from that quarter, an extensive sea coast, and
our most important commercial cities are subject to visitation. -- However wise
and just the measures of our government may be, we are not to expect that
wisdom and justice will always protect us against the maratime nations of the
world, especially if we are known always to be unprepared for resistance. The
agricultural interests of our country is promoted as our commerce is extended
-- but our commerce cannot become, or continue extensive, unless it be
protected, and the only question that arises is whether we had better protect
it ourselves, or apply to a foreign power to relieve us of this burden. If the
produce of our country cannot be exported with safety in American vessels, the
merchants, must resort to those ships whose cannon affords security, and the
exports from the United States must be principally made in foreign bottoms;
while our ships unarmed and unprotected will become a kind of common property
for the free booters of all nations. Without a navy our coasts cannot be secure
our commerce cannot flourish -- our country cannot become respectable. Did not
the knowledge of our being destitute of naval force influence the directory of
France to authorize the seizure of our vessels? -- did not the same knowledge
suggest to the infamous and abandoned Pain, the diabolical plan of sending
privateers to the United States to plunder, burn and destroy our sea port
towns, that by individual distress our government might be revolutionized? And
when we have an extensive coast exposed to this kind of devastation -- in a
time of general danger shall we sit down, and with mercantile accuracy
calculate the expense of defensive measures before we dare adopt them? Shall we
doubt the propriety of contributing a small portion of our incomes to preserve
entire our remaining possessions? Shall we be backward in affording our
proportionate aid to an establishment necessary to our existence? Or when
called on to determine whether we will resign or defend our rights, shall
Americans hesitate in the choice of the alternative? God forbid. Happy would it
have been for our country had the naval establishment been made at an earlier
period -- then our citizens would not have sustained those immense losses for
which they now vainly seek redress. It Is an undeniable fact that the American
ships of war, few as they are had not been three months at sea, before they
were the immediate cause of saving to our citizens more than the whole expense
of the armament: And it is equally undeniable that the previous depredations on
our commerce -- the sums violently taken from our citizens, had been in amount
more than sufficient to have built, manned and equipt for sea, fifty ships of
the line. But this immence tax imposed on our country by France we hear
excused, nay submission to a continuance of it, recommended by those, who
violently declaim against the payment of the small sum which our own government
requires to terminate the degrading evil. A reflection too arising from this
subject not perhaps always made, is, that the actual benefits derived from a
navy, is not to be estimated by calculating the proportion, between the losses
prevented and the expense of the armament; for the loss and the expense however
equal in amount are differently proportioned, and differently felt. The losses
by depredations on our commerce often terminate in the ruin of whole families,
in reducing many from affluence to poverty, and in checking the spirit of
commercial enterprise -- But were the amount of those losses drawn to the
general treasury by public taxes, all parts of the political body furnishing
its just proportion, no possible inconvenience could arise and the relative
situations of men would be perfectly preserved. So that (for instance) at the
first appearance of the political hydrophobia in France, had there been a
general contribution according to ability by all the American citizens, of a
sum adequate to the building the navy, I have mentioned, the inconvenience
would have been nothing, compared with the inconvenience we have since
sustained by French villainy; and in this case too, the property so contributed
would have remained our own, and continued in our hands, whereas it is now in
possession of our enemies, and to us lost forever: and it matters not to whom
the loss in the first instance is particularly injurious; for such is the nice
and admirable chain of connection between all the members of the social body,
so intimately is the prosperity of the whole, connected with the prosperity of
each individual, and the welfare of each individual so absolutely connected
with the welfare of the whole, that no one family or citizen can be reduced to
ruin without the whole community's being in a greater or less degree a sufferer.

But we are told of the danger of an army and a navy, as though these
establishments were composed of infernal furies let loose to prey upon society
-- Let us enquire then who are the persons that man the navy and compose the
army -- they are our fathers -- our brothers, our relations -- or in one
comprehensive word, they are Americans; the friends of peace, of order and good
government -- men attached to their country from principle, and bound to it by
the most endearing ties. And from such men are we to apprehend danger? To
resolve this question I need go no further than your own hearts, I appeal to
you in your military capacity whether you forget you are American citizens when
you shoulder a musket? I ask of you whose military appearance on this day
creates such pleasing sensations, whether you could be prevailed on to turn
your arms against the country which gave you birth -- against the country in
which you gain your daily subsistence -- and against that liberty for which
many of you have fought and bled. Those who pretend to apprehend danger from
this source, make not the distinction between an army of foreign mercenaries
sent to enforce the will of a foreign power, and a body of citizens enrolled
for their own security and the defense of their own government. In the one case
every thing that is gained by the soldier is lost to the citizen, and acquired
by the government employing the army -- in the other, the interest of the
citizen, the soldier and the government is so intimately connected, that no
political chemistry can possibly separate them -- Here every American citizen
is a soldier, the government requires he should be so -- and every soldier is a
citizen, one common cause unites us, and one common country is our inheritance.

In addition to the open opposition to those defensive measures which common
prudence rendered necessary, the past year has produced an event far
transcending all former bounds of party insolence -- I mean the unprecedented
mission of Dr. Logan to France. This embassy which has been a subject of some
speculation in the United States, merits no notice, only as an instance of the
lengths a party in our country would go to accomplish their purposes. Dr. Logan
in a publication, attempts to exonerate himself from the charge of being
missionary, and to convince us that his going to France was for individual
purposes. But his vindication like some other precious confessions, establishes
the criminality of the person it was intended to acquit. He insinuates that by
his exertions, the embargo on American vessels in France was taken off, and
many of our seamen released from prison; whether this be true or not, the
Doctor stands equally culpable. If the statement be not true, it is evident,
that (added to the criminality of the falsehood,) by a pretense of rendering
this kind of service, the real object of the voyage was to be concealed: But if
the statement be true it operates still more against him. For it is well known
that no individual even of respectability and consequence, could have had
influence enough in France, to have obtained from that nation an act of common
justice. The minister of foreign relations and the directory, who had refused
to listen to three dignified characters clothed with legal authority, were not
to have their iniquities suspended for a single moment by the eloquence of a
Dr. Logan, an individual of that nation whose ministers they had just
rerejected -- but when in this famous Doctor, they beheld the representative of
the French party in America, and when they read his friendly letters of
introduction substituted for official credentials, they concluded that by
listening to him, an idea might be impressed on the minds of the American
people, that there were in the United States persons more agreeable to the
great nation, than those the government had chosen -- and they supposed, that
such was our wish for peace, that our confidence would be transferred from our
government to the party with whose conditions they pretended a willingness to
comply. But happily their calculations were erroneous, and the spurious envoy
has sunk into the contempt he merited. What! Shall the rights of the American
people be usurped by an individual -- the order they have established be
inverted by a party? shall the right of making treaties wisely and expressly
delegated to the President and Senate of the United States, be wrested from
them by a party to whom no legal responsibility is attached, and in whom no
confidence is, or ought to be placed. Let it not be said in justification that
peace was the object -- that might or might not be -- if it were, do we know
the terms on which it was to be obtained, and have we any security that these
terms did not contain a surrender of our rights? Besides if an individual has a
right to interfere in diplomatic negociations to procure peace, he has an equal
right so to interfere to promote war; and in the case before us, the
probability is that under the specious pretense of obtaining peace, means were
to be devised of prosecuting war with effect. The station of this illegitimate
negotiator, the time of his embassy -- the persons who were his intimates
previous to his departure, afford strong grounds of belief that his object was
not of a pacific nature, nor for the good of his country. And it is a certain
fact that about the time of this infamous business and while pacific overtures
were thrown out to lull us into security, arrangements were in actual
preparation in the West Indies for an invasion of the southern states. It
deserves notice too that this unprecedented proceeding originated with, and was
supported by that party, who are continually disturbing the harmony of society
by their discordant vociferations against unconstitutional usurpations.

Those who have observed with but moderate attention, the conduct of the French
directory for a few years past cannot but be convinced that they have formed a
systematic plan for revolutionizing or disorganizing all the governments of the
world, and for reducing them to their own despotic sway -- they have declared
war against the religion of the gospel -- the principles of social order -- and
the rights of man: and we have only to extend our views across the Atlantic to
be presented with those scenes which our country would certainly exhibit, were
we by listening to their agents to become the dupes of their intrigue. Turn
then your attention and observe but the progress of a French army in the
European world, see before them terror and confusion -- view behind them misery
and ruin -- and on every side behold destruction and desolation. See the
social, the political, the religious, and the moral systems of civilized
nations dreadfully convulsed -- the ancient boundaries of peaceful nations, and
the territorial limits of independent states swept away; see commerce wholly
fail -- industry sicken and die -- the old and the young -- the rich and the
poor involved in one common calamity, and despotism with haughty stride, and
indiscriminate in difference trampling on the liberties of mankind. -- The
history of their progress is a history of a continued repetition of those
crimes and enormities which degrade and disgrace human nature, and assimilate
man to the diabolical inhabitants of the infernal world. The rich they plunder
of their wealth -- the poor they torture to obtain the discovery of imaginary
treasures, and punish with slavery and death any inability to pay stipulated
requisitions. Departing from the character of men, they discover no respect for
that tender and amiable sex, without whose lovely society life would not be
desirable, and which few nations have heretofore been so barbarous as to treat
with indifference -- but the aged matron and the blooming daughter -- the
affectionate wife and the tender child, are compelled to submit to the most
villainous insults, and to become the subjects of the most brutal outrages.
They neither reverence the aged or pity the infirm -- neither respect the
virtuous or protect the young -- but all ages, conditions and situations, are
reduced to the miserable equality, of suffering equally the most abominable
indignities, and of hearing a villainous soldiery exult in their distress and
laugh at their calamity. And are these the blessings of which we are desirous
to participate? Is this an entertainment to which we wish to introduce the fair
daughters of Columbia? Among the admirers of these French delights there are
doubtless some men of rationality and reflection, and of such permit me to ask
whether their choice has been influenced by reasonings founded on experience or
analogy. You have seen the progress of the French armies in the European world
-- you have seen the effect which their principles accompanied by their
presence has produced -- you have seen the consequence of listening to their
professions and of giving heed to their agents, you have seen the faith due to
their solemn engagements and the result of trusting to their friendly
pretentions -- you have seen social compacts inverted and governments
overturned; and amongst all the nations where the disorganizing frenzy has
received countenance, or gained admission, permit me to ask, what state -- what
city, what town, what village (nay I had almost said what habitation) has been
benefited by the chaotic change? Let the man disposed to favor the evident
views of France toward this country, point out to his fellow citizens the good
that is to result from the accomplishment of his wishes; and to render the
attainment of this good probable, let him show its existence elsewhere. Or let
him point out the nation, town or district that has not been injured by a
connection with the French republic. Look at the people whose liberties they
pretended to respect -- whom they accost in soft and soothing language, and see
what has followed from their friendly professions. Can a single instance be
produced where confidence placed in them has not been abused? -- a solitary
case where a reliance on their engagements has not made work for bitter
repentance? And bitter would be our repentance were we to become the miserable
dupes of their wicked machinations. To destroy our government has long been the
favorite object of the French Republic, and the various forms which Proteus
like they have exhibited, their persuasions and their menaces -- their
pretended friendship and declared enmity, their open violence and assumed
moderation -- their former villainy and recent affectation of justice, are but
different modes of accomplishing the same end. Every effort for our ruin has
been exerted except an actual invasion, and that would have been attempted, had
not the energy of our government, and the union of our citizens evidenced in
the manly addresses from all parts of the continent to the executive authority,
induced an opinion which an experiment would certainly have confirmed, that an
invasion of this country would terminate in the destruction of the invaders.
But they still believed if they could lull us into security, and procure a
relaxation of defensive operations, that in an unguarded hour, and at an
unexpected quarter, they might rush upon us, like an overwhelming torrent,
deluge our country in blood, and in one grave bury our liberty and
independence. But the cobweb veil was too thin to hide the deformed features it
was intended to conceal -- without relaxing the measures of defense, the
President met their pacific overtures, and thereby proclaimed to the world that
we were ready for peace, but were resolved not to be unprepared for war. But we
are not to imagine this circumlocutory proposition through Mr. Murray, for a
renewal of negociations is an evidence of the wish of the directory of France
for peace -- it was intended to check the measures of government and to deceive
the people. What faith indeed ought to be placed, what faith can be placed, in
the professions of a nation whose conduct is uniformly iniquitous, and who deny
the very existence of those principles which ought to inspire confidence? In
every nation may be found, the profligate wretch -- the profane atheist and the
bold blasphemer, whose wickedness is not circumscribed by any bounds of
moderation -- but to France alone belongs the vile singularity, the dreadful
dishonor, of exhibiting an assemblage of infidels -- a nation who openly
declare themselves unincumbered by first principles or moral obligations, and
who by legislative decree have foolishly attempted to annihilate God himself.
May our virtue preserve us from their abandoned hypocrisy -- their licentious
depravity, and their gross infidelity.

The celebration of the birth day of our nation ought to be considered as a
voluntary assemblage of the sons of freedom, to renew their political vows, and
to reciprocate their mutual engagements, to regard the rights, vindicate the
honor, and defend the liberties of their country: And these engagements so
necessary to our salvation, can no otherways be fulfilled, than by cooperating
in our individual stations with our rulers, in preserving union and in
promoting harmony and order. In vain do we celebrate the Independence of our
country if we are indifferent to the means by which it is to be preserved -- in
vain do we call to mind the manly spirit of seventy-six, if instead of
imitation, cold commendation be the only result of our recollection -- in vain
do we admire the virtuous exertions of the departed heroes of the revolution,
unless following their great example, we are ever ready to devote our lives to
the service of our country -- in vain do we acknowledge and gratefully rejoice
in the happy effects of the union of our citizens and the wisdom of our public
councils, if we encourage internal division and withhold our support from the
government of our choice.

Situated as we are, remote from the political concussions of the old world --
possessing a country abundantly producttive in the necessaries, the
conveniences, and the luxuries of life -- blessed with a government wisely
formed and uprightly administered -- a government securing equally to every
individual of an extensive community, an equal portion of the advantages of the
social compact, we have no possible cause for discontent, but uncommon occasion
to return our grateful acknowledgments to the parent of nature for the singular
blessings we enjoy, and that our "lot is cast in this happy land."

But as the innocence and happiness of our first parents in Paradise, induced
the enemy of mankind to attempt by intrigue to draw them from their duty, and
thereby to involve them, and their posterity in misery; so an insidious foreign
foe the common enemy of social order, by similar artifice is endeavoring to
draw us from our duty, and to erect the monster anarchy on the ruins of our
excellent constitution. And shall we my friends so far disregard the blessings
of heaven -- be so ungrateful to the fathers of the revolution, and so
unmindful of our own security, as to be seduced from the government of our
country by the machinations of a nation, whose touch is poison, and whose
embrace is death? Shall we who have overcome difficulties seemingly
insurmountable, and waded through seas of blood to establish the Independence
of our country, now see all our exertions rendered of no avail -- the standard
of freedom thrown down, and the temple of liberty destroyed by the desolating
hand of French fraternity? While united we have nothing to fear, but divided we
necessarily become subject to all those evils which the restless passions of
ambitious and designing men are capable of producing, and an easy prey to the
violence of foreign foes. -- Individual liberty depends on the preservation of
national independence -- and national independence is only to be preserved by
union -- by a firm cooperation of all the states in the maintenance and
support of one government. The visionary theorist -- the self conceited
disorganizer who expatiating on local advantages, resources and wisdom,
pretends that any individual state is capacitated to preserve its liberty
unconnected with the other states, advances a doctrine as false as it is
dangerous. No nation can preserve its liberty, or its government unless it be
able to protect itself; and however consequential state politicians may feel --
no state in the union can singly protect itself or preserve its peace. Besides
the inmity which would probably arise between neighboring independent
sovereignties without any common tie, no state could preserve peace with
foreign nations -- could oppose a sufficient barrier to foreign aggressions. No
one state could possibly become sufficiently formidable, to destroy in the
ambitious all hopes of conquest. The knowledge of this has occasioned the
unwearied exertions of the French directory to divide us -- to create
differencies between the state legislatures and the legislature of the union,
that from the weakness which would necessarily attach to all parts from
division, they might usurp the rights of the whole. In the consolidated force
of the union directed by one will, and influenced by one government, we remain
secure against all the world. The man then who attempts to disunite us, to
create divisions between the state and federal governments, however plausible
his arguments, however sanctified his manners, or patriotic his pretentions, is
an enemy to the country and merits no countenance; and be him who he may, the
probability is that the time will arrive, when he will be found to be in the
employ of a foreign nation.

And now my friends in conclusion, permit me to ask, where ought our confidence
to be placed, in those of whose wisdom and virtue we have had long experience,
or in those whose conduct is at perpetual war with every thing rational and
consistent? To determine this shall we compare their different characters? As
well may those viscous exhalations which rise in an impure atmosphere and
amidst surrounding darkness emit a glimmering ray to lead the bewildered
traveller to ruin, be compared to the brilliancy of the sun in meridian
splendour: While the leading characters of those opposed to our government,
shrink from the test of investigation and suffer from scrutiny, on the other
side see human nature attain its highest degree of excellence and perfection.
See the dignified President of the United States in whose character is united
the wisdom of the politician -- the firmness of the hero, and the virtue of the
saint. Having early engaged to secure the Independence of his country his
persevering mind never forsook the object of his fond pursuit: at periods dark
and gloomy -- when "clouds obscured Columbia's day," and the hopes of many were
sinking in despair, in him was no "variableness or shadow of turning;" but with
a resolution inspiring new confidence, he pressed forward, in the unalterable
determination of securing the permanent liberty of his country.

See too the illustrious Washington on whose head rests the benedictions of a
grateful people -- he who has so often led our armies to battle and to conquest
has again become our commander in chief -- in his commendation panegyric is
exhausted; and fame with her hundred tongues, having proclaimed his numerous
virtues to a listening universe, disparing of doing justice to his amiable
character, bids us "in expressive silence muse his praise" while upon his
wonderful deeds Justice has placed the seal of immortality.

And does the man exist who can believe that these illustrious personages --
these fathers of the land (whose heads the silent lapse of time has silvered
oer,) whose lives have been uniformly devoted to the service of their fellow
men, and who are now approaching that period when temporal prospects and
earthly honors must be to them forever closed, can now depart from that line
of rectitude, from which the prying eye of suspicion has not been able to
discover the minutest deviation, and that they will now countenance measures
calculated to injure those they have heretofore endeavored to serve, to
enslave those whose freedom it has been their constant aim to secure?

No my friends in their upright lives, in their love of their country and
belief in God, we have a sure pledge of their righteous intentions. Let us then
lay aside all unreasonable jealousy -- as we are members of one political
family, let us unite as a band of brothers, and contribute according to our
several abilities all in our power to the general good -- let the government we
have chosen be the government of our support, and those who administer it, the
objects of our confidence, and the friends of our affection. Let not the
atheistical philosophy of modern days, overturn our moral principles, or
destroy our belief in that religion on which depends public and private
happiness; and let us give no countenance to those disorganizing principles
which strike at the root of civil society, and aim a deadly blow at individual
peace and private security. And may the great author of nature, (the
irresistible controller of human events) long continue to the United States his
protecting care -- under his guardianship may the blessings of liberty, and the
principles of rational government be transmitted from generation to generation,
and may the happiness and prosperity of our citizens, the freedom and
Independence of our country continue, till time shall be merged in
inconceivable Eternity.

THE END.

